 Cleveland brought his opposition to needless spending to the governor 's office ; he promptly sent the legislature eight vetos in his first two months in office . The first to attract attention was his veto of a bill to reduce the fares on New York City elevated trains to five cents . The bill had broad support because the trains ' owner , Jay Gould , was unpopular , and his fare increases were widely denounced . Cleveland , however , saw the bill as unjust — Gould had taken over the railroads when they were failing and had made the system solvent again . Moreover , Cleveland believed that altering Gould 's franchise would violate the Contract Clause of the federal Constitution . Despite the initial popularity of the fare @-@ reduction bill , the newspapers praised Cleveland 's veto . Theodore Roosevelt , then a member of the Assembly , had reluctantly voted for the bill to which Cleveland objected , in a desire to punish the unscrupulous railroad barons . After the veto , Roosevelt reversed himself , as did many legislators , and the veto was sustained . 
 Cleveland 's defiance of political corruption won him popular acclaim , and the enmity of the influential Tammany Hall organization in New York City . Tammany , under its boss , John Kelly , had disapproved of Cleveland 's nomination as governor , and their resistance intensified after Cleveland openly opposed and prevented the re @-@ election of their point man in the State Senate , Thomas F. Grady . Cleveland also steadfastly opposed nominees of the <unk> , as well as bills passed as a result of their deal making . The loss of Tammany 's support was offset by the support of Theodore Roosevelt and other reform @-@ minded Republicans who helped Cleveland to pass several laws reforming municipal governments . 
 = = Election of 1884 = = 
 = = = Nomination for president = = = 
 The Republicans convened in Chicago and nominated former Speaker of the House James G. Blaine of Maine for president on the fourth ballot . Blaine 's nomination alienated many Republicans who viewed Blaine as ambitious and immoral . The GOP standard bearer was weakened by alienating the Mugwumps , and the Conkling faction , recently disenfranchised by President Arthur . Democratic party leaders saw the Republicans ' choice as an opportunity to win the White House for the first time since 1856 if the right candidate could be found . 
 Among the Democrats , Samuel J. Tilden was the initial front @-@ runner , having been the party 's nominee in the contested election of 1876 . After Tilden declined a nomination due to his poor health , his supporters shifted to several other contenders . Cleveland was among the leaders in early support , and Thomas F. Bayard of Delaware , Allen G. Thurman of Ohio , Samuel Freeman Miller of Iowa , and Benjamin Butler of Massachusetts also had considerable followings , along with various favorite sons . Each of the other candidates had hindrances to his nomination : Bayard had spoken in favor of secession in 1861 , making him unacceptable to Northerners ; Butler , conversely , was reviled throughout the South for his actions during the Civil War ; Thurman was generally well liked , but was growing old and infirm , and his views on the silver question were uncertain . Cleveland , too , had detractors — Tammany remained opposed to him — but the nature of his enemies made him still more friends . Cleveland led on the first ballot , with 392 votes out of 820 . On the second ballot , Tammany threw its support behind Butler , but the rest of the delegates shifted to Cleveland , who won . Thomas A. Hendricks of Indiana was selected as his running mate . 
 = = = Campaign against Blaine = = = 
 Corruption in politics was the central issue in 1884 ; indeed , Blaine had over the span of his career been involved in several questionable deals . Cleveland 's reputation as an opponent of corruption proved the Democrats ' strongest asset . William C. Hudson created Cleveland 's contextual campaign slogan " A public office is a public trust . " Reform @-@ minded Republicans called " Mugwumps " denounced Blaine as corrupt and flocked to Cleveland . The Mugwumps , including such men as Carl Schurz and Henry Ward Beecher , were more concerned with morality than with party , and felt Cleveland was a kindred soul who would promote civil service reform and fight for efficiency in government . At the same time the Democrats gained support from the Mugwumps , they lost some blue @-@ collar workers to the Greenback @-@ Labor party , led by ex @-@ Democrat Benjamin Butler . In general , Cleveland abided by the precedent of minimizing presidential campaign travel and speechmaking ; Blaine became one of the first to break with that tradition . 
 The campaign focused on the candidates ' moral standards , as each side cast aspersions on their opponents . Cleveland 's supporters rehashed the old allegations that Blaine had corruptly influenced legislation in favor of the Little Rock and Fort Smith Railroad and the Union Pacific Railway , later profiting on the sale of bonds he owned in both companies . Although the stories of Blaine 's favors to the railroads had made the rounds eight years earlier , this time Blaine 's correspondence was discovered , making his earlier denials less plausible . On some of the most damaging correspondence , Blaine had written " Burn this letter " , giving Democrats the last line to their rallying cry : " Blaine , Blaine , James G. Blaine , the continental liar from the state of Maine , ' Burn this letter ! " 
 Commentator Jeff Jacoby notes that , " Not since George Washington had a candidate for President been so renowned for his rectitude . " The Republicans found a refutation buried in Cleveland 's past . Aided by sermons from an opportunistic preacher named George H. Ball , they charged that Cleveland had fathered an illegitimate child while he was a lawyer in Buffalo , and chanted , " Ma , Ma , where 's my Pa ? " When confronted with the scandal , Cleveland immediately instructed his supporters to " Above all , tell the truth . " Cleveland admitted to paying child support in 1874 to Maria Crofts Halpin , the woman who claimed he fathered her child , who she had named Oscar Folsom Cleveland . Halpin had been involved with several men at the time , including Cleveland 's friend and law partner , Oscar Folsom , for whom the child was named . Cleveland did not know which man was the father ; he assumed responsibility because he was the only bachelor among them . Shortly before the 1884 election , the Republican media published an affidavit from Halpin in which she stated that until she met Cleveland , her " life was pure and spotless " , and " there is not , and never was , a doubt as to the paternity of our child , and the attempt of Grover Cleveland , or his friends , to couple the name of Oscar Folsom , or any one else , with that boy , for that purpose is simply infamous and false . " 
 The electoral votes of closely contested New York , New Jersey , Indiana , and Connecticut would determine the election . In New York , the Tammany Democrats decided that they would gain more from supporting a Democrat they disliked than a Republican who would do nothing for them . Blaine hoped that he would have more support from Irish Americans than Republicans typically did ; while the Irish were mainly a Democratic constituency in the 19th century , Blaine 's mother was Irish Catholic , and he had been supportive of the Irish National Land League while he was Secretary of State . The Irish , a significant group in three of the swing states , did appear inclined to support Blaine until a Republican , Samuel D. Burchard , gave a speech pivotal for the Democrats , denouncing them as the party of " Rum , Romanism , and Rebellion . " The Democrats spread the word of this implied Catholic insult on the eve of the election . They also blistered Blaine for attending a banquet with some of New York City 's wealthiest men . 
 After the votes were counted , Cleveland narrowly won all four of the swing states , including New York by 1200 votes . While the popular vote total was close , with Cleveland winning by just one @-@ quarter of a percent , the electoral votes gave Cleveland a majority of 219 – 182 . Following the electoral victory , the " Ma , Ma ... " attack phrase gained a classic riposte : " Gone to the White House . Ha ! Ha ! Ha ! " 
 = = First term as president ( 1885 – 1889 ) = = 
 = = = Reform = = = 
 Soon after taking office , Cleveland was faced with the task of filling all the government jobs for which the president had the power of appointment . These jobs were typically filled under the spoils system , but Cleveland announced that he would not fire any Republican who was doing his job well , and would not appoint anyone solely on the basis of party service . He also used his appointment powers to reduce the number of federal employees , as many departments had become bloated with political time @-@ servers . Later in his term , as his fellow Democrats chafed at being excluded from the spoils , Cleveland began to replace more of the partisan Republican officeholders with Democrats . ; this was especially the case with policy making positions . While some of his decisions were influenced by party concerns , more of Cleveland 's appointments were decided by merit alone than was the case in his predecessors ' administrations . 
 Cleveland also reformed other parts of the government . In 1887 , he signed an act creating the Interstate Commerce Commission . He and Secretary of the Navy William C. Whitney undertook to modernize the navy and canceled construction contracts that had resulted in inferior ships . Cleveland angered railroad investors by ordering an investigation of western lands they held by government grant . Secretary of the Interior Lucius Q.C. Lamar charged that the rights of way for this land must be returned to the public because the railroads failed to extend their lines according to agreements . The lands were forfeited , resulting in the return of approximately 81 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 330 @,@ 000 km2 ) . 
 Cleveland was the first Democratic President subject to the Tenure of Office Act which originated in 1867 ; the act purported to require the Senate to approve the dismissal of any presidential appointee who was originally subject to its advice and consent . Cleveland objected to the act in principle and his steadfast refusal to abide by it prompted its fall into disfavor and led to its ultimate repeal in 1887 . 
 = = = Vetoes = = = 
 Cleveland faced a Republican Senate and often resorted to using his veto powers . He vetoed hundreds of private pension bills for American Civil War veterans , believing that if their pensions requests had already been rejected by the Pension Bureau , Congress should not attempt to override that decision . When Congress , pressured by the Grand Army of the Republic , passed a bill granting pensions for disabilities not caused by military service , Cleveland also vetoed that . Cleveland used the veto far more often than any president up to that time . In 1887 , Cleveland issued his most well @-@ known veto , that of the Texas Seed Bill . After a drought had ruined crops in several Texas counties , Congress appropriated $ 10 @,@ 000 to purchase seed grain for farmers there . Cleveland vetoed the expenditure . In his veto message , he espoused a theory of limited government : 
 I can find no warrant for such an appropriation in the Constitution , and I do not believe that the power and duty of the general government ought to be extended to the relief of individual suffering which is in no manner properly related to the public service or benefit . A prevalent tendency to disregard the limited mission of this power and duty should , I think , be steadfastly resisted , to the end that the lesson should be constantly enforced that , though the people support the government , the government should not support the people . The friendliness and charity of our countrymen can always be relied upon to relieve their fellow @-@ citizens in misfortune . This has been repeatedly and quite lately demonstrated . Federal aid in such cases encourages the expectation of paternal care on the part of the government and weakens the sturdiness of our national character , while it prevents the indulgence among our people of that kindly sentiment and conduct which strengthens the bonds of a common brotherhood . 
 = = = Silver = = = 
 One of the most volatile issues of the 1880s was whether the currency should be backed by gold and silver , or by gold alone . The issue cut across party lines , with western Republicans and southern Democrats joining together in the call for the free coinage of silver , and both parties ' representatives in the northeast holding firm for the gold standard . Because silver was worth less than its legal equivalent in gold , taxpayers paid their government bills in silver , while international creditors demanded payment in gold , resulting in a depletion of the nation 's gold supply . 
 Cleveland and Treasury Secretary Daniel Manning stood firmly on the side of the gold standard , and tried to reduce the amount of silver that the government was required to coin under the Bland @-@ Allison Act of 1878 . Cleveland unsuccessfully appealed to Congress to repeal this law before he was inaugurated . Angered Westerners and Southerners advocated for cheap money to help their poorer constituents . In reply , one of the foremost silverites , Richard P. Bland , introduced a bill in 1886 that would require the government to coin unlimited amounts of silver , inflating the then @-@ deflating currency . While Bland 's bill was defeated , so was a bill the administration favored that would repeal any silver coinage requirement . The result was a retention of the status quo , and a postponement of the resolution of the Free Silver issue . 
 = = = Tariffs = = = 
 Another contentious financial issue at the time was the protective tariff . While it had not been a central point in his campaign , Cleveland 's opinion on the tariff was that of most Democrats : that the tariff ought to be reduced . Republicans generally favored a high tariff to protect American industries . American tariffs had been high since the Civil War , and by the 1880s the tariff brought in so much revenue that the government was running a surplus . 
 In 1886 , a bill to reduce the tariff was narrowly defeated in the House . The tariff issue was emphasized in the Congressional elections that year , and the forces of protectionism increased their numbers in the Congress , but Cleveland continued to advocate tariff reform . As the surplus grew , Cleveland and the reformers called for a tariff for revenue only . His message to Congress in 1887 ( quoted at right ) highlighted the injustice of taking more money from the people than the government needed to pay its operating expenses . Republicans , as well as protectionist northern Democrats like Samuel J. Randall , believed that American industries would fail absent high tariffs , and continued to fight reform efforts . Roger Q. Mills , chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee , proposed a bill to reduce the tariff from about 47 % to about 40 % . After significant exertions by Cleveland and his allies , the bill passed the House . The Republican Senate failed to come to agreement with the Democratic House , and the bill died in the conference committee . Dispute over the tariff persisted into the 1888 presidential election . 
 = = = Foreign policy , 1885 – 1889 = = = 
 Cleveland was a committed non @-@ interventionist who had campaigned in opposition to expansion and imperialism . He refused to promote the previous administration 's Nicaragua canal treaty , and generally was less of an expansionist in foreign relations . Cleveland 's Secretary of State , Thomas F. Bayard , negotiated with Joseph Chamberlain of the United Kingdom over fishing rights in the waters off Canada , and struck a conciliatory note , despite the opposition of New England 's Republican Senators . Cleveland also withdrew from Senate consideration the Berlin Conference treaty which guaranteed an open door for U.S. interests in the Congo . 
 = = = Military policy , 1885 @-@ 1889 = = = 
 Cleveland 's military policy emphasized self @-@ defense and modernization . In 1885 Cleveland appointed the Board of Fortifications under Secretary of War William C. Endicott to recommend a new coastal fortification system for the United States . No improvements to US coastal defenses had been made since the late 1870s . The Board 's 1886 report recommended a massive $ 127 million construction program at 29 harbors and river estuaries , to include new breech @-@ loading rifled guns , mortars , and naval minefields . The Board and the program are usually called the Endicott Board and the Endicott Program . Most of the Board 's recommendations were implemented , and by 1910 27 locations were defended by over 70 forts . Many of the weapons remained in place until scrapped in World War II as they were replaced with new defenses . Endicott also proposed to Congress a system of examinations for Army officer promotions . For the Navy , the Cleveland administration spearheaded by Secretary of the Navy William Collins Whitney moved towards modernization , although no ships were constructed that could match the best European warships . Although completion of the four steel @-@ hulled warships begun under the previous administration was delayed due to a corruption investigation and subsequent bankruptcy of their building yard , these ships were completed in a timely manner in naval shipyards once the investigation was over . Sixteen additional steel @-@ hulled warships were ordered by the end of 1888 ; these ships later proved vital in the Spanish – American War of 1898 , and many served in World War I. These ships included the " second @-@ class battleships " Maine and Texas , designed to match modern armored ships recently acquired by South American countries from Europe , such as the Brazilian battleship Riachuelo . Eleven protected cruisers ( including the famous Olympia ) , one armored cruiser , and one monitor were also ordered , along with the experimental cruiser Vesuvius . 
 = = = Civil rights and immigration = = = 
 Cleveland , like a growing number of Northerners ( and nearly all white Southerners ) saw Reconstruction as a failed experiment , and was reluctant to use federal power to enforce the 15th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution , which guaranteed voting rights to African Americans . Though Cleveland appointed no black Americans to patronage jobs , he allowed Frederick Douglass to continue in his post as recorder of deeds in Washington , D.C. and appointed another black man to replace Douglass upon his resignation . 
 Although Cleveland had condemned the " outrages " against Chinese immigrants , he believed that Chinese immigrants were unwilling to assimilate into white society . Secretary of State Thomas F. Bayard negotiated an extension to the Chinese Exclusion Act , and Cleveland lobbied the Congress to pass the Scott Act , written by Congressman William Lawrence Scott , which prevented the return of Chinese immigrants who left the United States . The Scott Act easily passed both houses of Congress , and Cleveland signed it into law on October 1 , 1888 . 
 = = = Indian policy = = = 
 Cleveland viewed Native Americans as wards of the state , saying in his first inaugural address that " [ t ] his guardianship involves , on our part , efforts for the improvement of their condition and enforcement of their rights . " He encouraged the idea of cultural assimilation , pushing for the passage of the Dawes Act , which provided for distribution of Indian lands to individual members of tribes , rather than having them continued to be held in trust for the tribes by the federal government . While a conference of Native leaders endorsed the act , in practice the majority of Native Americans disapproved of it . Cleveland believed the Dawes Act would lift Native Americans out of poverty and encourage their assimilation into white society . It ultimately weakened the tribal governments and allowed individual Indians to sell land and keep the money . 
 In the month before Cleveland 's 1885 inauguration , President Arthur opened four million acres of Winnebago and Crow Creek Indian lands in the Dakota Territory to white settlement by executive order . Tens of thousands of settlers gathered at the border of these lands and prepared to take possession of them . Cleveland believed Arthur 's order to be in violation of treaties with the tribes , and rescinded it on April 17 of that year , ordering the settlers out of the territory . Cleveland sent in eighteen companies of Army troops to enforce the treaties and ordered General Philip Sheridan , at the time Commanding General of the U. S. Army , to investigate the matter . 
 = = = Marriage and children = = = 
 Cleveland entered the White House as a bachelor , and his sister Rose Cleveland joined him , to act as hostess for the first two years of his administration . However , unlike the previous bachelor president James Buchanan , Cleveland did not remain a bachelor for very long . In 1885 the daughter of Cleveland 's friend Oscar Folsom visited him in Washington . Frances Folsom was a student at Wells College . When she returned to school , President Cleveland received her mother 's permission to correspond with her , and they were soon engaged to be married . On June 2 , 1886 , Cleveland married Frances Folsom in the Blue Room at the White House . He was the second President to wed while in office , and has been the only President married in the White House . This marriage was unusual , since Cleveland was the executor of Oscar Folsom 's estate and had supervised Frances 's upbringing after her father 's death ; nevertheless , the public took no exception to the match . At 21 years , Frances Folsom Cleveland was the youngest First Lady in history , and the public soon warmed to her beauty and warm personality . 
 The Clevelands had five children : Ruth ( 1891 – 1904 ) , Esther ( 1893 – 1980 ) , Marion ( 1895 – 1977 ) , Richard Folsom ( 1897 – 1974 ) , and Francis Grover ( 1903 – 1995 ) . British philosopher Philippa Foot was their granddaughter . 
 = = = Administration and Cabinet = = = 
 = = = Judicial appointments = = = 
 During his first term , Cleveland successfully nominated two justices to the Supreme Court of the United States . The first , Lucius Q.C. Lamar , was a former Mississippi Senator who served in Cleveland 's Cabinet as Interior Secretary . When William Burnham Woods died , Cleveland nominated Lamar to his seat in late 1887 . While Lamar had been well liked as a Senator , his service under the Confederacy two decades earlier caused many Republicans to vote against him . Lamar 's nomination was confirmed by the narrow margin of 32 to 28 . 
 Chief Justice Morrison Waite died a few months later , and Cleveland nominated Melville Fuller to fill his seat on April 30 , 1888 . Fuller accepted . He had previously declined Cleveland 's nomination to the Civil Service Commission , preferring his Chicago law practice . The Senate Judiciary Committee spent several months examining the little @-@ known nominee , before the Senate confirmed the nomination 41 to 20 . 
 Cleveland nominated 41 lower federal court judges in addition to his four Supreme Court justices . These included two judges to the United States circuit courts , nine judges to the United States Courts of Appeals , and 30 judges to the United States district courts . Because Cleveland served terms both before and after Congress eliminated the circuit courts in favor of the Courts of Appeals , he is one of only two presidents to have appointed judges to both bodies . The other , Benjamin Harrison , was in office at the time that the change was made . Thus , all of Cleveland 's appointments to the circuit courts were made in his first term , and all of his appointments to the Courts of Appeals were made in his second . 
 = = Election of 1888 and return to private life = = 
 = = = Defeated by Harrison = = = 
 The Republicans nominated Benjamin Harrison of Indiana for President and Levi P. Morton of New York for Vice President . Cleveland was easily renominated at the Democratic convention in St. Louis . Vice President Hendricks having died in 1885 , the Democrats chose Allen G. Thurman of Ohio to be Cleveland 's new running mate . 
 The Republicans gained the upper hand in the campaign , as Cleveland 's campaign was poorly managed by Calvin S. Brice and William H. Barnum , whereas Harrison had engaged more aggressive fundraisers and tacticians in Matt Quay and John Wanamaker . 
 The Republicans campaigned heavily on the tariff issue , turning out protectionist voters in the important industrial states of the North . Further , the Democrats in New York were divided over the gubernatorial candidacy of David B. Hill , weakening Cleveland 's support in that swing state . 
 As in 1884 , the election focused on the swing states of New York , New Jersey , Connecticut , and Indiana . But unlike that year , when Cleveland had triumphed in all four , in 1888 he won only two , losing his home state of New York by 14 @,@ 373 votes . The Republicans won Indiana , largely as the result of a fraudulent voting practice known as Blocks of Five . Republican victory in that state , where Cleveland lost by just 2 @,@ 348 votes , was sufficient to propel Harrison to victory , despite his loss of the nationwide popular vote . Cleveland continued his duties diligently until the end of the term and began to look forward to return to private life . 
 = = = Private citizen for four years = = = 
 As Frances Cleveland left the White House , she told a staff member , " Now , Jerry , I want you to take good care of all the furniture and ornaments in the house , for I want to find everything just as it is now , when we come back again . " When asked when she would return , she responded , " We are coming back four years from today . " In the meantime , the Clevelands moved to New York City where Cleveland took a position with the law firm of Bangs , Stetson , Tracy , and <unk> . This affiliation was more of an office sharing arrangement , though quite compatible . Cleveland 's law practice brought only a moderate income , perhaps because Cleveland spent considerable time at the couple 's vacation home Grey Gables at Buzzard Bay , where fishing became his obsession . While they lived in New York , the Clevelands ' first child , Ruth , was born in 1891 . 
 The Harrison administration worked with Congress to pass the McKinley Tariff , an aggressively protectionist measure and the Sherman Silver Purchase Act , which increased money backed by silver ; these were among policies Cleveland deplored as dangerous to the nation 's financial health . At first he refrained from criticizing his successor , but by 1891 Cleveland felt compelled to speak out , addressing his concerns in an open letter to a meeting of reformers in New York . The " silver letter " thrust Cleveland 's name back into the spotlight just as the 1892 election was approaching . 
 = = Election of 1892 = = 
 = = = Democratic nomination = = = 
 Cleveland 's enduring reputation as chief executive and his recent pronouncements on the monetary issues made him a leading contender for the Democratic nomination . His leading opponent was David B. Hill , a Senator for New York . Hill united the anti @-@ Cleveland elements of the Democratic party — silverites , protectionists , and Tammany Hall — but was unable to create a coalition large enough to deny Cleveland the nomination . Despite some desperate maneuvering by Hill , Cleveland was nominated on the first ballot at the convention in Chicago . For vice president , the Democrats chose to balance the ticket with Adlai E. Stevenson of Illinois , a silverite . Although the Cleveland forces preferred Isaac P. Gray of Indiana for vice president , they accepted the convention favorite . As a supporter of greenbacks and Free Silver to inflate the currency and alleviate economic distress in the rural districts , Stevenson balanced the otherwise hard @-@ money , gold @-@ standard ticket headed by Cleveland . 
 = = = Campaign against Harrison = = = 
 The Republicans re @-@ nominated President Harrison , making the 1892 election a rematch of the one four years earlier . Unlike the turbulent and controversial elections of 1876 , 1884 , and 1888 , the 1892 election was , according to Cleveland biographer Allan Nevins , " the cleanest , quietest , and most creditable in the memory of the post @-@ war generation , " in part because Harrison 's wife , Caroline , was dying of tuberculosis . Harrison did not personally campaign at all . Following Caroline Harrison 's death on October 25 , two weeks before the national election , Cleveland and all of the other candidates stopped campaigning , thus making Election Day a somber and quiet event for the whole country as well as the candidates . 
 The issue of the tariff worked to the Republicans ' advantage in 1888 . The legislative revisions of the past four years also made imported goods so expensive that now many voters favored tariff reform and were skeptical of big business . Many Westerners , traditionally Republican voters , defected to James Weaver , the candidate of the new Populist Party . Weaver promised Free Silver , generous veterans ' pensions , and an eight @-@ hour work day . The Tammany Hall Democrats adhered to the national ticket , allowing a united Democratic party to carry New York . At the campaign 's end , many Populists and labor supporters endorsed Cleveland after an attempt by the Carnegie Corporation to break the union during the Homestead strike in Pittsburgh and after a similar conflict between big business and labor at the Tennessee Coal and Iron Co . The final result was a victory for Cleveland by wide margins in both the popular and electoral votes , and it was Cleveland 's third consecutive popular vote plurality . 
 = = Second term as president ( 1893 – 1897 ) = = 
 = = = Economic panic and the silver issue = = = 
 Shortly after Cleveland 's second term began , the Panic of 1893 struck the stock market , and he soon faced an acute economic depression . The panic was worsened by the acute shortage of gold that resulted from the increased coinage of silver , and Cleveland called Congress into special session to deal with the problem . The debate over the coinage was as heated as ever , and the effects of the panic had driven more moderates to support repealing the coinage provisions of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act . Even so , the silverites rallied their following at a convention in Chicago , and the House of Representatives debated for fifteen weeks before passing the repeal by a considerable margin . In the Senate , the repeal of silver coinage was equally contentious . Cleveland , forced against his better judgment to lobby the Congress for repeal , convinced enough Democrats – and along with eastern Republicans , they formed a 48 – 37 majority for repeal . Depletion of the Treasury 's gold reserves continued , at a lesser rate , and subsequent bond issues replenished supplies of gold . At the time the repeal seemed a minor setback to silverites , but it marked the beginning of the end of silver as a basis for American currency . 
 = = = Tariff reform = = = 
 Having succeeded in reversing the Harrison administration 's silver policy , Cleveland sought next to reverse the effects of the McKinley tariff . The Wilson @-@ Gorman Tariff Act was introduced by West Virginian Representative William L. Wilson in December 1893 . After lengthy debate , the bill passed the House by a considerable margin . The bill proposed moderate downward revisions in the tariff , especially on raw materials . The shortfall in revenue was to be made up by an income tax of two percent on income above $ 4 @,@ 000 ( US $ 105 @,@ 000 today ) . 
 The bill was next considered in the Senate , where it faced stronger opposition from key Democrats led by Arthur <unk> Gorman of Maryland , who insisted on more protection for their states ' industries than the Wilson bill allowed . The bill passed the Senate with more than 600 amendments attached that nullified most of the reforms . The Sugar Trust in particular lobbied for changes that favored it at the expense of the consumer . Cleveland was outraged with the final bill , and denounced it as a disgraceful product of the control of the Senate by trusts and business interests . Even so , he believed it was an improvement over the McKinley tariff and allowed it to become law without his signature . 
 = = = Voting rights = = = 
 In 1892 , Cleveland had campaigned against the Lodge Bill , which would have strengthened voting rights protections through the appointing of federal supervisors of congressional elections upon a petition from the citizens of any district . The Enforcement Act of 1871 had provided for a detailed federal overseeing of the electoral process , from registration to the certification of returns . Cleveland succeeded in ushering in the 1894 repeal of this law ( ch . 25 , 28 Stat . 36 ) . The pendulum thus swung from stronger attempts to protect voting rights to the repealing of voting rights protections ; this in turn led to unsuccessful attempts to have the federal courts protect voting rights in Giles v. Harris , 189 U.S. 475 ( 1903 ) , and Giles v. <unk> , 193 U.S. 146 ( 1904 ) . 
 = = = Labor unrest = = = 
 The Panic of 1893 had damaged labor conditions across the United States , and the victory of anti @-@ silver legislation worsened the mood of western laborers . A group of workingmen led by Jacob S. Coxey began to march east toward Washington , D.C. to protest Cleveland 's policies . This group , known as Coxey 's Army , agitated in favor of a national roads program to give jobs to workingmen , and a weakened currency to help farmers pay their debts . By the time they reached Washington , only a few hundred remained , and when they were arrested the next day for walking on the lawn of the United States Capitol , the group scattered . Even though Coxey 's Army may not have been a threat to the government , it signaled a growing dissatisfaction in the West with Eastern monetary policies . 
 = = = Pullman Strike = = = 
 The Pullman Strike had a significantly greater impact than Coxey 's Army . A strike began against the Pullman Company over low wages and twelve @-@ hour workdays , and sympathy strikes , led by American Railway Union leader Eugene V. Debs , soon followed . By June 1894 , 125 @,@ 000 railroad workers were on strike , paralyzing the nation 's commerce . Because the railroads carried the mail , and because several of the affected lines were in federal receivership , Cleveland believed a federal solution was appropriate . Cleveland obtained an injunction in federal court , and when the strikers refused to obey it , he sent federal troops into Chicago and 20 other rail centers . " If it takes the entire army and navy of the United States to deliver a postcard in Chicago " , he proclaimed , " that card will be delivered . " Most governors supported Cleveland except Democrat John P. Altgeld of Illinois , who became his bitter foe in 1896 . Leading newspapers of both parties applauded Cleveland 's actions , but the use of troops hardened the attitude of organized labor toward his administration . 
 Just before the 1894 election , Cleveland was warned by Francis Lynde Stetson , an advisor : 
 " We are on the eve of [ a ] very dark night , unless a return of commercial prosperity relieves popular discontent with what they believe [ is ] Democratic incompetence to make laws , and consequently [ discontent ] with Democratic Administrations anywhere and everywhere . " 
 The warning was appropriate , for in the Congressional elections , Republicans won their biggest landslide in decades , taking full control of the House , while the Populists lost most of their support . Cleveland 's factional enemies gained control of the Democratic Party in state after state , including full control in Illinois and Michigan , and made major gains in Ohio , Indiana , Iowa and other states . Wisconsin and Massachusetts were two of the few states that remained under the control of Cleveland 's allies . The Democratic opposition were close to controlling two @-@ thirds of the vote at the 1896 national convention , which they needed to nominate their own candidate . They failed for lack of unity and a national leader , as Illinois governor John Peter Altgeld had been born in Germany and was ineligible to be nominated for President . 
 = = = Foreign policy , 1893 – 1897 = = = 
 When Cleveland took office he faced the question of Hawaiian annexation . In his first term , he had supported free trade with Hawai 'i and accepted an amendment that gave the United States a coaling and naval station in Pearl Harbor . In the intervening four years , Honolulu businessmen of European and American ancestry had denounced Queen Liliuokalani as a tyrant who rejected constitutional government . In early 1893 they overthrew her , set up a republican government under Sanford B. Dole , and sought to join the United States . The Harrison administration had quickly agreed with representatives of the new government on a treaty of annexation and submitted it to the Senate for approval . Five days after taking office on March 9 , 1893 , Cleveland withdrew the treaty from the Senate and sent former Congressman James Henderson Blount to Hawai 'i to investigate the conditions there . 
 Cleveland agreed with Blount 's report , which found the populace to be opposed to annexation . Liliuokalani initially refused to grant amnesty as a condition of her reinstatement , saying that she would either execute or banish the current government in Honolulu , but Dole 's government refused to yield their position . By December 1893 , the matter was still unresolved , and Cleveland referred the issue to Congress . In his message to Congress , Cleveland rejected the idea of annexation and encouraged the Congress to continue the American tradition of non @-@ intervention ( see excerpt at right ) . The Senate , under Democratic control but opposed to Cleveland , commissioned and produced the Morgan Report , which contradicted Blount 's findings and found the overthrow was a completely internal affair . Cleveland dropped all talk of reinstating the Queen , and went on to recognize and maintain diplomatic relations with the new Republic of Hawaii . 
 Closer to home , Cleveland adopted a broad interpretation of the Monroe Doctrine that not only prohibited new European colonies , but also declared an American national interest in any matter of substance within the hemisphere . When Britain and Venezuela disagreed over the boundary between Venezuela and the colony of British Guiana , Cleveland and Secretary of State Richard Olney protested . British Prime Minister Lord Salisbury and the British ambassador to Washington , Julian Pauncefote , misjudged how important successful resolution of the dispute was to the American government , having prolonged the crisis before ultimately accepting the American demand for arbitration . A tribunal convened in Paris in 1898 to decide the matter , and in 1899 awarded the bulk of the disputed territory to British Guiana . But by standing with a Latin American nation against the encroachment of a colonial power , Cleveland improved relations with the United States ' southern neighbors , and at the same time , the cordial manner in which the negotiations were conducted also made for good relations with Britain . 
 = = = Military policy , 1893 @-@ 1897 = = = 
 The second Cleveland administration was as committed to military modernization as the first , and ordered the first ships of a navy capable of offensive action . Construction continued on the Endicott program of coastal fortifications begun under Cleveland 's first administration . The adoption of the Krag – Jørgensen rifle , the US Army 's first bolt @-@ action repeating rifle , was finalized . In 1895 @-@ 96 Secretary of the Navy Hilary A. Herbert , having recently adopted the aggressive naval strategy advocated by Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan , successfully proposed ordering five battleships ( the Kearsarge and Illinois classes ) and sixteen torpedo boats . Completion of these ships nearly doubled the Navy 's battleships and created a new torpedo boat force , which previously had only two boats . However , the battleships and seven of the torpedo boats were not completed until 1899 @-@ 1901 , after the Spanish – American War . 
 = = = Cancer = = = 
 In the midst of the fight for repeal of Free Silver coinage in 1893 , Cleveland sought the advice of the White House doctor , Dr. O 'Reilly , about soreness on the roof of his mouth and a crater @-@ like edge ulcer with a granulated surface on the left side of Cleveland 's hard palate . Samples of the tumor were sent anonymously to the army medical museum . The diagnosis was not a malignant cancer , but instead an <unk> . 
 Cleveland decided to have surgery secretly , to avoid further panic that might worsen the financial depression . The surgery occurred on July 1 , to give Cleveland time to make a full recovery in time for the upcoming Congressional session . Under the guise of a vacation cruise , Cleveland and his surgeon , Dr. Joseph Bryant , left for New York . The surgeons operated aboard the Oneida , a yacht owned by Cleveland 's friend E. C. Benedict , as it sailed off Long Island . The surgery was conducted through the President 's mouth , to avoid any scars or other signs of surgery . The team , sedating Cleveland with nitrous oxide and ether , successfully removed parts of his upper left jaw and hard palate . The size of the tumor and the extent of the operation left Cleveland 's mouth disfigured . During another surgery , Cleveland was fitted with a hard rubber dental prosthesis that corrected his speech and restored his appearance . A cover story about the removal of two bad teeth kept the suspicious press placated . Even when a newspaper story appeared giving details of the actual operation , the participating surgeons discounted the severity of what transpired during Cleveland 's vacation . In 1917 , one of the surgeons present on the Oneida , Dr. William W. Keen , wrote an article detailing the operation . 
 Cleveland enjoyed many years of life after the tumor was removed , and there was some debate as to whether it was actually malignant . Several doctors , including Dr. Keen , stated after Cleveland 's death that the tumor was a carcinoma . Other suggestions included <unk> or a benign salivary mixed tumor ( also known as a pleomorphic adenoma ) . In the 1980s , analysis of the specimen finally confirmed the tumor to be <unk> carcinoma , a low @-@ grade epithelial cancer with a low potential for metastasis . 
 = = = Administration and cabinet = = = 
 = = = Judicial appointments = = = 
 Cleveland 's trouble with the Senate hindered the success of his nominations to the Supreme Court in his second term . In 1893 , after the death of Samuel Blatchford , Cleveland nominated William B. Hornblower to the Court . Hornblower , the head of a New York City law firm , was thought to be a qualified appointee , but his campaign against a New York machine politician had made Senator David B. Hill his enemy . Further , Cleveland had not consulted the Senators before naming his appointee , leaving many who were already opposed to Cleveland on other grounds even more aggrieved . The Senate rejected Hornblower 's nomination on January 15 , 1894 , by a vote of 30 to 24 . 
 Cleveland continued to defy the Senate by next appointing Wheeler Hazard Peckham another New York attorney who had opposed Hill 's machine in that state . Hill used all of his influence to block Peckham 's confirmation , and on February 16 , 1894 , the Senate rejected the nomination by a vote of 32 to 41 . Reformers urged Cleveland to continue the fight against Hill and to nominate Frederic R. <unk> , but Cleveland acquiesced in an inoffensive choice , that of Senator Edward Douglass White of Louisiana , whose nomination was accepted unanimously . Later , in 1896 , another vacancy on the Court led Cleveland to consider Hornblower again , but he declined to be nominated . Instead , Cleveland nominated Rufus Wheeler Peckham , the brother of Wheeler Hazard Peckham , and the Senate confirmed the second Peckham easily . 
 = = = States admitted to the Union = = = 
 In Cleveland 's first term , no new states had been admitted in more than a decade , owing to Congressional Democrats ' reluctance to admit states they believed would send Republican members . When Harrison took office , he and the Republican Congress admitted six states — North Dakota , South Dakota , Montana , Washington , Idaho , and Wyoming — all of which were expected to send Republican delegations . Utah , however , was believed to be Democratic . This , combined with uncertainty about Mormon polygamy ( disavowed in 1890 ) , led it to be excluded from the new states . When Cleveland won election to a second term , he and the Democratic majority in the 53rd United States Congress passed an Enabling Act in 1894 that permitted Utah to apply for statehood . Utah joined the Union as the 45th state on January 4 , 1896 . 
 = = 1896 election and retirement = = 
 Cleveland 's agrarian and silverite enemies gained control of the Democratic party in 1896 , repudiated his administration and the gold standard , and nominated William Jennings Bryan on a Silver Platform . Cleveland silently supported the Gold Democrats ' third @-@ party ticket that promised to defend the gold standard , limit government and oppose high tariffs , but he declined their nomination for a third term . The party won only 100 @,@ 000 votes in the general election , and William McKinley , the Republican nominee , triumphed easily over Bryan . Agrarians nominated Bryan again in 1900 . In 1904 the conservatives , with Cleveland 's support , regained control of the Democratic Party and nominated Alton B. Parker . 
 After leaving the White House on March 4 , 1897 , Cleveland lived in retirement at his estate , Westland Mansion , in Princeton , New Jersey . For a time he was a trustee of Princeton University , and was one of the majority of trustees who preferred Dean West 's plans for the Graduate School and undergraduate living over those of Woodrow Wilson , then president of the university . Cleveland consulted occasionally with President Theodore Roosevelt ( 1901 – 1909 ) , but was financially unable to accept the chairmanship of the commission handling the Coal Strike of 1902 . Cleveland still made his views known in political matters . In a 1905 article in The Ladies Home Journal , Cleveland weighed in on the women 's suffrage movement , writing that " sensible and responsible women do not want to vote . The relative positions to be assumed by men and women in the working out of our civilization were assigned long ago by a higher intelligence . " 
 In 1906 , a group of New Jersey Democrats promoted Cleveland as a possible candidate for the United States Senate . The incumbent , John F. Dryden , was not seeking re @-@ election , and some Democrats felt that the former President could attract the votes of some disaffected Republican legislators who might be drawn to Cleveland 's statesmanship and conservatism . 
 Cleveland 's health had been declining for several years , and in the autumn of 1907 he fell seriously ill . In 1908 , he suffered a heart attack and died on June 24 at age 71 . His last words were , " I have tried so hard to do right . " He is buried in the Princeton Cemetery of the Nassau Presbyterian Church . 
 = = Honors and memorials = = 
 In his first term in office , Cleveland sought a summer house to escape the heat and smells of Washington , D.C. , near enough the capital . He secretly bought a farmhouse , Oak View ( or Oak Hill ) , in a rural upland part of the District of Columbia , in 1886 , and remodeled it into a Queen Anne style summer estate . He sold Oak View upon losing his bid for re @-@ election in 1888 . Not long thereafter , suburban residential development reached the area , which came to be known as Oak View , and then Cleveland Heights , and eventually Cleveland Park . The Clevelands are depicted in local murals . 
 Grover Cleveland Hall at Buffalo State College in Buffalo , New York . Cleveland Hall houses the offices of the college president , vice presidents , and other administrative functions and student services . Cleveland was a member of the first board of directors of the then Buffalo Normal School . Grover Cleveland Middle School in his birthplace , Caldwell , New Jersey , was named for him , as is Grover Cleveland High School in Buffalo , New York , and the town of Cleveland , Mississippi . Mount Cleveland , a volcano in Alaska , is also named after him . In 1895 he became the first U.S. President who was filmed . 
 The first U.S. postage stamp to honor Cleveland appeared in 1923 . This twelve @-@ cent issue accompanied a thirteen @-@ cent stamp in the same definitive series that depicted his old rival Benjamin Harrison . Cleveland 's only two subsequent stamp appearances have been in issues devoted to the full roster of U.S. Presidents , released , respectively , in 1938 and 1986 . 
 Cleveland 's portrait was on the U.S. $ 1000 bill of series 1928 and series 1934 . He also appeared on the first few issues of the $ 20 Federal Reserve Notes from 1914 . Since he was both the 22nd and 24th president , he was featured on two separate dollar coins released in 2012 as part of the Presidential $ 1 Coin Act of 2005 . 
 = Before and After Science = 
 Before and After Science is the fifth studio album by British musician Brian Eno . Produced by Eno and Rhett Davies , it was originally released by Polydor Records in December 1977 . Guest musicians from the United Kingdom and Germany helped with the album , including members of Roxy Music , Free , Fairport Convention , Can and Cluster . Over one hundred tracks were written with only ten making the album 's final cut . The musical styles of the album range from energetic and jagged to more languid and pastoral . 
 The album marks Eno 's last foray into rock music for the 1970s as a solo artist , with all his remaining albums of the decade showcasing more of Eno 's avant @-@ garde and ambient music , which was hinted at on the second half of Before and After Science . The album was Eno 's second to chart in the United States . The song " King 's Lead Hat " , the title of which is an anagram for Talking Heads , was remixed and released as a single , although it didn 't chart in the United Kingdom . Critical response to the album has remained positive , with several critics calling it one of Eno 's best works . 
 = = Production = = 
 Unlike Eno 's previous albums , which were recorded in a very short time , Before and After Science was two years in the making . During this two @-@ year period , Eno was busy working on his solo ambient music albums Music for Films and Discreet Music . Due to the very positive critical reception accorded his previous rock music @-@ oriented album Another Green World , Eno was afraid of repeating himself but still wanted to release a high @-@ quality product . 
 As on previous rock @-@ based recordings , for Before and After Science Eno worked with a plethora of guest musicians . Several artists from German and British groups of the era contributed to the album , collaborating with Eno for the first time . Guitarist Fred Frith caught the attention of Brian Eno who was " excited by the timbral possibilities that [ Frith had ] been discovering " on his album Guitar Solos . Eno asked Frith to record with him , and this resulted in Frith playing guitar on the album . Jaki Liebezeit of the German krautrock group Can played drums for Eno on " Backwater " , while German ambient music group Cluster contributed to the songwriting and instrumentation of the track " By This River " . Eno had previously worked with Cluster on their album Cluster & Eno released in 1977 . Additional session musicians included Dave <unk> of British folk band Fairport Convention , who contributed drums to " Kurt 's Rejoinder " and " Here He Comes " , and Andy Fraser of British blues rock band Free , who played drums on " King 's Lead Hat " . 
 Eno also had several musicians who he had worked with on previous solo albums return . Percy Jones of Brand X and Phil Collins of Brand X and Genesis , who had been on Eno 's two previous rock albums , played bass and drums respectively . Other contributors included Robert Fripp of King Crimson , Paul Rudolph of Hawkwind and Bill MacCormick and Phil Manzanera of Quiet Sun . Robert Wyatt went under the pseudonym of Shirley Williams and is credited on the album for " time " and " brush timbales " on " Through Hollow Lands " and " Kurt 's Rejoinder " respectively . Working extensively with the musicians and his instructional cards — the Oblique Strategies — during the two years working on the album , Eno wrote over one hundred songs . 
 = = Style = = 
 Jim DeRogatis , author of Turn on Your Mind : Four Decades of Great Psychedelic Rock , described the overall sound of Before and After Science as " the coldest and most clinical of Eno 's pop efforts " , while David Ross Smith of online music database AllMusic wrote that " Despite the album 's pop format , the sound is unique and strays far from the mainstream " . According to David Bowie 's biographer Thomas Jerome Seabrook , the album is " split between up @-@ tempo art @-@ rock on side one and more pastoral material on side two " , while Piotr Orlov of LA Weekly categorized it as an art pop record . The album 's opening tracks " No One Receiving " and " Backwater " start the album as upbeat and bouncy songs . " King 's Lead Hat " is an anagram of Talking Heads , a new wave group Eno had met after a concert in England when they were touring with Ramones . Eno would later produce Talking Heads ' second , third and fourth albums , including Remain in Light . The last five songs of the album have been described as having " an occasional pastoral quality " and being " pensive and atmospheric " . 
 Opposed to Another Green World 's music , which Eno described as " sky music " , Eno referred to the music of Before and After Science as " ocean music " . References to water in the lyrics appear in songs such as " Backwater " , " Julie With ... " and " By this River " . Author Simon Reynolds noted themes of " boredom " and " bliss " through the album , citing " Here He Comes " , about " a boy trying to vanish by floating through the sky through a different time " and " Spider and I " , about a boy watching the sky and dreaming about being carried away with a ship , as examples . Eno 's songwriting style was described as " a sound @-@ over @-@ sense approach " . Influenced by poet Kurt Schwitters , Eno consciously did not make songwriting or lyrics the main focus in the music . Tom Carson of Rolling Stone noted this style , stating that the lyrics are " only complementary variables " to the music on the album . Lester Bangs commented on Eno 's lyrical style on " Julie with ... " stating that the lyrics themes " could be a murderer 's ruminations , or simply a lovers ' retreat ... or Julie could be three years old " . Schwitters ' influence is also shown on the song " Kurt 's Rejoinder " , on which samples of Schwitters ' poem " <unk> " can be heard . 
 = = Release = = 
 Before and After Science was released in December 1977 on Polydor in the United Kingdom and on Island in the United States . The first pressings of the album included four offset prints by Peter Schmidt . The back cover of the LP says " Fourteen Pictures " under the album title , referencing Eno 's ten songs and Peter Schmidt 's 4 prints . These prints included " The Road to the Crater " , " Look at September , look at October " , " The Other House " and " Four Years " . The album did not chart in the United Kingdom , but was Eno 's first album since Here Come the Warm Jets to chart in the United States , where it peaked at 171 on the Billboard Top LPs & Tapes chart . " King 's Lead Hat " was remixed and released as a single in January 1978 , featuring the b @-@ side " R.A.F. " , which is credited to " Eno & Snatch " . This single failed to chart in either the United Kingdom or the United States . 
 Before and After Science was re @-@ issued on compact disc through E.G. Records in January 1987 . In 2004 , Virgin Records began reissuing Eno 's albums in batches of four to five . The remastered digipak release of Before and After Science was released on 31 May 2004 in the United Kingdom and on 1 June 2004 in North America . 
 On a side note , the black @-@ and @-@ white album cover art was used by the Singapore government for an anti @-@ heroin campaign in the late 1970s . The image was used briefly on posters and then quickly changed , probably due to legal reasons . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On the album 's initial release , the album received very positive reviews from rock critics . Writing for Creem , Joe <unk> called the Before and After Science " the perfect Eno album " , while Mitchell Schneider wrote a positive review in Crawdaddy ! , stating that he couldn 't " remember the last time a record took such a hold of [ him ] — and gave [ him ] such an extreme case of vertigo , too " . In Down Beat , Russel Shaw wrote that " [ Before and After Science ] is another typically awesome , stunning and numbing Brian Eno album — the record Pink Floyd could make if they set their collective mind to it . " Tom Carson of Rolling Stone noted that the album " is less immediately ingratiating than either Taking Tiger Mountain or Here Come the Warm Jets . Still , the execution here is close to flawless , and despite Eno 's eclecticism , the disparate styles he employs connect brilliantly . " Critic Robert Christgau gave the album an A − rating , stating that he " didn 't like the murkiness of the quiet , largely instrumental reflections that take over side two " , but didn 't find that it " diminishes side one 's oblique , charming tour of the popular rhythms of the day " . In 1979 , Before and After Science was voted 12th best album of the year on the Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop critics poll for 1978 . 
 Modern reviews of Before and After Science have also been positive . David Ross Smith of AllMusic awarded the album the highest rating of five stars stating that it ranks alongside Here Come the Warm Jets and Another Green World " as the most essential Eno material " . The music webzine Tiny Mix Tapes awarded the album their highest rating , stating that it " is not only one of the best albums in Eno 's catalog , but of the 1970s as a whole " . The webzine Pitchfork Media gave Before and After Science a positive but less enthusiastic review , calling the album a " neutered star in search of fuel , boasting only ' King 's Lead Hat ' for the pop world , and the luminous pure prog @-@ jazz of ' Energy Fools the Magician ' for the out @-@ rock contingent " . Ten days later Pitchfork placed Before and After Science at number 100 on their list of " Top 100 Albums of the 1970s " , referring to it as a " lovely , charming album " and going on to state that , while " not formally groundbreaking , it 's frequently overlooked when discussing great albums from an era that 's romanticized as placing premiums on progression and innovation — and particularly in the context of Eno 's career , which is so full of both " . 
 The album was included in Robert Dimery 's 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Brian Eno , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Musicians 
 Production 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Chuck E. Cheese 's = 
 Chuck E. Cheese 's ( formerly Chuck E. Cheese 's Pizza Time Theatre and Chuck E. Cheese 's Pizza ) is a chain of American family entertainment centers and restaurants . The chain is the primary brand of CEC Entertainment , Inc. and is headquartered in Irving , Texas . The establishment serves pizza and other menu items , complemented by arcade games , amusement rides , and animatronic displays as a focus of entertainment for the entire family . The brand derives its name from its main animatronic character Chuck E. Cheese , a comedic mouse who sings and interacts with guests . 
 Chuck E. Cheese 's Pizza Time Theatre in San Jose , California , was the first location to open in 1977 . The concept was authored by Atari co @-@ founder Nolan Bushnell , credited with bringing video games such as Pong to the mainstream . The Pizza Time Theatre was the first family restaurant to integrate food , animated entertainment , and an indoor arcade . The chain merged with competitor Showbiz Pizza Place in 1984 , forming Showbiz Pizza Time , Inc . In the early 1990s , the company unified the two brands renaming every location to Chuck E. Cheese 's Pizza . They redesigned the logo in 1994 , dropping Pizza from each store 's name . In 1998 , Showbiz Pizza Time , Inc. became CEC Entertainment , Inc . , and the company operates 590 locations as of 2015 . 
 = = Corporate history = = 
 Chuck E. Cheese 's , originally referred to as Chuck E. Cheese ’ s Pizza Time Theater , was founded by Atari founder Nolan Bushnell who was seeking to expand the purview of video game arcades beyond more adult locations like pool halls to a kid and family friendly venue . Bushnell ’ s experience in the amusement park industry , as well as his fondness of The Walt Disney Company , was influential in the conceptualization of the Pizza Time Theatre concept . The first location opened in San Jose , California in 1977 , and was labeled as the first family restaurant to integrate food , cheap animated entertainment , and an indoor arcade . In 1978 , Bushnell purchased the Pizza Time Theatre concept from Atari 's then @-@ corporate parent , Warner Communications . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 As the restaurant became increasingly successful , he began to franchise , resulting in a co @-@ development agreement between Bushnell and Robert Brock of Topeka Inn Management in 1979 . The agreement handed Brock exclusive franchising rights for opening Pizza Time Theatres in sixteen states across the southern and midwestern United States , while also forming a company subdivision , " Pizza Show Biz " , to develop the Pizza Time Theatres . 
 = = = ShowBiz Pizza Place = = = 
 In November 1978 , Brock met Aaron Fechter of Creative Engineering , Inc . Concerned that Fechter ’ s animatronics would be too strong a competition for Bushnell ’ s work , Brock requested that Bushnell release him from the co @-@ development agreement , citing misrepresentation . In December 1979 , Brock and Fechter formed “ Showbiz Pizza Place Inc ” , severing Brock 's business relationship with Bushnell . ShowBiz Pizza Place was conceptually identical to Pizza Time Theatre in all aspects except for animation , which would be provided by Creative Engineering . Showbiz Pizza Place opened its first location on March 3 , 1980 , in Kansas City , Missouri . 
 Upon the opening of ShowBiz Pizza Place , Bushnell sued Brock and Topeka Inn Management over breach of contract . Brock immediately issued a counter @-@ suit against Bushnell , citing misrepresentation . The court case began in March 1980 , eventually settling out of court with Showbiz agreeing to pay Pizza Time Theatre a portion of its profits over the following decade . During this period , Topeka Inn Management also changed its name to Brock Hotel Corporation and moved its headquarters to Irving , Texas . Both restaurants experienced increased success as the video game industry became more robust , and , to maintain competition , both franchises continually modified and diversified their animatronic shows . 
 = = = Mergers and restructuring = = = 
 In 1981 , Pizza Time Theatre went public ; however , the evolving video game industry and the video game crash of 1983 resulted in significant losses for Pizza Time Theatre , which lost $ 15 million in 1983 , and by 1984 , Bushnell ’ s debts were insurmountable , resulting in the filing of Chapter 11 bankruptcy for Pizza Time Theatre Inc . Showbiz then bought the foundering company , recreating itself as Showbiz Pizza Time Inc . 
 After the merger , both restaurants continued operating under the different titles , while major financial restructuring had begun , eventually becoming publicly traded in 1989 , with sales increasing by 8 @.@ 3 % . During this period , Creative Engineering began to sever ties with ShowBiz Pizza Time ( they officially left the company in September 1990 ) , eventually resulting in the unification of its mixed characters . By 1992 , all restaurants assumed the name of Chuck E. Cheese ’ s Pizza . However , the name was changed to Chuck E. Cheese 's in 1995 after a 1994 redesigning of the concept . In 1998 , the company renamed itself CEC Entertainment , Inc .. Part of this renaming was related to a move from the NASDAQ to the NYSE . In 1999 , CEC Entertainment , Inc. bought out competitor Discovery Zone . Chuck E. Cheese 's celebrated its 30th anniversary in 2007 . 
 In February 2014 , Apollo Global Management acquired CEC Entertainment for $ 54 per share , or about US $ 950 million . There are 577 open locations throughout North America , South America , and the Middle East . 
 = = = Mascot redesign = = = 
 In 2012 , Chuck E. Cheese 's announced that their Chuck E. Cheese mascot would receive a major makeover to make the character look more like a rockstar . Jaret Reddick , lead singer of the musical group Bowling for Soup , was hired as the new voice of Chuck E. Cheese , who had been voiced by Duncan Brannan for many years . 
 The newly designed character was featured in a series of advertising campaign spots produced by Sugar Film Productions , Reel FX and <unk> . 
 = = International expansion = = 
 In the early 80s , the restaurant opened in Australia under the name " Charlie Cheese 's Pizza Playhouse " due to the word " chuck " meaning to throw up in Australia . 
 During the early 80s , a Chuck E. Cheese opened at least one restaurant in Hong Kong , though they soon closed due to the 1984 bankruptcy . 
 = = Products = = 
 = = = Menu items = = = 
 While its primary focus is pizza , Chuck E. Cheese 's also offers cold @-@ cut sandwiches , buffalo wings , salad bars and desserts . Some stores are also used as " test " locations which feature new Chuck E. Cheese foods . Certain Chuck E. Cheese locations also offer beer and wine . 
 Starting on November 13 , 2012 , new gluten @-@ free menu items are available at more than 500 locations in the U.S. and Canada . This currently includes a choice of a personal @-@ size cheese pizza and an individual chocolate cupcake . 
 = = Entertainment = = 
 = = = Arcade and currency = = = 
 From the time of the company 's inception to today , one of the main draws for the stores has been the arcade . The arcade games primarily consist of either redemption games or video arcade games . 
 The brass tokens issued by the company for use in their arcades exist in numerous varieties , and are collected by <unk> enthusiasts . The company once tested a card access method for use with their arcade and skill games in one location . The test location would no longer use tokens , and instead use a refillable card to access credits , which replace tokens , and points , which replace tickets . However , this was later scrapped . It was tested under different names , including " Chuck E. ' s Super Discount Card " and " Chuck E. Token Card " . This method is currently being tested in some markets again . Instead of electronic tickets like the former cards , Patrons still carry paper tickets and the card just take the place of the metal tokens . <unk> , or CEC Entertainment , has called the new system " Play Pass " . 
 = = = <unk> figures = = = 
 Along with the arcade , the other main draw for the centers since the beginning was its animatronic show , until the mid @-@ 1990s . More recently , less attention has been placed on animatronics . However , there are now several different styles of animatronic shows in use within the company , depending on when the location opened , whether it was renovated , and other factors . 
 When the first location opened in 1977 , the animatronic characters were featured in framed portraits hanging on the walls of the main dining area , but they are no longer in use today . The show featured <unk> the cat ( the first character to face retirement as he was soon replaced with Mr. Munch in 1978 ) , <unk> the singing chef , Jasper T. Jowls , the <unk> , and the main focus of the show , Chuck E. Cheese . Later , restaurants also added " Cabaret " shows in separate rooms of each restaurant . They also frequently changed out the sole female character , named Helen Henny , in the main show . They achieved this by applying a cosmetic change to the existing robot , as well as a change of stage backdrop , to match the performer . 
 Beginning in 1998 , the company 's show installed into new stores , referred to as " Studio C " , consists of a single animated Chuck E. Cheese character alongside large television monitors , lighting effects , and interactive elements . The other characters appear as puppets on the TV screens . In some markets , the company has also tried a new store concept that omits the animated show entirely . This is the Circle of Lights stage which either consists of a live Chuck E. Cheese costume character or an animatronic in a futuristic light stage with large television monitors . 
 The members that currently perform in the animatronic show are : 
 Chuck E. Cheese — vocals 
 Helen Henny — vocals 
 Mr. Munch — vocals , keyboards 
 Jasper T. Jowls — vocals , guitar 
 <unk> E. <unk> — vocals , percussion 
 = = = Costumed shows = = = 
 There are two types of costumed shows used by Chuck E. Cheese 's : the LIVE ! show and the Road show . The LIVE ! show is performed at the front of the stage in the showroom , whenever a child is celebrating a birthday . The live show is a way of pumping up the crowd before a customized rendition of " Happy Birthday " is sung to the child that is celebrating the birthday ( " I say Happy , you say Birthday ... ) . A costumed Chuck E. Cheese dances with the guests and sings , while being accompanied by the cast members . The Road show is a performance by a costumed Chuck E. Cheese character , and is performed outside the normal showroom . Children are gathered via the public announcement system or by Chuck E. Cheese himself . Chuck E. Cheese wants the kids to dance in order to win free tickets . The free tickets are thrown at the end of the performance for all the kids that participated . Chuck E. comes out every hour on the half hour ( 12 : 30 , 1 : 30 , etc . ) . The songs Chuck E. and the kids dance to are usually well @-@ known classic songs such as " If You 're Happy and You Know It " and " Head , Shoulders , Knees , and Toes " . 
 = French ship Vengeur du Peuple = 
 The Vengeur du Peuple ( " Avenger of the People " ) was a 74 @-@ gun ship of the line of the French Navy . Funded by a don des <unk> donation from the chamber of commerce of Marseille , she was launched in 1762 as Marseillois . 
 She took part in the naval operations in the American Revolutionary War in Admiral d 'Estaing 's squadron , duelling Preston in a single @-@ ship action on 11 August 1778 , taking part in the Battle of the Chesapeake where she duelled HMS Intrepid , and supporting the flagship Ville de Paris at the Battle of the Saintes . She also took part in the Battle of Saint Kitts . 
 After the French Revolution , she was renamed Vengeur du Peuple and took part in the Glorious First of June . There , she was disabled after a furious duel with HMS Brunswick and surrendered after losing hope of being rescued by a French ship . After a few hours , as British ships were beginning rescue operations , she listed and foundered , taking almost half her crew with her . 
 The sinking of Vengeur du Peuple was used as propaganda by the National Convention and Bertrand Barère , who gave birth to the legend that the crew had gone down with the ship fighting , rather than surrender . The Scottish historian Thomas Carlyle repeated the tale in his The French Revolution : A History , yielding a rebuttal by Rear @-@ Admiral John Griffiths , who had witnessed the events . Although discredited in naval history circles , the legend lived on as a folk tale , inspiring numerous representations and a fictional account by Jules Verne in Twenty Thousand Leagues Under The Sea . 
 = = Career = = 
 The French Navy had lost 29 ships during the Seven Years ' War , casualties being particularly high at the Battle of Lagos and the Battle of Quiberon Bay . To replace these losses , in 1761 the Duke of Choiseul launched subscriptions , called don des <unk> , whereby French individuals and organisations could donate to the Crown the funds necessary to build and equip a warship . 13 million livres were raised and 18 ships , including two three @-@ deckers , were built and named after their patrons . The Marseillois was funded by the chamber of commerce of Marseille , for 500 @,@ 000 livres . 
 Marseillois was ordered on 16 January 1762 , to be built in Toulon on a design by the engineer Coulomb , and named the same day by Louis XV , following the request of her patrons . The chamber of commerce of Marseille further requested that the ship be built in Marseille , but Coulomb determined that the harbour there was too shallow for the launch of a 74 @-@ gun ship , and the order for Marseillois was eventually confirmed at Toulon . There , lack of timber in the shipyards , that were already busy building Languedoc , Zélé and Bourgogne , delayed the construction of Marseillois until 1764 . Her building was directed by the engineer Chapelle . 
 She was launched on 16 July 1766 , and completed quickly , decorated by sculptures carved by Pierre <unk> . After her completion , she was put in reserve , where she would remain for 11 years . On 1 February 1778 , Marseillois was hove down for maintenance and repairs of her hull , which was found to be in " very good shape " , although her keel had <unk> by 38 centimetres ( 15 in ) ; maintenance completed two days later , and she was commissioned under Captain Louis @-@ Armand de La Poype de Vertrieu . 
 = = = American Revolutionary War = = = 
 The outbreak of the American War of Independence had caused relations between France and Great Britain to deteriorate , and diplomatic ties were broken on 16 March 1778 . Admiral d 'Estaing took command of a squadron of thirteen ships of the line and four frigates in Toulon . Marseillois was assigned to this fleet , the first active service she would see . The fleet set sail on 18 April 1778 , crossed Gibraltar on 16 May , and arrived at the mouth of the Delaware River on 8 July . 
 = = = = Campaign of 1778 – 80 , La Poype de Vertrieu = = = = 
 The French squadron arrived unopposed off New York on 8 July . British forces there amounted to a squadron of nine smaller ships of the line and two frigates under Admiral Lord Howe ; in order to avoid battle with the more numerous and powerful French ships , Howe retreated under the protection of the strong defences of New York . D 'Estaing wished to press the attack , but his pilots advised that the harbour was too shallow for his ships , so the squadron spent two weeks at anchor blockading Howe , resupplying and conferring with the American government . On 22 July , he departed for Newport to join the American Revolutionaries , where he arrived on 28 July and anchored his fleet outside the harbour to better coordinate his attack with that of the Revolutionary land forces . Marseillois anchored in front of the main channel with most of the fleet , while Fantasque , <unk> and the frigates blockaded the Sakonnet River , and Protecteur and Provence blocked the Connecticut River . 
 On 8 August , the French squadron sailed into Newport harbour , Marseillois coming sixth in the line . They had begun to disembark troops the following day when Howe 's squadron arrived from New York . D 'Estaing found his anchored ships were now vulnerable to attacks from land batteries , warships and fireships , and cancelled the landing , putting to sea to challenge Howe in battle . Howe 's force moved off , pursued by the French . On 11 August the French closed in and the two fleets manoeuvred in preparation for a battle , but around 16 : 00 , a Nor 'easter storm broke out , scattering both fleets . Marseillois sustained damage to her rigging , losing her mizzen and her bowsprit , and was cut off from the bulk of the French squadron . The next day , around 20 : 00 , having only just erected jury rigging , she was attacked by the 50 @-@ gun HMS Preston , under William Hotham . The two ships duelled indecisively for one hour before parting . Marseillois rejoined the French fleet on 14 August . 
 Marseillois took part in the Battle of St. Lucia in September , coming third in the French line of battle , and was present at other encounters with the British fleets in the Caribbean theatre of the American Revolutionary War . The next year , on 6 July 1779 , Marseillois took part in the Battle of Grenada , sailing in the rear of the French fleet . Later in the year , she took part in the Siege of Savannah , where she was eighth in the line of battle . 
 The French fleet sustained damage at the Siege of Savannah and eventually returned to Europe . Marseillois returned to Toulon with Zélé , <unk> , Protecteur , and Experiment . During the campaign , 46 members of her crew had died ; of these , only three had been killed in combat . 
 La Poype de Vertrieu wrote his report and recommendations for the refitting of Marseillois on 24 December 1779 ; he found her a passable ship , but her high poop hindered her sailing when running , and he recommended improvements to the gun ports of the castles , which were obstructed and allowed only two guns on the quarterdeck and one on the forecastle to be used . Furthermore , substantial repairs on the rigging were needed , and she needed her hull heated to kill worms . La Poype de Vertrieu wrote " it appears that Marseillois shall never be an exceptional sailor , but I am convinced that she will give satisfaction " . 
 = = = = Campaign of 1780 , Albert de Rions = = = = 
 After the repairs had been completed , Captain d 'Albert de Rions was given command of Marseillois . She was appointed to a two @-@ ship squadron under Suffren , who had his flag on Zélé . They set sail on 19 May 1780 to patrol off Portugal , and joined up with a division under <unk> in Cadiz on 17 June . 
 On 6 November , Marseillois departed Cadiz with a joint Franco @-@ Spanish fleet under Admiral d 'Estaing , bound for Brest , where she arrived on 3 January 1781 . 
 = = = = Campaign of 1781 – 82 , Castellane <unk> = = = = 
 In Brest , command of Marseillois passed to Captain Henri @-@ César de Castellane <unk> , and she became part of a squadron under Admiral François Joseph Paul de Grasse . A young Pierre @-@ Charles Villeneuve served aboard as an ensign . On 22 March 1781 , the fleet sailed for America to reinforce D 'Estaing 's forces there , arriving off Martinique on 29 April . There , the fleet met the British forces under Admiral Hood , and the Battle of Fort Royal broke out , an inconclusive long @-@ ranged artillery duel that lasted until the British retreated the next day due to the damage sustained by HMS Intrepid , Centaur and Russell . 
 De Grasse put to sail on 5 July , bound for Saint @-@ Domingue where he arrived on 16 July . At Cap @-@ Français , the fleet joined with the frigate Concorde , under Captain de <unk> , which brought news of the status and plans of the Continental Army . Letters from Washington and Rochambeau requested that de Grasse set sail either to New York , or into Chesapeake Bay . Reinforcing his fleet with the squadron under Admiral de <unk> and with 3 @,@ 300 soldiers taken from the garrisons of the island , De Grasse decided to sail for the Chesapeake . 
 On 5 September 1781 , the French and British squadrons met in the Battle of the Chesapeake . Marseillois was in the van of the French squadron , and exchanged the first shots of the day with the 64 @-@ gun HMS Intrepid , under Captain Anthony Molloy . In early April , Marseillois took part in the four @-@ day Battle of the Saintes . She was sailing at the rear of the fleet , and the French and British ships were already trading shots for ten minutes when she took her position in the line of battle . Later in the afternoon , she maintained a position in the line ahead of the flagship Ville de Paris , and supported her until she struck her colours , at which point Admiral de Vaudreuil ordered the fleet to regroup and follow him to Saint @-@ Domingue . The fleet reached Cap @-@ Français in several waves , the main corps arriving on 25 April ; Marseillois , along with Hercule , Pluton and <unk> , arrived on 11 May . 
 On 25 and 26 January 1782 , Marseillois took part in the Battle of Saint Kitts , where she held the 5th position in the line of battle . Marseillois returned to France at some point in 1782 , where she was listed on 1 September to be decommissioned . 
 = = = = Campaign of 1782 – 83 , Lombard = = = = 
 In October 1782 , she was hove down and coppered . She was then recommissioned in December 1782 in Brest under chevalier de Lombard , and was part of a two @-@ ship squadron along with Protecteur . 
 Negotiations for peace with England started in January 1783 , and Marseillois was decommissioned in Rochefort on 13 February 1783 . She remained in this state until 1794 , with some repairs being conducted in 1785 and 1788 . 
 = = = French Revolutionary War = = = 
 By February 1794 the still decommissioned , Marseillois had been renamed Vengeur du Peuple , probably a response to the participation of the city of Marseille in the Federalist revolts of 1793 . She was recommissioned in Rochefort , and on 24 March 1794 , Captain Jean François Renaudin took command . On 1 April 1794 , she sailed to Île @-@ d 'Aix , where she joined up with Pelletier , and on 11 April , the squadron sailed on again , reaching Brest on 18 April , having been joined en route by <unk> . Upon their arrival the ships were assigned to the squadron under Admiral Villaret de Joyeuse . 
 = = = = Glorious First of June = = = = 
 On 16 May 1794 , the fleet departed from Brest with the mission of protecting a convoy of ships carrying food to France , beginning the Atlantic campaign of May 1794 . On 1 June , the French squadron encountered the British fleet , in an engagement known as the Glorious First of June . Vengeur was third in the French line of battle , after the flagship Montagne and between Achille and Northumberland . 
 The British fleet approached the French line in an oblique manner , leading to individual engagements as the British ships attempted to break through at several points . Around 9 : 30 , the British flagship HMS Queen Charlotte cut the French line aft of Montagne , firing a devastating raking broadside that killed Montagne 's commander , Captain <unk> . The ship astern of Montagne , Jacobin , attempted to prevent Queen Charlotte breaking through by accelerating to close the gap between herself and her flagship ; this left a gap behind her , between Jacobin and Achille , that HMS Brunswick , under Captain John Harvey , attempted to exploit to cut the line and assist Queen Charlotte . Achille accelerated and closed the gap , and Brunswick turned her fire against Vengeur , while Achille engaged HMS Ramillies and Valiant . 
 Prevented from cutting the French line ahead of Achille , HMS Brunswick turned and tried to cross aft of her , between Achille and Vengeur . Seeing the manoeuvre , Renaudin also accelerated to close this new gap , and Brunswick and Vengeur collided , the anchor of Brunswick becoming entangled in the rigging of Vengeur . Vengeur fired an entire broadside at point @-@ blank range , but was then unable to fire her main batteries again , the ships being so close as to prevent French gunners from ramming ammunition into their guns ; in contrast , British gunners used rammers with semi @-@ rigid rope handles instead of wooden handles , and were able to reload and maintain a sustained fire , riddling Vengeur with holes . The fight went on for four hours , until Brunswick , after shattering the rudder of Vengeur to prevent her from manoeuvring , separated at 12 : 45 . Her fire also opened a large hole in the hull of Vengeur . 
 During the duel between Vengeur and Brunswick , the undamaged HMS Ramillies had approached and put herself in a favourable position to rake Vengeur , and was waiting for Brunswick to separate to open fire . When she did so , Ramillies fired two broadsides , leaving Vengeur with only her foremast standing , which fell half an hour later . Ramillies sustained some damage herself . Soon afterwards , seawater inundated the powder room of Vengeur , denying her all means of defence , and 250 of her crew were out of action . The <unk> @-@ et @-@ un Mai closed in around 3 : 30 , attempting to provide assistance , but the proximity of several British sails endangered her so that she eventually sailed away . 
 Renaudin , seeing the hapless condition of his ship , ordered his flags hoisted half @-@ mast in surrender and distress around 14 : 00 , but after her surrender no British ship managed to get men aboard to take possession . This left Vengeur 's few remaining unwounded crew to attempt to salvage what they could . Ultimately the ship 's pumps became unmanageable , and Vengeur began to sink . Only the timely arrival of boats from the undamaged HMS Alfred and Culloden , as well as the services of the cutter Rattler , saved any of the Vengeur 's crew from drowning , these ships taking off nearly 500 sailors between them . Lieutenant John Winne of Rattler was especially commended for this hazardous work . By 18 : 15 , Vengeur was clearly beyond salvage and only the very worst of the wounded and the dead remained aboard , though some possibly stayed aboard in the hope of being rescued by a French ship rather than a British and avoid captivity . 
 Alfred rescued about 100 men ; Rattler , about 40 ; and Culloden , 127 , including Captain Renaudin , who abandoned his ship and left in the very first British boat . He was taken to Culloden and served a meal in the officers ' mess ; as he dined with his son and other French and British officers , a commotion was heard ; racing to the gallery of Culloden , the party witnessed Vengeur sink with the remaining wounded aboard . Figures of the casualties on Vengeur are not precisely known , but amount to approximately 250 killed during the battle , 106 drowned in the sinking , and 367 rescued by the British . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The sinking of Vengeur du Peuple was exploited for political purposes in France , as several sailors were said to have cried " Vive la Nation , vive la République ! " ( " Long live the nation , long live the republic " ) from the bow of the ship as she foundered ; this was bloated out of proportion by French politicians , who added that the sailors had waved the tricolour , sung La Marseillaise in defiance , and even continued firing guns until water reached them while the ship foundered , to eventually sink with her rather than surrender . They also extrapolated that the entire crew had disappeared with the Vengeur , a claim disproved by the return of captured crewmembers as they were quickly released from British captivity . 
 The origin of the legend is a speech made by Bertrand Barère at the National Convention on 21 messidor ( 9 July ) , Rapport sur l <unk> des <unk> <unk> le vaisseau le Vengeur , where he claimed that Vengeur had refused to surrender , nailing her flag , and that all the sailors had died with the ship , giving a last shout of " long live the Republic " and waving all sorts of flags and pennants while the ship disappeared . 
 Lord Howe denies the account entirely , claiming that it never occurred , a position followed by many British sources . Thomas Carlyle originally included the legend in his The French Revolution : A History , prompting Rear @-@ admiral John Griffiths – who , as a lieutenant on HMS Culloden at the time , had been an eyewitness to the sinking – to publicly challenge Carlyle 's tale . Carlyle set out to get to the bottom of the story , eventually unearthing the official report of Vengeur 's captain , Renaudin . Carlyle concluded that Barère had concocted a " cunningly devised fable " , and changed his account of the sinking of the Vengeur in subsequent editions . 
 The three most serious reports of the events are the report of Jean François Renaudin , captain of Vengeur , written in captivity on 1 <unk> an II ( 19 June 1794 ) , signed by Renaudin , Jean <unk> , Louis Rousseau , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and others , then in British custody in Tavistock ; the report of Cyprien Renaudin , first officer of Vengeur ( and cousin to Jean François Renaudin ) , which was found around 1929 in family archives ; and later accounts written in 1838 by Rear @-@ admiral John Griffiths , who had witnessed the event 44 years earlier . 
 In French drawings , Vengeur is often depicted as flying the Tricolour , which had been recently ordered by the Convention to be flown as battle ensign ; however , due to a lack of bunting in Brest , Villaret had not been able to distribute this flag to all his ships , and thus Vengeur probably still flew the white flag with a canton of three equal columns of red , white , and blue . 
 The notion that the ship would have nailed her flag and never surrendered , as Barère claimed , is never accounted in any of the reports . Though Jean François Renaudin never explicitly states that he surrendered , he does mention that he had his flag flown half @-@ mast in distress when he was surrounded by British ships , indicating that he was requesting assistance from the enemy . Griffiths observes that Vengeur was dismasted to the point that there would have been nothing on which to nail a flag anyway , and James makes mentions of Vengeur hoisting the Union Jack in submission . 
 The exact cause of the sinking was also the subject of dispute . Barère 's account describes Vengeur as sinking from the shots that would have holed her hull ; actually , Cyprien Renaudin mentions only two such holes in the lower hull of Vengeur and a noise " like a strong waterfall " at the poop , which he could not identify ; this is consistent with James ' account of " the Brunswick , by a few well @-@ directed shot , split the Vengeur 's rudder , and shattered her stern @-@ post ; besides making a large hole in her counter , through which the water rushed in great quantity . " In any case , the superstructures were very much battered , prompting Lieutenant Rotheram , of Culloden , to report that he " could not place a two @-@ feet rule in any direction , he thought , that would not touch two shot @-@ holes " . Claude <unk> attributes the sinking to ineptitude of the crew who had failed to close damaged lower gunports . The later study conducted by Captain Diaz de Soria in the 1950s suggests that water did enter from the gun ports of the lower battery , ripped off in the collision with Culloden and shattered by artillery fire , and that the crew failed to obstruct them with temporary contrivances . The panicking crew would have aggravated the situation by failing to man the pumps , explaining why it took four hours for Vengeur to sink between her surrender around 14 : 00 until her sinking between 18 : 00 and 18 : 30 . 
 The most debated point is the patriotic shouts , sometimes claimed to have been accompanied by singing of the Marseillaise . These shouts are denied entirely by Griffiths , but are mentioned in French accounts . Renaudin 's report does claim that sailors shouted " Vive la République " , but that it was in desperation for being unable to reach the British craft ; it does not mention any particular defiance in the intent , though , nor does it mention flags or La Marseillaise ; this position is followed by Troude and <unk> . Guérin proposes a variation , that knowing themselves doomed , the sailors remaining on Vengeur made a last display of patriotic and political fervour before dying . William James provides an alternative theory when he suggests that any person who behaved in such a manner on the stricken ship was acting under the influence of alcohol ; Troude , otherwise very critical of Barère 's account , vehemently dismissed this idea . 
 Captain Renaudin was said in a naval registry to have swum to safety . He had in fact abandoned his ship with the first British boat , leaving his men behind in disregard for military customs and the 1765 standing order that Captains had to be last to abandon ship , and though his account insinuates that he was on a boat close to Vengeur when she foundered , he was actually dining in the mess of Culloden at the moment of the sinking . In 1795 , Loutherbourg depicted the rescue of Vengeur 's crew by British ships in his large canvas of the battle , Lord Howe 's action , or the Glorious First of June . 
 = = = Contemporary reactions in France = = = 
 The speech of 9 July by Barère at the National Convention inflamed the nation , and as it specifically encouraged artists to exalt the story , poets like Ponce @-@ Denis <unk> @-@ Lebrun and Marie @-@ Joseph Chenier composed eulogies to commemorate the event , wrote new words for existing songs , and even produced a three @-@ act opera . 
 Barère had the following decree passed at the National Convention on 21 June 1794 : 
 The reappearance of the purportedly sunk crew , and the Thermidorian reaction , prevented the completion of this programme . 
 Captain Renaudin was posthumously promoted to contre @-@ amiral on 29 August 1794 ; he was later exchanged for the captain of HMS Thames , Captain James Cotes . On 10 September 1794 , Jean @-@ Jacques <unk> declared before the Convention : 
 In spite of these facts , the myth lived on : in his Histoire de la révolution française , Adolphe Thiers wrote an account repeating Barère 's version , where Vengeur refused to surrender . In 1847 Alphonse de Lamartine even invented the story that Renaudin had been killed heroically , cut in half by a cannon shot like Dupetit @-@ Thouars . 
 Some reports however indicate that the legend was not seriously accepted : Carlyle suggests one near @-@ eyewitness French account amounted to " not a recantation of an impudent amazing falsehood , but to some vague faint murmur or whimper of admission that it is probably false " . Captain Diaz de Soria relates the story , probably apocryphal , that in 1840 , the Prince of Joinville , while decorating the purported last survivor of Vengeur , would have told him " we do this for the legend , my good man : nations , after all , live only of legends " . In 1857 , Guérin wrote " one wonders how , after that , history could remain so credulous " . 
 = = = Jules Verne 's depiction = = = 
 In Twenty Thousand Leagues Under The Sea , published in 1870 , Jules Verne reported the incident with its revolutionary slant : 
 = = = Models = = = 
 At least two models of Vengeur du Peuple are known . One , a scrimshaw model crafted by a prisoner of war , is on display at Vancouver Maritime Museum . 
 The other is a 1 / 55th arsenal model realised by master <unk> between 1951 and 1952 , under the direction of Captain Diaz de Soria . It was built from the plans of the hull and rafter of the ship , though sculptures were undocumented and had to be reconstituted from drawings . It is currently on display at the Musée de la Marine et de l <unk> de Marseille . 
 = She Shoulda Said No ! = 
 " She Shoulda Said ' No ' ! " ( also known as Wild Weed ; Marijuana , the Devil 's Weed ; The Story of Lila Leeds and Her Exposé of the Marijuana Racket ; and The Devil 's Weed ) is a 1949 exploitation film that follows in the spirit of morality tales such as the 1936 films Reefer Madness and Marihuana . Directed by Sam Newfield ( using the pseudonym " Sherman Scott " ) and starring Lila Leeds , it was originally produced to capitalize on the arrest of Leeds and Robert Mitchum on a charge of marijuana conspiracy . The film was issued under many titles ; it struggled to find a distributor until film presenter Kroger Babb picked up the rights , reissuing it as The Story of Lila Leeds and Her Exposé of the Marijuana Racket . Its relative success came only after the promotional posters were redone and a story fabricated that the film was being presented in conjunction with the United States Treasury . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Leeds ' character is " Anne Lester " , a young orphan who is trying to pay for her brother 's college education . After meeting Markey , a drug dealer , Anne begins to believe that she must smoke marijuana to fit in with her friends . She then goes to a " tea party " , where she tries the drug for the first time . She is unaffected by the initial experiment , and loses her fear of drugs as she continues to smoke . 
 Anne 's drug use results in the loss of many of her inhibitions , and the film shows her actions under the influence , including scenes implying sexual promiscuity . As the film progresses , she is fired from her job and begins selling drugs for Markey . Her brother hangs himself when he learns of her new job , and she is arrested and given a tour of the various psychiatric wards and jails that drug users end up in . Finally , after 50 days in jail , she is released , cleaned up and ready to cooperate with the authorities regarding Markey . 
 = = Production and marketing = = 
 The film itself is semi @-@ biographical , its story following what Leeds herself experienced . The film was inspired by the highly publicized arrest of movie stars Robert Mitchum and Leeds for marijuana possession . On September 1 , 1948 , the actors , along with two others , were arrested after being caught smoking marijuana at the home of Leeds in the early morning , and were charged with the felony of narcotics possession . Public empathy for Mitchum resulted in the charge being downgraded to the lesser one of conspiracy to possess marijuana , and his sentence of sixty days in jail was set aside in 1951 . Leeds , however , was sentenced to sixty days in prison and placed on probation for five years . 
 Upon her release , Leeds struggled to find work in Hollywood , and signed on to star in Wild Weed . During publicity for the film in 1949 , Leeds , who had been 21 at the time of the arrest , said that appearing in the picture would keep other people her age from trying drugs , but in 1952 she confided in Collier 's that she " only had one offer . . . which was an obvious attempt to capitalize on the Mitchum case notoriety . I took it . I was broke . " The film gained approval from the Federal Bureau of Narcotics to use the drug references , a standard practice at the time even though the Bureau had no power to censor the films . The film used its plot to push many of the beliefs of the time : that drug @-@ using youth would turn to crime and the theory of " marijuana as a gateway drug " . The latter was a leading argument for drug prohibition during the era , and an argument that Leeds herself made , based on her own history with marijuana and heroin . 
 Via Franklin Productions , Kay filmed the production in six days , a common occurrence given that most films of the era were shot with a quick turnaround . Eureka Productions initially distributed the film , but it struggled to find an audience until Kroger Babb 's Hallmark Productions acquired the rights for distribution . Babb initially marketed the film under the title The Story of Lila Leeds and Her Exposé of the Marijuana Racket , but failed to achieve success with that title and eventually changed it to " She Shoulda Said ' No ' ! " . He pushed the sensuality of Leeds with new promotional photographs and a new tagline : " How Bad Can a Good Girl Get ... without losing her virtue or respect ? ? ? " , while sending letters to local communities falsely claiming that the United States Treasury Department implored Hallmark to release the film " in as many towns and cities as possible in the shortest possible length of time " as a public service . The square @-@ up misleadingly stated that the producers wished to " publicly acknowledge the splendid cooperation of the Nation 's narcotic experts and Government departments , who aided in various ways the success of this production . . . . If its presentation saves but one young girl or boy from becoming a ' dope fiend ' – then its story has been well told . " 
 Babb , who gained notoriety for his various marketing gimmicks , occasionally had Leeds make appearances and give lectures at showings of the film . Babb often booked the movie as a midnight presentation twice a week in the same town ; David F. Friedman , who would later use the film in his own double @-@ billings , attributed the distribution plan to a film that was so low in quality that Babb wanted to cash in and move to his next stop as fast as possible . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to Friedman , Babb 's presentations of the film made more money than any other film the same theater would showcase over a typical film 's full booking . While actual dollar figures are not available because of the nature of the genre ( which was known for poor record keeping and unconventional distribution practices ) , the general financial success of " She Shoulda Said ' No ' ! " prompted producers , in 1951 , to import a similar film from Argentina titled The Marihuana Story . That film , about a doctor who goes undercover into the world of drug addicts to learn about his wife 's death only to become addicted to marijuana himself , was not as successful as other exploitation @-@ style efforts as the public was more concerned about drug use by younger people . 
 " She Shoulda Said ' No ' ! " was not well @-@ received critically upon its initial release , with The New York Times saying " [ n ] ever did vice seem so devoid of enchantment . " Production and distribution of drug films slowed considerably following the film 's run until Frank Sinatra 's The Man with the Golden Arm forced changes to the Production Code , which was a studio @-@ based system which regulated various aspects of objectionable content in films . 
 The film achieved some attention due to its B movie status over the years , being featured in a number of film compilations while continuing to focus on the salacious material as a selling point . In 1993 , a VHS version was released as part of " David Friedman 's Roadshow Rarities " , the twenty @-@ ninth volume in the Something Weird video series . Alpha Video Distributors released the film on DVD in 2006 . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Alan Baxter – Markey 
 Lyle Talbot – Captain Hayes 
 Lila Leeds – Ann 
 Michael Whelan – Treanor 
 Mary Ellen <unk> – Rita 
 Doug Blackley – Lieutenant Mason 
 David Holt – Bob Lester 
 Don Harvey – Lieutenant Tyne 
 David <unk> – Ricky 
 Jack Elam – Raymond 
 Dick Cogan – Edmunds 
 Knox Manning – Narrator 
 = The Girls of the Ghetto = 
 The Girls of the Ghetto is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on Bella , who works in a sweatshop and save enough money to have her little sisters emigrate to New York . John Magie encounters one of the girls and urges to attend classes . During an outbreak of fever , John is suddenly taken ill and Bella nurses him back to health . At the time of its production , the term " ghetto " was a buzzword and the focus of the hardworking Jewess struggling to survive was a focus of other 1910 productions . The film was released on July 19 , 1910 , and received criticism for not having the character appear to be Jewish and incorrectly portraying her place of work as a sweatshop . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from July 23 , 1910 . It states : " Bella is an immigrant girl doing sweatshop work in the ghetto of a great city . But by saving for some time , she manages to get enough money to send to the old country for her two little sisters . She meets them at Ellis Island and escorts them across Battery Park to their new home . The three girls live with an uncle and aunt in one poor room in a tenement . The smallest of the sisters while playing on the sidewalk one day gets lost and suddenly finds herself in Chinatown . She is dismayed at the entirely strange surroundings , and is weeping bitterly when found by John Magie , a young settlement worker . He dries her tears and takes her safely to her sweatshop home . John is at once attracted by Bella , whom he meets for the first time when he brings the little one back . He does the family many little kindnesses , bringing them flowers and books , and induces the girls to attend the classes at the settlement . While teaching his class one evening , John is suddenly attacked with a fever , which is epidemic at that time . All his pupils flee from him in fear , except Bella , who remains and nurses him back to health . Upon his recovery John makes Bella his wife and they take up together the work of bringing knowledge and happiness to the poor of the East Side [ of New York City ] . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Marie Eline as an immigrant 's child 
 Anna Rosemond 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . Lonergan was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . J. Hoberman , author of Bridge of Light : Yiddish Film Between Two Worlds , writes that the Lower East Side had reached a total population of 540 @,@ 000 and the world " ghetto " became a buzzword . Other 1910 films on the subject included Yankee 's The Ghetto <unk> and D. W. Griffith 's A Child of the Ghetto . Patricia Erens , author of The Jew in American Cinema says these films highlight the hard @-@ working Jewess in melodramatic situations that are only resolved with improbable solutions . The setting for the film included scenes in Manhattan 's Chinatown and was advertised as " a study of settlement conditions in the great East Side of New York City . It was produced right in the heart of the ghetto to assure a faithful presentation of East Side localities and life . Representatives of all races and nationalities pass through the picture , from the slow @-@ stepping Russian to the gliding Chinee . " Some of the details of the production were recorded due to the flaws in the depicting a sweatshop and the fact the Hebrew characters are not recognizable as Hebrews . 
 The film director and the cameraman are unknown , but the " Thanhouser Kid " Marie Eline and Anna Rosemond are known credits . Members cast may have included the leading players of the Thanhouser productions Frank H. Crane and Violet Heming . Despite the lack of production details , the quality of the Thanhouser films in general stood out amongst the Independent producers . An editorial by " The Spectator " in The New York Dramatic Mirror contained specific praise for Thanhouser productions by stating , " ... practically all other Independent American companies , excepting Thanhouser , show haste and lack of thought in their production . Crude stories are crudely handled , giving the impression that they are rushed through in a hurry - anything to get a thousand feet of negative ready for the market . Such pictures , of course , do not cost much to produce , but they are not of a class to make reputation . The Thanhouser company , alone of the Independents , shows a consistent effort to do things worthwhile ... " The editorial warned that American audiences were not subject to be entertained by the novelty of moving images and cautioned the Independents that there was distinct danger in quantity over quality . The editorial was written by Frank E. Woods of the American Biograph Company , a Licensed company , and like the publication itself had a considerable slant to the Licensed companies . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1000 feet long , was released on July 19 , 1910 . The film had a wide national release with known advertisements by theaters found in Indiana , Nebraska , Missouri , Pennsylvania , North Carolina , and Texas . 
 This production was met with negative attention by film critics . A reviewer in the The Moving Picture News wrote , " There isn 't a lot to the story , but the acting is of the class which still finds favor with the public . The pictures taken in Chinatown do not go quite far enough in depicting East Side conditions ; the photography of these particular scenes is not the ideal of Thanhouser productions ... " The New York Dramatic Mirror was more moderate in its criticism by identifying specific faults with the portrayal , but found that the story to be good and the parts well @-@ acted . The Morning Telegraph offered similar criticism , " The story of this picture is fairly good , but the details are wrong . In the first place , the producers evidently never were in a sweatshop , or else they would not have representing a sweatshop a store like a custom tailor shop , doing a thriving business . The people who are supposed to be Hebrews hardly resemble them . The next objection is when the settlement worker falls into a faint , the girl is very slow in picking him up . The story tells of a poor immigrant Hebrew girl who falls in love with a settlement worker , who returns her affection , which finally results in their marriage . " Some advertisements would bill the production as seeing the other side of New York City life . 
 = Jim Thorpe = 
 James Francis " Jim " Thorpe ( Sac and Fox ( Sauk ) : Wa @-@ Tho @-@ Huk , translated as " Bright Path " ; May 22 , 1887 – March 28 , 1953 ) was a Sac and Fox athlete of Native American and European ancestry . Considered one of the most versatile athletes of modern sports , he won Olympic gold medals in the 1912 pentathlon and decathlon , played American football ( collegiate and professional ) , and also played professional baseball and basketball . He lost his Olympic titles after it was found he was paid for playing two seasons of semi @-@ professional baseball before competing in the Olympics , thus violating the amateurism rules that were then in place . In 1983 , 30 years after his death , the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) restored his Olympic medals . 
 Thorpe grew up in the Sac and Fox Nation in Oklahoma . He played as part of several all American Indian teams throughout his career , and " barnstormed " as a professional basketball player with a team composed entirely of American Indians . 
 From 1920 to 1921 , Thorpe was nominally the first president of the American Professional Football Association ( APFA ) , which would become the National Football League ( NFL ) in 1922 . 
 He played professional sports until age 41 , the end of his sports career coinciding with the start of the Great Depression . Thorpe struggled to earn a living after that , working several odd jobs . Thorpe suffered from alcoholism , and lived his last years in failing health and poverty . 
 In a poll of sports fans conducted by ABC Sports , Thorpe was voted the Greatest Athlete of the Twentieth Century out of 15 other athletes including Muhammad Ali , Babe Ruth , Jesse Owens , Wayne Gretzky , Jack Nicklaus , and Michael Jordan . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Information about Thorpe 's birth , name and ethnic background varies widely . He was baptized " Jacobus Franciscus Thorpe " in the Catholic Church . Thorpe was born in Indian Territory , but no birth certificate has been found . He was generally considered to have been born on May 22 , 1887 , near the town of Prague , Oklahoma . Thorpe himself said in an article in The Shawnee News @-@ Star in 1949 that he was born May 28 , 1888 , on his mother 's allotment " near and south of <unk> – Pottawatomie County – along the banks of the North Fork River ... hope this will clear up the inquiries as to my birthplace . " However , most biographers believe that he was born on May 22 , 1887 , as that is what is listed on his baptismal certificate . <unk> was a small community , now disappeared , on the line between Pottawatomie and Lincoln Counties . While the town of Prague , Lincoln County , now claims to be the birthplace of Thorpe , there is no evidence that Thorpe himself called Prague his hometown . All his personal references were either Shawnee ( the county seat of Pottawatomie County and about ten miles ( 16 km ) southwest of his birthplace ) or " Pott County " . The Sac and Fox agency is in Stroud , Lincoln County , which could cause some of the confusion . 
 Thorpe 's parents were both of mixed @-@ race ancestry . His father , Hiram Thorpe , had an Irish father and a Sac and Fox Indian mother . His mother , Charlotte Vieux , had a French father and a Potawatomi mother , a descendant of Chief Louis Vieux . He was raised as a Sac and Fox , and his native name , Wa @-@ Tho @-@ Huk , translated as " path lit by great flash of lightning " or , more simply , " Bright Path " . As was the custom for Sac and Fox , he was named for something occurring around the time of his birth , in this case the light brightening the path to the cabin where he was born . Thorpe 's parents were both Roman Catholic , a faith which Thorpe observed throughout his adult life . 
 Thorpe attended the Sac and Fox Indian Agency school in Stroud , Oklahoma , with his twin brother , Charlie . Charlie helped him through school until he succumbed to a bout of pneumonia when they were nine years old . He ran away from school several times . His father then sent him to the Haskell Institute , an Indian boarding school in Lawrence , Kansas , so that he would not run away again . When his mother died of childbirth complications two years later , he became depressed . After several arguments with his father , he left home to work on a horse ranch . 
 In 1904 the sixteen @-@ year @-@ old Thorpe returned to his father and decided to attend Carlisle Indian Industrial School in Carlisle , Pennsylvania . There his athletic ability was recognized and he was coached by Glenn Scobey " Pop " Warner , one of the most influential coaches of early American football history . Later that year he became orphaned after Hiram Thorpe died from gangrene poisoning after being wounded in a hunting accident , and Jim again dropped out of school . He resumed farm work for a few years and then returned to Carlisle Indian Industrial School . 
 = = Amateur career = = 
 = = = College career = = = 
 Thorpe began his athletic career at Carlisle in 1907 when he walked past the track and beat all the school 's high jumpers with an impromptu 5 @-@ ft 9 @-@ in jump still in street clothes . His earliest recorded track and field results come from 1907 . He also competed in football , baseball , lacrosse and even ballroom dancing , winning the 1912 intercollegiate ballroom dancing championship . 
 Pop Warner was hesitant to allow Thorpe , his best track and field athlete , to compete in a physical game such as football . Thorpe , however , convinced Warner to let him try some rushing plays in practice against the school team 's defense ; Warner assumed he would be tackled easily and give up the idea . Thorpe " ran around past and through them not once , but twice " . He then walked over to Warner and said " Nobody is going to tackle Jim " , while flipping him the ball . 
 Thorpe gained nationwide attention for the first time in 1911 . As a running back , defensive back , placekicker and punter , Thorpe scored all his team 's points — four field goals and a touchdown — in an 18 – 15 upset of Harvard , a top ranked team in those early days of the National Collegiate Athletic Association . His team finished the season 11 – 1 . In 1912 Carlisle won the national collegiate championship largely as a result of his efforts – he scored 25 touchdowns and 198 points during the season . 
 Carlisle 's 1912 record included a 27 – 6 victory over Army . In that game , Thorpe 's 92 @-@ yard touchdown was nullified by a teammate 's penalty , but on the next play Thorpe rushed for a 97 @-@ yard touchdown . Future President Dwight Eisenhower , who played against him that season , recalled of Thorpe in a 1961 speech : 
 " Here and there , there are some people who are supremely endowed . My memory goes back to Jim Thorpe . He never practiced in his life , and he could do anything better than any other football player I ever saw . " 
 He was awarded All @-@ American honors in both 1911 and 1912 . 
 Football was – and would remain – Thorpe 's favorite sport . He competed only sporadically in track and field , even though this turned out to be the sport in which he gained his greatest fame . 
 In the spring of 1912 , he started training for the Olympics . He had confined his efforts to jumps , hurdles and shot @-@ puts , but now added pole vaulting , javelin , discus , hammer and 56 lb weight . In the Olympic trials held at Celtic Park in New York , his all @-@ round ability stood out in all these events and so he riveted a claim to a place on the team that went to Sweden . 
 = = = Olympic career = = = 
 For the 1912 Summer Olympics in Stockholm , Sweden , two new multi @-@ event disciplines were included , the pentathlon and the decathlon . A pentathlon , based on the ancient Greek event , had been introduced at the 1906 Summer Olympics . The 1912 version consisted of the long jump , javelin throw , 200 @-@ meter dash , discus throw and 1500 @-@ meter run . 
 The decathlon was a relatively new event in modern athletics , although it had been part of American track meets since the 1880s and a version had been featured on the program of the 1904 St. Louis Olympics . The events of the new decathlon differed slightly from the American version . Both seemed appropriate for Thorpe , who was so versatile that he served as Carlisle 's one @-@ man team in several track meets . According to his obituary in The New York Times he could run the 100 @-@ yard dash in 10 seconds flat , the 220 in 21 @.@ 8 seconds , the 440 in 51 @.@ 8 seconds , the 880 in 1 : 57 , the mile in 4 : 35 , the 120 @-@ yard high hurdles in 15 seconds , and the 220 @-@ yard low hurdles in 24 seconds . He could long jump 23 ft 6 in and high @-@ jump 6 ft 5 in . He could pole vault 11 feet , put the shot 47 ft 9 in , throw the javelin 163 feet , and throw the discus 136 feet . 
 Thorpe entered the U.S. Olympic trials for both the pentathlon and the decathlon . He won the awards easily , winning three events , and was named to the pentathlon team , which also included future International Olympic Committee president Avery Brundage . There were only a few candidates for the decathlon team , however , and the trials were cancelled . 
 His schedule in the Olympics was busy . Along with the decathlon and pentathlon , he competed in the long jump and high jump . The first competition was the pentathlon . He won four of the five events and placed third in the javelin , an event he had not competed in before 1912 . Although the pentathlon was primarily decided on place points , points were also earned for the marks achieved in the individual events . He won the gold medal . That same day , he qualified for the high jump final in which he placed fourth , and also took seventh place in the long jump . Even more remarkably , because someone had stolen his shoes just before he was due to compete , he found some discarded ones in a rubbish bin and won his medals wearing them . He is shown in the 1912 photo wearing two different shoes and extra socks because one shoe was too big . 
 Thorpe 's final event was the decathlon , his first — and as it turned out , his only — Olympic decathlon . Strong competition from local favorite Hugo Wieslander was expected . Thorpe , however , easily defeated Wieslander by more than 700 points . He placed in the top four in all ten events , and his Olympic record of 8 @,@ 413 points would stand for nearly two decades . Overall , Thorpe won eight of the 15 individual events comprising the pentathlon and decathlon . 
 As was the custom of the day , the medals were presented to the athletes during the closing ceremonies of the games . Along with the two gold medals , Thorpe also received two challenge prizes , which were donated by King Gustav V of Sweden for the decathlon and Czar Nicholas II of Russia for the pentathlon . Several sources recount that , when awarding Thorpe his prize , King Gustav said , " You , sir , are the greatest athlete in the world " , to which Thorpe replied , " Thanks , King " . Contemporary sources from 1912 are lacking , suggesting that the story was apocryphal , however . The anecdote appeared in newspapers as early as 1948 , 36 years after his appearance in the Olympics , and in books as early as 1952 . 
 Thorpe 's successes had not gone unnoticed at home , and he was honored with a ticker @-@ tape parade on Broadway . He remembered later , " I heard people yelling my name , and I couldn 't realize how one fellow could have so many friends . " 
 Apart from his track and field appearances , he also played in one of two exhibition baseball games at the 1912 Olympics , which featured two teams composed of U.S. track and field athletes . It was not Thorpe 's first try at baseball , as the public would soon learn . 
 = = = All @-@ Around Champion = = = 
 After his victories at the Olympic Games in Sweden , on September 2 , 1912 , he returned to Celtic Park , the home of the Irish American Athletic Club , in Queens , New York ( where he had qualified four months earlier for the Olympic Games ) , to compete in the Amateur Athletic Union 's All @-@ Around Championship . Competing against Bruno <unk> of the Irish American Athletic Club and J. <unk> of Princeton University , he won seven of the ten events contested and came in second in the remaining three . With a total point score of 7 @,@ 476 points , Thorpe broke the previous record of 7 @,@ 385 points set in 1909 , ( also set at Celtic Park ) , by Martin Sheridan , the champion athlete of the Irish American Athletic Club . Sheridan , a five @-@ time Olympic gold medalist , was present to watch his record broken , approached Thorpe after the event and shook his hand saying , " Jim , my boy , you 're a great man . I never expect to look upon a finer athlete . " He told a reporter from New York World , " Thorpe is the greatest athlete that ever lived . He has me beaten fifty ways . Even when I was in my prime , I could not do what he did today . " 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 In 1912 , strict rules regarding amateurism were in effect for athletes participating in the Olympics . Athletes who received money prizes for competitions , were sports teachers or had competed previously against professionals were not considered amateurs and were barred from competition . 
 In late January 1913 , the Worcester Telegram published a story announcing that Thorpe had played professional baseball , and other U.S. newspapers followed up the story . Thorpe had indeed played professional baseball in the Eastern Carolina League for Rocky Mount , North Carolina , in 1909 and 1910 , receiving meager pay ; reportedly as little as US $ 2 ( $ 51 today ) per game and as much as US $ 35 ( $ 889 today ) per week . College players , in fact , regularly spent summers playing professionally but most used aliases , unlike Thorpe . 
 Although the public didn 't seem to care much about Thorpe 's past , the Amateur Athletic Union ( AAU ) , and especially its secretary James Edward Sullivan , took the case very seriously . Thorpe wrote a letter to Sullivan , in which he admitted playing professional baseball : 
 I hope I will be partly excused by the fact that I was simply an Indian schoolboy and did not know all about such things . In fact , I did not know that I was doing wrong , because I was doing what I knew several other college men had done , except that they did not use their own names ... 
 His letter didn 't help . The AAU decided to withdraw Thorpe 's amateur status retroactively and asked the International Olympic Commission ( IOC ) to do the same . Later that year , the IOC unanimously decided to strip Thorpe of his Olympic titles , medals and awards and declare him a professional . 
 Although Thorpe had played for money , the AAU and IOC did not follow the rules for disqualification . The rulebook for the 1912 Olympics stated that protests had to be made " within " 30 days from the closing ceremonies of the games . The first newspaper reports did not appear until January 1913 , about six months after the Stockholm Games had concluded . There is also some evidence that Thorpe 's amateur status had been questioned long before the Olympics , but the AAU had ignored the issue until being confronted with it in 1913 . 
 The only positive element of this affair for Thorpe was that , as soon as the news was reported that he had been declared a professional , he received offers from professional sports clubs . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Baseball free agent = = = 
 Because the minor league team that last held Jim Thorpe 's contract had disbanded in 1910 , he found himself in the rare position of being a sought after free agent at the major league level during the era of the reserve clause , and thus had a choice of baseball teams for which to play . In January 1913 , he turned down a starting position with the American League cellar @-@ dwelling St. Louis Browns , choosing instead to join the 1912 National League champion New York Giants , who , with Thorpe playing in 19 of their 151 games , would repeat as the 1913 National League champions . Immediately following the Giants ' October loss in the 1913 World Series , Thorpe and the Giants joined the Chicago White Sox for a world tour . Barnstorming across the United States and then around the world , Thorpe was the celebrity of the tour . Thorpe 's presence increased the publicity , attendance and gate receipts for the tour . He met with Pope Pius X and Abbas II Hilmi Bey ( the last Khedive of Egypt ) , and played before 20 @,@ 000 people in London including King George V. While in Rome , he was filmed wrestling with another baseball player on the floor of the Colosseum , although no known copy of that film has survived . 
 = = = Baseball , football , and basketball = = = 
 Thorpe signed with the New York Giants baseball club in 1913 and played sporadically with them as an outfielder for three seasons . After playing in the minor leagues with the Milwaukee Brewers in 1916 , he returned to the Giants in 1917 but was sold to the Cincinnati Reds early in the season . In the " double no @-@ hitter " between Fred Toney of the Reds and Hippo Vaughn of the Chicago Cubs , Thorpe drove in the winning run in the 10th inning . Late in the season , he was sold back to the Giants . Again , he played sporadically for them in 1918 before being traded to the Boston Braves on May 21 , 1919 , for Pat Ragan . In his career , he amassed 91 runs scored , 82 runs batted in and a .252 batting average over 289 games . He continued to play minor league baseball until 1922 . 
 But Thorpe had not abandoned football either . He first played professional football in 1913 as a member of the Indiana @-@ based Pine Village Pros , a team that had a several @-@ season winning streak against local teams during the 1910s . He then signed with the Canton Bulldogs in 1915 . They paid him $ 250 ( $ 5 @,@ 848 today ) a game , a tremendous wage at the time . Before signing him Canton was averaging 1 @,@ 200 fans a game , but 8 @,@ 000 showed up for his debut against the Massillon Tigers . The team won titles in 1916 , 1917 , and 1919 . He reportedly ended the 1919 championship game by kicking a wind @-@ assisted 95 @-@ yard punt from his team 's own 5 @-@ yard line , effectively putting the game out of reach . In 1920 , the Bulldogs were one of 14 teams to form the American Professional Football Association ( APFA ) , which would become the National Football League ( NFL ) two years later . Thorpe was nominally the APFA 's first president , but spent most of the year playing for Canton and a year later was replaced as president by Joseph Carr . He continued to play for Canton , coaching the team as well . Between 1921 and 1923 , he helped organize and played for the <unk> Indians ( LaRue , Ohio ) , an all @-@ Native American team . Although the team 's record was 3 – 6 in 1922 , and 1 – 10 in 1923 , he played well and was selected for the Green Bay Press @-@ Gazette 's first All @-@ NFL team in 1923 , which would later be formally recognized by the NFL as the league 's official All @-@ NFL team in 1931 ) . 
 Thorpe never played for an NFL championship team . He retired from professional football at age 41 , having played 52 NFL games for six teams from 1920 to 1928 . 
 Until 2005 , most of Thorpe 's biographers were unaware of his basketball career until a ticket discovered in an old book that year documented his career in basketball . By 1926 , he was the main feature of the " World Famous Indians " of LaRue which sponsored traveling football , baseball and basketball teams . " Jim Thorpe and His World @-@ Famous Indians " barnstormed for at least two years ( 1927 – 28 ) in parts of New York and Pennsylvania as well as Marion , Ohio . Although pictures of Thorpe in his <unk> basketball uniform were printed on postcards and published in newspapers , this period of his life was not well documented . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 Thorpe married three times and had eight children ( one of whom died in childhood ) . In 1913 Thorpe married Iva M. Miller , whom he had met at Carlisle . In 1917 Iva and Thorpe bought a house now known as the Jim Thorpe House in Yale , Oklahoma , and lived there until 1923 . They had four children : Gail Margaret ( October 31 , 1917 – June 3 , 2005 ) , James F. ( May 8 , 1918 – September 28 , 1919 ) , Charlotte Marie ( September 16 , 1919 – December 8 , 1998 ) and Grace Frances ( December 10 , 1921 – April 1 , 2008 ) . Miller filed for divorce from Thorpe in 1925 , claiming desertion . 
 In 1926 Thorpe married <unk> Verona Kirkpatrick ( September 19 , 1905 – March 2 , 2007 ) . She was working for the manager of the baseball team for which he was playing at the time . They had four sons : Carl Phillip ( May 1 , 1927 – March 18 , 1986 ) , a lieutenant colonel in the U.S. Army , William K. , Richard A. and John R. " Jack " ( June 29 , 1937 – February 22 , 2011 ) . Kirkpatrick divorced Thorpe in 1941 after 15 years of marriage . 
 Lastly , Thorpe married Patricia Gladys Evelyn " Patsy " Askew ( née Woodbury ) on June 2 , 1945 ; she was with him when he died . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After his athletic career , Thorpe struggled to provide for his family . He found it difficult to work a non @-@ sports @-@ related job and never held a job for an extended period of time . During the Great Depression in particular , he had various jobs , among others as an extra for several movies , usually playing an American Indian chief in Westerns . He also worked as a construction worker , a doorman ( bouncer ) , a security guard and a ditch digger , and briefly joined the United States Merchant Marine in 1945 . Thorpe was a chronic alcoholic during his later life . 
 He ran out of money sometime in the early 1950s . When hospitalized for lip cancer in 1950 , he was admitted as a charity case . At a press conference announcing the procedure , his wife , Patricia , wept and pleaded for help , saying , " We 're broke ... Jim has nothing but his name and his memories . He has spent money on his own people and has given it away . He has often been exploited . " 
 = = Death = = 
 In early 1953 , Thorpe went into heart failure for the third time while dining with Patricia in their home in Lomita , California . He was briefly revived by artificial respiration and spoke to those around him , but lost consciousness shortly afterward and died on March 28 at the age of 65 . 
 = = Racism = = 
 Thorpe , whose parents were both half Caucasian , was raised as an American Indian . His accomplishments occurred during a period of severe racial inequality in the United States . It has often been suggested that his medals were stripped because of his ethnicity . While it is difficult to prove this , the public comment at the time largely reflected this view . At the time Thorpe won his gold medals , not all Native Americans were recognized as U.S. citizens . ( The U.S. government had wanted them to make concessions to adopt European @-@ American ways to receive such recognition . ) Citizenship was not granted to all American Indians until 1924 . 
 While Thorpe attended Carlisle , students ' ethnicity was used for marketing purposes . The football team was called the Indians . A photograph of Thorpe and the 1911 football team emphasized racial differences among the competing athletes ; the inscription on the most important game ball of that season reads , " 1911 , Indians 18 , Harvard 15 . " Additionally , the school and journalists often categorized sporting competitions as conflicts of Indians against whites ; newspaper headings such as " Indians Scalp Army 27 – 6 " or " Jim Thorpe on Rampage " made stereotypical journalistic play of the Indian background of Carlisle 's football team . The first notice of Thorpe in the The New York Times was headlined " Indian Thorpe in Olympiad ; Redskin from Carlisle Will Strive for Place on American Team . " His accomplishments were described in a similar racial context by other newspapers and sportswriters throughout his life . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Olympic awards reinstated = = = 
 Over the years , supporters of Thorpe attempted to have his Olympic titles reinstated . US Olympic officials , including former teammate and later president of the IOC Avery Brundage , rebuffed several attempts , with Brundage once saying , " Ignorance is no excuse . " Most persistent were the author Robert Wheeler and his wife , Florence Ridlon . They succeeded in having the AAU and United States Olympic Committee overturn its decision and restore Thorpe 's amateur status before 1913 . 
 In 1982 , Wheeler and Ridlon established the Jim Thorpe Foundation and gained support from the U.S. Congress . Armed with this support and evidence from 1912 proving that Thorpe 's disqualification had occurred after the 30 @-@ day time period allowed by Olympics rules , they succeeded in making the case to the IOC . In October 1982 , the IOC Executive Committee approved Thorpe 's reinstatement . In an unusual ruling , they declared that Thorpe was co @-@ champion with Ferdinand Bie and Wieslander , although both of these athletes had always said they considered Thorpe to be the only champion . In a ceremony on January 18 , 1983 , the IOC presented two of Thorpe 's children , Gale and Bill , with commemorative medals . Thorpe 's original medals had been held in museums , but they had been stolen and have never been recovered . 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 Thorpe 's monument , featuring the quote from Gustav V ( " You , sir , are the greatest athlete in the world . " ) , still stands near the town named for him , Jim Thorpe , Pennsylvania . The grave rests on mounds of soil from Thorpe 's native Oklahoma and from the stadium in which he won his Olympic medals . 
 Thorpe 's achievements received great acclaim from sports journalists , both during his lifetime and since his death . In 1950 an Associated Press poll of almost 400 sportswriters and broadcasters voted Thorpe the " greatest athlete " of the first half of the 20th century . That same year , the Associated Press named Thorpe the " greatest American football player " of the first half of the century . In 1999 , the Associated Press placed him third on its list of the top athletes of the century , following Babe Ruth and Michael Jordan . ESPN ranked Thorpe seventh on their list of best North American athletes of the century . 
 Thorpe was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1963 , one of seventeen players in the charter class . Thorpe is memorialized in the Pro Football Hall of Fame rotunda with a larger @-@ than @-@ life statue . He was also inducted into halls of fame for college football , American Olympic teams , and the national track and field competition . 
 President Richard Nixon , as authorized by U.S. Senate Joint Resolution 73 , proclaimed Monday , April 16 , 1973 , as " Jim Thorpe Day " to promote the nationwide recognition of Thorpe . In 1986 , the Jim Thorpe Association established an award with Thorpe 's name . The Jim Thorpe Award is given annually to the best defensive back in college football . The annual Thorpe Cup athletics meeting is named in his honor . The United States Postal Service issued a 32 ¢ stamp on 3 February 1998 as part of the Celebrate the Century stamp sheet series . 
 In 2015 proposed designs for the 2018 Native American dollar coin featuring Thorpe were released . 
 = = = Jim Thorpe , Pennsylvania = = = 
 After Thorpe 's funeral was held at St. Benedict 's Catholic Church in Shawnee , Oklahoma , his body was lying in state at Fairview Cemetery after citizens had paid to have it moved to Shawnee by train from California . The people were in a fund raising effort to erect a permanent monument and burial place for Thorpe at the town 's Athletic Park . Local officials had asked the state legislature for funding but were turned down so they doubled their efforts to raise the money on their own . Meanwhile , Thorpe 's third wife , unbeknownst to the rest of his family , " stole " Thorpe 's body and had it shipped to Pennsylvania when she heard that the small Pennsylvania towns of Mauch Chunk and East Mauch Chunk were seeking to attract business . She made a deal with officials which , according to Thorpe 's son Jack , was done by Patricia for monetary considerations . The towns bought Thorpe 's remains , erected a monument to him , merged , and renamed the newly united town in his honor Jim Thorpe , Pennsylvania even though Thorpe had never been there . The monument site contains his tomb , two statues of him in athletic poses , and historical markers describing his life story . 
 The town of Shawnee , disappointed that they were unable to honor the man who considered Shawnee his hometown , named their football field in his honor . 
 In June 2010 , Jack Thorpe filed a federal lawsuit against the borough of Jim Thorpe , seeking to have his father 's remains returned to his homeland and re @-@ interred near other family members in Oklahoma . Citing the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act , Jack was arguing to bring his father 's remains to the reservation in Oklahoma , where they would be buried near those of his father , sisters and brother , a mile from the place he was born . He claimed that the agreement between his stepmother and Jim Thorpe , Pa . , borough officials was made against the wishes of other family members who want him buried in Native American land . Jack Thorpe died at 73 on February 22 , 2011 . 
 In April 2013 , U.S. District Judge Richard Caputo ruled that Jim Thorpe borough in northeastern Pennsylvania amounts to a museum under the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act ( " <unk> " ) . A lawyer for Bill and Richard Thorpe said the men would pursue the legal process to have their father returned to Sac and Fox land in central Oklahoma . 
 On October 23 , 2014 , the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit reversed Judge Caputo 's ruling . The appeals court held that Jim Thorpe borough is not a " museum " , as that term is used in <unk> , and that the plaintiffs therefore could not invoke that federal statute to seek reinterment of Thorpe 's remains . It directed the trial court to enter a judgment in favor of the borough . The appeals court noted that although the plaintiffs were free to ask a Pennsylvania state court to order <unk> of Thorpe 's remains under state law , there is " great reluctance " under Pennsylvania state law to order <unk> . 
 On October 5 , 2015 , the United States Supreme Court refused to hear the matter , effectively bringing the legal process to an end . 
 = = In film = = 
 In the 1930s , Thorpe appeared in several short films and features . Usually , his roles were cameo appearances as an Indian , although in the 1932 comedy , Always Kickin , Thorpe was prominently cast in a speaking part as himself , a kicking coach teaching young football players to drop @-@ kick . In 1931 , during the Great Depression , he sold the film rights to his life story to MGM for $ 1 @,@ 500 ( $ 23 @,@ 000 today ) . The movie included archival footage of the 1912 and 1932 Olympics , as well as a banquet in which Thorpe was honored . Thorpe was seen in some long shots in the film ; and one scene showed him as a coaching assistant . It was also distributed in the United Kingdom , where it was called Man of Bronze . 
 Thorpe had a cameo appearance in the 1940 film Knute Rockne , All American . Late in the film , he tells Pat O 'Brien ( playing Knute Rockne ) at the halftime of a game , " Two minutes , Rock ! " He is referenced by O 'Brien earlier in the film , as a player you could build a team around . He played a member of the Navajo band in the 1950 film Wagon Master . 
 Thorpe was memorialized in the Warner Bros. film Jim Thorpe – All @-@ American ( 1951 ) starring Burt Lancaster , with Billy Gray performing as Thorpe as a child . The film was directed by Michael Curtiz . Although there were rumors that Thorpe received no money , he was paid $ 15 @,@ 000 by Warner Bros. plus a $ 2 @,@ 500 donation toward an annuity for him by the studio head of publicity . 
 He is mentioned twice in Disney 's 1973 film The World 's Greatest Athlete . 
 Thorpe is featured as a ghost figure in the 1994 film <unk> : A Spirited Journey , where he is portrayed by Russell Means . 
 = Tong Yabghu Qaghan = 
 Tong Yabghu Qaghan ( died 628 ) ( also known as T 'ung Yabghu , Ton Yabghu , Tong Yabghu Khagan , Tun Yabghu , and Tong <unk> , Traditional Chinese <unk> , Simplified Chinese : <unk> , pinyin <unk> <unk> , Wade @-@ Giles : t 'ung @-@ yeh @-@ hu k 'o @-@ han ) was khagan of the Western Turkic Khaganate from 618 to 628 AD . His name is usually translated as " Tiger <unk> " in Old Turkic . Another interpretation of his name is " sufficiency " or " completeness " . He was the brother of <unk> ( r . 611 @-@ 618 ) , the previous khagan of the western Göktürks , and was a member of the Ashina clan . Tong Yabghu 's reign is generally regarded as the zenith of the Western Göktürk Khaganate . 
 = = Reign = = 
 Tong Yabghu maintained close relations with the Tang Dynasty of China , and may have married into the Imperial family . The Chinese Buddhist pilgrim Xuanzang visited the western Göktürk capital <unk> in modern Kyrgyzstan and left a description of the khagan . Scholars believe the khagan described by Xuanzang was Tong Yabghu . Gao and La <unk> argue that the khagan Xuanzang met was his son Si Yabghu , rather than Tong Yabghu . Xuanzang described the khagan as follows : 
 The khan wore a green satin robe ; his hair , which was ten feet long , was free . A band of white silk wound round his forehead and hung down behind . The ministers of the presence , numbering two hundred in number , all wearing embroidered robes , stood on his right and left . The rest of his military retinue [ was ] clothed in fur , serge and fine wool , the spears and standards and bows in order , and the riders of camels and horses stretched far out of [ sight ] . 
 According to the Old Book of Tang , Tong Yabghu 's reign was once considered as the golden age of Western Göktürk Khaganate : 
 Tong <unk> Kaghan is a man of bravery and astuteness . He is good at art of war . Thus he controlled Tiele tribes to the north , confronted Persia to the west , connected with <unk> ( nowadays Kashmir ) to the south . All countries are subjected to him . He controlled ten thousands of men with arrow and bow , establishing his power over the western region . He occupied the land of Wusun and moved his tent to <unk> north of Tashkent . All of the princes of western region assumed the Turk office of <unk> . Tong <unk> Kaghan also sent a <unk> to monitor them for imposition . The power of Western Turks had never reached such a state before " . 
 = = Alleged Campaigns against Persia = = 
 Tong Yabghu 's empire fought with the Sassanids of Iran . In the early 620 's the khagan 's nephew Böri Shad led a series of raids across the Caucasus Mountains into Persian territory . Many scholars have identified Tong Yabghu as the Ziebel mentioned in Byzantine sources as having ( as khagan of the Khazars ) campaigned with the Emperor Heraclius in the Caucasus against the Sassanid Persian Empire in 627 @-@ 628 . It has long been maintained by some scholars , including Chavannes , Uchida , Gao and Xue <unk> that Tong Yabghu cannot be positively identified with Ziebel ( or any Khazar ruler ) and may actually have died as early as 626 . These scholars point to discrepancies in the dates between Byzantine and Chinese sources and argue that definitively conflating Ziebel with Tong Yabghu is an exaggeration of the extant evidence . The latest research on this topic proves that they were right : if Tong indeed died in 628 , Ziebel is to be identified with Sipi khagan , Tong Yabghu 's uncle , who murdered him and rose briefly to the throne . Sipi was by then pronounced Zibil and he was a small kaghan in charge of the western part of Tong Yabghu 's empire , exactly as Ziebel was according to the Byzantine sources . Ziebel is described as the brother of Tong in the Byzantine sources , and as his uncle in the Chinese sources , a discrepancy which long precluded the identification . However uncle and elder brother is the same word in ancient Turkish , <unk> , and the Chinese sources could not rendered this double meaning with their very precise system of kinship names . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Tong Yabghu appointed governors or <unk> to manage the various tribes and people under his overlordship . In all likelihood Tong Yabghu 's nephew Böri Shad , and son of Zibil / Ziebel was the commander of the Khazars , the westernmost of the tribes owing allegiance to the Western Göktürks ; this branch of the family may have provided the Khazars with their first khagans in the mid seventh century . 
 = = Death = = 
 In ca . 630 he was murdered by Zibil , his uncle and a partisan of Dula clan . Following the death of Tong Yabghu , the might of the Western Göktürks largely collapsed . Although the khaganate lingered for a few decades before falling to the Chinese Empire , many of the client tribes became independent and a number of successor states , including the Khazar Khaganate and Great Bulgaria , became independent . 
 = Jayne Mansfield in popular culture = 
 Actress , singer , Playmate and stage show performer Jayne Mansfield , despite her limited success in Hollywood , had an enormous impact on popular culture of the late 1950s and has remained a popular subject in popular culture ever since . During a period between 1956 and 1957 , there were about 122 @,@ 000 lines of copy and 2 @,@ 500 photographs that appeared in newspapers . Dennis Russel , in an article on her in the St. James Encyclopedia of Popular Culture ( 1999 ) , said that " Although many people have never seen her movies , Jayne Mansfield remains , long after her death , one of the most recognizable icons of 1950s celebrity culture . " In the 2004 novel Child of My Heart by Alice McDermott , a National Book Award winning writer , the 1950s is referred to as " in those Marilyn Monroe / Jayne Mansfield days " . R. L. <unk> and Bill <unk> has claimed that it was Mansfield along with Marilyn Monroe and Brigitte Bardot who made the bikini popular . 
 M. Thomas Inge describes Mansfield , Monroe and Jane Russell as personification of the bad girl in popular culture , as opposed to Doris Day , Debbie Reynolds , Natalie Wood personifying the good girl . Mansfield , Monroe and Barbara Windsor have been described as representations of a historical juncture of sexuality in comedy and popular culture . Evangelist Billy Graham once said , " This country knows more about Jayne Mansfield 's statistics than the Second Commandment . " As late as the mid @-@ 1980s she remained one of the biggest TV draws . As an indication of her impact on popular culture today , more than two generations later , there are numerous cultural references to the Hollywood sex symbol and Playboy Playmate in recent films , books , TV and music . Numerous show biz people were dubbed Jayne Mansfield over the time , including Italian actress Marisa <unk> and professional wrestler Missy Hyatt . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 Mansfield 's public persona and career image became another subject in popular culture . Francesca Lia Block 's <unk> Bat books often refer to Mansfield ; their characters Dirk and <unk> watch The Girl Can 't Help It , and the Witch Baby 's mother is part of a sinister cult that masquerades as a Jayne Mansfield fan club . In Lynda <unk> 's 2004 novel , Bombshell , the character Grace is advised not to become a Jayne Mansfield when it is suspected that she is pregnant without a boyfriend or a husband . Mansfield 's films and events of her life also became subjects of inspiration in popular culture . In the 1963 movie , The Stripper , the aspiring stripper Lila Green , played by Joanne Woodward , is mistaken as Mansfield . In the 2005 novel Who Wrote the Book of Love ? by Lee Siegel , Lucky Lee , an American boy in Southern California in the 1950s , becomes infatuated with Marilyn Monroe and Mansfield in his journey through sexual enlightenment . In the book Lucky Lee uses famous quotes from films and literature - like " Wow ! What a body ! " and " Me Tarzan , you Jayne ! " In the book it is spelled Jayne instead of Jane , to make a pun to allude to Mansfield . Dutch writer Jan Cremer wrote a large part of his autobiographical novel I , Jan Cremer – III about their relationship . 
 She remains a recurring character in works of fiction . In the eleventh episode of the second season of TV series Goodnight Sweetheart - titled Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea ( 1993 ) - Diana Kent plays the role of Mansfield in a time travel story . In the same episode John Evans plays the role of Winston Churchill . She also was a character in Underworld , a 2005 novel by Don DeLillo . In a 2002 detective novel by Max Allan Collins , Chicago Confidential , the series private investigator Nathan Heller falls in love with Mansfield , becomes friends with Frank Sinatra and is threatened by Joseph McCarthy . 
 Mansfield also features in numerous works of art and entertainment in general . She is mentioned in the third sketch of the 48th show of the second season of The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show ( also featuring Wailing Whale episodes 5 & 6 ) , which was first released on May 13 , 1961 . Mansfield also helped unveil a Rocky & Bullwinkle statue on Sunset Boulevard . On the Married ... with Children season 3 episode " A Dump of My Own , " Al Bundy says that when he was young he had two dreams and one of them was to become an astronaut and land on the planet Jayne Mansfield . In the episode of Frasier , " The Impossible Dream " , Mansfield is mentioned by Marty , stating that an example of a fun dream would be in the jungle with Jayne Mansfield and her getting bit by a snake . In the 2001 film Vixen Highway , Ann Tait plays the role of a Dr. Jayne Mansfield . Writer @-@ artist Jack Kirby of Marvel Comics drew inspiration from the strong @-@ woman image of Jayne Mansfield in designing the character Susan Storm of the Fantastic Four . 
 = = Publicity stunts = = 
 Mansfield 's publicity antics are another recurring theme in popular culture . On the season 32 episode of Saturday Night Live hosted by Alec Baldwin ( with musical guest Christina Aguilera ) , one of the commercial bumpers has Alec Baldwin <unk> into the famous picture of Sophia Loren staring at Mansfield 's chest at Romanoff 's in Beverly Hills . It was a direct reference to publicity stunt of Mansfield in April 1957 intended to deflect attention from Loren during a dinner party in the Italian star 's honor . Photographs of the encounter were published around the world . The most famous image showed Loren raising a contemptuous eyebrow at the American actress who , sitting between Loren and her dinner companion , Clifton Webb , had leaned over the table , allowing her breasts to spill over her low neckline and exposing one nipple . The photo of Sophia Loren sitting next to Jayne Mansfield and regarding her cleavage inspired other photographers too . In 1993 , Daniela Federici created an homage with Anna Nicole Smith as Mansfield and New York City DJ Sky <unk> as Loren for a Guess Jeans campaign . Later , Mark Seliger took a picture named Heidi Klum at Romanoff 's with Heidi Klum in a reproduction of the restaurant set . The meeting between Mansfield and Anton LaVey , the founder and high priest of the Church of Satan , was a much publicized and oft quoted event of her life , as well as the history of the Church . 
 = = Death = = 
 The fatal motor accident that killed Mansfield and spread the rumors of her decapitation had been the subject of many plots and scenes . In the film To Wong Foo , Thanks for Everything ! Julie Newmar , Miss Vida <unk> ( Patrick Swayze ) remarked while trying out a vintage yellow convertible , " I feel like Miss Jayne Mansfield in this car ! " <unk> Jackson ( Wesley Snipes ) replied " Uh oh , Jayne Mansfield , not a good auto reference . " In Severance : Stories , the 2006 story book containing 62 postmortem monologues , each 240 @-@ words long , by Robert Olen Butler , a Pulitzer Award winning writer , Mansfield 's death is included along with James Dean , John the Baptist , Maximilien Robespierre , Marie Antoinette , Cicero and others . The underride guard , a strong bar made of steel tubing fitted underneath the rear portion of a semi @-@ trailer , is also known as a Mansfield bar , commemorating her accident that occurred before the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act required underride guards on semi @-@ trailers . 
 In the 1994 film Leprechaun 2 , directed by Rodman Flender , a character degrades the leprechaun by saying , " If hearing the actual sound of Jayne Mansfield 's head being severed from her body is too intense for you , well then , you know , more power to ya . " The accident is also referred to in the 1998 film One of Them . In Money , Love : A Novel by Brad Barkley , the character Roman organizes a show of Celebrity Death Cars , including that of Dean and Mansfield , to win back his love interest Gladys . In the song Movie Star by the rock band Cracker sang , " Well the movie star , well she crashed her car , but everyone said she was beautiful even without her head , everyone said she was dangerous " , making an allusion to the accident . In the 2003 single , " Overdrive , " Katy Rose sang , " I 'm sitting in Jayne Mansfield 's car . " The Hollywood Forever Cemetery , where her cenotaph is located , is described as one of the sights to see in California by the regional tourist guide by Lonely Planet . In the episode In <unk> of Dead Like Me , George orders a " Jayne Mansfield " for breakfast . When <unk> the waitress gives George her order it is a pastry in the shape of breasts with blueberries as nipples . Daisy refers to the breakfast as " ... blueberry muffins with their tops cut off , " making reference to the urban legend of how Mansfield died . 
 In David Cronenberg 's 1996 film Crash ( based on J. G. Ballard 's 1973 novel of the same name ) , a male stunt driver dressed as Mansfield recreates her fatal accident , killing himself in the process . His partner , a fellow celebrity @-@ crash aficionado , comes across the scene of the wreck and says , " You did the Jayne Mansfield crash without me ? " Differing from the book , the storyline of the film revolves around these two partners recreating fatal celebrity disasters , in the name of a project they call retrospectives , including those of James Dean , Grace Kelly , Albert Camus and John F. Kennedy . The film was nominated for the Golden Palm at the Cannes Film Festival , it instead won the Special Jury Prize for daring , audacity , and originality . 
 = = Anatomy = = 
 Physical features of the " voluptuous " actress became subjects of humor or fascination in popular culture in a number of ways . In a 1950s Trans World Airlines ( TWA ) advertisement Mansfield is shown in a low @-@ cut bodice , facing TWA crews , with the copy reading " quite ... roomy ... perfect " . She came to be known as " the Cleavage Queen " and " the Queen of Sex and Bosom " . As early as in 1959 , Harry Carlson , co @-@ founder of Fraternity Records , marketed Jayne Mansfield water bottles shaped after her curves . 
 Her bosom was so much a part of her public persona that talk @-@ show host Jack Paar once welcomed the actress to The Tonight Show by saying , " Here they are , Jayne Mansfield " , a line written for Paar by Dick Cavett which became the title of her biography by Raymond Strait . Joan Jacobs <unk> describes the 1950s as " an era distinguished by its worship of full @-@ breasted women " and attributes the paradigm shift to Mansfield and Monroe . Almost half a century after her death , a biographer of Nikolaus Pevsner ( a German @-@ born writer on British architecture ) , noted the improbable coincidence that Pevsner and Mansfield had once stayed at the same hotel in Bolton , Lancashire . There , she had " electrified the dining room with her imposing bosom " . Patricia Vettel @-@ Becker makes that observation more specific by attributing the phenomenon to Playboy and the appearance of Mansfield and Monroe in the magazine . Anita Ekberg and Bettie Page are also added to the list of catalysts besides Mansfield and Monroe . Drawing on the Freudian concept of fetishism , British science fiction writer and socio @-@ cultural commentator J. G. Ballard commented that Mae West , Mansfield and Monroe 's breasts " loomed across the horizon of popular consciousness . " 
 Only Hearts founder and head designer Helena Stuart commented , " She was the first one that was really that big . Without the bra , it wouldn 't have worked . There was a whole lot there to be held in and pushed up . " It has been claimed that her bosom was a major force behind the development of the 1950s brassieres , including the " Whirlpool bra " , Cuties , the " Shutter bra " , the " Action bra " , latex pads , cleavage revealing designs and uplift outline . 
 In the short story by Graham Greene , May we borrow your husband ? , a character comments on her breasts as , " Everybody could grow them big except me . I am no Jayne Mansfield , I can tell you . " In the 2001 fiction and poetry collection of <unk> <unk> , The I. V. Lounge Reader , a character tries out lipsticks in Mansfield colors and lifting underwear to emphasize her femininity . " All women aspire to be Jayne Mansfield " , says a character in Drake Worthington 's 2002 book , St. Vincent 's Manhattan , while trying out a bra . In the Seinfeld episode " The Implant " Jerry quips " you know that Jayne Mansfield had some big breasts ! " to girlfriend Sidra ( Teri Hatcher ) as he tries to figure out if her breasts are in fact real . Mansfield Domes are the unofficial names of two prominent granite mounds located in Yosemite National Park . In Toni Morrison 's Beloved a character comments " Yeah , while I 'm nursing . I feel like Jayne Mansfield " when her son comments on how big her breasts are . 
 Mansfield 's derrière is also repeatedly referred to in popular culture . On an episode of Gilmore Girls , Lorelai goes fishing with Alex . She catches a fish , brings it home and names it Jayne Mansfield because she had a " great tail switch . " In a sketch entitled The Worst Job I Ever ' Ad in the 1976 LP Derek and Clive Live by comedians Peter Cook and Dudley Moore , known as Derek and Clive , Clive ( Cook ) had the terrible job of retrieving lobsters from Mansfield 's derrière . In The Broom of the System , a novel by David Foster Wallace , much of the story happens in East Corinth , a Cleveland suburb designed to look like Mansfield 's curves from a bird 's eye view . 
 = = Musical inspiration = = 
 Mansfield became an inspiration for musicians in the punk rock genre . The <unk> , a punk band , who take their name from the actress , released titles " Jayne 's Laugh " and " Jayne Mansfield Was A Punk " . St. Jayne , a punk band from Cleveland , Ohio was also named after her . Another band of the genre called itself Jane Mansfield 's Head in 1980s . In 1989 , the band L.A. Guns released " The Ballad of Jayne " and the next year the cyberpunk band Sigue Sigue Sputnik released " Hey Jane Mansfield Superstar ! " . Masons , punk band form Tucson , Arizona , toured in 2000 playing three songs dedicated to her — " Bombshell , " " Crash My Car " and " The Witch . " The Motors , a British pub rock / punk band , had their billboard campaign I lost my head over The Motors , which featured a picture of Jayne Mansfield , banned . German punk band The Bates has recorded a tune called " The Lips of Jayne Mansfield , " featured in the 1990 album Shake . The Dave Brothers , a punk rock band in the late 1990s had a Sunday show on radio station <unk> ( 106 FM , later taken over by <unk> ) called the Church of Jayne Mansfield and distributed her posters for promotion . The Village Voice , a newspaper , compared punk pornographer Bruce <unk> to Mansfield . Marc Bolan , one of the most influential artists of glam rock that spawned the punk , compared the demise of Elvis Presley to Jayne Mansfield . The Japanese female garage punk band The 5 @.@ 6 @.@ 7 @.@ 8 's wrote a song titled " I Walk Like Jayne Mansfield , " which is featured in the movie Kill Bill Vol . 1 , directed by Quentin Tarantino . Katy Rose mentions Mansfield in her song " Overdrive . " 
 The alternative rock band Siouxsie and the Banshees picked the title of Billboard Top 100 hit single " Kiss Them for Me " ( included in their 1991 's album Superstition ) from Mansfield 's 1957 film Kiss Them for Me . Lyrics of the song uses Mansfield 's <unk> " <unk> " , and refers to her heart @-@ shaped swimming pool , her love of champagne and parties , and to the grisly automobile accident which claimed her life in 1967 . In Grok , a novel by Tom <unk> , a character plays the CD and asks , " Yes , kiss them for me — I may be delayed . " Too Hot To Handle , the UFO song considered to one of the top 500 heavy metal songs , takes its title from a Jayne Mansfield film . Mansfield is also alluded in the song " The Actor " by Robbie Williams , from the album " Rudebox " . Alternative rock band The Chills released " 16 <unk> " as a memorial to Mansfield . 
 = = Magazines = = 
 The magazine that ignited her career , Playboy , featured her on numerous issues . It has been conjectured that Playboy was a pioneer in starting an American " breast fetish " which has exaggerated the importance of large breasts , in which both Jayne Mansfield and Marilyn Monroe , featured in the early issues of the magazine , played significant roles . Playboy ' pictorials of Mansfield and Monroe were part of the emerging trend that gave birth to the large @-@ breasted feminine ideal and men 's magazines including Rogue , Nugget and Dude . Numerous other magazines featured her on the cover . These include : Hollywood Studio Magazine : Then And Now ( May 1987 , Volume 20 , No. 5 . ) , Life Magazine ( April 23 , 1956 ) , Modern Man : The Adult Picture Magazine ( March 1966 ) , Photo @-@ Rama Magazine ( Volume 6 , No. 16 ) and Playboy ( June 1963 ) . 
 = = Poems = = 
 The poem " Elegy for Jayne Mansfield , July 1967 " , by Karen Lindsey , was included in the feminist anthology Sisterhood is Powerful : An Anthology of Writings From The Women 's Liberation Movement , edited by Robin Morgan . 
 = = Playboy = = 
 She posed nude for the February 1955 issue of Playboy , an event that helped launch Mansfield 's career and increased the magazine 's circulation ; Playboy had begun publishing from publisher – editor Hugh Hefner 's kitchen the year before . In 1964 , the magazine repeated the pictorial . Photos from that pictorial was reprinted in a number of Playboy issues , including : December 1965 ( " The Playboy Portfolio of Sex Stars " ) , January 1979 ( " 25 Beautiful Years " ) , January 1984 ( " 30 Memorable Years " ) , January 1989 ( " Women Of The Fifties " ) , January 1994 ( " Remember Jayne " ) , November 1996 ( " Playboy Gallery " ) , August 1999 ( " Playboy 's Sex Stars of the Century " ; Special edition ) , and January 2000 ( " <unk> Of The Century " ) . In the Lee Siegel novel Who Wrote the Book of Love ? , the character Lucky Lee turns the issue of Playboy into a bribe to meet a girl . 
 It was 1963 when , unexpectedly , Hugh Hefner noticed photographs Bill Kobrin took of Jayne Mansfield and asked him to shoot her centerfold for Playboy . In June that year , her naked pictures from the set of the film Promises ! Promises ! in a series of photographs published in a Playboy pictorial ( titled The <unk> Jayne Mansfield ) . The pictorial was printed with a description that went , " enjoying the luxuries of a bubble bath and a double bed " . It included pictures that shows Mansfield staring at her breast , as does T.C. Jones ( <unk> , a female impersonator hair stylist ) , then grasping it in her hand and lifting it high . That issue of the magazine was banned , and Hugh Hefner , the publisher , was arrested by Chicago Police , in June 1963 , the only time in his life The trial resulted in a hung jury that voted 7 to 5 for acquittal . Copies of the issue reportedly sold for as much as $ 10 each . Since that Jayne Mansfield fiasco , Playboy was scrutinized by the Customs Department issue @-@ by @-@ issue until 1967 , and they found 51 issues out of 51 objectionable . The heavy publicity of Promises ! Promises ! in the July 1963 issue of Playboy and advanced blurbs on Playboy put Mansfield 's name out as a major box office draw , though reviews of the film were next to disastrous . 
 Playboy issues featuring Mansfield include February 1955 ( Playmate of the Month ) , February 1956 , February 1957 , February 1958 , December 1958 , February 1960 ( The best of Jayne Mansfield ) , June 1963 ( the issue that had Hugh Hefner arrested ) , Annual 1964 ( first issue of The best of Playboy ) , December 1965 , Newsstand Special 1989 ( 100 Beautiful Women ) , January 1994 and Newsstand Special 1999 ( 45th Anniversary Special ) , as well as the Playboy calendar in 1959 . In the February 1958 issue of the magazine the pictorial titled " The nude Jayne Mansfield " included pictures of a teen @-@ age , brunette Jayne posing nude for an art class and her pictures with Sophia Loren . 
 = = Biographies = = 
 In 1980 , a TV film was made on her life — The Jayne Mansfield Story — which was nominated for three Emmy Awards in the categories for hair , makeup and costume . In the film directed by Dick Lowry , Mansfield is played by Loni Anderson and her husband Mickey Hargitay is played by Arnold Schwarzenegger . She was featured in the A & E Television Networks TV series Biography in an episode titled Jayne Mansfield : Blonde Ambition . The TV series won an Emmy Award in outstanding non @-@ fiction TV series category in 2001 . A & E again featured her life in another TV serial titled Dangerous Curves in 1999 . In 1988 , her story and archival footage was a part of TV documentary Hollywood Sex Symbols . The first film documentary on her , The Wild , Wild World of Jayne Mansfield , started with herself working in the film , but it was finished in 1968 after her death and had to make use of archival footage . Fans of trash documentaries made a cult out of this film . 
 Numerous books has been written on her life and career . These include : Jayne Mansfield ( May Mann ; Pocket ; 1974 ) , Jayne Mansfield : A biography ( May Mann ; Abelard @-@ Schuman ; 1974 ) , The tragic secret life of Jayne Mansfield ( Raymond Strait ; <unk> ; 1974 ) , Jayne Mansfield and the American fifties ( Martha Saxton ; Houghton Mifflin ; 1975 ) , Jayne Mansfield ( Jean @-@ Pierre Jackson ; <unk> ; 1984 ) , <unk> : The Life and Death of Jayne Mansfield ( Guus <unk> , Gerard Timmer ; Citadel ; 1988 ) , Here They Are Jayne Mansfield ( Raymond Strait , <unk> Books ; 1992 ) , Jayne Mansfield Vs . Mamie Van Doren : Battle of the Blondes ( A Pictorial History ) ( Alan <unk> ; Shake Books ; 1993 ) , Jayne Mansfield : A Bio @-@ Bibliography ( Jocelyn Faris ; Greenwood Press ; 1994 ) , Man Enough to Be Woman ( Jayne County , Rupert Smith ; Serpent 's Tail ; 1996 ) , Sex Lives of the Hollywood Goddesses 2 ( Nigel Cawthorne ; Prion ; 2004 ) , Diamonds to Dust : The Life and Death of Jayne Mansfield ( Frank Ferruccio ; Outskirts Press ; 2007 , and Did Success Spoil Jayne Mansfield ? : Her Life in Pictures & Text ( Frank Ferruccio ; Outskirts Press ; 2010 ) . 
 There are currently plans to make a new film of Mansfield 's life , although little progress has been made . Over the years several directors including Gus Van Sant , Brian DePalma and Catherine Hardwicke have expressed interest in making a biopic of Mansfield . Universal is apparently planning a film and reportedly has a list of actresses and models being considered to play Mansfield , including Ashley Benson , Sienna Miller , Holly Madison , Kate Upton , Kelly Rohrbach , Marisa Miller , Dakota Blue Richards , Hailey Clauson , Holly Willoughby and Charlotte McKinney . 
 = = Documentary appearance = = 
 After Mansfield 's death , the documentary The Wild , Wild World of Jayne Mansfield ( 1968 ) included nude scenes from the film and pages from the Playboy pictorial , along with scenes from her other films including Too Hot to Handle ( 1960 ) , The Loves of Hercules ( 1960 ) and L 'Amore Primitivo ( 1964 ) . Promises ! Promises ! was presented for the first time on television in its uncut form in 1984 on the Playboy Channel . A VHS release soon followed but was only briefly in print . On February 14 , 2006 , VCI Video released the film on DVD with extras such as original trailers and a gallery of stills from the Playboy issue along with never before released lobby cards . 
 = The Interview ( 2014 film ) = 
 The Interview is a 2014 American political satire comedy film directed by Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg . It is their second directorial work , following This Is the End ( 2013 ) . The screenplay is by Dan Sterling , based upon a story he co @-@ authored with Rogen and Goldberg . The film stars Rogen and James Franco as journalists who set up an interview with North Korean leader Kim Jong @-@ un ( Randall Park ) , and are recruited by the CIA to assassinate him . 
 Rogen and Goldberg developed the idea for The Interview in the late 2000s , with Kim Jong @-@ il as the original assassination target . In 2011 , after Jong @-@ il 's death , Jong @-@ un replaced him as the North Korean leader . Rogen and Goldberg re @-@ developed the script with the focus on Jong @-@ un 's character . The announcement for the film was made in March 2013 , along with the beginning of pre @-@ production . Principal photography took place in Vancouver from October to December 2013 . 
 In June 2014 , the North Korean government threatened action against the United States if Columbia Pictures released the film . Columbia delayed the release from October to December , and reportedly re @-@ edited the film to make it more acceptable to North Korea . In November , the computer systems of parent company Sony Pictures Entertainment were hacked by the " Guardians of Peace " , a group the FBI claims has ties to North Korea . The group also threatened terrorist attacks against cinemas that showed the film . Major cinema chains opted not to release the film , leading Sony to release it for online rental and purchase on December 24 , 2014 , followed by a limited release at select cinemas the next day . 
 The Interview grossed $ 40 million in digital rentals , making it Sony 's most successful digital release , and earned an additional $ 11 @.@ 2 million worldwide at the box office on a $ 44 million budget . It received mixed reviews for its humor and subject matter , although critics praised the performances of Rogen , Franco , Park and Diana Bang . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dave Skylark , host of the talk show Skylark Tonight , interviews celebrities about personal topics and gossip . After Dave and his crew celebrate their 1,000th episode , Aaron Rapaport , the show 's producer , is upset by a person from the same business , criticizing Skylark Tonight as not being a real news program as it only covers entertainment and gossips . A while later Aaron reveals his concern and urge for change , which Dave agrees . Dave discovers that North Korean leader Kim Jong @-@ un is a fan of Skylark Tonight , prompting Aaron to arrange an interview . Aaron travels to rural China to receive instructions from Sook @-@ yin Park , the North Korean chief propagandist , and Aaron accepts the task of interviewing Kim , on behalf of Dave . 
 The next day , CIA Agent Lacey shows up at Dave and Aaron 's place , proposing that Dave and Aaron assassinate Kim using a <unk> strip that will expose Kim to ricin via handshake ; they reluctantly agree . Dave carries the <unk> Strip hidden inside a pack of gum . Upon their arrival in the presidential palace in Pyongyang , they are introduced to security officers Koh and Yu ; Koh discovers the ricin strip and chews it , believing it to be gum . Lacey airdrops two more strips from a UAV and Aaron smuggles them into the palace by hiding the container in his rectum , escaping a Siberian tiger in the process . 
 Dave spends the day with Kim , playing basketball and partying . Kim persuades Dave that he is misunderstood as a cruel dictator and as a failed administrator , and they become friends . At dinner , Koh has a seizure and inadvertently kills Yu before dying . The next morning , Dave feels guilty and discards one of the ricin strips , then thwarts Aaron 's attempt to poison Kim with the second strip . After a dinner mourning the death of Kim 's bodyguards , Dave witnesses Kim 's malicious side ; and after taking a walk and discovering that a nearby grocery store is merely a façade , Dave realizes that Kim has been lying to him . 
 At the same time , during attempted sex with Aaron , who still has the ricin band in his hand , Sook @-@ yin reveals that she despises Kim and apologizes for defending the regime . Dave , Aaron , and Sook @-@ yin form a plan to break Kim 's cult of personality by causing him to cry on air . During the internationally televised interview with Kim , Dave addresses increasingly sensitive topics and challenges Kim 's need for his father 's approval . Despite his initial resistance , Kim eventually cries uncontrollably and soils himself after Dave sings " Firework " ( having learned of Kim 's fondness of Katy Perry earlier ) , ruining his reputation . Sook @-@ yin and Aaron seize control of the broadcasting center and fend off guards trying to halt the broadcast . 
 Kim shoots Dave , who survives due to a bulletproof vest under his shirt . Dave , Aaron , and Sook @-@ yin regroup and escape the presidential palace , hijacking Kim 's Soviet tank to get to their pickup point . Kim boards a helicopter and pursues the group with the military . He prepares nuclear missiles , but before he can issue the command to launch , Dave fires a shell from the tank and destroys Kim 's helicopter , killing everyone on board . With the immediate threat over , Sook guides Dave and Aaron to an escape route , and they are rescued by SEAL Team Six members disguised as Korean People 's Army troops . Back in the US , Dave writes a book about his experience , and North Korea moves toward becoming a <unk> democracy with Sook @-@ yin as interim leader . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Seth Rogen as Aaron Rapaport 
 James Franco as Dave Skylark 
 Lizzy Caplan as Agent Lacey 
 Randall Park as Kim Jong @-@ un 
 Diana Bang as Sook @-@ yin Park 
 Timothy Simons as Malcolm 
 Reese Alexander as Agent <unk> 
 Anders Holm as Jake 
 James Yi as Officer Koh 
 Paul Bae as Officer Yu 
 Geoff Gustafson as Cole 
 Charles Rahi Chun as General Jong 
 The film also features cameos from Eminem , Rob Lowe , Bill Maher , Seth Meyers , Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt , Ben Schwartz , Brian Williams , and Scott Pelley . Iggy Azalea , Nicki Minaj , Emma Stone , Zac Efron , and Guy Fieri appear in the title graphic for Skylark Tonight . 
 In November 2014 , following a cyber @-@ attack that stole and leaked company information , it was revealed that Rogen and Franco were reported to have been paid $ 8 @.@ 4 million and $ 6 @.@ 5 million respectively from the $ 44 million budgeted film . Hackers also revealed that Kevin Federline was paid $ 5 @,@ 000 for a cameo appearance . According to documents , Jay @-@ Z and Beyoncé were reportedly paid $ 10 @,@ 000 each to cameo , but do not appear in the film . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg developed the idea for The Interview in late 2000 , joking about what would happen if a journalist was required to assassinate a world leader . Initially , screenwriter Dan Sterling wrote his script based on a fake dictator from a fake country , but Rogen , Goldberg , and Sony executives asked him to rewrite the script focusing on Jong @-@ un . The screenplay was then titled Kill Kim Jong Un . They picked North Korea leader Kim Jong @-@ il , but put the project on hold until Jong @-@ il died and his son Kim Jong @-@ un assumed power in 2011 . Development resumed when Rogen and Goldberg realized that Jong @-@ un is closer to their own age , which they felt would be more humorous . To write the story , co @-@ written with Daily Show writer Dan Sterling , they researched meticulously by reading non @-@ fiction books and watching video footage about North Korea . The script was later reviewed by an employee in the State Department . Rogen and Goldberg aimed to make the project more relevant and satirical than their previous films while retaining toilet humor . They were pleased when former NBA star Dennis Rodman visited North Korea , as it reinforced their belief that the premise of the film was realistic . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 In March 2013 , it was announced that Rogen and Goldberg would direct a comedy film for Columbia Pictures in which Rogen would star alongside James Franco , with Franco playing a talk @-@ show host and Rogen playing his producer . Rogen and Goldberg were on board to produce along with James Weaver through Point Grey Pictures , while Columbia was said to finance the $ 30 million budgeted film . Lizzy Caplan joined the film 's cast in October 2013 . Caplan signed on to play Agent Lacey , a CIA agent who tries to get Franco 's character to assassinate the Korean prime minister . Randall Park and Timothy Simons signed on to co @-@ star later that month . Park plays the North Korean prime minister Kim Jong @-@ Un and Simons the director of the talk show . Park was the first to audition for the role of Kim and got the part immediately . Before filming began , Park gained 15 pounds and shaved his head to resemble Jong @-@ un 's crew cut . His role was praised by critics . Although Rogen and Goldberg wrote the character of Kim as " robotic and strict " , Park instead played it " sheepish and shy " , which they found more humorous . Diana Bang was cast as Sook @-@ yin Park , for which she was well received by critics . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography on the film began in Vancouver , British Columbia , on October 10 , 2013 , and concluded on December 20 , 2013 . There are hundreds of visual effects in the film ; a crowd scene at the Pyongyang airport , for example , was digitally manipulated with a shot from 22 Jump Street . 
 = = Pre @-@ release reaction = = 
 In June 2014 , The Guardian reported that the film had " touched a nerve " within the North Korean government , as they are " notoriously paranoid about perceived threats to their safety . " The Korean Central News Agency ( KCNA ) , the state news agency of North Korea , reported that their government promised " stern " and " merciless " retaliation if the film was released . KCNA said that the release of a film portraying the assassination of the North Korean leader would not be allowed and it would be considered the " most blatant act of terrorism and war . " The next month , North Korea 's United Nations ambassador Ja Song @-@ nam condemned the film , describing its production and distribution as " an act of war " and because of Kim 's assassination in the film , " the most undisguised sponsoring of terrorism " . The Guardian described Song @-@ nam 's comments as " perfect publicity for the movie . " Later in July , KCNA wrote to U.S. President Barack Obama , asking to have the film pulled . Shortly before the planned release of the film on December 25 , 2014 , screenwriter Dan Sterling told Creative Screenwriting : " I couldn 't believe that the most infamous man in the world knew about my script – but most importantly , I would never want something I wrote to lead to some kind of humanitarian disaster . I would be horrified if anyone got hurt over this . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Delay and changes = = = 
 In August 2014 , Sony delayed the film 's release from October 10 to December 25 , 2014 . Sony made post @-@ production alterations to the film to modify its portrayal of North Korea , including modifying the designs of buttons worn by characters , originally modeled after real North Korean military buttons praising the country 's leaders , and cutting a portion of Kim Jong @-@ un 's death scene . 
 = = = Sony Pictures Entertainment hack and threats = = = 
 On November 24 , 2014 , an anonymous group identifying themselves as the " Guardians of Peace " hacked the computer networks of Columbia Pictures ' parent company Sony Pictures Entertainment . The hackers leaked internal emails , employee records and several recent and unreleased Sony Pictures films , including Annie , Mr. Turner , Still Alice , and To Write Love on Her Arms . The North Korean government denied involvement in the hack . On December 8 , the hackers leaked further materials , including a demand that Sony pull " the movie of terrorism " , widely interpreted as referring to The Interview . 
 On December 16 , 2014 , the hackers issued a warning to movie @-@ goers , threatening to attack the New York premiere of The Interview and any other cinema showing it on its theatrical release . Two further messages , allegedly from the Guardians of Peace , were released on December 18 . One , sent in a private message to Sony executives , said that the hackers would not release further information if Sony never releases the film and removed its presence from the internet . The other , posted to <unk> , a web application used for text storage which the Guardians of Peace had used for previous messages , stated that Sony had " suffered enough " and could release The Interview , but only if Kim Jong @-@ un 's death scene was not " too happy " . The message also threatened that if Sony made another film antagonizing North Korea , the hackers " will be here ready to fight " . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 Rogen predicted that the film would make its way to North Korea , stating that " we were told one of the reasons they 're so against the movie is that they 're afraid it 'll actually get into North Korea . They do have bootlegs and stuff . Maybe the tapes will make their way to North Korea and cause a revolution . " Business Insider reported via Free North Korea Radio that there was high demand for bootleg copies of the film in North Korea . The South Korean human rights organizations Fighters for a Free North Korea and Human Rights Foundation , largely made up of North Korean defectors , planned to distribute DVD copies of The Interview via balloon drops . The groups had previously air @-@ dropped offline copies of the Korean Wikipedia into North Korea on a bootable USB memory device . The balloon drop was postponed after the North Korean government referred to the plan as a de facto " declaration of war . " 
 On December 10 , Sony Pictures Entertainment Japan announced that the film would not be released in Japan as live @-@ action comedy films do not often perform well in the market ; in the Asia @-@ Pacific region , the film would be released only in Australia and New Zealand . 
 = = = Cancellation of wide theatrical release = = = 
 The premiere was held in Los Angeles on December 11 , 2014 . The film scheduled a wide release in the UK and Ireland on February 6 , 2015 . Following the hackers ' threats on December 16 , Rogen and Franco canceled scheduled publicity appearances and Sony pulled all television advertising . The National Association of Theater Owners said that they would not object to cinema owners delaying the film to ensure the safety of movie @-@ goers . Shortly afterwards , the ArcLight and Carmike cinema chains announced that they would not screen the film . 
 On December 17 , Sony canceled the New York City premiere . Later that day , other major theater chains including AMC , Cinemark , Cineplex , Regal and Southern Theatres either delayed or canceled screenings of the film . The chains reportedly came under pressure from the malls where many theaters are located , which feared that the terror threat would harm their holiday sales . They also feared expensive lawsuits in the event of an attack ; Cinemark , for instance , contended that it could not have foreseen the 2012 Aurora shooting , which took place at one of its multiplexes , a defense that would not hold in the event of an attack at a screening of The Interview . 
 The cancellation affected other films portraying North Korea . An Alamo Drafthouse Cinema location in Dallas planned to hold a free screening of Team America : World Police , which satirizes Kim Jong @-@ un 's father Kim Jong @-@ il , in place of its previously scheduled screening of The Interview ; Paramount Pictures refused to permit the screening . New Regency pulled out of a planned film adaptation of the graphic novel Pyongyang starring Steve Carell ; Carell declared it a " sad day for creative expression " . 
 Sony received criticism for canceling the wide release . Guardian film critic Peter Bradshaw wrote that it was an " unprecedented defeat on American turf " , but that " North Korea will find that their bullying edict will haunt them . " In the Capital and Gizmodo suggested the cancellation caused a Streisand effect , whereby the attempt to remove or censor a work has the unintended consequence of publicizing it more widely . In a press conference , U.S. President Barack Obama said that though he was sympathetic to Sony 's need to protect employees , he thought Sony had " made a mistake . We cannot have a society in which some dictator in some place can start imposing censorship in the United States . I wish they 'd spoken to me first . I would have told them : do not get into the pattern in which you are intimidated . " 
 According to Sony Pictures Entertainment CEO Michael Lynton , the cancellation of the wide release was a response to the refusal of cinema chains to screen the film , not the hackers ' threats , and that Sony would seek other ways to distribute the film . Sony released a statement saying that the company " is and always has been strongly committed to the First Amendment ... Free expression should never be suppressed by threats and extortion . " 
 = = = Revised release = = = 
 After the wide release cancellation , Sony considered other ways to release the film , citing pressure from the film industry , theater owners , and the White House . On NBC 's Meet the Press on December 21 , Sony 's legal counsel David Boies noted that the company was still committed to releasing the movie . Sony planned a limited release for December 25 , 2014 , at more than three hundred American independent and arthouse cinemas . Lynton stated that Sony was trying to show the film to the largest audience by securing as many theaters as they could . 
 Sony released The Interview for rental or purchase in the United States through the streaming services Google Play , Xbox Video , and YouTube on December 24 , 2014 . It was also available for a limited time on <unk> , a website operated by the stealth startup <unk> , which Sony previously worked with to market The Fifth Wave . Within hours , The Interview spread to file sharing websites after a security hole allowed people to download rather than stream the movie . <unk> estimated that The Interview had been downloaded illegally via torrents at least 1 @.@ 5 million times in just two days . On December 27 , the North Korean National Defence Commission released a statement accusing President Obama of forcing Sony to distribute the film . The film was released on iTunes on December 28 . 
 In the first week of January 2015 , Sony announced The Interview would receive a wide theatrical release in the United Kingdom and Ireland on February 6 , but it would not be distributed digitally in the UK . The film became available for streaming on Netflix on January 24 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Sony released the film on Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVD on February 17 , 2015 . The home release was packaged as the " Freedom Edition " , and included 90 minutes of deleted scenes , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurettes , a blooper reel , feature commentary with directors Rogen and Goldberg , and a special episode of Naked and Afraid featuring Rogen and Franco . As of July 21 , 2015 , the film had earned over $ 6 @.@ 7 million in sales in the US . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office and online rentals = = = 
 The Interview opened to a limited release in the United States on December 25 , 2014 , across 331 theaters and earned over $ 1 million on its opening day . Variety called the opening gross " an impressive launch for a title playing in only about 300 independent theaters in the U.S. " It went on to earn over $ 1 @.@ 8 million in its opening weekend , and by the end of its run on January 25 , 2015 , had grossed $ 6 @.@ 1 million at the box office . 
 Within four days of its online release on December 24 , 2014 , The Interview earned over $ 15 million through online rentals and purchases . It became Sony Pictures ' highest @-@ grossing online release , outselling Arbitrage ( $ 14 million ) , Bachelorette ( $ 8 @.@ 2 million ) , and <unk> ( $ 7 million ) . It is the top @-@ selling Google Play and YouTube film of 2014 . By January 20 , 2015 , the film had earned more than $ 40 million from online sales and rentals . 
 Sony expected The Interview to break even through video @-@ on @-@ demand sales and saving millions of dollars on marketing . The National Association of Theater Owners contended that Sony would lose at least $ 30 million due to poor box office performance . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds a 52 % approval rating , based on 132 reviews , with an average rating of 5 @.@ 6 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads : " Unfortunately overshadowed by controversy ( and under @-@ screened as a result ) , The Interview 's screenplay offers middling laughs bolstered by its two likable leads . " On Metacritic , the film has a score of 52 out of 100 , based on 33 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . 
 IGN 's Roth Cornet wrote that " though it 's unlikely to stand out as one of the shrewdest political satires of its time , [ it ] is a clever , unrestrained and — most importantly — <unk> parody that pokes fun at both a vapid media and one of the world 's most dangerous dictators . " Edward Douglas of ComingSoon.net said the film was " hilarious , but it will probably get us <unk> " . Jordan Hoffman of The Guardian gave the film three out of five stars and wrote that " if this unessential but agreeable movie really triggered an international response , this is life reflecting art in a major way . " 
 Scott Foundas of Variety panned the film as " cinematic waterboarding " and " about as funny as a communist food shortage , and just as protracted " , but praised the performances of Randall Park and Diana Bang . Mike Hale of The New York Times also praised Park and Bang , but wrote that " after seeing The Interview and the ruckus its mere existence has caused , the only sensible reaction is amazement at the huge disconnect between the innocuousness of the film and the viciousness of the response . " 
 = = = Political response = = = 
 In the wake of the Sony Pictures Entertainment hack , leaks revealed e @-@ mails between Sony Pictures Entertainment CEO Michael Lynton and RAND Corporation defense analyst Bruce Bennett from June 2014 . Bennett advised against toning down The Interview 's graphic Jong @-@ un death scene , in the hope that it would " start some real thinking in South Korea and , I believe , in the North once the DVD leaks into the North " . Bennett expressed his view that " the only resolution I can see to the North Korean nuclear and other threats is for the North Korean government to eventually go away " , which he felt would be likeliest to occur following an assassination of Kim . Lynton replied that a senior figure in the United States Department of State agreed . Bennett responded that the office of Robert R. King , U.S. Special Envoy for North Korean Human Rights Issues , had determined that the North Korean statements had been " typical North Korean bullying , likely without follow @-@ up " . 
 In an interview with CNN , Bennett said Lynton sits on the board of trustees of the RAND Corporation , which had asked Bennett to talk to Lynton and give his opinion on the film . Bennett felt The Interview was " coarse " and " over the top " , but that " the depiction of Kim Jong @-@ un was a picture that needed to get into North Korea . There are a lot of people in prison camps in North Korea who need to take advantage of a change of thinking in the north . " Bennett felt that if the DVD were smuggled into the country it might have an effect " over time " . Bennett contacted the Special Envoy for North Korean Human Rights Issues , a personal friend of his , who " took the standard government approach : we don 't tell industry what to do " . Jen <unk> , a spokesperson for the United States Department of State , confirmed that Daniel R. Russel , the U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs , had spoken to Sony executives ; she reiterated that " entertainers are free to make movies of their choosing , and we are not involved in that " . 
 = Strepsirrhini = 
 Strepsirrhini or Strepsirhini ( / <unk> / ; <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ RY @-@ nee ) is a suborder of primates that includes the lemuriform primates , which consist of the lemurs of Madagascar , galagos ( " bushbabies " ) and pottos from Africa , and the lorises from India and southeast Asia . Also belonging to the suborder are the extinct adapiform primates , a diverse and widespread group that thrived during the Eocene ( 56 to 34 million years ago [ mya ] ) in Europe , North America , and Asia , but disappeared from most of the Northern Hemisphere as the climate cooled . The last of the adapiforms died out at the end of the Miocene ( ~ 7 mya ) . Adapiforms are sometimes referred to as being " lemur @-@ like " , although the diversity of both lemurs and adapiforms does not support this comparison . The two leading taxonomic classifications for the suborder divide living strepsirrhine primates into either two superfamilies ( Lemuroidea and Lorisoidea ) within the infraorder Lemuriformes or two infraorders , Lemuriformes and Lorisiformes . The suborder represents a related group , and replaced the widely used and now obsolete suborder Prosimii ( " prosimians " ) , which included strepsirrhines and tarsiers , a grouping based primarily on shared anatomical traits . Today , Strepsirrhini excludes the tarsiers , which are now grouped in the other major primate suborder , Haplorhini , along with the monkeys and apes ( simians or anthropoids ) . Strepsirrhines are often inappropriately referred to as " living fossils " . Instead , they have evolved for millions of years under natural selection , and have diversified to fill many ecological niches . Some of their traits may be derived from ancestral primates , while others are unique to strepsirrhines . 
 Strepsirrhines are defined by their wet nose or rhinarium . They also have a smaller brain than comparably sized simians , large olfactory lobes for smell , a vomeronasal organ to detect pheromones , and a bicornuate uterus with an epitheliochorial placenta . Their eyes contain a reflective layer to improve their night vision , and their eye sockets include a ring of bone around the eye , but they lack a wall of thin bone behind it . Strepsirrhine primates produce their own vitamin C , whereas haplorhine primates must obtain it from their diets . Lemuriform primates are characterized by a toothcomb , a specialized set of teeth in the front , lower part of the mouth mostly used for combing fur during grooming . Often , the toothcomb is incorrectly used to characterize all strepsirrhines . Instead , it is unique to lemuriforms and is not seen among adapiforms . Lemuriforms groom orally , and also possess a grooming claw on the second toe of each foot for scratching in areas that are inaccessible to the mouth and tongue . It is unclear whether adapiforms possessed grooming claws . 
 The taxonomy of strepsirrhines is controversial and has a complicated history . Confused taxonomic terminology and oversimplified anatomical comparisons have created misconceptions about primate and strepsirrhine phylogeny , illustrated by the media attention surrounding the single " Ida " fossil in 2009 . Strepsirrhines diverged from the haplorhine primates near the beginning of the primate radiation between 55 and 90 mya . Older divergence dates are based on genetic analysis estimates , while younger dates are based on the scarce fossil record . Lemuriform primates may have evolved from either cercamoniines or sivaladapids , both of which were adapiforms that may have originated in Asia . They were once thought to have evolved from adapids , a more specialized and younger branch of adapiform primarily from Europe . Lemurs rafted to Madagascar between 47 and 54 mya , whereas the lorises split from the African galagos around 40 mya and later colonized Asia . Both living and extinct strepsirrhines are behaviorally diverse , although all are primarily arboreal ( tree @-@ dwelling ) . Most living lemuriforms are nocturnal , while most extinct adapiforms were diurnal . Both living and extinct groups primarily fed on fruit , leaves , and insects . Many of today 's strepsirrhines are endangered due to habitat destruction , hunting for bushmeat , and live capture for the exotic pet trade . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The taxonomic name Strepsirrhini derives from the Greek <unk> ( <unk> or " a turning [ inward ] ) " and <unk> ( rhinos or " nose " ) , which refers to the appearance of the sinuous ( comma @-@ shaped ) nostrils on the rhinarium or wet nose . The name was first used by French naturalist Étienne Geoffroy Saint @-@ Hilaire in 1812 as a <unk> rank comparable to Platyrrhini ( New World monkeys ) and Catarrhini ( Old World monkeys ) . In his description , he mentioned " Les <unk> <unk> et <unk> " ( " Nostrils terminal and winding " ) . 
 When British zoologist Reginald Innes Pocock revived Strepsirrhini and defined Haplorhini in 1918 , he omitted the second " r " from both ( " Strepsirhini " and " Haplorhini " instead of " Strepsirrhini " and " Haplorrhini " ) , although he did not remove the second " r " from Platyrrhini or Catarrhini , both of which were also named by É . Geoffroy in 1812 . Following Pocock , many researchers continued to spell Strepsirrhini with a single " r " until primatologists Paulina Jenkins and Prue Napier pointed out the error in 1987 . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 Strepsirrhines include the extinct adapiforms and the lemuriform primates , which include lemurs and lorisoids ( lorises , pottos , and galagos ) . The lemuriforms , and particularly the lemurs of Madagascar , are often portrayed inappropriately as " living fossils " or as examples of " basal " , or " inferior " primates . These views have historically hindered the understanding of mammalian evolution and the evolution of strepsirrhine traits , such as their reliance on smell ( olfaction ) , characteristics of their skeletal anatomy , and their brain size , which is relatively small . In the case of lemurs , natural selection has driven this isolated population of primates to diversify significantly and fill a rich variety of ecological niches , despite their smaller and less complex brains compared to simians . 
 The origin of the earliest primates , from which both the strepsirrhines and haplorhines ( simians and tarsiers ) evolved , is a mystery . Both their place of origin and the group from which they evolved are uncertain . Although the fossil record demonstrating their initial radiation across the Northern Hemisphere is very detailed , the fossil record from the tropics — where primates most likely evolved — is very poor , particularly around the time that primates and other major clades ( groups consisting of an ancestor and all its descendants ) of eutherian mammals were first appearing . Consequently , geneticists and primatologists have used genetic analyses to determine the relatedness between primate lineages and the amount of time since they diverged . Using this molecular clock , divergence dates for the major primate lineages have suggested that primates evolved more than 80 – 90 mya , nearly 40 million years before the first primates appear in the fossil record . 
 The early primates include both nocturnal and diurnal small @-@ bodied species , and all were arboreal , with hands and feet specially adapted for maneuvering on small branches . <unk> from the early Paleocene are sometimes considered " archaic primates " because their teeth resembled those of early primates , and because they possessed arboreal adaptations , such as a divergent hallux ( big toe ) . Although plesiadapiforms were closely related to primates , they may represent a paraphyletic group from which primates may or may not have directly evolved , and some genera may have been more closely related to colugos , also known as dermopterans or " flying lemurs " , which are thought to be closely related to primates . 
 The first true primates ( <unk> ) do not appear in the fossil record until the early Eocene ( ~ 55 mya ) , at which point they radiated across the Northern Hemisphere during a brief period of rapid global warming known as the Paleocene – Eocene Thermal Maximum . These first primates included Cantius , Donrussellia , <unk> , and Teilhardina on the northern continents , as well as the more questionable ( and fragmentary ) fossil Altiatlasius from Paleocene Africa . These earliest fossil primates are often divided into two groups , adapiforms ( sometimes called adapids , or <unk> ) and <unk> ( or omomyids — suspected relatives of tarsiers ) . Both appeared suddenly in the fossil record without transitional forms to indicate ancestry , and both groups were rich in diversity and were widespread throughout the Eocene . Although few fossils of extant primate groups — lemuriforms , tarsiers , or simians — are known from the Early to Middle Eocene , evidence from genetics and newer fossil finds suggest they may have been present during this early adaptive radiation . The divergence between strepsirrhines , simians , and tarsiers likely followed almost immediately after primates first evolved . 
 = = = <unk> evolution = = = 
 Adapiforms are extinct strepsirrhines that shared many anatomical similarities with lemuriforms . They are sometimes referred to as lemur @-@ like primates , although the diversity of both lemurs and adapiforms do not support this analogy . Like living strepsirrhines , adapiforms were extremely diverse , with at least 30 genera and 80 species known from the fossil record as of the early 2000s . They diversified across Laurasia during the Eocene , some reaching North America via a land bridge . They were among the most common mammals found in the fossil beds from that time . A few rare species have also been found in northern Africa . The most basal of the adapiforms include the genera Cantius from North America and Europe and Donrussellia from Europe . The latter bears the most ancestral traits , so it is often considered a sister group or stem group of the other adapiforms . 
 Adapiforms are often divided into three major groups : 
 <unk> were most commonly found in Europe , although the oldest specimens ( <unk> from middle Eocene China ) indicate that they most likely evolved in Asia and immigrated . They died out in Europe during the Grande <unk> , part of a significant extinction event at the end of the Eocene . 
 <unk> , which most closely resembled some of Madagascar 's lemurs , come from Europe and North America . The European branch is often referred to as cercamoniines . The North American branch thrived during the Eocene , but did not survive into the Oligocene . Like the adapids , the European branch were also extinct by the end of the Eocene . 
 <unk> of southern and eastern Asia are best known from the Miocene , and the only adapiforms to survive past the Eocene / Oligocene boundary ( ~ 34 mya ) . Their relationship to the other adapiforms remains unclear . They had vanished before the end of the Miocene ( ~ 7 mya ) . 
 The relationship between adapiform and lemuriform primates has not been clearly demonstrated , so the position of adapiforms as a paraphyletic stem group is questionable . Both molecular clock data and new fossil finds suggest that the lemuriform divergence from the other primates and the subsequent lemur @-@ lorisoid split both predate the appearance of adapiforms in the early Eocene . Yet new calibration methods may reconcile the discrepancies between the molecular clock and the fossil record , favoring more recent divergence dates . The fossil record suggests that the strepsirrhine adapiforms and the haplorhine <unk> had been evolving independently before the early Eocene , although their most basal members share enough dental similarities to suggest that they diverged during the Paleocene ( 66 – 55 mya ) . 
 = = = Lemuriform evolution = = = 
 Lemuriform origins are unclear and debated . American paleontologist Philip Gingerich proposed that lemuriform primates evolved from one of several genera of European adapids based on similarities between the front lower teeth of adapids and the toothcomb of extant lemuriforms ; however , this view is not strongly supported due to a lack of clear transitional fossils . Instead , lemuriforms may be descended from a very early branch of Asian cercamoniines or sivaladapids that immigrated to northern Africa . 
 Until discoveries of three 40 @-@ million @-@ year @-@ old fossil lorisoids ( Karanisia , <unk> , and <unk> ) in the El Fayum deposits of Egypt between 1997 and 2005 , the oldest known lemuriforms had come from the early Miocene ( ~ 20 mya ) of Kenya and Uganda . These newer finds demonstrate that lemuriform primates were present during the middle Eocene in Afro @-@ Arabia and that the lemuriform lineage and all other strepsirrhine taxa had diverged before then . Djebelemur from Tunisia dates to the late early or early middle Eocene ( 52 to 46 mya ) and has been considered a cercamoniine , but also may have been a stem lemuriform . <unk> from Algeria date to roughly the same time and may be a sister group of the <unk> . Together with Plesiopithecus from the late Eocene Egypt , the three may qualify as the stem lemuriforms from Africa . 
 Molecular clock estimates indicate that lemurs and the lorisoids diverged in Africa during the Paleocene , approximately 62 mya . Between 47 and 54 mya , lemurs dispersed to Madagascar by rafting . In isolation , the lemurs diversified and filled the niches often filled by monkeys and apes today . In Africa , the lorises and galagos diverged during the Eocene , approximately 40 mya . Unlike the lemurs in Madagascar , they have had to compete with monkeys and apes , as well as other mammals . 
 = = Taxonomic classification = = 
 Strepsirrhine primates were first grouped under the genus Lemur by Swedish taxonomist Carl Linnaeus in the 10th edition of Systema Naturae published in 1758 . At the time , only three species were recognized , one of which ( the colugo ) is no longer recognized as a primate . In 1785 , Dutch naturalist Pieter Boddaert divided the genus Lemur into two genera : <unk> for the lemurs , colugos , and tarsiers and Tardigradus for the lorises . Ten years later , É . Geoffroy and Georges Cuvier grouped the tarsiers and galagos due to similarities in their hindlimb morphology , a view supported by German zoologist Johann Karl Wilhelm Illiger , who placed them in the family <unk> while placing the lemurs and tarsiers in the family <unk> ( Prosimii ) in 1811 . The use of the tarsier @-@ galago classification continued for many years until 1898 , when Dutch zoologist Ambrosius <unk> demonstrated two different types of placentation ( formation of a placenta ) in the two groups . 
 English comparative anatomist William Henry Flower created the suborder Lemuroidea in 1883 to distinguish these primates from the simians , which were grouped under English biologist St. George Jackson Mivart 's suborder Anthropoidea ( = Simiiformes ) . According to Flower , the suborder Lemuroidea contained the families Lemuridae ( lemurs , lorises , and galagos ) , <unk> ( aye @-@ aye ) , and Tarsiidae ( tarsiers ) . Lemuroidea was later replaced by Illiger 's suborder Prosimii . Many years earlier , in 1812 , É . Geoffroy first named the suborder Strepsirrhini , in which he included the tarsiers . This taxonomy went unnoticed until 1918 , when Pocock compared the structure of the nose and reinstated the use of the suborder Strepsirrhini , while also moving the tarsiers and the simians into a new suborder , Haplorhini . It was not until 1953 , when British anatomist William Charles Osman Hill wrote an entire volume on strepsirrhine anatomy , that Pocock 's taxonomic suggestion became noticed and more widely used . Since then , primate taxonomy has shifted between Strepsirrhini @-@ Haplorhini and Prosimii @-@ Anthropoidea multiple times . 
 Most of the academic literature provides a basic framework for primate taxonomy , usually including several potential taxonomic schemes . Although most experts agree upon phylogeny , many disagree about nearly every level of primate classification . 
 = = = <unk> controversies = = = 
 The most commonly recurring debate in <unk> during the 1970s , 1980s , and early 2000s concerned the phylogenetic position of tarsiers compared to both simians and the other prosimians . Tarsiers are most often placed in either the suborder Haplorhini with the simians or in the suborder Prosimii with the strepsirrhines . Prosimii is one of the two traditional primate suborders and is based on evolutionary grades ( groups united by anatomical traits ) rather than phylogenetic clades , while the Strepsirrhini @-@ Haplorrhini taxonomy was based on evolutionary relationships . Yet both systems persist because the Prosimii @-@ Anthropoidea taxonomy is familiar and frequently seen in the research literature and textbooks . 
 Strepsirrhines are traditionally characterized by several symplesiomorphic ( ancestral ) traits not shared with the simians , particularly the rhinarium . Other <unk> include long snouts , convoluted <unk> , relatively large olfactory bulbs , and smaller brains . The toothcomb is a synapomorphy ( shared , derived trait ) seen among lemuriforms , although it is frequently and incorrectly used to define the strepsirrhine clade . Strepsirrhine primates are also united in possessing an epitheliochorial placenta . Unlike the tarsiers and simians , strepsirrhines are capable of producing their own vitamin C and do not need it supplied in their diet . Further genetic evidence for the relationship between tarsiers and simians as a haplorhine clade is the shared possession of three SINE markers . 
 Because of their historically mixed assemblages which included tarsiers and close relatives of primates , both Prosimii and Strepsirrhini have been considered wastebasket taxa for " lower primates " . Regardless , the strepsirrhine and haplorrhine clades are generally accepted and viewed as the preferred taxonomic division . Yet , tarsiers still closely resemble both strepsirrhines and simians in different ways , and since the early split between strepsirrhines , tarsiers , and simians is ancient and hard to resolve , a third taxonomic arrangement with three suborders is sometimes used : Prosimii , Tarsiiformes , and Anthropoidea . More often , the term " prosimian " is no longer used in official taxonomy , but is still used to illustrate the behavioral ecology of tarsiers relative to the other primates . 
 In addition to the controversy over tarsiers , the debate over the origins of simians once called the strepsirrhine clade into question . Arguments for an evolutionary link between adapiforms and simians made by paleontologists Gingerich , Elwyn L. Simons , Tab Rasmussen , and others could have potentially excluded adapiforms from Strepsirrhini . In 1975 , Gingerich proposed a new suborder , <unk> , to suggest that strepsirrhines are more closely related to simians than tarsiers . However , no clear relationship between the two had been demonstrated by the early 2000s . The idea reemerged briefly in 2009 during the media attention surrounding Darwinius masillae ( dubbed " Ida " ) , a cercamoniine from Germany that was touted as a " missing link between humans and earlier primates " ( simians and adapiforms ) . However , the cladistic analysis was flawed and the phylogenetic inferences and terminology were vague . Although the authors noted that Darwinius was not a " fossil lemur " , they did emphasize the absence of a toothcomb , which adapiforms did not possess . 
 = = = <unk> classification and clade terminology = = = 
 Within Strepsirrhini , two common classifications include either two infraorders ( Adapiformes and Lemuriformes ) or three infraorders ( Adapiformes , Lemuriformes , Lorisiformes ) . A less common taxonomy places the aye @-@ aye ( Daubentoniidae ) in its own infraorder , Chiromyiformes . In some cases , plesiadapiforms are included within the order Primates , in which case <unk> is sometimes treated as a suborder , with Strepsirrhini becoming an infraorder , and the Lemuriformes and others become parvorders . Regardless of the <unk> taxonomy , Strepsirrhini is composed of three ranked superfamilies and 14 families , seven of which are extinct . Three of these extinct families included the recently extinct giant lemurs of Madagascar , many of which died out within the last 1 @,@ 000 years following human arrival on the island . 
 When Strepsirrhini is divided into two infraorders , the clade containing all toothcombed primates can be called " lemuriforms " . When it is divided into three infraorders , the term " lemuriforms " refers only to Madagascar 's lemurs , and the toothcombed primates are referred to as either " crown strepsirrhines " or " extant strepsirrhines " . Confusion of this specific terminology with the general term " strepsirrhine " , along with oversimplified anatomical comparisons and vague phylogenetic inferences , can lead to misconceptions about primate phylogeny and misunderstandings about primates from the Eocene , as seen with the media coverage of Darwinius . Because the skeletons of adapiforms share strong similarities with those of lemurs and lorises , researchers have often referred to them as " primitive " strepsirrhines , lemur ancestors , or a sister group to the living strepsirrhines . They are included in Strepsirrhini , and are considered basal members of the clade . Although their status as true primates is not questioned , the questionable relationship between adapiforms and other living and fossil primates leads to multiple classifications within Strepsirrhini . Often , adapiforms are placed in their own infraorder due to anatomical differences with lemuriforms and their unclear relationship . When shared traits with lemuriforms ( which may or may not be synapomorphic ) are emphasized , they are sometimes reduced to families within the infraorder Lemuriformes ( or superfamily Lemuroidea ) . 
 The first fossil primate described was the adapiform Adapis <unk> by French naturalist Georges Cuvier in 1821 , who compared it to a hyrax ( " le Daman " ) , then considered a member of a now obsolete group called pachyderms . It was not recognized as a primate until it was reevaluated in the early 1870s . Originally , adapiforms were all included under the family Adapidae , which was divided into two or three subfamilies : <unk> , <unk> , and sometimes Sivaladapinae . All North American adapiforms were lumped under <unk> , while the Old World forms were usually assigned to <unk> . Around the 1990s , two distinct groups of European " adapids " began to emerge , based on differences in the postcranial skeleton and the teeth . One of these two European forms was identified as cercamoniines , which were allied with the <unk> found mostly in North America , while the other group falls into the traditional <unk> classification . The three major adapiform divisions are now typically regarded as three families within Adapiformes ( <unk> , Adapidae and Sivaladapidae ) , but other divisions ranging from one to five families are used as well . 
 = = Anatomy and physiology = = 
 All lemuriforms possess a specialized dental structure called a toothcomb , with the exception of the aye @-@ aye , in which the structure has been modified into two continually growing ( hypselodont ) incisors ( or canine teeth ) , similar to those of rodents . The toothcomb consists of either two or four procumbent lower incisors and procumbent lower canine teeth followed by a canine @-@ shaped premolar . It is used to comb the fur during oral grooming . Shed hairs that accumulate between the teeth of the toothcomb are removed by the sublingua or " under @-@ tongue " . Lemuriforms also possess a grooming claw on the second digit of each foot for scratching . Adapiforms did not possess a toothcomb . Instead , their lower incisors varied in orientation — from somewhat procumbent to somewhat vertical — and the lower canines were projected upwards and were often prominent . Adapiforms may have had a grooming claw , but there is little evidence of this . 
 Like all primates , strepsirrhine orbits ( eye sockets ) have a postorbital bar , a protective ring of bone created by a connection between the frontal and zygomatic bones . Both living and extinct strepsirrhines lack a thin wall of bone behind the eye , referred to as postorbital closure , which is only seen in haplorhine primates . Although the eyes of strepsirrhines point forward , giving stereoscopic vision , the orbits do not face fully forward . Among living strepsirrhines , most or all species are thought to possess a reflective layer behind the retina of the eye , called a tapetum lucidum , which improves vision in low light , but they lack a fovea , which improves day vision . This differs from tarsiers , which lack a tapetum lucidum but possess a fovea . 
 Strepsirrhine primates have a brain relatively comparable to or slightly larger in size than most mammals . Compared to simians , however , they have a relatively small brain @-@ to @-@ body size ratio . Strepsirrhines are also traditionally noted for their unfused mandibular symphysis ( two halves of the lower jaw ) , however , fusion of the mandibular symphysis was common in adapiforms , notably Notharctus . Also , several extinct giant lemurs exhibited a fused mandibular symphysis . 
 Many nocturnal species have large , independently movable ears , although there are significant differences in sizes and shapes of the ear between species . The structure of the middle and inner ear of strepsirrhines differs between the lemurs and lorisoids . In lemurs , the tympanic cavity , which surrounds the middle ear , is expanded . This leaves the ectotympanic ring , which supports the eardrum , free within the auditory bulla . This trait is also seen in adapiforms . In lorisoids , however , the tympanic cavity is smaller and the ectotympanic ring becomes attached to the edge of the auditory bulla . The tympanic cavity in lorisoids also has two accessory air spaces , which are not present in lemurs . Both lorisoids and cheirogaleid lemurs have replaced the internal carotid artery with an enlarged ascending pharyngeal artery . Strepsirrhines also possess distinctive features in their tarsus ( ankle bones ) that differentiate them from haplorhines , such as a sloping <unk> @-@ fibular facet ( the face where the talus bone and fibula meet ) and a difference in the location of the position of the flexor <unk> tendon on the talus . These differences give strepsirrhines the ability to make more complex rotations of the ankle and indicate that their feet are habitually inverted , or turned inward , an adaptation for grasping vertical supports . 
 Sexual dichromatism ( different coloration patterns between males and females ) can be seen in most brown lemur species , but otherwise lemurs show very little if any difference in body size or weight between sexes . This lack of sexual dimorphism is not characteristic of all strepsirrhines . Some adapiforms were sexually dimorphic , with males bearing a larger sagittal crest ( a ridge of bone on the top of the skull to which jaw muscles attach ) and canine teeth . <unk> exhibit some sexual dimorphism , but males are typically no more than 20 percent larger than females . 
 = = = <unk> and olfaction = = = 
 Strepsirrhines have a long snout that ends in a moist and touch @-@ sensitive rhinarium , similar to that of dogs and many other mammals . The rhinarium is surrounded by vibrissae that are also sensitive to touch . Convoluted <unk> on the inside of their nose filter , warm , and moisten the incoming air , while olfactory receptors of the main olfactory system lining the <unk> detect airborne smells . The olfactory bulbs of lemurs are comparable in size to those of other arboreal mammals . 
 The surface of the rhinarium does not have any olfactory receptors , so it is not used for smell in terms of detecting volatile substances . Instead , it has sensitive touch receptors ( Merkel cells ) . The rhinarium , upper lip , and gums are tightly connected by a fold of mucous membrane called the philtrum , which runs from the tip of the nose to the mouth . The upper lip is constrained by this connection and has fewer nerves to control movement , which leaves it less mobile than the upper lips of simians . The philtrum creates a gap ( diastema ) between the roots of the first two upper incisors . 
 The strepsirrhine rhinarium can collect relatively non @-@ volatile , fluid @-@ based chemicals ( traditionally categorized as pheromones ) and transmit them to the vomeronasal organ ( VNO ) , which is located below and in front of the nasal cavity , above the mouth . The VNO is an encased duct @-@ like structure made of cartilage and is isolated from the air passing through the nasal cavity . The VNO is connected to the mouth through nasopalatine ducts ( which communicate via the incisive foramen ) , which pass through the hard palate at the top , front of the mouth . Fluids traveling from the rhinarium to the mouth and then up the nasopalatine ducts to the VNO are detected , and information is relayed to the accessory olfactory bulb , which is relatively large in strepsirrhines . From the accessory olfactory bulb , information is sent to the amygdala , which handles emotions , and then to the hypothalamus , which handles basic body functions and metabolic processes . This neural pathway differs from that used by the main olfactory system . 
 All lemuriforms have a VNO , as do tarsiers and some New World monkeys . Adapiforms exhibit the gap between the upper incisors , which indicates the presence of a VNO , but there is some disagreement over whether or not they possessed a rhinarium . 
 = = = Reproductive physiology = = = 
 Extant strepsirrhines have an epitheliochorial placenta , where the maternal blood does not come in direct contact with the fetal chorion like it does in the <unk> placenta of haplorhines . The strepsirrhine uterus has two distinct chambers ( bicornuate ) . Despite having similar gestation periods to comparably sized haplorhines , fetal growth rates are generally slower in strepsirrhines , which results in newborn offspring that are as little as one @-@ third the size of haplorhine newborns . Extant strepsirrhines also have a lower basal metabolic rate , which elevates in females during gestation , putting greater demands on the mother . 
 Most primates have two mammary glands , but the number and positions vary between species within strepsirrhines . Lorises have two pairs , while others , like the ring @-@ tailed lemur , have one pair on the chest ( pectoral ) . The aye @-@ aye also has two mammary glands , but they are located near the groin ( inguinal ) . In females , the clitoris is sometimes enlarged and pendulous , resembling the male penis , which can make gender identification difficult for human observers . The clitoris may also have a bony structure in it , similar to the baculum ( penis bone ) in males . Most male primates have a baculum , but it is typically larger in strepsirrhines and usually forked at the tip . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 Approximately three @-@ quarters of all extant strepsirrhine species are nocturnal , sleeping in nests made from dead leaves or tree hollows during the day . All of the lorisoids from continental Africa and Asia are nocturnal , a circumstance that minimizes their competition with the simian primates of the region , which are diurnal . The lemurs of Madagascar , living in the absence of simians , are more variable in their activity cycles . The aye @-@ aye , mouse lemurs , woolly lemurs , and sportive lemurs are nocturnal , while ring @-@ tailed lemurs and most of their kin , sifakas , and indri are diurnal . Yet some or all of the brown lemurs ( Eulemur ) are cathemeral , which means they may be active during the day or night , depending on factors such as temperature and predation . Many extant strepsirrhines are well adapted for nocturnal activity due to their relatively large eyes ; large , movable ears ; sensitive tactile hairs ; strong sense of smell ; and the tapetum lucidum behind the retina . Among the adapiforms , most are considered diurnal , with the exception of <unk> and <unk> from Middle Eocene Europe , both of which had large orbits that suggest nocturnality . 
 Reproduction in most strepsirrhine species tends to be seasonal , particularly in lemurs . Key factors that affect seasonal reproduction include the length of the wet season , subsequent food availability , and the maturation time of the species . Like other primates , strepsirrhines are relatively slow breeders compared to other mammals . Their gestation period and interbirth intervals are usually long , and the young develop slowly , just like in haplorhine primates . Unlike simians , some strepsirrhines produce two or three offspring , although some produce only a single offspring . Those that produce multiple offspring tend to build nests for their young . These two traits are thought to be plesiomorphic ( ancestral ) for primates . The young are precocial ( relatively mature and mobile ) at birth , but not as coordinated as ungulates ( hoofed mammals ) . Infant care by the mother is relatively prolonged compared to many other mammals , and in some cases , the infants cling to the mother 's fur with their hands and feet . 
 Despite their relatively smaller brains compared to other primates , lemurs have demonstrated levels of technical intelligence in problem solving that are comparable to those seen in simians . However , their social intelligence differs , often emphasizing within @-@ group competition over cooperation , which may be due to adaptations for their unpredictable environment . Although lemurs have not been observed using objects as tools in the wild , they can be trained to use objects as tools in captivity and demonstrate a basic understanding about the functional properties of the objects they are using . 
 = = = Social systems and communication = = = 
 The nocturnal strepsirrhines have been traditionally described as " solitary " , although this term is no longer favored by the researchers who study them . Many are considered " solitary foragers " , but many exhibit complex and diverse social organization , often overlapping home ranges , initiating social contact at night , and sharing sleeping sites during the day . Even the mating systems are variable , as seen in wooly lemurs , which live in monogamous breeding pairs . Because of this social diversity among these solitary but social primates , whose level of social interaction is comparable to that of diurnal simians , alternative classifications have been proposed to emphasize their gregarious , dispersed , or solitary nature . 
 Among extant strepsirrhines , only the diurnal and cathemeral lemurs have evolved to live in multi @-@ male / multi @-@ female groups , comparable to most living simians . This social trait , seen in two extant lemur families ( Indriidae and Lemuridae ) , is thought to have evolved independently . Group sizes are smaller in social lemurs than in simians , and despite the similarities , the community structures differ . Female dominance , which is rare in simians , is fairly common in lemurs . Strepsirrhines spend a considerable amount of time grooming each other ( allogrooming ) . When lemuriform primates groom , they lick the fur and then comb it with their toothcomb . They also use their grooming claw to scratch places they cannot reach with their mouth . 
 Like New World monkeys , strepsirrhines rely on scent marking for much of their communication . This involves smearing secretions from epidermal scent glands on tree branches , along with urine and feces . In some cases , strepsirrhines may anoint themselves with urine ( urine washing ) . Body postures and gestures may be used , although the long snout , non @-@ mobile lips , and reduced facial <unk> restrict the use of facial expressions in strepsirrhines . Short @-@ range calls , long @-@ range calls , and alarm calls are also used . Nocturnal species are more constrained by the lack of light , so their communication systems differ from those of diurnal species , often using long @-@ range calls to claim their territory . 
 = = = Locomotion = = = 
 Living strepsirrhines are predominantly arboreal , with only the ring @-@ tailed lemur spending considerable time on the ground . Most species move around quadrupedally ( on four legs ) in the trees , including five genera of smaller , nocturnal lemurs . <unk> , indriids , sportive lemurs , and bamboo lemurs leap from vertical surfaces , and the indriids are highly specialized for vertical clinging and leaping . Lorises are slow @-@ moving , deliberate climbers . 
 Analyses of extinct adapiforms postcranial skeletons suggest a variety of locomotor behavior . The European adapids Adapis , <unk> , and <unk> shared adaptations for slow climbing like the lorises , although they may have been quadrupedal runners like small New World monkeys . Both Notharctus and <unk> from North America and <unk> from Europe exhibit limb proportions and joint surfaces comparable to vertical clinging and leaping lemurs , but were not as specialized as indriids for vertical clinging , suggesting that they ran along branches and did not leap as much . <unk> Cantius and <unk> appear to have been agile arboreal quadrupeds , with adaptations comparable to the brown lemurs . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Primates primarily feed on fruits ( including seeds ) , leaves ( including flowers ) , and animal prey ( arthropods , small vertebrates , and eggs ) . Diets vary markedly between strepsirrhine species . Like other leaf @-@ eating ( folivorous ) primates , some strepsirrhines can digest cellulose and hemicellulose . Some strepsirrhines , such as the galagos , slender lorises , and angwantibos are primarily insectivorous . Other species , such as fork @-@ marked lemurs and needle @-@ clawed bushbabies , specialize on tree gum , while indriids , sportive lemurs , and bamboo lemurs are folivores . Many strepsirrhines are frugivores ( fruit eaters ) , and others , like the ring @-@ tailed lemur and mouse lemurs , are omnivores , eating a mix of fruit , leaves , and animal matter . 
 Among the adapiforms , frugivory seems to have been the most common diet , particularly for medium @-@ sized to large species , such as Cantius , <unk> and <unk> . <unk> was also common among the medium and large @-@ sized adapiforms , including <unk> , Notharctus , Adapis and <unk> . Sharp cusps on the teeth of some of the smaller adapiforms , such as Anchomomys and Donrussellia , indicate that they were either partly or primarily insectivorous . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Before their extinction , adapiform primates were primarily found across North America , Asia , and Europe , with a few species in Africa . They flourished during the Eocene when those regions were more tropical in nature , and they disappeared when the climate became cooler and drier . Today , the lemuriforms are confined in the tropics , ranging between 28 ° S to 26 ° N latitude . Lorises are found both in equatorial Africa and Southeast Asia , while the galagos are limited to the forests and woodlands of sub @-@ Saharan Africa . Lemurs are endemic to Madagascar , although much of their diversity and habitat has been lost due to recent human activity . 
 As with nearly all primates , strepsirrhines typically reside in tropical rainforests . These habitats allow strepsirrhines and other primates to evolve diverse communities of sympatric species . In the eastern rainforests of Madagascar , as many as 11 or 12 species share the same forests , and prior to human arrival , some forests had nearly double that diversity . Several species of lemur are found in drier , seasonal forests , including the spiny forest on the southern tip of the island , although the lemur communities in these regions are not as rich . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Like all other primates , strepsirrhines face an elevated risk of extinction due to human activity , particularly deforestation in tropical regions . Much of their habitat has been converted for human use , such as agriculture and pasture . The threats facing strepsirrhine primates fall into three main categories : habitat destruction , hunting ( for bushmeat or traditional medicine ) , and live capture for export or local exotic pet trade . Although hunting is often prohibited , the laws protecting them are rarely enforced . In Madagascar , local taboos known as fady sometimes help protect lemur species , although some are still hunted for traditional medicine . 
 In 2012 , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) announced that lemurs were the " most endangered mammals " , due largely to elevated illegal logging and hunting following a political crisis in 2009 . In Southeast Asia , slow lorises are threatened by the exotic pet trade and traditional medicine , in addition to habitat destruction . Both lemurs and slow lorises are protected from commercial international trade under CITES Appendix I. 
 = Jews = 
 The Jews ( / <unk> / ; Hebrew : <unk> ISO 259 @-@ 3 <unk> , Israeli pronunciation [ <unk> ] ) , also known as the Jewish people , are an <unk> group originating from the Israelites , or Hebrews , of the Ancient Near East . Jewish ethnicity , nationhood and religion are strongly interrelated , as Judaism is the traditional faith of the Jewish nation , while its observance varies from strict observance to complete <unk> . 
 Jews originated as a national and religious group in the Middle East during the second millennium BCE , in the part of the Levant known as the Land of Israel . The Merneptah Stele appears to confirm the existence of a people of Israel , associated with the god El , somewhere in Canaan as far back as the 13th century BCE ( Late Bronze Age ) . The Israelites , as an outgrowth of the Canaanite population , consolidated their hold with the emergence of the Kingdom of Israel , and the Kingdom of Judah . Some consider that these Canaanite sedentary Israelites melded with incoming nomadic groups known as ' Hebrews ' . Though few sources in the Bible mention the <unk> periods in detail , the experience of diaspora life , from the Ancient Egyptian rule over the Levant , to Assyrian Captivity and Exile , to Babylonian Captivity and Exile , to Seleucid Imperial rule , to the Roman occupation , and the historical relations between Israelites and their homeland , became a major feature of Jewish history , identity and memory . 
 The worldwide Jewish population reached a peak of 16 @.@ 7 million prior to World War II , but approximately 6 million Jews were systematically murdered during the Holocaust . Since then the population has slowly risen again , and as of 2015 was estimated at 14 @.@ 3 million by the Berman Jewish <unk> , or less than 0 @.@ 2 % of the total world population ( roughly one in every 514 people ) . According to the report , about 43 % of all Jews reside in Israel ( 6 @.@ 2 million ) , and 40 % in the United States ( 5 @.@ 7 million ) , with most of the remainder living in Europe ( 1 @.@ 4 million ) and Canada ( 0 @.@ 4 million ) . These numbers include all those who self @-@ identified as Jews in a socio @-@ demographic study or were identified as such by a respondent in the same household . The exact world Jewish population , however , is difficult to measure . In addition to issues with census methodology , disputes among proponents of halakhic , secular , political , and ancestral identification factors regarding who is a Jew may affect the figure considerably depending on the source . Israel is the only country where Jews form a majority of the population . The modern State of Israel was established as a Jewish state and defines itself as such in its Declaration of Independence and Basic Laws . Its Law of Return grants the right of citizenship to any Jew who requests it . 
 Despite their small percentage of the world 's population , Jews have significantly influenced and contributed to human progress in many fields , including philosophy , ethics , literature , business , fine arts and architecture , music , theatre and cinema , medicine , as well as science and technology , both historically and in modern times . 
 = = Name and etymology = = 
 The English word Jew continues Middle English <unk> , <unk> . These terms derive from Old French <unk> , earlier <unk> , which had elided ( dropped ) the letter " d " from the Medieval Latin <unk> , which , like the New Testament Greek term <unk> , meant both Jews and Judeans / " of Judea " . 
 The Greek term was originally a loan from Aramaic Y <unk> , corresponding to Hebrew : <unk> , Yehudi ( sg . ) ; <unk> , <unk> ( pl . ) , in origin the term for a member of the tribe of Judah or the people of the kingdom of Judah . According to the Hebrew Bible , the name of both the tribe and kingdom derive from Judah , the fourth son of Jacob . 
 The Hebrew word for Jew , <unk> ISO 259 @-@ 3 <unk> , is pronounced [ <unk> ] , with the stress on the final syllable , in Israeli Hebrew , in its basic form . The Ladino name is ג <unk> <unk> , <unk> ( sg . ) ; ג <unk> <unk> , <unk> ( pl . ) ; Yiddish : <unk> <unk> ( sg . ) ; <unk> , <unk> ( pl . ) . 
 The etymological equivalent is in use in other languages , e.g. , <unk> <unk> ( sg . ) , al @-@ <unk> ( pl . ) , and <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> in Arabic , " Jude " in German , " <unk> " in Portuguese , " <unk> " in French , " <unk> " in Danish and Norwegian , " <unk> " in Spanish , " <unk> " in Dutch , etc . , but derivations of the word " Hebrew " are also in use to describe a Jew , e.g. , in Italian ( <unk> ) , in Persian ( " <unk> / <unk> " ( Persian : <unk> / <unk> ) ) and Russian ( <unk> , <unk> ) . The German word " Jude " is pronounced [ <unk> ] , the corresponding adjective " <unk> " [ <unk> ] ( Jewish ) is the origin of the word " Yiddish " . ( See Jewish ethnonyms for a full overview . ) 
 According to The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language , Fourth Edition ( 2000 ) : 
 It is widely recognized that the attributive use of the noun Jew , in phrases such as Jew lawyer or Jew ethics , is both vulgar and highly offensive . In such contexts Jewish is the only acceptable possibility . Some people , however , have become so wary of this construction that they have extended the stigma to any use of Jew as a noun , a practice that carries risks of its own . In a sentence such as There are now several Jews on the council , which is unobjectionable , the substitution of a <unk> like Jewish people or persons of Jewish background may in itself cause offense for seeming to imply that Jew has a negative connotation when used as a noun . 
 = = Origins = = 
 According to the Hebrew Bible narrative , Jewish ancestry is traced back to the Biblical patriarchs such as Abraham , Isaac and Jacob , and the Biblical matriarchs Sarah , Rebecca , Leah , and Rachel , who lived in Canaan around the 18th century BCE . Jacob and his family migrated to Ancient Egypt after being invited to live with Jacob 's son Joseph by the Pharaoh himself . The patriarchs ' descendants were later enslaved until the Exodus led by Moses , traditionally dated to the 13th century BCE , after which the Israelites conquered Canaan . 
 Modern archaeology has largely discarded the historicity of the Patriarchs and of the Exodus story , with it being reframed as constituting the Israelites ' inspiring national myth narrative . The Israelites and their culture , according to the modern archaeological account , did not overtake the region by force , but instead branched out of the Canaanite peoples and culture through the development of a distinct <unk> — and later monotheistic — religion centered on Yahweh , one of the Ancient Canaanite deities . The growth of Yahweh @-@ centric belief , along with a number of cultic practices , gradually gave rise to a distinct Israelite ethnic group , setting them apart from other Canaanites . The Canaanites themselves are archeologically attested in the Middle Bronze Age , while the Hebrew language is the last extant member of the Canaanite languages . In the Iron Age I period ( 1200 – 1000 BCE ) Israelite culture was largely Canaanite in nature . 
 Although the Israelites were divided into Twelve Tribes , the Jews ( being one offshoot of the Israelites , another being the Samaritans ) are traditionally said to descend mostly from the Israelite tribes of Judah ( from where the Jews derive their ethnonym ) and Benjamin , and partially from the tribe of Levi , who had together formed the ancient Kingdom of Judah , and the remnants of the northern Kingdom of Israel who migrated to the Kingdom of Judah and assimilated after the 720s BCE , when the Kingdom of Israel was conquered by the Neo @-@ Assyrian Empire . 
 Israelites enjoyed political independence twice in ancient history , first during the periods of the Biblical judges followed by the United Monarchy . After the fall of the United Monarchy the land was divided into Israel and Judah . The term Jew originated from the Roman " Judean " and denoted someone from the southern kingdom of Judah . The shift of ethnonym from " Israelites " to " Jews " ( inhabitant of Judah ) , although not contained in the Torah , is made explicit in the Book of Esther ( 4th century BCE ) , a book in the Ketuvim , the third section of the Jewish Tanakh . In 587 BC Nebuchadnezzar II , King of the Neo @-@ Babylonian Empire , besieged Jerusalem , destroyed the First Temple , and deported the most prominent citizens of Judah . In 586 BC , Judah itself ceased to be an independent kingdom , and its remaining Jews were left stateless . The Babylonian exile ended in 539 BCE when the Achaemenid Empire conquered Babylon and Cyrus the Great allowed the exiled Jews to return to Yehud and rebuild their Temple . The Second Temple was completed in 515 BCE . Yehud province was a peaceful part of the Achaemenid Empire until the fall of the Empire in c . 333 BCE to Alexander the Great . Jews were also politically independent during the Hasmonean dynasty spanning from 140 to 37 BCE and to some degree under the Herodian dynasty from 37 BCE to 6 CE . Since the destruction of the Second Temple in 70 CE , most Jews have lived in diaspora . As an ethnic minority in every country in which they live ( except Israel ) , they have frequently experienced persecution throughout history , resulting in a population that has fluctuated both in numbers and distribution over the centuries . 
 Genetic studies on Jews show that most Jews worldwide bear a common genetic heritage which originates in the Middle East , and that they bear their strongest resemblance to the peoples of the Fertile Crescent . The genetic composition of different Jewish groups shows that Jews share a common genetic pool dating back 4 @,@ 000 years , as a marker of their common ancestral origin . Despite their long @-@ term separation , Jews maintained a common culture , tradition , and language . 
 = = Judaism = = 
 The Jewish people and the religion of Judaism are strongly interrelated . Converts to Judaism typically have a status within the Jewish <unk> equal to those born into it . Conversion is not encouraged by mainstream Judaism , and is considered a difficult task . A significant portion of conversions are undertaken by children of mixed marriages , or by would @-@ be or current spouses of Jews . 
 The Hebrew Bible , a religious interpretation of the traditions and early national history of the Jews , established the first of the Abrahamic religions , which are now practiced by 54 % of the world . Judaism guides its adherents in both practice and belief , and has been called not only a religion , but also a " way of life , " which has made drawing a clear distinction between Judaism , Jewish culture , and Jewish identity rather difficult . Throughout history , in eras and places as diverse as the ancient Hellenic world , in Europe before and after The Age of Enlightenment ( see Haskalah ) , in Islamic Spain and Portugal , in North Africa and the Middle East , India , China , or the contemporary United States and Israel , cultural phenomena have developed that are in some sense characteristically Jewish without being at all specifically religious . Some factors in this come from within Judaism , others from the interaction of Jews or specific communities of Jews with their surroundings , others from the inner social and cultural dynamics of the community , as opposed to from the religion itself . This phenomenon has led to considerably different Jewish cultures unique to their own communities . 
 = = Babylon and Rome = = 
 After the destruction of the Second Temple Judaism lost much of its sectarian nature . Nevertheless , a significant Hellenized Diaspora remained , centered in Alexandria , at the time the largest urban Jewish community in the world . Hellenism was a force not just in the Diaspora but also in the Land of Israel over a long period of time . Generally , scholars view Rabbinic Judaism as having been meaningfully influenced by Hellenism . 
 Without a Temple , Greek speaking Jews no longer looked to Jerusalem in the way they had before . Judaism separated into a linguistically Greek and a Hebrew / Aramaic sphere . The theology and religious texts of each community were distinctively different . Hellenized Judaism never developed yeshivas to study the Oral Law . Rabbinic Judaism ( centered in the Land of Israel and Babylon ) almost entirely ignores the Hellenized Diaspora in its writings . Hellenized Judaism eventually disappeared as its practitioners assimilated into Greco @-@ Roman culture , leaving a strong Rabbinic eastern Diaspora with large centers of learning in Babylon . 
 By the first century , the Jewish community in Babylonia , to which Jews migrated after the Babylonian conquest as well as after the Bar Kokhba revolt in 135 CE , already held a speedily growing population of an estimated one million Jews , which increased to an estimated two million between the years 200 CE and 500 CE , both by natural growth and by immigration of more Jews from the Land of Israel , making up about one @-@ sixth of the world Jewish population at that era . The 13th @-@ century author Bar Hebraeus gave a figure of 6 @,@ 944 @,@ 000 Jews in the Roman world Salo <unk> Baron considered the figure convincing . The figure of seven million within and one million outside the Roman world in the mid @-@ first century became widely accepted , including by Louis Feldman . However , contemporary scholars now accept that Bar Hebraeus based his figure on a census of total Roman citizens . The figure of 6 @,@ 944 @,@ 000 being recorded in Eusebius ' Chronicon . Louis Feldman , previously an active supporter of the figure , now states that he and Baron were mistaken . Feldman 's views on active Jewish missionizing have also changed . While viewing classical Judaism as being receptive to converts , especially from the second century BCE through the first century CE , he points to a lack of either missionizing tracts or records of the names of rabbis who sought converts , as evidence for the lack of active Jewish missionizing . Feldman maintains that conversion to Judaism was common and the Jewish population was large both within the Land of Israel and in the Diaspora . Other historians believe that conversion during the Roman era was limited in number and did not account for much of the Jewish population growth , due to various factors such as the illegality of male conversion to Judaism in the Roman world from the mid @-@ second century . Another factor that made conversion difficult in the Roman world was the halakhic requirement of circumcision , a requirement that proselytizing Christianity quickly dropped . The <unk> <unk> , a tax imposed on Jews in 70 CE and relaxed to exclude Christians in 96 CE , also limited Judaism 's appeal . 
 = = Who is a Jew ? = = 
 Judaism shares some of the characteristics of a nation , an ethnicity , a religion , and a culture , making the definition of who is a Jew vary slightly depending on whether a religious or national approach to identity is used . Generally , in modern secular usage Jews include three groups : people who were born to a Jewish family regardless of whether or not they follow the religion , those who have some Jewish ancestral background or lineage ( sometimes including those who do not have strictly matrilineal descent ) , and people without any Jewish ancestral background or lineage who have formally converted to Judaism and therefore are followers of the religion . 
 Historical definitions of Jewish identity have traditionally been based on halakhic definitions of matrilineal descent , and halakhic conversions . Historical definitions of who is a Jew date back to the codification of the Oral Torah into the Babylonian Talmud , around 200 CE . Interpretations of sections of the Tanakh , such as Deuteronomy 7 : 1 – 5 , by Jewish sages , are used as a warning against intermarriage between Jews and Canaanites because " [ the non @-@ Jewish husband ] will cause your child to turn away from Me and they will worship the gods ( i.e. , idols ) of others . " Leviticus 24 : 10 says that the son in a marriage between a Hebrew woman and an Egyptian man is " of the community of Israel . " This is complemented by Ezra 10 : 2 – 3 , where Israelites returning from Babylon vow to put aside their gentile wives and their children . Since the anti @-@ religious Haskalah movement of the late 18th and 19th centuries , halakhic interpretations of Jewish identity have been challenged . 
 According to historian Shaye J. D. Cohen , the status of the offspring of mixed marriages was determined <unk> in the Bible . He brings two likely explanations for the change in Mishnaic times : first , the Mishnah may have been applying the same logic to mixed marriages as it had applied to other mixtures ( Kil <unk> ) . Thus , a mixed marriage is forbidden as is the union of a horse and a donkey , and in both unions the offspring are judged matrilineally . Second , the <unk> may have been influenced by Roman law , which dictated that when a parent could not contract a legal marriage , offspring would follow the mother . 
 = = Ethnic divisions = = 
 Within the world 's Jewish population there are distinct ethnic divisions , most of which are primarily the result of geographic branching from an originating Israelite population , and subsequent independent evolutions . An array of Jewish communities was established by Jewish settlers in various places around the Old World , often at great distances from one another , resulting in effective and often long @-@ term isolation . During the millennia of the Jewish diaspora the communities would develop under the influence of their local environments : political , cultural , natural , and <unk> . Today , manifestations of these differences among the Jews can be observed in Jewish cultural expressions of each community , including Jewish linguistic diversity , culinary preferences , liturgical practices , religious interpretations , as well as degrees and sources of genetic admixture . 
 Jews are often identified as belonging to one of two major groups : the Ashkenazim and the Sephardim . Ashkenazim , or " Germanics " ( Ashkenaz meaning " Germany " in Hebrew ) , are so named denoting their German Jewish cultural and geographical origins , while Sephardim , or " Hispanics " ( <unk> meaning " Spain / Hispania " or " Iberia " in Hebrew ) , are so named denoting their Spanish / Portuguese Jewish cultural and geographic origins . The more common term in Israel for many of those broadly called Sephardim , is Mizrahim ( lit . " Easterners " , <unk> being " East " in Hebrew ) , that is , in reference to the diverse collection of Middle Eastern and North African Jews who are often , as a group , referred to collectively as Sephardim ( together with Sephardim proper ) for liturgical reasons , although Mizrahi Jewish groups and Sephardi Jews proper are ethnically distinct . 
 Smaller groups include , but are not restricted to , Indian Jews such as the Bene Israel , Bnei <unk> , Cochin Jews , and Bene Ephraim ; the Romaniotes of Greece ; the Italian Jews ( " <unk> " or " <unk> Roma " ) ; the <unk> from Yemen ; various African Jews , including most <unk> the Beta Israel of Ethiopia ; and Chinese Jews , most notably the Kaifeng Jews , as well as various other distinct but now almost extinct communities . 
 The divisions between all these groups are approximate and their boundaries are not always clear . The Mizrahim for example , are a heterogeneous collection of North African , Central Asian , Caucasian , and Middle Eastern Jewish communities that are no closer related to each other than they are to any of the earlier mentioned Jewish groups . In modern usage , however , the Mizrahim are sometimes termed Sephardi due to similar styles of liturgy , despite independent development from Sephardim proper . Thus , among Mizrahim there are Egyptian Jews , Iraqi Jews , Lebanese Jews , Kurdish Jews , Libyan Jews , Syrian Jews , Bukharian Jews , Mountain Jews , Georgian Jews , Iranian Jews and various others . The <unk> from Yemen are sometimes included , although their style of liturgy is unique and they differ in respect to the admixture found among them to that found in Mizrahim . In addition , there is a differentiation made between Sephardi migrants who established themselves in the Middle East and North Africa after the expulsion of the Jews from Spain and Portugal in the 1490s and the pre @-@ existing Jewish communities in those regions . 
 Ashkenazi Jews represent the bulk of modern Jewry , with at least 70 % of Jews worldwide ( and up to 90 % prior to World War II and the Holocaust ) . As a result of their emigration from Europe , Ashkenazim also represent the overwhelming majority of Jews in the New World continents , in countries such as the United States , Canada , Argentina , Australia , and Brazil . In France , the immigration of Jews from Algeria ( Sephardim ) has led them to outnumber the Ashkenazim . Only in Israel is the Jewish population representative of all groups , a melting pot independent of each group 's proportion within the overall world Jewish population . 
 = = Languages = = 
 Hebrew is the liturgical language of Judaism ( termed <unk> ha @-@ <unk> , " the holy tongue " ) , the language in which most of the Hebrew scriptures ( Tanakh ) were composed , and the daily speech of the Jewish people for centuries . By the 5th century BCE , Aramaic , a closely related tongue , joined Hebrew as the spoken language in Judea . By the 3rd century BCE , some Jews of the diaspora were speaking Greek . Others , such as in the Jewish communities of Babylonia , were speaking Hebrew and Aramaic , the languages of the Babylonian Talmud . These languages were also used by the Jews of Israel at that time . 
 For centuries , Jews worldwide have spoken the local or dominant languages of the regions they migrated to , often developing distinctive dialectal forms or branches that became independent languages . Yiddish is the Judæo @-@ German language developed by Ashkenazi Jews who migrated to Central Europe . Ladino is the Judæo @-@ Spanish language developed by Sephardic Jews who migrated to the Iberian peninsula . Due to many factors , including the impact of the Holocaust on European Jewry , the Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries , and widespread emigration from other Jewish communities around the world , ancient and distinct Jewish languages of several communities , including Judæo @-@ Georgian , Judæo @-@ Arabic , Judæo @-@ Berber , <unk> , Judæo @-@ Malayalam and many others , have largely fallen out of use . 
 For over sixteen centuries Hebrew was used almost exclusively as a liturgical language , and as the language in which most books had been written on Judaism , with a few speaking only Hebrew on the Sabbath . Hebrew was revived as a spoken language by Eliezer ben Yehuda , who arrived in Palestine in 1881 . It had not been used as a mother tongue since <unk> times . Modern Hebrew is now one of the two official languages of the State of Israel along with Modern Standard Arabic . 
 Despite efforts to revive Hebrew as the national language of the Jewish people , knowledge of the language is not commonly possessed by Jews worldwide and English has emerged as the lingua franca of the Jewish diaspora . Although many Jews once had sufficient knowledge of Hebrew to study the classic literature , and Jewish languages like Yiddish and Ladino were commonly used as recently as the early 20th century , most Jews lack such knowledge today and English has by and large superseded most Jewish vernaculars . The three most commonly spoken languages among Jews today are Hebrew , English , and Russian . Some Romance languages , particularly French and Spanish , are also widely used . Yiddish has been spoken by more Jews in history than any other language , but it is far less used today following the Holocaust and the adoption of Modern Hebrew by the Zionist movement and the State of Israel . In some places , the mother language of the Jewish community differs from that of the general population or the dominant group . For example , in Quebec , the Ashkenazic majority has adopted English , while the Sephardic minority uses French as its primary language . Similarly , South African Jews adopted English rather than Afrikaans . Due to both Czarist and Soviet policies , Russian has superseded Yiddish as the language of Russian Jews , but these policies have also affected neighboring communities . Today , Russian is the first language for many Jewish communities in a number of Post @-@ Soviet states , such as Ukraine and Uzbekistan , as well as for Ashkenazic Jews in Azerbaijan , Georgia , and Tajikistan . Although communities in North Africa today are small and dwindling , Jews there had shifted from a multilingual group to a monolingual one ( or nearly so ) , speaking French in Algeria , Morocco , and the city of Tunis , while most North Africans continue to use Arabic as their mother tongue . 
 = = Genetic studies = = 
 Y DNA studies tend to imply a small number of founders in an old population whose members parted and followed different migration paths . In most Jewish populations , these male line ancestors appear to have been mainly Middle Eastern . For example , Ashkenazi Jews share more common paternal lineages with other Jewish and Middle Eastern groups than with non @-@ Jewish populations in areas where Jews lived in Eastern Europe , Germany and the French Rhine Valley . This is consistent with Jewish traditions in placing most Jewish paternal origins in the region of the Middle East . Conversely , the maternal lineages of Jewish populations , studied by looking at mitochondrial DNA , are generally more heterogeneous . Scholars such as Harry <unk> and Raphael Falk believe this indicates that many Jewish males found new mates from European and other communities in the places where they migrated in the diaspora after fleeing ancient Israel . In contrast , Behar has found evidence that about 40 % of Ashkenazi Jews originate maternally from just four female founders , who were of Middle Eastern origin . The populations of Sephardi and Mizrahi Jewish communities " showed no evidence for a narrow founder effect . " Subsequent studies carried out by Feder et al. confirmed the large portion of non @-@ local maternal origin among Ashkenazi Jews . Reflecting on their findings related to the maternal origin of Ashkenazi Jews , the authors conclude " Clearly , the differences between Jews and non @-@ Jews are far larger than those observed among the Jewish communities . Hence , differences between the Jewish communities can be overlooked when non @-@ Jews are included in the comparisons . " 
 Studies of autosomal DNA , which look at the entire DNA mixture , have become increasingly important as the technology develops . They show that Jewish populations have tended to form relatively closely related groups in independent communities , with most in a community sharing significant ancestry in common . For Jewish populations of the diaspora , the genetic composition of Ashkenazi , Sephardi , and Mizrahi Jewish populations show a predominant amount of shared Middle Eastern ancestry . According to Behar , the most parsimonious explanation for this shared Middle Eastern ancestry is that it is " consistent with the historical formulation of the Jewish people as descending from ancient Hebrew and Israelite residents of the Levant " and " the dispersion of the people of ancient Israel throughout the Old World " . North African , Italian and others of Iberian origin show variable frequencies of admixture with non @-@ Jewish historical host populations among the maternal lines . In the case of Ashkenazi and Sephardi Jews ( in particular Moroccan Jews ) , who are closely related , the source of non @-@ Jewish admixture is mainly southern European , while Mizrahi Jews show evidence of admixture with other Middle Eastern populations and Sub @-@ Saharan Africans . Behar et al. have remarked on an especially close relationship of Ashkenazi Jews and modern Italians . Jews were found to be more closely related to groups in the north of the Fertile Crescent ( Kurds , Turks , and Armenians ) than to Arabs . 
 The studies also show that the Sephardic Bnei <unk> ( descendants of the " <unk> " forced converts to Catholicism ) of Iberia ( estimated at about 19 @.@ 8 % of modern Iberia ) and Ibero @-@ America ( estimated at least 10 % of modern Ibero @-@ America ) have Sephardic Jewish origins within the last few centuries , while the Bene Israel and Cochin Jews of India , Beta Israel of Ethiopia , and a portion of the <unk> people of Southern Africa , despite more closely resembling the local populations of their native countries , also have some more remote ancient Jewish descent . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 = = = Population centers = = = 
 According to the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics there were 13 @,@ 421 @,@ 000 Jews worldwide in 2009 , roughly 0 @.@ 19 % of the world 's population at the time . 
 According to the 2007 estimates of The Jewish People Policy Planning Institute , the world 's Jewish population is 13 @.@ 2 million . <unk> cites figures ranging from 12 to 18 million . These statistics incorporate both practicing Jews affiliated with synagogues and the Jewish community , and approximately 4 @.@ 5 million unaffiliated and secular Jews . 
 According to Sergio <unk> , a demographer of the Jewish population , in 2015 there were about 6 @.@ 3 million Jews in Israel , 5 @.@ 7 million in the United States , and 2 @.@ 3 million in the rest of the world . 
 = = = = Israel = = = = 
 Israel , the Jewish nation @-@ state , is the only country in which Jews make up a majority of the citizens . Israel was established as an independent democratic and Jewish state on May 14 , 1948 . Of the 120 members in its parliament , the Knesset , as of 2016 , 14 members of the Knesset are Arab citizens of Israel ( not including the Druze ) , most representing Arab political parties . One of Israel 's Supreme Court judges is also an Arab citizen of Israel . 
 Between 1948 and 1958 , the Jewish population rose from 800 @,@ 000 to two million . Currently , Jews account for 75 @.@ 4 % of the Israeli population , or 6 million people . The early years of the State of Israel were marked by the mass immigration of Holocaust survivors in the aftermath of the Holocaust and Jews fleeing Arab lands . Israel also has a large population of Ethiopian Jews , many of whom were airlifted to Israel in the late 1980s and early 1990s . Between 1974 and 1979 nearly 227 @,@ 258 immigrants arrived in Israel , about half being from the Soviet Union . This period also saw an increase in immigration to Israel from Western Europe , Latin America , and North America . 
 A trickle of immigrants from other communities has also arrived , including Indian Jews and others , as well as some descendants of Ashkenazi Holocaust survivors who had settled in countries such as the United States , Argentina , Australia , Chile , and South Africa . Some Jews have emigrated from Israel elsewhere , because of economic problems or disillusionment with political conditions and the continuing Arab @-@ Israeli conflict . Jewish Israeli emigrants are known as <unk> . 
 = = = = Diaspora ( outside Israel ) = = = = 
 The waves of immigration to the United States and elsewhere at the turn of the 19th century , the founding of Zionism and later events , including pogroms in Russia , the massacre of European Jewry during the Holocaust , and the founding of the state of Israel , with the subsequent Jewish exodus from Arab lands , all resulted in substantial shifts in the population centers of world Jewry by the end of the 20th century . 
 More than half of the Jews live in the Diaspora ( see Population table ) . Currently , the largest Jewish community outside Israel , and either the largest or second @-@ largest Jewish community in the world , is located in the United States , with 5 @.@ 2 million to 6 @.@ 4 million Jews by various estimates . Elsewhere in the Americas , there are also large Jewish populations in Canada ( 315 @,@ 000 ) , Argentina ( 180 @,@ 000 @-@ 300 @,@ 000 ) , and Brazil ( 196 @,@ 000 @-@ 600 @,@ 000 ) , and smaller populations in Mexico , Uruguay , Venezuela , Chile , Colombia and several other countries ( see History of the Jews in Latin America ) . Demographers disagree on whether the United States has a larger Jewish population than Israel , with many maintaining that Israel surpassed the United States in Jewish population during the 2000s , while others maintain that the United States still has the largest Jewish population in the world . Currently , a major national Jewish population survey is planned to ascertain whether or not Israel has overtaken the United States in Jewish population . 
 Western Europe 's largest Jewish community , and the third @-@ largest Jewish community in the world , can be found in France , home to between 483 @,@ 000 and 500 @,@ 000 Jews , the majority of whom are immigrants or refugees from North African Arab countries such as Algeria , Morocco , and Tunisia ( or their descendants ) . The United Kingdom has a Jewish community of 292 @,@ 000 . In Eastern Europe , there are anywhere from 350 @,@ 000 to one million Jews living in the former Soviet Union , but exact figures are difficult to establish . In Germany , the 102 @,@ 000 Jews registered with the Jewish community are a slowly declining population , despite the immigration of tens of thousands of Jews from the former Soviet Union since the fall of the Berlin Wall . Thousands of Israelis also live in Germany , either permanently or temporarily , for economic reasons . 
 Prior to 1948 , approximately 800 @,@ 000 Jews were living in lands which now make up the Arab world ( excluding Israel ) . Of these , just under two @-@ thirds lived in the French @-@ controlled Maghreb region , 15 – 20 % in the Kingdom of Iraq , approximately 10 % in the Kingdom of Egypt and approximately 7 % in the Kingdom of Yemen . A further 200 @,@ 000 lived in Pahlavi Iran and the Republic of Turkey . Today , around 26 @,@ 000 Jews live in Arab countries and around 30 @,@ 000 in Iran and Turkey . A small @-@ scale exodus had begun in many countries in the early decades of the 20th century , although the only substantial aliyah came from Yemen and Syria . The exodus from Arab and Muslim countries took place primarily from 1948 . The first large @-@ scale <unk> took place in the late 1940s and early 1950s , primarily in Iraq , Yemen and Libya , with up to 90 % of these communities leaving within a few years . The peak of the exodus from Egypt occurred in 1956 . The exodus in the Maghreb countries peaked in the 1960s . Lebanon was the only Arab country to see a temporary increase in its Jewish population during this period , due to an influx of refugees from other Arab countries , although by the mid @-@ 1970s the Jewish community of Lebanon had also dwindled . In the aftermath of the exodus wave from Arab states , an additional migration of Iranian Jews peaked in the 1980s when around 80 % of Iranian Jews left the country . 
 Outside Europe , the Americas , the Middle East , and the rest of Asia , there are significant Jewish populations in Australia ( 112 @,@ 500 ) and South Africa ( 70 @,@ 000 ) . There is also a 7 @,@ 500 @-@ strong community in New Zealand . 
 = = = Demographic changes = = = 
 = = = = Assimilation = = = = 
 Since at least the time of the Ancient Greeks , a proportion of Jews have assimilated into the wider non @-@ Jewish society around them , by either choice or force , ceasing to practice Judaism and losing their Jewish identity . Assimilation took place in all areas , and during all time periods , with some Jewish communities , for example the Kaifeng Jews of China , disappearing entirely . The advent of the Jewish Enlightenment of the 18th century ( see Haskalah ) and the subsequent emancipation of the Jewish populations of Europe and America in the 19th century , accelerated the situation , encouraging Jews to increasingly participate in , and become part of , secular society . The result has been a growing trend of assimilation , as Jews marry non @-@ Jewish spouses and stop participating in the Jewish community . 
 Rates of interreligious marriage vary widely : In the United States , it is just under 50 % , in the United Kingdom , around 53 % ; in France ; around 30 % , and in Australia and Mexico , as low as 10 % . In the United States , only about a third of children from intermarriages affiliate with Jewish religious practice . The result is that most countries in the Diaspora have steady or slightly declining religiously Jewish populations as Jews continue to assimilate into the countries in which they live . 
 = = = = War and persecution = = = = 
 The Jewish people and Judaism have experienced various persecutions throughout Jewish history . During Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages the Roman Empire ( in its later phases known as the Byzantine Empire ) repeatedly repressed the Jewish population , first by ejecting them from their homelands during the pagan Roman era and later by officially establishing them as second @-@ class citizens during the Christian Roman era . 
 According to James Carroll , " Jews accounted for 10 % of the total population of the Roman Empire . By that ratio , if other factors had not intervened , there would be 200 million Jews in the world today , instead of something like 13 million . " 
 Later in medieval Western Europe , further persecutions of Jews by Christians occurred , notably during the Crusades — when Jews all over Germany were massacred — and a series of expulsions from the Kingdom of England , Germany , France , and , in the largest expulsion of all , Spain and Portugal after the Reconquista ( the Catholic Reconquest of the Iberian Peninsula ) , where both unbaptized Sephardic Jews and the ruling Muslim Moors were expelled . 
 In the Papal States , which existed until 1870 , Jews were required to live only in specified neighborhoods called ghettos . 
 Islam and Judaism have a complex relationship . Traditionally Jews and Christians living in Muslim lands , known as <unk> , were allowed to practice their religions and administer their internal affairs , but they were subject to certain conditions . They had to pay the jizya ( a per capita tax imposed on free adult non @-@ Muslim males ) to the Islamic state . <unk> had an inferior status under Islamic rule . They had several social and legal disabilities such as prohibitions against bearing arms or giving testimony in courts in cases involving Muslims . Many of the disabilities were highly symbolic . The one described by Bernard Lewis as " most degrading " was the requirement of distinctive clothing , not found in the Quran or hadith but invented in early medieval Baghdad ; its enforcement was highly erratic . On the other hand , Jews rarely faced martyrdom or exile , or forced compulsion to change their religion , and they were mostly free in their choice of residence and profession . 
 Notable exceptions include the massacre of Jews and forcible conversion of some Jews by the rulers of the Almohad dynasty in Al @-@ Andalus in the 12th century , as well as in Islamic Persia , and the forced confinement of Moroccan Jews to walled quarters known as <unk> beginning from the 15th century and especially in the early 19th century . In modern times , it has become commonplace for standard antisemitic themes to be conflated with anti @-@ Zionist publications and pronouncements of Islamic movements such as Hezbollah and Hamas , in the pronouncements of various agencies of the Islamic Republic of Iran , and even in the newspapers and other publications of Turkish <unk> <unk> . " 
 Throughout history , many rulers , empires and nations have oppressed their Jewish populations or sought to eliminate them entirely . Methods employed ranged from expulsion to outright genocide ; within nations , often the threat of these extreme methods was sufficient to silence dissent . The history of antisemitism includes the First Crusade which resulted in the massacre of Jews ; the Spanish Inquisition ( led by Tomás de Torquemada ) and the Portuguese Inquisition , with their persecution and autos @-@ da @-@ fé against the New Christians and <unk> Jews ; the Bohdan Chmielnicki Cossack massacres in Ukraine ; the Pogroms backed by the Russian Tsars ; as well as expulsions from Spain , Portugal , England , France , Germany , and other countries in which the Jews had settled . According to a 2008 study published in the American Journal of Human Genetics , 19 @.@ 8 % of the modern Iberian population has Sephardic Jewish ancestry , indicating that the number of conversos may have been much higher than originally thought . 
 The persecution reached a peak in Nazi Germany 's Final Solution , which led to the Holocaust and the slaughter of approximately 6 million Jews . Of the world 's 15 million Jews in 1939 , more than a third were killed in the Holocaust . The Holocaust — the state @-@ led systematic persecution and genocide of European Jews ( and certain communities of North African Jews in European controlled North Africa ) and other minority groups of Europe during World War II by Germany and its collaborators remains the most notable modern @-@ day persecution of Jews . The persecution and genocide were accomplished in stages . Legislation to remove the Jews from civil society was enacted years before the outbreak of World War II . Concentration camps were established in which inmates were used as slave labour until they died of exhaustion or disease . Where the Third Reich conquered new territory in Eastern Europe , specialized units called Einsatzgruppen murdered Jews and political opponents in mass shootings . Jews and Roma were crammed into ghettos before being transported hundreds of miles by freight train to extermination camps where , if they survived the journey , the majority of them were killed in gas chambers . Virtually every arm of Germany 's bureaucracy was involved in the logistics of the mass murder , turning the country into what one Holocaust scholar has called " a genocidal nation . " 
 = = = = Migrations = = = = 
 Throughout Jewish history , Jews have repeatedly been directly or indirectly expelled from both their original homeland , the Land of Israel , and many of the areas in which they have settled . This experience as refugees has shaped Jewish identity and religious practice in many ways , and is thus a major element of Jewish history . The incomplete list of major and other noteworthy migrations that follows includes numerous instances of expulsion or departure under duress : 
 The mythical patriarch Abraham is described as a migrant to the land of Canaan from Ur of the <unk> after an attempt on his life by King Nimrod . 
 The Children of Israel , in the Biblical story whose historicity is uncertain , undertook the Exodus ( meaning " departure " or " exit " in Greek ) from ancient Egypt , as recorded in the Book of Exodus . 
 Assyrian policy was to deport and displace conquered peoples , and it is estimated some 4 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 among captive populations suffered this dislocation over 3 centuries of Assyrian rule . With regard to Israel , Tiglath @-@ Pileser III claims he deported 80 % of the population of Lower Galilee , some 13 @,@ 520 people . Some 27 @,@ 000 Israelites , 20 @-@ 25 % of the population of the Kingdom of Israel , were described as being deported by Sargon II , and were replaced by other deported populations and sent into permanent exile by Assyria , initially to the Upper Mesopotamian provinces of the Assyrian Empire , 
 Between 10 @,@ 000 and 80 @,@ 000 people from the Kingdom of Judah were exiled by Babylonia , then returned to Judea by Cyrus the Great of the Persian Achaemenid Empire , and then many were exiled again by the Roman Empire . 
 The 2 @,@ 000 year dispersion of the Jewish diaspora beginning under the Roman Empire , as Jews were spread throughout the Roman world and , driven from land to land , settled wherever they could live freely enough to practice their religion . Over the course of the diaspora the center of Jewish life moved from Babylonia to the Iberian Peninsula to Poland to the United States and , as a result of Zionism , back to Israel . 
 Many expulsions during the Middle Ages and Enlightenment in Europe , including : 1290 , 16 @,@ 000 Jews were expelled from England , see the ( Statute of Jewry ) ; in 1396 , 100 @,@ 000 from France ; in 1421 thousands were expelled from Austria . Many of these Jews settled in Eastern Europe , especially Poland . 
 Following the Spanish Inquisition in 1492 , the Spanish population of around 200 @,@ 000 Sephardic Jews were expelled by the Spanish crown and Catholic church , followed by expulsions in 1493 in Sicily ( 37 @,@ 000 Jews ) and Portugal in 1496 . The expelled Jews fled mainly to the Ottoman Empire , the Netherlands , and North Africa , others migrating to Southern Europe and the Middle East . 
 During the 19th century , France 's policies of equal citizenship regardless of religion led to the immigration of Jews ( especially from Eastern and Central Europe ) . 
 The arrival of millions of Jews in the New World , including immigration of over two million Eastern European Jews to the United States from 1880 to 1925 , see History of the Jews in the United States and History of the Jews in Russia and the Soviet Union . 
 The pogroms in Eastern Europe , the rise of modern antisemitism , the Holocaust , and the rise of Arab nationalism all served to fuel the movements and migrations of huge segments of Jewry from land to land and continent to continent , until they arrived back in large numbers at their original historical homeland in Israel . 
 The Islamic Revolution of Iran caused many Iranian Jews to flee Iran . Most found refuge in the US ( particularly Los Angeles ) and Israel . Smaller communities of Persian Jews exist in Canada and Western Europe . 
 When the Soviet Union collapsed , many of the Jews in the affected territory ( who had been <unk> ) were suddenly allowed to leave . This produced a wave of migration to Israel in the early 1990s . 
 = = = = Growth = = = = 
 Israel is the only country with a Jewish population that is consistently growing through natural population growth , although the Jewish populations of other countries , in Europe and North America , have recently increased through immigration . In the Diaspora , in almost every country the Jewish population in general is either declining or steady , but Orthodox and Haredi Jewish communities , whose members often shun birth control for religious reasons , have experienced rapid population growth . 
 Orthodox and Conservative Judaism discourage proselytism to non @-@ Jews , but many Jewish groups have tried to reach out to the assimilated Jewish communities of the Diaspora in order for them to reconnect to their Jewish roots . Additionally , while in principle Reform Judaism favors seeking new members for the faith , this position has not translated into active proselytism , instead taking the form of an effort to reach out to non @-@ Jewish spouses of intermarried couples . 
 There is also a trend of Orthodox movements pursuing secular Jews in order to give them a stronger Jewish identity so there is less chance of intermarriage . As a result of the efforts by these and other Jewish groups over the past 25 years , there has been a trend ( known as the Baal <unk> movement ) for secular Jews to become more religiously observant , though the demographic implications of the trend are unknown . Additionally , there is also a growing rate of conversion to Jews by Choice of gentiles who make the decision to head in the direction of becoming Jews . 
 = = Leadership = = 
 There is no single governing body for the Jewish community , nor a single authority with responsibility for religious doctrine . Instead , a variety of secular and religious institutions at the local , national , and international levels lead various parts of the Jewish community on a variety of issues . 
 = = Notable individuals = = 
 Jews have made a myriad of contributions to humanity in a broad and diverse range of fields , including the sciences , arts , politics , and business . Although Jews comprise only 0 @.@ 2 % of the world 's population , over 20 % of Nobel Prize laureates have been Jewish , with multiple winners in each category . 
 = M. C. Escher = 
 Maurits Cornelis Escher ( Dutch pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; 17 June 1898 – 27 March 1972 ) was a Dutch graphic artist who made mathematically inspired woodcuts , lithographs , and mezzotints . 
 Early in his career he drew inspiration from nature , making studies of insects , landscapes , and plants such as lichens , all of which he reused as details in his artworks . He travelled in Italy and Spain , sketching buildings , townscapes , architecture and the tilings of the Alhambra and La Mezquita , Cordoba , and became steadily more interested in their mathematical structure . 
 His work features mathematical objects and operations including impossible objects , explorations of infinity , reflection , symmetry , perspective , truncated and stellated polyhedra , hyperbolic geometry , and tessellations . Although Escher considered that he had no mathematical ability , he interacted with mathematicians George Pólya , Roger Penrose , and Harold Coxeter ; read mathematical papers by these authors and by the crystallographer Friedrich Haag ; and conducted his own original research into tessellation . 
 Escher 's art became popular , both among scientists and mathematicians , and in popular culture . Apart from being used in a variety of technical papers , his work has appeared on the covers of many books and albums . He featured as one of the major inspirations of Douglas Hofstadter 's 1979 book Gödel , Escher , Bach . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Maurits Cornelis Escher was born on 17 June 1898 in Leeuwarden , Friesland , in a house that forms part of the <unk> Ceramics Museum today . He was the youngest son of the civil engineer George Arnold Escher and his second wife , Sara <unk> . In 1903 , the family moved to Arnhem , where he attended primary and secondary school until 1918 . Known to his friends and family as " Mauk " , he was a sickly child , and was placed in a special school at the age of seven ; he failed the second grade . Although he excelled at drawing , his grades were generally poor . He also took carpentry and piano lessons until he was thirteen years old . 
 In 1918 , he went to the Technical College of Delft . From 1919 to 1922 , Escher attended the Haarlem School of Architecture and Decorative Arts , learning drawing and the art of making woodcuts . He briefly studied architecture , but he failed a number of subjects ( partly due to a persistent skin infection ) and switched to decorative arts , studying under the graphic artist Samuel <unk> de Mesquita . 
 = = Study journeys = = 
 In 1922 , an important year of his life , Escher traveled through Italy , visiting Florence , San <unk> , Volterra , Siena , Ravello . In the same year he traveled through Spain , visiting Madrid , Toledo , and Granada . He was impressed by the Italian countryside , and in Granada by the Moorish architecture of the fourteenth @-@ century Alhambra . The intricate decorative designs of the Alhambra , based on geometrical symmetries featuring interlocking repetitive patterns in the coloured tiles or sculpted into the walls and ceilings , triggered his interest in the mathematics of tessellation , and became a powerful influence on his work . 
 Escher returned to Italy , and lived in Rome from 1923 to 1935 . While in Italy , Escher met Jetta <unk> , whom he married in 1924 . The couple settled in Rome where their first son , Giorgio ( George ) Arnaldo Escher , named after his grandfather , was born . Escher and Jetta later had two more sons : Arthur and Jan. 
 He travelled frequently , visiting ( among other places ) Viterbo in 1926 , the Abruzzi in 1927 and 1929 , Corsica in 1928 and 1933 , Calabria in 1930 , the Amalfi coast in 1931 and 1934 , <unk> and Sicily in 1932 and 1935 . The townscapes and landscapes of these places feature prominently in his artworks . In May and June 1936 , Escher travelled back to Spain , revisiting the Alhambra and spending days at a time making detailed drawings of its mosaic patterns . It was here that he became fascinated to the point of obsession with tessellation , explaining : 
 It remains an extremely absorbing activity , a real mania to which I have become addicted , and from which I sometimes find it hard to tear myself away . 
 The sketches he made in the Alhambra formed a major source for his work from that time on . He also studied the architecture of the Mezquita , the Moorish mosque of Cordoba . This turned out to be the last of his long study journeys ; after 1937 , his artworks were created in his studio rather than in the field . His art correspondingly changed sharply from being mainly observational , with a strong emphasis on the realistic details of things seen in nature and architecture , to being the product of his geometric analysis and his visual imagination . All the same , even his early work already shows his interest in the nature of space , the unusual , perspective , and multiple points of view . 
