 Jay @-@ Z and Kanye West are both American rappers who have collaborated on several tracks together . In 2010 , they began production and recording on a collaborative record Watch the Throne . The track features Mr Hudson , who is signed to West 's GOOD Music label singing an interpolation of Cassius track " I < 3 U So " . Mike Dean and West handled the production of the song . The artwork for " Why I Love You " features the French flag with a black third substituted for blue and is exactly the same cover used for Kanye West and Jay @-@ Z 's song " Niggas in Paris " , which was sent to rhythmic radio simultaneously with " Why I Love You " on September 13 , 2011 . The track was performed by West and Jay on their Watch the Throne tour . It was released as a single in the United Kingdom on November 28 , 2011 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The track contains a " sledgehammer beat " which is " built around French house duo Cassius ' 2010 single " I < 3 U So " . West , who co @-@ produced the track , " continues in the sonic vein he introduced in My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , lacing the songs with rock dynamics , layering his beats with eerie vocal chorales , piling on proggy flourishes . " " Slashing violin parts " come in on the bridge before the song ends abruptly . 
 Lyrically the song is about " Jay 's dismay at past crewmates ' betrayals . " The track features lines such as " Caesar didn 't see it , so he ceased to exist / So the nigga that killed him had keys to his shit " which have been interpreted as insults towards artists such as Dame Dash , Beanie Sigel and Wiz Khalifa . The song " revisits " the split @-@ up of Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records and has Jay @-@ Z lamenting betrayal and how his past protégés failed to maintain without him . The track makes the " <unk> point that being Sean Carter or Kanye West can have its downsides . " 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Produced by Mike Dean and Kanye West 
 Co @-@ produced by Anthony Kilhoffer 
 Recorded by Noah Goldstein ( assisted by Matt Arnold ) at Real World Studios and Barford Estate , Sydney 
 Mixed by Anthony Kilhoffer and Mike Dean at ( The Mercer ) Hotel 
 Cello : Chris " Hitchcock " Chorney 
 Cello arrangement : Mike Dean 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Why I Love You " received mostly positive reviews from music critics . AbsolutePunk 's Ian Walker described the track as an " album spotlight " , and stated that it 's " carried by a dramatic , driving chorus from famed R & B artist Mr Hudson and , while featuring one of Jay 's weakest verses on the entire album , showcases a surprisingly strong back @-@ and @-@ forth from the two headlining artists towards the end . " Rob Harvilla of Spin commented that " Why I Love You " closes out the album proper with a monster Cassius @-@ lifted chorus . " Alexis Petridis of The Guardian stated that the song is " pure pop aggrandisement " , musing that " this rather enjoyable piece of maximalism feels quite at home on an album writ so large , both in sound and verse , that a planetarium was deemed the only fitting venue for its first playback . " Craig Jenkins of Prefix wrote that " Mike Dean 's titanic , Cassius @-@ sampling " Why I Love You " slowly peels layers off its stuffy largess to reveal the gorgeous string accompaniment underfoot . Kanye and his team are still trafficking in proggy , kitchen @-@ sink experimentation , and Kanye 's transformation into rap 's own ELO is nearly complete . " Entertainment Weekly 's Kyle Anderson was less enthusiastic about the track , writing that " Everything falls apart on the album @-@ closing " Why I Love You , " which cranks up West 's love of prog @-@ rock bombast so much that it sounds like guest crooner Mr Hudson is trying to sing the hook over a poorly recorded bootleg of a Muse concert . " 
 = = Charts performance = = 
 Due to the hype around Watch the Throne worldwide , " Why I Love You " debuted on various charts globally on the week of the album 's release . In the UK the song reached a peak of 87 , and 27 on their R & B chart . In South Korea , the track charted at position 94 . The song became a top 40 single in both Iceland and Belgium . It also charted in France at number 56 , and in Switzerland at 52 . 
 = IAU definition of planet = 
 The definition of planet set in Prague , Czech Republic in August 2006 by the International Astronomical Union ( IAU ) states that , in the Solar System , a planet is a celestial body which : 
 is in orbit around the Sun , 
 has sufficient mass to assume hydrostatic equilibrium ( a nearly round shape ) , and 
 has " cleared the neighborhood " around its orbit . 
 A non @-@ satellite body fulfilling only the first two of these criteria is classified as a " dwarf planet " . According to the IAU , " planets and dwarf planets are two distinct classes of objects " . A non @-@ satellite body fulfilling only the first criterion is termed a " small Solar System body " ( SSSB ) . Initial drafts planned to include dwarf planets as a subcategory of planets , but because this could potentially have led to the addition of several dozens of planets into the Solar System , this draft was eventually dropped . The definition was a controversial one and has drawn both support and criticism from different astronomers , but has remained in use . 
 According to this definition , there are eight known planets in the Solar System . The definition distinguishes planets from smaller bodies and is not useful outside the Solar System , where smaller bodies cannot be found yet . Extrasolar planets , or exoplanets , are covered separately under a complementary 2003 draft guideline for the definition of planets , which distinguishes them from dwarf stars , which are larger . 
 = = Reasons for the debate = = 
 Before the discoveries of the early 21st century , astronomers had no real need for a formal definition for planets . With the discovery of Pluto in 1930 , astronomers considered the Solar System to have nine planets , along with thousands of smaller bodies such as asteroids and comets . Pluto was thought to be larger than Mercury . 
 In 1978 , the discovery of Pluto 's moon Charon radically changed this picture . By measuring Charon 's orbital period , astronomers could accurately calculate Pluto 's mass for the first time , which they found to be much smaller than expected . Pluto 's mass was roughly one twenty @-@ fifth of Mercury 's , making it by far the smallest planet , smaller even than the Earth 's Moon , although it was still over ten times as massive as the largest asteroid , Ceres . 
 In the 1990s , astronomers began finding other objects at least as far away as Pluto , now known as Kuiper Belt objects , or KBOs . Many of these shared some of Pluto 's key orbital characteristics and are now called plutinos . Pluto came to be seen as the largest member of a new class of objects , and some astronomers stopped referring to Pluto as a planet . Pluto 's eccentric and inclined orbit , while very unusual for a planet in the Solar System , fits in well with the other KBOs . New York City 's newly renovated Hayden Planetarium did not include Pluto in its exhibit of the planets when it reopened as the Rose Center for Earth and Space in 2000 . 
 Starting in 2000 , with the discovery of at least three bodies ( Quaoar , Sedna , and Eris ) all comparable to Pluto in terms of size and orbit , it became clear that either they all had to be called planets or Pluto would have to be reclassified . Astronomers also knew that more objects as large as Pluto would be discovered , and the number of planets would start growing quickly . They were also concerned about the classification of planets in other planetary systems . In 2006 , the matter came to a head with the first measurement of the size of 2003 UB313 . That measurement had showed Eris ( as it was mistakenly believed to be until the ' New Horizons ' mission to Pluto ) to appear to be slightly larger than Pluto , and so was thought to be equally deserving of the status of ' planet ' at the time . 
 = = = Historical parallel = = = 
 The process of new discoveries spurring a contentious refinement of Pluto 's categorization echoed a debate in the 19th century that began with the discovery of Ceres on January 1 , 1801 . Astronomers immediately declared the tiny object to be the " missing planet " between Mars and Jupiter . Within four years , however , the discovery of two more objects with comparable sizes and orbits had cast doubt on this new thinking . By 1851 , the number of " planets " had grown to 23 , and it was clear that hundreds more would eventually be discovered . Astronomers began cataloguing them separately and began calling them " asteroids " instead of " planets " . 
 = = History of the definition = = 
 Because new planets are discovered infrequently , the IAU did not have any machinery for their definition and naming . After the discovery of Sedna , it set up a 19 @-@ member committee in 2005 , with the British astronomer Iwan Williams in the chair , to consider the definition of a planet . It proposed three definitions that could be adopted : 
 Cultural 
 a planet is a planet if enough people say it is ; 
 Structural 
 a planet is large enough to form a sphere ; 
 Dynamical 
 the object is large enough to cause all other objects to eventually leave its orbit . 
 Another committee , chaired by a historian of astronomy , Owen Gingerich , a historian and astronomer emeritus at Harvard University who led the committee which generated the original definition , and consisting of five planetary scientists and the science writer Dava Sobel , was set up to make a firm proposal . 
 = = First draft proposal = = 
 The IAU published the original definition proposal on August 16 , 2006 . Its form followed loosely the second of three options proposed by the original committee . It stated that : 
 A planet is a celestial body that ( a ) has sufficient mass for its self @-@ gravity to overcome rigid body forces so that it assumes a hydrostatic equilibrium ( nearly round ) shape , and ( b ) is in orbit around a star , and is neither a star nor a satellite of a planet . 
 This definition would have led to three celestial bodies being recognized as planets : 
 Ceres , which had been considered a planet at the time of its discovery , but was subsequently treated as an asteroid 
 Charon , a moon of Pluto ; the Pluto @-@ Charon system would have been considered a double planet 
 Eris , a body in the scattered disk of the outer Solar System 
 A further twelve bodies , pending refinements of knowledge regarding their physical properties , were possible candidates to join the list under this definition . Some objects in this second list were more likely eventually to be adopted as ' planets ' than others . Despite what had been claimed in the media , the proposal did not necessarily leave the Solar System with only twelve planets . Mike Brown , the discoverer of Sedna and Eris , has said that at least 53 known bodies in the Solar System probably fit the definition , and that a complete survey would probably reveal more than 200 . 
 The definition would have considered a pair of objects to be a double planet system if each component independently satisfied the planetary criteria and the common center of gravity of the system ( known as the barycenter ) was located outside of both bodies . Pluto and Charon would have been the only known double planet in the Solar System . Other planetary satellites ( like Earth and its moon ) might be in hydrostatic equilibrium , but would still not have been defined as a component of a double planet , since the barycenter of the system lies within the more massive celestial body ( the Earth ) . 
 The term " minor planet " would have been abandoned , replaced by the categories " small Solar System body " ( SSSB ) and a new classification of " pluton " . The former would have described those objects underneath the " spherical " threshold . The latter would have been applied to those planets with highly inclined orbits , large eccentricities and an orbital period of more than 200 earth years ( that is , those orbiting beyond Neptune ) . Pluto would have been the prototype for this class . The term " dwarf planet " would have been available to describe all planets smaller than the eight " classical planets " in orbit around the Sun , though would not have been an official IAU classification . The IAU did not make recommendations in the draft resolution on what separated a planet from a brown dwarf . A vote on the proposal was scheduled for August 24 , 2006 . 
 Such a redefinition of the term " planet " could also have led to changes in classification for the trans @-@ Neptunian objects Haumea , Makemake , Sedna , Orcus , Quaoar , Varuna , 2002 <unk> , Ixion , 2002 <unk> , and the asteroids Vesta , Pallas , and Hygiea . 
 On 18 August the Division of Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical Society endorsed the draft proposal . 
 According to an IAU draft resolution , the roundness condition generally results in the need for a mass of at least 5 × 1020 kg , or diameter of at least 800 km . However , Mike Brown claims that these numbers are only right for rocky bodies like asteroids , and that icy bodies like Kuiper Belt objects reach hydrostatic equilibrium at much smaller sizes , probably somewhere between 200 and 400 km in diameter . It all depends on the rigidity of the material that makes up the body , which is in turn strongly influenced by its internal temperature . Assuming that Methone 's shape reflects the balance between the tidal force exerted by Saturn and the moon 's gravity , its tiny 3 km diameter suggests Methone is composed of icy fluff . 
 = = = Advantages = = = 
 The proposed definition found support among many astronomers as it used the presence of a physical qualitative factor ( the object being round ) as its defining feature . Most other potential definitions depended on a limiting quantity ( e.g. , a minimum size or maximum orbital inclination ) tailored for the Solar System . According to members of the IAU committee this definition did not use human @-@ made limits but instead deferred to " nature " in deciding whether or not an object was a planet . 
 It also had the advantage of measuring an observable quality . Suggested criteria involving the nature of formation would have been more likely to see accepted planets later declassified as scientific understanding improved . 
 Additionally , the definition kept Pluto as a planet . Pluto 's planetary status was and is fondly thought of by many , and the general public could have been alienated from professional astronomers ; there was considerable uproar when the media last suggested , in 1999 , that Pluto might be demoted , which was a misunderstanding of a proposal to catalog all trans @-@ Neptunian objects uniformly . 
 = = = Criticism of first draft proposal = = = 
 The proposed redefinition was criticised as ambiguous : Astronomer Phil Plait and <unk> writer Nick <unk> both wrote about why they thought the redefinition was not , in general , a good one . It defined a planet as orbiting a star , which would have meant that any planet ejected from its star system or formed outside of one ( a rogue planet ) could not have been called a planet , even if it fit all other definitions . A similar situation already applied to the term ' moon ' , such bodies ceasing to be moons on being ejected from planetary orbit ; this usage had widespread acceptance . Similarly , the redefinition did not differentiate between planets and brown dwarf stars . Any attempt to clarify this differentiation was to be left until a later date . 
 There had also been criticism of the proposed definition of double planet : at present the Moon is defined as a satellite of the Earth , but over time the Earth @-@ Moon barycenter will drift outwards ( see tidal acceleration ) and could eventually become situated outside of both bodies . This development would then upgrade the Moon to planetary status at that time , according to the redefinition . The time taken for this to occur , however , would be billions of years , long after many astronomers expect the Sun to expand into a red giant and destroy both Earth and Moon . 
 In an 18 August 2006 Science Friday interview , Mike Brown expressed doubt that a scientific definition was even necessary . He stated , " The analogy that I always like to use is the word " continent " . You know , the word " continent " has no scientific definition ... they 're just cultural definitions , and I think the geologists are wise to leave that one alone and not try to redefine things so that the word " continent " has a big , strict definition . " 
 On 18 August , Owen Gingerich said that correspondence he had received had been evenly divided for and against the proposal . 
 = = Alternative proposal = = 
 According to Alan Boss of the Carnegie Institution of Washington , a subgroup of the IAU met on August 18 , 2006 and held a straw poll on the draft proposal : only 18 were in favour of it , with over 50 against . The 50 in opposition preferred an alternative proposal drawn up by Uruguayan astronomer Julio Ángel Fernández . 
 Under this proposal , Pluto would have been demoted to a dwarf planet . 
 = = Revised draft proposal = = 
 On 22 August the draft proposal was rewritten with two changes from the previous draft . The first was a generalisation of the name of the new class of planets ( previously the draft resolution had explicitly opted for the term ' pluton ' ) , with a decision on the name to be used postponed . Many geologists had been critical of the choice of name for Pluto @-@ like planets , being concerned about the term pluton which has been used for years within the geological community to represent a form of magmatic intrusion ; such formations are fairly common balls of rock . Confusion was thought undesirable due to the status of <unk> as a field closely allied to geology . Further concerns surrounded use of the word pluton as in major languages such as French and Spanish , Pluto is itself called Pluton , potentially adding to confusion . 
 The second change was a redrawing of the planetary definition in the case of a double planet system . There had been a concern that , in extreme cases where a double body had its secondary component in a highly eccentric orbit , there could have been a drift of the barycenter in and out of the primary body , leading to a shift in the classification of the secondary body between satellite and planet depending on where the system was in its orbit . Thus the definition was reformulated so as to consider a double planet system in existence if its barycenter lay outside both bodies for a majority of the system 's orbital period . 
 Later on August 22 , two open meetings were held which ended in an abrupt about @-@ face on the basic planetary definition . The position of astronomer Julio Ángel Fernández gained the upper hand among the members attending and was described as unlikely to lose its hold by August 24 . This position would result in only eight major planets , with Pluto ranking as a " dwarf planet " . The discussion at the first meeting was heated and lively , with IAU members in vocal disagreement with one another over such issues as the relative merits of static and dynamic physics ; the main sticking point was whether or not to include a body 's orbital characteristics among the definition criteria . In an indicative vote , members heavily defeated the proposals on Pluto @-@ like objects and double planet systems , and were evenly divided on the question of hydrostatic equilibrium . The debate was said to be " still open " , with private meetings being held ahead of a vote scheduled for the following day . 
 At the second meeting of the day , following ' secret ' negotiations , a compromise began to emerge after the Executive Committee moved explicitly to exclude consideration of extra @-@ solar planets and to bring into the definition a criterion concerning the dominance of a body in its neighbourhood . 
 = = Final draft proposal = = 
 The final , third draft definition proposed on 24 August was : 
 = = = Plenary session debate = = = 
 Voting on the definition took place at the Assembly plenary session during the afternoon . Following a reversion to the previous rules on 15 August , as a planetary definition is a primarily scientific matter , every individual member of the Union attending the Assembly was eligible to vote . 
 The IAU Executive Committee presented four Resolutions to the Assembly , each concerning a different aspect of the debate over the definition . Minor amendments were made on the floor for the purposes of clarification . 
 Resolution 5A constituted the definition itself as stated above . There was much discussion among members about the appropriateness of using the expression " cleared the neighbourhood " instead of the earlier reference to " dominant body " , and about the implications of the definition for satellites . The Resolution was ultimately approved by a near @-@ unanimous vote . 
 Resolution 5B sought to amend the above definition by the insertion of the word classical before the word planet in paragraph ( 1 ) and footnote [ 1 ] . This represented a choice between having a set of three distinct categories of body ( planet , " dwarf planet " and SSSB ) and the opening of an umbrella of ' planets ' over the first two such categories . The Resolution proposed the latter option ; it was defeated convincingly , with only 91 members voting in its favour . 
 Resolution 6A proposed a statement concerning Pluto : " Pluto is a dwarf planet by the above definition and is recognized as the prototype of a new category of trans @-@ Neptunian objects . " After a little quibbling over the grammar involved and questions of exactly what constituted a " trans @-@ Neptunian object " , the Resolution was approved by a vote of 237 – 157 , with 30 abstentions . A new category of dwarf planet was thus established . It would be named " plutoid " and more narrowly defined by the IAU Executive Committee on 11 June 2008 . 
 Resolution 6B sought to insert an additional sentence at the end of the statement in 6A : " This category is to be called ' plutonian objects ' . " There was no debate on the question , and in the vote the proposed name was defeated by 186 – 183 ; a proposal to conduct a re @-@ vote was rejected . An IAU process will be put in motion to determine the name for the new category . 
 On a literal reading of the Resolution , " dwarf planets " are by implication of paragraph ( 1 ) excluded from the status of ' planet ' . Use of the word planet in their title may , however , cause some ambiguity . 
 = = Final definition = = 
 The final definition , as passed on 24 August 2006 under the Resolution 5A of the 26th General Assembly is : 
 The IAU further resolves : 
 The IAU also resolved that " planets and dwarf planets are two distinct classes of objects " , meaning that dwarf planets , despite their name , would not be considered planets . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 = = = Substance = = = 
 The wording of the final draft of the definition has continued to be criticized . Notably , Alan Stern , the lead scientist on NASA 's robotic mission to Pluto , has contended that Earth , Mars , Jupiter , and Neptune have not fully cleared their orbital zones , just like Pluto . Earth orbits with 10 @,@ 000 near @-@ Earth asteroids . Jupiter , meanwhile , is accompanied by 100 @,@ 000 Trojan asteroids on its orbital path . Stern has asserted : " If Neptune had cleared its zone , Pluto wouldn 't be there . " 
 Some astronomers counter this opinion by saying that , far from not having cleared their orbits , the major planets completely control the orbits of the other bodies within their orbital zone . Although Jupiter does coexist with a large number of small bodies in its orbit ( the Trojan asteroids ) , these bodies only exist in Jupiter 's orbit because they are in the sway of the planet 's huge gravity . Earth accretes or ejects near @-@ Earth asteroids on million @-@ year time scales , thereby clearing its orbit . Similarly , Pluto may cross the orbit of Neptune , but Neptune long ago locked Pluto and its attendant Kuiper belt objects , called plutinos , into a 3 : 2 resonance ( i.e. , they orbit the Sun twice for every three Neptune orbits ) . Since the orbits of these objects are entirely dictated by Neptune 's gravity , Neptune is therefore gravitationally dominant . 
 Some aspects of the definition are as yet difficult to apply outside the Solar System . Techniques for identifying extrasolar objects generally cannot determine whether an object has " cleared its orbit " , except indirectly via an orbit @-@ clearing criterion . The wording of the 2006 definition is heliocentric in its use of the word Sun instead of star or stars , and is thus not applicable to the numerous objects which have been identified in orbit around other stars . A separate " working " definition for extrasolar planets was , however , recommended by a working group of the IAU in 2003 and includes the criterion : " The minimum mass / size required for an extrasolar object to be considered a planet should be the same as that used in the Solar System . " 
 = = = Process = = = 
 The final vote has come under much criticism because of the relatively small percentage of the 9000 @-@ strong membership who participated . Besides the fact that most members do not attend the General Assemblies , this lack was also due to the timing of the vote : the final vote was taken on the last day of the 10 @-@ day event , after many participants had left or were preparing to leave . The claim is that only 424 astronomers were present for the vote , which is less than 5 % of the entire community of astronomers . However , sampling 400 representative members out of a population of 9 @,@ 000 statistically yields a result with good accuracy ( confidence interval better than 5 % ) . There is also the issue of the many astronomers who were unable or who chose not to make the trip to Prague and , thus , cast no vote . Astronomer Marla <unk> has clarified that not all members of the Union were needed to vote on the classification issue : only those whose work is directly related to planetary studies . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The decision generated cultural and societal implications , affecting the " industry of astronomical artifacts and toys . " Most educational books that included the definition were printed after 2006 . The decision was important enough to prompt the editors of the 2007 edition of the World Book Encyclopedia to hold off printing until a final result had been reached . The new designation also has repercussions in the astrological world and finds mixed receptions , with differences of opinion as to whether to make any changes to astrological practice as a result of the redefinition . 
 = = = Popular culture = = = 
 The impact of the revised definition , particularly the change in the status of Pluto , has been reflected in popular culture . A number of musical contributions have commemorated the change : 
 " Planet X " ( 1996 ) , song by Christine Lavin . A good @-@ natured protest against suggestions that Pluto is not a planet . 
 " Pluto " ( 1998 ) , song by 2 <unk> J 's . An impassioned defense of Pluto 's status as a planet . 
 Thing a Week , August 25 , 2006 podcast by Jonathan Coulton . Featured a song " I 'm Your Moon " , from Charon 's point of view , about Pluto being reclassified as a dwarf planet . 
 " Bring Back Pluto " ( 2007 ) , song by Aesop Rock on the album None Shall Pass . Hip @-@ hop song supporting Pluto 's status as the 9th planet in the Solar System . 
 " Pluto " ( 2009 ) , song by Robbie Fulks , part of his release " 50 @-@ <unk> . Doberman . " About Pluto 's reclassification , remembered as a 9th planet from the times of the singer 's youth , and re @-@ presents Pluto as an unforgotten monarch of the Kuiper Belt . 
 " Ode to Pluto " is the final track on Terra Lumina 's self @-@ titled debut album , mentioning the change of classification . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The verb to pluto ( preterite and past participle : plutoed ) was coined in the aftermath of the 2006 IAU decision . In January 2007 , the American Dialect Society chose plutoed as its 2006 Word of the Year , defining to pluto as " to demote or devalue someone or something , as happened to the former planet Pluto when the General Assembly of the International Astronomical Union decided Pluto no longer met its definition of a planet . " 
 Society president Cleveland Evans stated the reason for the organization 's selection of plutoed : " Our members believe the great emotional reaction of the public to the demotion of Pluto shows the importance of Pluto as a name . We may no longer believe in the Roman god Pluto , but we still have a sense of connection with the former planet " . 
 = = New dwarf planet subclass = = 
 On June 11 , 2008 , the IAU announced that the subcategory of dwarf planets with trans @-@ Neptunian orbits would be known as " plutoids " . In an accompanying press release , the IAU said that : 
 This subcategory includes Pluto , Haumea , Makemake and Eris . 
 = Milla Jovovich = 
 Milica <unk> " Milla " Jovovich ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> ; born December 17 , 1975 ) is a Ukrainian @-@ born American actress , model , musician , and fashion designer . She has appeared in numerous science fiction and action films , leading the music channel VH1 to deem her the " reigning queen of kick @-@ butt " in 2006 . Born in Kiev , Jovovich emigrated with her parents to the United States when she was five . In 1987 , she began modeling at the age of 12 when Herb Ritts photographed her for the cover of the Italian magazine Lei . Richard Avedon featured her in Revlon 's " Most Unforgettable Women in the World " advertisements . 
 In 1988 , Jovovich had her first acting role in the television film The Night Train to Kathmandu , and that year also appeared in her first feature film , Two Moon Junction . Jovovich gained attention for her role in the explicit 1991 romance film Return to the Blue Lagoon , as she was then only 15 . She was considered to have a breakthrough with her role in the 1997 French science @-@ fiction film The Fifth Element written and directed by Luc Besson . She and Besson married that year , but soon divorced . She starred as the heroine and martyr in Besson 's The Messenger : The Story of Joan of Arc ( 1999 ) . Jovovich is also well known for playing Alice , the leading character in the Resident Evil film series , adapted from the video game series of the same name . Though the films have been critically panned , they have been commercially successful . 
 Jovovich released an album , The Divine Comedy , in 1994 . She continues to release demos for other songs on her official website and contributes to film soundtracks . In 2003 , she and model Carmen Hawk created the clothing line Jovovich @-@ Hawk . Jovovich has her own production company , Creature Entertainment . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Milla Jovovich was born in 1975 in Kiev , Ukrainian SSR , to a Serbian father and an ethnic Russian mother . 
 In 1980 , when Jovovich was five years old , her family left the Soviet Union for political reasons and immigrated to London . They subsequently immigrated to Sacramento , California , settling in Los Angeles seven months later . Milla 's parents divorced soon after their arrival in Los Angeles . 
 In 1988 , her father had a relationship with an Argentine woman , and they had a son , Marco Jovovich . Due to her parents ' divorce years before , Jovovich saw little of her half brother . 
 In Los Angeles , her mother , Galina Jovovich , tried to get acting jobs , but found little success because of language barriers , and eventually resorted to cleaning houses to earn money . Both parents served as cooks and housekeepers for director Brian De Palma . Milla 's father was convicted and imprisoned for participating in an illegal operation concerning medical insurance ; he was given a 20 @-@ year sentence in 1994 , but was released in 1999 after serving five years . According to Milla , " Prison was good for him . He 's become a much better person . It gave him a chance to stop and think . " 
 Jovovich attended public schools in Los Angeles , becoming fluent in English in three months . In school , she was teased by classmates for coming from the Soviet Union : " I was called a <unk> and a Russian spy . I was never , ever , ever accepted into the crowd . " At age 12 , Jovovich left seventh grade to focus on modeling , which she had started at age nine . She has said she was rebellious during her early teens , engaging in drug use , shopping mall vandalism , and credit @-@ card fraud . In 1994 , she became naturalized as a U.S. citizen at the age of 19 . 
 = = Modeling career = = 
 It was Jovovich 's early work with Ritz , Richard Avedon and Peter Lindbergh that led to her success in advertising , bringing the young model contracts and covers for both Vogue and Cosmopolitan . Since then , she has been featured on more than 100 magazine covers , including all the major fashion magazines in the US . She has been part of campaigns for Banana Republic , Christian Dior , Damiani , Donna Karan , Gap , Versace , Calvin Klein , DKNY , Coach , Giorgio Armani , H & M , and Revlon . Since 1998 , Jovovich has been an " international spokesmodel " for L 'Oréal cosmetics . She was referred to in a minor cameo in Bret Easton Ellis ' novel Glamorama , a satire of society 's obsession with celebrities and beauty . 
 Jovovich was said to be designer Miuccia Prada 's muse in 2002 ; a 2003 article claimed she was Gianni Versace 's " favourite supermodel " . In 2004 , Jovovich topped Forbes magazine 's " Richest <unk> of the World " list , earning a reported $ 10 @.@ 5 million . 
 In 2006 , Jovovich was picked up by Mango , a Spanish clothing line , as their new spokesmodel and is featured in their ad campaigns ; she can also be seen in ads for Etro . She has noted that " Modeling was never a priority " and that the money she earns enables her " to be selective about the creative decisions [ she ] make [ s ] " . 
 In 2012 , Jovovich was hired as the new " face " of a global advertising campaign for wristwatch and jewelry retailer Jacob & Co . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Early work ( 1985 – 1993 ) = = = 
 Jovovich 's mother had " raised [ her ] to be a movie star . " In 1985 , Galina enrolled Jovovich at the age of 10 in acting classes , and when her acting jobs picked up , she started attending school for young actors rather than regular school system . 
 In 1988 , Jovovich appeared in her first professional role as Lily McLeod in the made @-@ for @-@ television film The Night Train to Kathmandu . Later that year , she made her debut in a feature film as Samantha <unk> in the romantic thriller Two Moon Junction . She had several roles in television series , including Paradise ( 1988 ) , Married ... with Children ( 1989 ) and Parker Lewis Can 't Lose ( 1990 ) . 
 At age 15 , she was cast as the lead as Lilli Hargrave in Return to the Blue Lagoon ( 1991 ) , opposite Brian Krause . Given her age and beauty , she was often compared to Brooke Shields , another child model @-@ turned @-@ actress who had starred in the original Blue Lagoon . The role was controversial , as Jovovich appeared nude in the film , as had Shields in The Blue Lagoon .. For this role , Jovovich was nominated both for " Best Young Actress Starring in a Motion Picture " at the 1991 Young Artist Awards , and " Worst New Star " at the 1991 Golden Raspberry Awards . 
 In 1992 , Milla Jovovich co @-@ starred with Christian Slater in the comedy <unk> . Later that year , she portrayed Mildred Harris in the Charlie Chaplin biographical film Chaplin . In 1993 she acted in Richard Linklater 's film Dazed and Confused . She played Michelle Burroughs , on @-@ screen girlfriend to Pickford ( played by her then @-@ boyfriend Shawn Andrews ) . Strongly featured in promotions for the film , Jovovich was upset to find her role much reduced in the released film . Discouraged , she took a hiatus from acting roles , moving to Europe . She started to work at music . 
 = = = Breakthrough ( 1997 – 2001 ) = = = 
 Jovovich returned to acting in 1997 with a lead role in the French science fiction action film The Fifth Element , alongside Bruce Willis and Gary Oldman . This was written and directed by Luc Besson . She portrayed Leeloo , an alien who helps to save the planet . Jovovich said she " worked like hell : no band practice , no clubs , no pot , nothing " to acquire the role and impress Besson . They married on December 14 , 1997 , but later divorced . 
 Jovovich co @-@ created and mastered an alien fictional language of over 400 words for her role . She wore a costume that came to be known as the " ACE @-@ bandage " costume ; the body suit designed by Jean @-@ Paul Gaultier was made of medical bandages . The Fifth Element was selected as the opening film for the 1997 Cannes Film Festival and its worldwide box office gross was over $ 263 million , more than three times its budget of $ 80 million . The Fifth Element was often praised for its visual style ; critic James Berardinelli wrote , " Jovovich makes an impression , although her effectiveness has little to do with acting and less to do with dialogue " . Jovovich was nominated for " Favorite Female Newcomer " at the Blockbuster Entertainment Awards and " Best Fight " at the MTV Movie Awards . The film inspired a video game and a planned Leeloo action figure , but the figure was never released due to licensing problems . In a 2003 interview , Jovovich said Leeloo was her favorite role . 
 In 1998 , Jovovich appeared in Spike Lee 's drama He Got Game , as abused prostitute Dakota Burns ; she acted with Denzel Washington and Ray Allen . In 1999 , she appeared in the music video for the song " If You Can 't Say No " by Lenny Kravitz . That year she returned to the action genre playing the title role in The Messenger : The Story of Joan of Arc , under direction of Luc Besson . She cut her hair short and wore armor in several extensive battle scenes . Jovovich received generally good reviews for her performance , although she also received a Razzie Award nomination for " Worst Actress " . The historical drama did moderately well at the box office , gaining $ 66 million worldwide . In 2000 , Jovovich appeared as the troubled Eloise in The Million Dollar Hotel , a film based on a concept story by Bono of the band U2 and Nicholas Klein . Directed by Wim Wenders , Jovovich starred alongside Jeremy Davies and Mel Gibson ; she provided vocals on the film 's soundtrack . That year she also played bar owner Lucia , in the British western film The Claim ( 2000 ) . This was followed by a supporting role as the evil Katinka in the comedy Zoolander ( 2001 ) . 
 = = = International success ( 2002 – 2006 ) = = = 
 In 2002 , Jovovich starred in the horror / action film Resident Evil , released in the United States on March 15 , 2002 and based on the CAPCOM video game series of the same name . She portrayed Alice , the film 's heroine , who fights a legion of zombies created by the Umbrella Corporation . Jovovich had accepted the role because she and her brother Marco had been fans of the video game franchise . Jovovich had performed all the stunts required in the film , except for a scene that would involve her jumping to a cement platform , which her management deemed too dangerous , and had trained in karate , kickboxing , and combat @-@ training . The film was commercially successful , grossing $ 17 million on its opening weekend , and gaining $ 40 million domestically and $ 102 million worldwide . Later , she portrayed the manipulative gang wife Erin in No Good Deed ( 2002 ) , Nadine in the romantic comedy You Stupid Man ( 2002 ) , punk rocker Fangora ( " Fanny " ) in Dummy ( 2003 ) , and provided a guest voice on the television series King of the Hill . The role of Fangora in Dummy allowed Jovovich to act in film with Oscar @-@ winning Adrien Brody , who was a friend prior to filming . Jovovich found it easy to identify with this role because she felt Fangora possessed similar qualities to the actress ' own life . 
 In 2004 , Jovovich reprised the role of Alice in the sequel to Resident Evil , Resident Evil : Apocalypse . The role required her to do fight training for three hours a day , in addition to the three months prior to filming in which she had " gun training , martial arts , everything " . Apocalypse received even more negative reactions from the critics than the first film , but it was an even greater commercial success , ranking number one at the box office unlike the first film . Following the release of the film , Jovovich was unhappy with the critical results and director Alexander Witt 's effort . She noted during an interview that year that her large action films take care of the commercial part of her career , while she acts in " independent little films that never come out " to appease her artistic side , and " It 's a good balance " . The following year , she was featured in Gore Vidal 's faux trailer remake of Caligula , as Drusilla . In 2006 , Jovovich 's film , the science fiction / action thriller Ultraviolet , was released on March 3 . She played the title role of Violet Song <unk> Shariff , a role that also involved heavily choreographed fight sequences . It was not screened for critics , but when reviewed , it was critically panned , grossing $ 31 million worldwide . That year , Jovovich also starred in .45 , as Kat , the revenge driven girlfriend of an illegal gun and drug dealer with Scottish actor and DJ Angus Macfadyen . 
 = = = Recent and future roles ( 2007 – present ) = = = 
 In 2007 , Jovovich reprised her role as Alice in Resident Evil : Extinction , the third of the Resident Evil series . The film grossed an estimated $ 24 million in 2 @,@ 828 theaters on its opening weekend , topping the box office gross for that week . It opened stronger than its predecessor , Resident Evil : Apocalypse , which opened with $ 23 million in 3 @,@ 284 theaters ( over 450 more theaters than Extinction ) . In a March 2006 interview , Jovovich said that she would not appear in another action film " for a long time " , expressing a desire to portray more diverse roles , but she added that talks of another sequel in the Resident Evil franchise were a " real possibility " . 
 In 2009 , Jovovich starred in David Twohy 's A Perfect Getaway with Kiele Sanchez , Timothy Olyphant , and Steve Zahn . The film is a thriller about a newlywed couple ( Milla and Zahn ) on their honeymoon in Hawaii . She played <unk> Anderson . 
 Jovovich played <unk> , the wife of a jailed arsonist ( played by Edward Norton ) in Stone , a psychological thriller starring Robert De Niro . Filming began in May 2009 at the recently closed Southern Michigan Correctional Facility in Jackson , Michigan . 
 Jovovich played the role of Dr. Abigail Tyler in the science @-@ fiction thriller The Fourth Kind and starred in the psychological thriller Faces in the Crowd , which was written and directed by Julien <unk> ; in the latter film , she plays the survivor of a serial killer ’ s attack that leaves her suffering from a condition called prosopagnosia , which renders her unable to recognize faces . 
 Jovovich returned as Alice in the fourth movie of the Resident Evil series , Afterlife , which was directed by her husband , Paul W. S. Anderson . She had a role in Dirty Girl , which premiered on September 12 , 2010 at the Toronto Film Festival , opposite Juno Temple , William H. Macy , Mary Steenburgen , and Tim McGraw . Jovovich starred in Paul W. S. Anderson 's The Three Musketeers , as Milady de Winter , in 2011 . 
 Jovovich is set to star in David R. Ellis ' horror film Bad Luck , based on a screenplay by David J. <unk> . She appeared in Famke Janssen 's directorial debut film Bringing Up Bobby , which also stars Marcia Cross . <unk> , a Russian film which translates into Lucky Trouble , also stars Jovovich . 
 Jovovich was set to portray Amalia <unk> in The Winter Queen in 2007 ; however , with the announcement of her pregnancy early that year , the film was postponed . In the spring of 2011 , Seven Arts and GFM Films announced they would be merging their distribution operations . The joint venture is expected to release The Winter Queen under the direction of Fyodor Bondarchuk . 
 She returned to her role as Alice in the fifth installment of Resident Evil for Resident Evil : Retribution , which was released on September 14 , 2012 . She is also set to return as Alice in the sixth and allegedly last installment of the film franchise , entitled ' Resident Evil : The Final Chapter ' . 
 = = Music career = = 
 Jovovich had begun working on a music album as early as 1988 , when she was signed by SBK Records after the company heard a demo she recorded . In August 1990 , she asserted in an interview that the then @-@ forthcoming album would be " a mix between Kate Bush , Sinéad O 'Connor , This Mortal Coil , and the Cocteau Twins " . After it was initially presented by SBK strictly as a pop album , Jovovich protested , insisting on using her personal poetry for lyrics and recording her own instrumental material . Jovovich had written the songs when she was fifteen , with the exception of a Ukrainian folk song , " In a Glade " , that she covered . In April 1994 , billed under her first name , she released The Divine Comedy , a title that was a reference to the epic poem by Dante Alighieri of the same name . Jovovich had chosen the title after seeing Russian artist Alexis Steele 's proposed cover artwork sketch for the then untitled album . Jovovich found that the sketch had " all the struggle that I 'm singing about . It IS the divine comedy " . The Divine Comedy was well received by critics , and featured pop @-@ infused traditional Ukrainian folk songs that led to comparisons with musicians Tori Amos and Kate Bush . John McAlley of Rolling Stone called the album " remarkable " , " strikingly mature and rich in invention " , and as featuring " angst @-@ laced poetry with vivid melodies and arrangements that find a common spirit in synth pop , European folk and psychedelic dream rock " . 
 Jovovich released the track " Gentleman Who Fell " , with an accompanying music video , as the sole single from the album . The music video was originally directed by Lisa Bonet and featured Harry Dean Stanton , but Jovovich was unsatisfied with the results and decided to film another version . The second version of " Gentleman Who Fell " , a homage to Maya Deren 's short film <unk> of the Afternoon ( 1943 ) , was subsequently played on MTV . Jovovich toured the United States during most of 1994 to promote the album , opening for Toad the Wet Sprocket and Crash Test Dummies , as well as playing smaller acoustic sets . Jovovich had opted to perform in smaller and more intimate settings , turning down a musical appearance on Saturday Night Live . Jovovich has also been collaborating musically with longtime friend and musician Chris Brenner , who co @-@ wrote with her on the Divine Comedy Album and who was the musical coordinator for the supporting tour . She and Brenner met in 1993 and have since worked together on several ventures . Following The Divine Comedy , she expressed interest in releasing a second album , having had ten songs ready for a future recording that was intended for a Summer 1996 release . Despite the appearance of a lo @-@ fi field recording The People Tree Sessions in 1998 , Jovovich has yet to release a second album . 
 In May 1999 , Jovovich along with Chris Brenner formed an experimental band called Plastic Has Memory , in which she wrote the songs , sang , and played electric guitar . The band was " [ m ] uch heavier and darker than the vaguely Ukrainian folk @-@ sounding elements of her first album " and had a similar sound to a grunge and trip hop Portishead . Plastic Has Memory played about a dozen shows in Los Angeles and New York City for a potential Virgin Records album release , one of which Mick Jagger had attended . Though Plastic Has Memory was featured on Hollywood Goes Wild , a benefit celebrity compilation album , the group never formally released a record and is no longer together . 
 Jovovich has contributed tracks to several of her film soundtracks , including The Million Dollar Hotel ( 2000 ) and Dummy ( 2002 ) , and has also provided songs for the soundtracks of films in which she has not acted such as Underworld ( 2003 ) produced by musician Danny Lohner who was the bass player in Nine Inch Nails for many years . Her song " The Gentlemen Who Fell " was featured on The Rules of Attraction soundtrack in 2002 . In 2001 , Jovovich was one of many celebrities whose vocals were featured in a cover of " We are Family " to raise money for the American Red Cross . She has appeared as guest vocalist on the song " Former Lover " on Deepak Chopra 's album , A Gift of Love II : Oceans of Ecstasy ( 2002 ) and Legion of Boom ( 2004 ) by The Crystal Method . 
 Since 2003 , Jovovich has worked with musician Maynard James Keenan , of Tool and A Perfect Circle , on his Industrial side project Puscifer , contributing vocals to the track " REV 22 : 20 " , which was featured on various film soundtracks in its original or a remixed form . As of January , 2009 , she can be heard collaborating with Maynard and Danny Lohner on the Puscifer track called , " The Mission . " She also performed the song at the first live Puscifer performance on February 13 , 2009 in Las Vegas , Nevada . Danny Lohner , and longtime music collaborator Chris Brenner currently continue to record and perform with Jovovich who has made several highly praised appearances in recent years . 
 Jovovich continues to write songs which she refers to as " demos " , and which are provided for free in MP3 format on her official website . She provides license to freely download and remix the tracks , but reserves the right to sell and issue them . 
 A new single called Electric Sky was released on May 18 , 2012 . The song was presented at the Life Ball in 2012 . 
 = = Fashion design = = 
 Jovovich and fellow model Carmen Hawk launched a line of clothing called Jovovich @-@ Hawk in 2003 . The pair opened a showroom in New York City 's Greenwich Village on September 13 , 2005 , and the line lasted for four years . All of the dresses for Jovovich @-@ Hawk line were designed by herself and her partner Carmen Hawk , in The atelier is based in Los Angeles , but pieces could be found at Fred Segal in Los Angeles , Harvey Nichols , and over 50 stores around the world . Vogue has praised the line for its " girl @-@ about @-@ town cult status most designers spend years trying to achieve . " 
 In November 2006 , the Council of Fashion Designers of America ( CFDA ) and US Vogue nominated Jovovich @-@ Hawk for the CFDA / Vogue Fashion Fund Award . Jovovich @-@ Hawk was nominated as a finalist , although Doo @-@ Ri Chung took the top prize . 
 In 2007 , Jovovich and Hawk designed the costume for Jovovich 's character in Resident Evil : Extinction . The shorts Alice , her character , wears are a variation on the ' Alice Star ' Shorts from the Spring 2007 collection . In late 2007 , Jovovich @-@ Hawk signed a deal to design a diffusion collection for Target 's Go International campaign , following in the footsteps of Luella , Paul & Joe and <unk> Schouler . 
 In late 2008 , Jovovich and Hawk mutually agreed to end the business due to increased demands on their time . Jovovich explained , " I 'm an artist . I 'm not someone who can deal with shipping rates and taxes " . 
 = = Media personality = = 
 Jovovich has been noted for her careers as a model , singer and actress . Music channel VH1 has referred to her as the " reigning queen of kick @-@ butt " for her roles in various sci @-@ fi and action films and Rebecca Flint Marx of Allmovie said that despite the negative critical response for the Resident Evil films , the franchise has turned Jovovich into an " A @-@ list action star " . Her action roles have given her a geek following for which MTV said she was " Every Geek 's Dream Girl " . 
 In 2004 , Jovovich was ranked No. 69 on Maxim magazine 's " Top 100 Hot List " , ranked No. 82 in 2005 and ranked No. 21 in 2010 . Maxim also named her No. 11 on their list of " Hottest Nerd <unk> " . In 2008 , she was ranked No. 90 on Ask Men 's Top 99 Women of 2008 List . In 2011 , Jovovich attended and sang at the birthday celebration of Mikhail Gorbachev . The actress also gave a speech in which she thanked Gorbachev , saying that when she and her family left the Soviet Union in 1980 they were sadly sure that they would never see their relatives again and that thanks to him they have been reunited . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Jovovich was born in Ukraine when it was part of the Soviet Union to a Montenegrin father – a doctor , and a Russian mother – an actress . In addition to English , she is fluent in French and partly in Russian . She had referred to the role the Russian culture played in her life when she stated in 2005 : " I have a Russian mother , she was a famous actress in the USSR ( Galina <unk> ) . And the first books , which I read , were in Russian . I was raised in the atmosphere of the Russian classical theatre school . The art , built on the system of Stanislavsky – that 's the most realistic art . And the modern cinema stands on the same principle . A Russian person wants to find the truth . This is the base of the Russian culture . I never forget it , especially since I have Russian roots " . Jovovich established a charitable foundation in 2005 to help Ukrainian children . At the time she referred to herself : " I am a strong Ukrainian girl , that is why I work a lot " . 
 In addition to being a former smoker , Jovovich has advocated the legalization of cannabis , and appeared in a spread and on the cover for High Times . In an article published in 1994 , she admitted that her only vices were cigarettes and cannabis . She practices yoga and meditates often in attempts to live a healthy lifestyle ; although not affiliating with any specific religion , she prays and considers herself a " spiritual person " . She avoids junk foods and prefers to cook for herself . She practices Brazilian Jiu @-@ Jitsu in addition to other varieties of martial arts . Jovovich also enjoys playing the guitar , and writing poems and lyrics for songs . 
 = = = Relationships and marriage = = = 
 Jovovich married on @-@ screen boyfriend Shawn Andrews in 1992 while filming Dazed and Confused together . Andrews was 21 , while Jovovich was 16 ; the marriage was annulled by her mother two months later . Shortly after the annulment , Jovovich moved to Europe with her friend and musician Chris Brenner where she met and then lived with her new boyfriend , ex @-@ Jamiroquai bassist Stuart <unk> , in London from May 1994 to October 1995 . From 1995 to 1997 , she dated photographer Mario <unk> . In Las Vegas , she married The Fifth Element director Luc Besson in 1997 where they went skydiving directly after the ceremony ; they divorced in 1999 . Between 1998 and 2001 , she befriended the young poet and musician , Anno Birkin , and each was the other 's inspiration behind many of their compositions . Jovovich became involved with Birkin romantically just before his death in a car accident on November 8 , 2001 . 
 Jovovich currently resides in homes in Los Angeles and New York with her husband , film writer and director Paul W. S. Anderson , whom she married on 22 August 2009 . The two met while working on the 2002 film Resident Evil , which Anderson wrote and directed , and in which Jovovich starred . Anderson proposed to Jovovich in 2003 , but the two separated for a period of time before becoming a couple again . On November 3 , 2007 , Jovovich gave birth to her and Anderson 's first child , a daughter , Ever Gabo . The child was born at Cedars @-@ Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles , California . On April 1 , 2015 their second daughter , <unk> <unk> , was born . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 1994 : The Divine Comedy 
 1998 : The People Tree Sessions 
 Singles 
 1994 : " Gentleman Who Fell " 
 1994 : " Bang Your Head " 
 1994 : " It 's Your Life " 
 2012 : " Electric Sky " 
 Compilations , soundtracks and albums featuring Jovovich 
 = = = Soundtrack appearances = = = 
 = = = Compilation appearances = = = 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Jovovich has been nominated for numerous awards . In 1992 , she was nominated for Best Young Actress Starring in a Motion Picture at the Young Artist Awards for her role in Return to the Blue Lagoon . She was also nominated for a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst New Star for her role in this film . 
 In 1998 , she was also nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress for her role in The Fifth Element , the Blockbuster Entertainment Award for Best New Actress , and the MTV Movie Award for Best Fight Scene ( between her and aliens ) for the role as well . Conversely she also received a nomination for the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Supporting Actress for the same role . 
 She received a nomination for the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actress for The Messenger : The Story of Joan of Arc , in 2000 . 
 In 2002 , she received a nomination for the Saturn Best Actress Award for her role as Alice in Resident Evil and won Best Actress in a sci @-@ fi / action film for Resident Evil : Extinction from the Scream Awards in 2008 . 
 She was also nominated for Best Horror Actress at the 2010 Scream Awards for her performance as Dr. Abigail Tyler in The Fourth Kind , and won the Hollywood Spotlight Award for Best Actress at the 14th Annual Hollywood Awards Gala for her role as <unk> in the 2010 film Stone . 
 In 2011 , she won the Scream Award for Best Science Fiction Actress for Resident Evil : Afterlife and in 2012 she received a nomination for Choice Movie Actress : Action from the Teen Choice Awards . 
 In 2013 , she was nominated for the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actress for her performance in Resident Evil : Retribution . 
 = American goldfinch = 
 The American goldfinch ( Spinus tristis ) , also known as the eastern goldfinch or " lightning bird , " is a small North American bird in the finch family . It is migratory , ranging from mid @-@ Alberta to North Carolina during the breeding season , and from just south of the Canadian border to Mexico during the winter . 
 The only finch in its subfamily to undergo a complete molt , the American goldfinch displays sexual dimorphism in its coloration ; the male is a vibrant yellow in the summer and an olive color during the winter , while the female is a dull yellow @-@ brown shade which brightens only slightly during the summer . The male displays brightly colored plumage during the breeding season to attract a mate . 
 The American goldfinch is a <unk> and adapted for the consumption of seedheads , with a conical beak to remove the seeds and agile feet to grip the stems of seedheads while feeding . It is a social bird , and will gather in large flocks while feeding and migrating . It may behave territorially during nest construction , but this aggression is short @-@ lived . Its breeding season is tied to the peak of food supply , beginning in late July , which is relatively late in the year for a finch . This species is generally monogamous , and produces one brood each year . 
 Human activity has generally benefited the American goldfinch . It is often found in residential areas , attracted to bird feeders which increase its survival rate in these areas . Deforestation also creates open meadow areas which are its preferred habitat . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The American goldfinch was one of the many species originally described by Linnaeus in the landmark 1758 10th edition of his work Systema Naturae . It was initially included in the genus Spinus , a group containing New World goldfinches and siskins , but in 1976 , Spinus was merged into the genus Carduelis as a subgenus . Recent studies resurrect the genus Spinus . Its closest relatives are the lesser goldfinch ( S. <unk> ) , Lawrence 's goldfinch ( S. <unk> ) , and the siskins . Although it shares a name with the European goldfinch , the two are in separate subgenera and are not directly related . Carduelis is derived from <unk> , the Latin word for thistle ; the species name tristis is Latin for ' sorrowful ' . There are four recognized subspecies of the American goldfinch : 
 S. t. tristis is the most common of the subspecies . Its summer range is from southern Canada to Colorado , and east to the Carolinas . Its winter range is from southern Canada south to Florida and central Mexico . 
 S. t. pallidus is differentiated from other subspecies by its paler body color , stronger white markings and , in males , a larger black cap . It is slightly larger than C. t. tristis . The summer range is from British Columbia to western Ontario , south to Colorado and west to Oregon . In winter , the range extends from southern Canada and northern California , south to Mexico . 
 S. t. <unk> is smaller and darker than the other subspecies . It occurs on the coastal slope of the Cascade Mountains from southern British Columbia to central California , overlapping with the range of C. t. pallidus . 
 S. t. <unk> occurs west of the Sierra Nevada range during the summer and in south and central Baja California Peninsula to the Mojave Desert and Colorado Desert in winter . In winter , the plumage of both sexes is browner than other subspecies , and in summer , the male 's black cap is smaller than that of other subspecies . This subspecies has been called the willow goldfinch . 
 This seems to be the most ancient extant species of the <unk> American Spinus / Carduelis <unk> radiation , whose parental species is Carduelis / Spinus <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 The American goldfinch is a small finch , 11 – 14 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 – 5 @.@ 5 in ) long , with a wingspan of 19 – 22 cm ( 7 @.@ 5 – 8 @.@ 7 in ) . It weighs between 11 – 20 g ( 0 @.@ 39 – 0 @.@ 71 oz ) . Among standard measurements , the wing chord is 6 @.@ 5 to 7 @.@ 8 cm ( 2 @.@ 6 to 3 @.@ 1 in ) , the tail is 4 @.@ 2 to 5 @.@ 1 cm ( 1 @.@ 7 to 2 @.@ 0 in ) , the culmen is 0 @.@ 9 to 1 @.@ 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 35 to 0 @.@ 43 in ) and the tarsus is 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 47 to 0 @.@ 55 in ) . The beak is small , conical , and pink for most of the year , but turns bright orange with the spring molt in both sexes . The shape and size of the beak aid in the extraction of seeds from the seed heads of thistles , sunflowers , and other plants . 
 The American goldfinch undergoes a molt in the spring and autumn . It is the only <unk> finch to undergo a molt twice a year . During the winter molt it sheds all its feathers ; in the spring , it sheds all but the wing and tail feathers , which are dark brown in the female and black in the male . The markings on these feathers remain through each molt , with bars on the wings and white under and at the edges of the short , notched tail . The sexual dimorphism displayed in plumage coloration is especially pronounced after the spring molt , when the bright color of the male 's summer plumage is needed to attract a mate . 
 Once the spring molt is complete , the body of the male is a brilliant lemon yellow , a color produced by carotenoid pigments from plant materials in its diet , with a striking jet black cap and white rump that is visible during flight . The female is mostly brown , lighter on the underside with a yellow bib . After the autumn molt , the bright summer feathers are replaced by duller plumage , becoming buff below and olive @-@ brown above , with a pale yellow face and bib . The autumn plumage is almost identical in both sexes , but the male has yellow shoulder patches . In some winter ranges , the goldfinches lose all traces of yellow , becoming a predominantly medium tan @-@ gray color with an olive tinge evident only on close viewing . 
 The immature American goldfinch has a dull brown back , and the underside is pale yellow . The shoulders and tail are dull black with buff @-@ colored , rather than white , markings on wings and rump . This coloration is the same in both genders . 
 The song of the American goldfinch is a series of musical warbles and twitters , often with a long note . A <unk> @-@ tsi @-@ tsi @-@ tsit call is often given in flight ; it may also be described as per @-@ chic @-@ o @-@ ree . While the female incubates the eggs , she calls to her returning mate with a soft continuous <unk> sound . The young begin to use a call of chick @-@ kee or chick @-@ wee shortly before fledging , which they use until they have left the nest entirely . There are two defense calls made by adults during nesting ; a <unk> call made to rally other goldfinches to the nest and distract predators , and a <unk> used to signal to the nestlings to quiet them and get them to crouch down in the nest to become less conspicuous . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The American goldfinch prefers open country where weeds thrive , such as fields , meadows , flood plains , as well as roadsides , orchards , and gardens . It may also be found in open deciduous and riparian woodlands and areas of secondary growth . This habitat preference continues during the spring and autumn migrations . 
 The summer breeding range stretches across North America from coast to coast . It is bounded on the north by Saskatchewan and stretches south across North America to North Carolina on the east coast , and northern California on the west coast . The American goldfinch is a short @-@ distance migrant , moving south in response to colder weather and lessened food supply . The migration is completed in compact flocks , which travel in an erratic , wavelike flight pattern . 
 Its winter range includes southern Canada and stretches south through the United States to parts of Mexico . In winter , in the northern part of its range , the finch may move nearer to feeders if they are available . In southern ranges , during winter , they remain in areas similar to the fields and flood plains where they live during the summer months . 
 Attempts were made to introduce the American goldfinch into Bermuda in the 19th century , and Tahiti in 1938 , but the species failed to become established . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 The American goldfinch flies in a distinctive undulating pattern , creating a wave @-@ shaped path . This normally consists of a series of wing beats to lift the bird , then folding in the wings and gliding in an arc before repeating the pattern . Birds often vocalize during the flapping phase of the pattern and then go silent during the coasting phase . The call made during flight is " per @-@ twee @-@ twee @-@ twee " , or " ti @-@ di @-@ di @-@ di " , punctuated by the silent periods . 
 The American goldfinch is gregarious during the non @-@ breeding season , when it is often found in large flocks , usually with other finches . During the breeding season , it lives in loose colonies . While the nest is being constructed , the male will act aggressively toward other males who intrude into his territory , driving them away , and the female reacts in the same way toward other females . This aggressiveness subsides once the eggs have been laid . 
 The American goldfinch does not act aggressively toward predators within its territory ; its only reaction is alarm calling . Predators include snakes , weasels , squirrels , and blue jays , which may destroy eggs or kill young , and hawks and cats , which pose a threat to both young and adults . As of 2007 , the oldest known American goldfinch was 10 years and 5 months old . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The American goldfinch is a diurnal feeder . According to the Cornell Lab of Ornithology , the species is one of the strictest vegetarians in the bird world . It is mainly granivorous , but will occasionally eat insects , which are also fed to its young to provide protein . Its diet consists of the seeds from a wide variety of annual plants , often those of weeds grasses and trees , such as thistle , teasel , dandelion , <unk> , mullein , cosmos , <unk> , sunflower , and alder . However , it also consumes tree buds , maple sap , and berries . It will eat at bird feeders provided by humans , particularly in the winter months , preferring Niger seed ( commonly and erroneously called thistle seed ) . 
 Unlike some finch species , the American goldfinch uses its feet extensively in feeding . It frequently hangs from seedheads while feeding in order to reach the seeds more easily . In the spring , the American goldfinch feeds on the catkins hanging from birches and alders by pulling one up with its beak and using its toes to hold the catkin still against the branch . This dexterity enables it to take advantage of food sources relatively inaccessible to potential competitors , increasing its chances of survival . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The American goldfinch begins its breeding season later in the year than any other finch and later than any other native North American bird , besides occasionally the sedge wren . This may be related to the abundance of seeds in the late summer months , as seeds represent the majority of their diet . 
 The courtship rituals of the American goldfinch include aerial maneuvers and singing by males , who begin courtship in late July . The flight displays begin as the male pursues the female , who flies in zigzagging evasive patterns . The male is able to signal his quality and fitness , both in the short term ( current body condition ) and long term ( genes ) , through ornamentation ( bill color and plumage ) . If a female accepts the male as a mate , the pair will fly in wide circles , as the male warbles throughout the flight . 
 Once a male has found a mate , he selects a territory , marking the boundaries by warbling as he flies from perch to perch . After circling the perimeter , he performs two flight displays , first repeating a low , flat flight , then flying in an exaggerated version of normal flight , tucking his wings close to his body , plummeting earthwards and catching himself as he spreads his wings to glide upward in a series of loops . Two or three pairs may group their territories together in a loose colony , perhaps to aid in defense against predators . 
 The nest is built in late summer by the female in the branches of a deciduous shrub or tree at a height of up to 10 m ( 33 ft ) . The nest @-@ building lasts approximately six days , during which time the female works in 10 – 40 minute increments . The male frequently flies with the female as she collects nesting materials , and though he may carry some materials back to the nest , he leaves its construction to the female . The outer shell of the nest is built of bark , weeds , vines , and grass . The inside diameter of the finished nest is about 6 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) . The rim is reinforced with bark bound by spiderwebs and caterpillar silk , and the cup is lined with plant down from milkweed , thistle , or cattail . The nest is so tightly woven that it can hold water , and it is possible for nestlings to drown following a rainstorm if the parents do not cover the nest . 
 American goldfinches lay four to six bluish @-@ white eggs , which are oval in shape and about 16 mm × 12 mm ( 0 @.@ 63 in × 0 @.@ 47 in ) , roughly the size of a peanut . It is thought that they are laid during the night . The eggs are incubated by the female alone , though the male brings her food as she nests , and most mating pairs raise only one brood each year . 
 The chicks hatch 12 – 14 days after incubation begins . Like all passerines , the chicks are altricial ; they are born naked , with reddish bodies , pale grey down , and closed eyes . The mother bird feeds her young regurgitated seeds and insects as they grow . The hatchlings develop quickly , opening their eyes after three days , and completing the growth of olive @-@ brown juvenile plumage after 11 – 15 days , at which time they begin to practice short flights close to the nest . For up to three weeks after fledging , they are still fed by the male , who locates them by listening for their fledging call . The chicks stop giving this call when they become entirely independent . 
 American goldfinches are occasionally victims of brood parasites , particularly brown @-@ headed cowbirds . One study found that 9 % of nests had brown @-@ headed cowbird eggs in them . American goldfinches make very poor hosts for brood parasites , with studies showing low hatching rates of brown @-@ headed cowbird eggs and no fledging success . This is despite the fact that the American goldfinch has no known behavioral adaptations against brood parasites . It is thought that the inability of brown @-@ headed cowbird chicks to survive is due to a failure to get enough nutrition ; the seed @-@ rich diet of American goldfinch chicks varies from the usual insect @-@ rich diet of other hosts . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 The American goldfinch is found in residential areas throughout its range . Backyard birders attract it using feeders containing <unk> thistle seed , or by planting grasses and perennial plants , such as <unk> , cosmos , bee balm , or globe thistle , which produce seedheads favored by finches . Although some controversy surrounds bird feeding ( see bird feeder for details ) , an increase in backyard feeding by humans has generally been beneficial to this species . 
 The American goldfinch is not threatened by human activity , and is widespread throughout its range . The clearing of forests by humans , though harmful to many species , has benefited the American goldfinch . Clearing of woodlands causes declines in numbers of neotropical migrants , while favoring short @-@ distance migrants and permanent residents . This benefits the American goldfinch both as a short @-@ distance migrant , and because the created open areas are the preferred environment of the bird , where weeds thrive which produce the primary food source of the American goldfinch . 
 = = State bird = = 
 The American goldfinch is the state bird of Iowa and New Jersey , where it is called the " eastern goldfinch " , and Washington , where it is called the " willow goldfinch " . It was chosen by schoolchildren in Washington in 1951 . 
 = Super Mario Bros. : The Lost Levels = 
 Super Mario Bros. : The Lost Levels is a 1986 side @-@ scrolling , platformer action game developed and published by Nintendo as the sequel to the 1985 Super Mario Bros. The games are similar in style and gameplay apart from a large increase in difficulty . Like the original , Mario or Luigi venture to rescue the princess from Bowser . Unlike the original , the game has no two @-@ player option and Luigi is differentiated from his twin plumber brother by having less ground friction and higher jump height . The Lost Levels also introduces setbacks like poison mushroom power @-@ ups , counterproductive level warps , and mid @-@ air wind gusts . The main game has 32 levels across eight worlds , followed by five bonus worlds . 
 The Lost Levels was first released in Japan for the Family Computer Disk System as Super Mario Bros. 2 ( Japanese : <unk> 2 ) on June 3 , 1986 , following the success of its predecessor . It was developed by Nintendo R & D4 , the team led by Mario creator Shigeru Miyamoto . Nintendo of America considered the game too difficult to sell in North America and instead sold a retrofitted version of Japanese game Doki Doki Panic as its Super Mario Bros. 2 . The game was not released in North America until its inclusion ( with numerous alterations ) on the 1993 Super Nintendo Entertainment System compilation Super Mario All @-@ Stars . It was later ported to the Game Boy Color , Game Boy Advance , and Virtual Console ( Wii , Nintendo 3DS , and Wii U ) . 
 The game is known for its intense difficulty . Reviewers characterized the game as an extension of the original release , continuing the difficulty progression of its forebear . In this way , some recommended the The Lost Levels for those who mastered the original . Video game journalists appreciated the game 's challenge in a speedrunning context . The game gave Luigi his first character traits and introduced the poison mushroom power @-@ up , which would be used throughout the Mario franchise . The Lost Levels was the most popular game on the Disk System , for which it sold about 2 @.@ 5 million copies . In 2014 , IGN ranked the game among the bottom of its top 125 Nintendo games . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Super Mario Bros. : The Lost Levels is a side @-@ scrolling , platformer action game similar in style and gameplay to the original 1985 Super Mario Bros. , save for an increase in difficulty . As in the original , Mario ( or Luigi ) venture to rescue the princess from Bowser . The player jumps between platforms , avoids enemy and inanimate obstacles , finds hidden secrets ( like the warp zone and vertical vines ) , and collects power @-@ ups like the Mushroom ( which makes Mario grow ) , the Fire Flower ( which lets Mario throw fireballs ) , and the <unk> Star . Unlike the original , there is no two @-@ player mode and the player chooses between the twin plumbers , who are differentiated for the first time , at the title screen . Luigi , designed for skilled players , has less ground friction and higher jump height . Mario is faster . 
 The game 's difficulty picks up from near the end of the original and progressively increases . The Lost Levels introduces obstacles including poison mushrooms , level warps that set the player farther back in the game , and wind gusts that redirect the player 's course mid @-@ air . Some of the game 's levels require " split @-@ second " precision . There were also some graphical changes , though the soundtrack is identical . After each boss fight , Toad tells Mario that " our princess is in another castle ! " The main game has 32 levels across eight worlds and five bonus worlds . A hidden World 9 is accessible if the player does not use a warp zone . Bonus worlds A through D are accessible when the player plays through the game eight times , for a total of 52 levels . 
 = = Development = = 
 In October 1985 , the original Super Mario Bros. was released in North America and sold tens of millions of Nintendo Entertainment System ( Family Computer in Japan ) video game consoles by February 1986 , signaling the end of the video game crash of 1983 . Shigeru Miyamoto , the creator of Mario , now led Nintendo 's R & D4 division , which was working on The Legend of Zelda , and no longer had time to design games completely by himself . Takashi Tezuka , the assistant director of Super Mario Bros. , joined Miyamoto to develop a sequel to the game with the R & D4 team . 
 The Lost Levels , originally released in Japan as Super Mario Bros. 2 on June 3 , 1986 , was similar in style to Super Mario Bros. but much more difficult in gameplay ; Jon Irwin in his book Super Mario Bros. 2 described it as " nails @-@ from @-@ diamonds hard " . Tezuka felt that Japanese players had mastered the original game , and so needed a more challenging game to follow it up . Commercials for The Lost Levels in Japan featured players failing at the game and screaming in frustration at their television . Some of the later levels of the game came from Vs . Super Mario Bros. , an arcade port of the original . After Zelda , The Lost Levels was the second release for on the Family Computer Disk System , an add @-@ on external disk drive with more spacious and less expensive disks than the Famicom cartridges . 
 When The Lost Levels was evaluated for release outside Japan , it was declined by Nintendo of America , which considered the game too difficult for North America . Howard Phillips , who evaluated games for the president of Nintendo of America , felt that the game was unfairly difficult , even beyond the unofficial moniker of " Nintendo Hard " that the company 's other games sometimes garnered . He felt that it would not sell well in the American market . In a 2012 interview , he said that " few games were more <unk> than Super Mario 2 on Famicom " and that " not having fun is bad when you 're a company selling fun . " 
 Nintendo instead released a retrofitted version of Doki Doki Panic as its Super Mario Bros. 2 outside Japan . Doki Doki Panic had originally been developed by Miyamoto and Kensuke Tanabe as a modified take on a Super Mario Bros. like game before it was released in Japan as a stand @-@ alone game as part of a collaboration with Fuji Television . Miyamoto spent more time on Doki Doki Panic than on The Lost Levels . Doki Doki Panic 's characters and artwork were modified to match Super Mario Bros. before being released in America , and the re @-@ skinned release became known as the " big aberration " in the Super Mario series . The American Super Mario Bros. 2 was later released in Japan as Super Mario USA . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Nintendo " cleaned up " parts of the Japanese Super Mario Bros. 2 and released it in later Super Mario collections as The Lost Levels . It was first released in North America in the 1993 Super Mario All @-@ Stars collection for the Super NES , in which World 9 and bonus worlds A through D were made automatically playable immediately after completing World 8 @-@ 4 . All @-@ Stars was rereleased as a Limited Edition for the Nintendo Wii console in remembrance of Super Mario Bros. ' s 25th anniversary in 2010 . It was also ported to other platforms . The All @-@ Stars version made the poison mushroom more visible and added a " do @-@ over " feature . 
 The Lost Levels is an unlockable bonus in the 1999 Game Boy Color game Super Mario Bros. Deluxe . The game was edited for the handheld device : the visible screen is cropped , features such as wind and the five bonus worlds are omitted . Challenge modes are added . The Lost Levels was rereleased in 2004 for the Game Boy Advance on the third volume of Nintendo 's Japan @-@ only Famicom Mini compilation cartridges . 
 Nintendo 's digital Virtual Console platform brought the unedited 1986 Japanese gameplay to North America for the first time . The Lost Levels was released for Nintendo 's Wii Virtual Console digital platform in Japan on May 1 , 2007 , in Europe on September 14 ( as part of Nintendo 's Hanabi Festival ) , and in North America on October 1 . The 3DS version released July 25 , 2012 , and then simultaneously in North America , Australia , and the United Kingdom on December 27 . The Wii U Virtual Console release came to Japan on August 8 , 2013 , to Europe on January 23 , 2014 , and to North America on March 13 . The Lost Levels were also included in Nintendo classic game compilations including the 2014 NES Remix 2 ( Wii U ) and Ultimate NES Remix ( 3DS ) . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Famicom Tsūshin named The Lost Levels as their number one game in the first month after its release . Critics characterized the game as an " expansion pack " or " update " to the original . IGN 's Lucas M. Thomas wrote that , apart from Luigi , the game feels like extra challenge levels tacked onto the end of the original . He agreed with Nintendo of America 's choice to not release the game in the 1980s . 
 The Lost Levels is known for its intense difficulty . IGN 's Rus McLaughlin wrote that the original 's " smooth level designs were replaced by insanely tough obstacle courses " . IGN 's Marty Silva said the game was " made to actively punish players ... from the first poison mushroom " . IGN 's Thomas referred to the levels as " frustratingly " hard , and the player @-@ character friction as " cramped " and " crippled " with either character . He compared the game to the subculture built around creating their own modified and nearly impossible Mario levels , and said The Lost Levels felt like " a fan @-@ made hack " in comparison to other Mario games . Atari HQ wrote that the original would not have sold " half as much " had it included levels from this sequel . 
 Nintendo Life 's Robert Hughes recommended the game for those who mastered the original game , with level design that designed for frustration . He felt the sequel taught patience where the original was designed for recklessness . He remembered the game as the black sheep of the All @-@ Stars collection , but still found the game " fiendishly clever " and fun . Likewise , Eurogamer 's Dan Whitehead wrote that the game was " technically a much better game " than the Doki Doki @-@ based Super Mario Bros. 2 , and that " Mario purists " would prefer having the real challenge . Jason Schreier of Kotaku wrote in 2015 that speedruns of The Lost Levels were " remarkably fun " to spectate , due to their demanding precision . IGN 's Samuel Claiborn felt that the 2014 NES Remix 2 Wii U compilation for the Wii U made The Lost Levels ' challenges more enjoyable when put in a speedrunning context . 
 Luigi received his " first distinctive character traits " in The Lost Levels : less ground friction , and the ability to jump farther . The game 's poison mushroom power @-@ up features in later Mario franchise games , including Super Mario 3D Land . Mario & Luigi : Partners in Time , and the Super Smash Bros. and Mario Kart series , as well as in the Wii U version of Tekken Tag Tournament 2 . 
 The Lost Levels was the most popular game on the Disk System , for which it sold about 2 @.@ 5 million copies . In 2014 , IGN ranked the game among the bottom of its top 125 Nintendo games . 
 = No Chris Left Behind = 
 " No Chris Left Behind " is the 16th episode of the fifth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on May 6 , 2007 . The episode features Chris after he is expelled from James Woods High School for dragging down their test scores , and is forced to attend an upper @-@ class academy that does not take kindly to Chris 's economically middle @-@ class and socially lower @-@ class upbringing . In an effort to fit in , he decides to join the academy 's Skull and Bones society , but he quickly finds participation in its activities to be too demanding . 
 The episode was written by Patrick Meighan and directed by Pete Michels . It received praise from critics for its storyline and many cultural references , in addition to receiving an Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Animation . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 7 @.@ 95 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Gary Cole , Neil Patrick Harris , Phil LaMarr , Josh Radnor and Tara Strong , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Seeking to spend time with her family , Lois decides to take them out to the ballet Swan Lake , on a late school night . The next morning , Chris is seen studying at the breakfast table for an upcoming exam at school . After first being told not to study at the table by Lois , Brian notices that Chris 's history textbook is hopelessly out of date . Upset by this , Lois goes to a PTA meeting to complain about the textbook . Responding to her grievances , Principal Shepherd explains that the school cannot afford new textbooks due to the school 's loss of federal funding under the No Child Left Behind Act as a result of their low test scores . Forced to make a decision on how to improve the scores and the school 's overall performance , Principal Shepherd decides to expel the school 's " dumbest " student , who is revealed to be Chris Griffin . 
 While talking about Chris 's situation with Lois , Peter is suddenly confronted by the Giant Chicken . This is the third fight between the two . Their epic battle ranges from the Griffin house , through the sewers , onto a subway train , over the girders of a high @-@ rise construction site , and then up into a biplane , crashing into a giant Ferris wheel , which is dislodged from its platform and rolls through the streets . The fight continues atop the rolling wheel until it demolishes a ten @-@ story apartment building . Emerging from the wreckage , Peter and the Chicken realize that neither has any idea what they are fighting about . They apologize to each other , and the Chicken invites Peter to join him and his wife , Nicole , for dinner . At the restaurant , the three have just finished a lovely meal when the check arrives , and both Peter and the Chicken ( named Ernie ) insists on paying the tab . As they face off , the fight resumes and leads them into the restaurant kitchen . Peter subdues Ernie with a pot of boiling water and beats him unconscious . Peter staggers home , and back in the kitchen , Ernie lies lifeless on the floor , but in a sudden close @-@ up , Ernie 's left eye opens as dramatic music plays , foreshadowing another chicken fight . Peter goes home and resumes his conversation with Lois . 
 After several failed attempts to find another school for Chris , Lois asks her father , Carter Pewterschmidt , to utilize his superior influence to get Chris admitted to the upper @-@ class Morningwood Academy , which he agrees to on the condition that Peter humiliate himself by starring in a shot @-@ by @-@ shot remake of Liar Liar , and eventually succeeds in doing so . At his new school , Chris is shunned by the wealthy students at the academy , being both verbally and physically assaulted , including being hit with socks full of paper money . After hearing this , Lois again turns to her father to help Chris , by inviting him to become a member of the Skull and Bones society with the other students , who eventually come to accept him . 
 Meanwhile , the family have all begun to take extra jobs to pay for Chris 's tuition ; Peter sells butt <unk> at the ballpark , Lois and Meg begin working as prostitutes , and Stewie decides to follow overweight park @-@ goers , while playing the tuba , making them fall . As this is happening , Chris starts to feel uncomfortable with his membership at the Skull and Bones , especially after one of their activities involves teasing an orphan they had pretended to adopt . Feeling his family should not go through so much trouble to keep him satisfied , Chris asks Carter to help him get back into his old school . Carter complies with his request , and Chris moves back home , and returns to James Woods High School . At the end of the episode , Stewie plays the tuba for Chris , making him fall . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by series regular Patrick Meighan , in his second episode for the season , the first being " Road to Rupert " , and directed by former Rugrats and Rocko 's Modern Life director Pete Michels , also in his second episode for the season , the first being " Chick Cancer " , before the conclusion of the fifth production season . 
 Some scenes that have been changed between the TV version and the Cartoon Network / DVD version include : the scene in which the family finds out how bad Buddy Cianci Junior High is after Chris reveals that his history textbook is outdated ( on the TV version , the textbook was originally from 1948 and included a chapter on Israel becoming a new country . On the Cartoon Network / DVD version , the textbook is from 1896 and includes a chapter called , " Negroes : America 's Dancin 'est <unk> , " and Lois commenting in disgust about how no one uses the word " Negro " anymore ) and the cutaway scene of Chris firing Rocky from punching the meat hanging in the freezers of the butcher shop ( with Rocky pointing out that Pauly is having sex with one of the meat cuts ) . 
 In addition to the regular cast , actor Gary Cole , actor Neil Patrick Harris , voice actor Phil LaMarr , actor Josh Radnor and voice actress Tara Strong guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Ralph Garman , writer Mark Hentemann , writer Chris Sheridan , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin and writer John Viener also made minor appearances . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the opening scene of the episode , the Griffin family is seen watching a television show entitled How I Met Your Father , a parody of the CBS comedy @-@ sitcom How I Met Your Mother , which was created by Craig Thomas and Carter Bays , who were writers for MacFarlane 's sister show , American Dad ! . Actors Josh Radnor and Neil Patrick Harris make cameo appearances , voicing their characters , Ted Mosby and Barney Stinson , who end up kissing passionately by the end of the scene . 
 During Peter 's prolonged fight with the Giant Chicken , a scene involving an electric carving knife is taken from the James Bond film The Living Daylights . 
 A Wilhelm scream is heard during the chicken fight . 
 Stating his desire to become more powerful , Stewie references the Neighborhood of Make @-@ Believe from Mister Rogers ' Neighborhood , and is then shown portraying King Friday XIII . The cutaway features a live action hand puppet segment , in which Stewie is making a proclamation to his subjects , before the Trolley comes along . This is the third reference to the show since the second season episodes " Brian in Love " and " Running Mates " . 
 In an attempt to get Chris into Morningwood Academy , Peter is forced by Carter Pewterschmidt to appear in a remake of the 1997 comedy film Liar Liar . After Chris is accepted to Morningwood Academy , he is asleep in his bed for the night , and is suddenly attacked by a group of classmates , who stuff wads of dollar bills into their socks , and quickly begin beating him with the weapons . This scene is a parody of that of the infamous sequence shown in director Stanley Kubrick 's 1987 war film Full Metal Jacket , in which the Marine recruits take turns striking Private Pyle with bars of soap wrapped in towels as punishment for frequently getting them in trouble . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a slight decrease from the previous week 's show , the episode was viewed in 7 @.@ 95 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings , in the United States . The episode also acquired a 2 @.@ 8 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , slightly edging out The Simpsons , in addition to significantly winning over series creator Seth MacFarlane 's second show on Fox , American Dad ! , in both rating and total viewership . 
 Reviews of the episode by television critics were mostly positive , calling it " refreshing . " Ahsan Haque of IGN praised the episode 's extended chicken fight scene , going on to note , " Like every other encounter with the Giant Chicken , this was highly entertaining , incredibly creative and just the type of sequence the Family Guy needs more of . " In contrast , Brett Love of TV Squad found the chicken scene to be too long , stating , " there are only 22 minutes per episode [ ... ] Taking a quarter of that for the chicken fight is just ridiculous . " Love did enjoy the scenes involving Chris 's time at Morningwood Academy , however , going on to mention that he " would have liked to see a little more of Chris and Carter bonding over Skull and Bones adventures . " 
 " No Chris Left Behind " was nominated for , and won the Primetime Emmy for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Animation . The recipient of the award was episode storyboard artist Steven Fonti , who was awarded the distinction due to his work in storyboarding the episode 's chicken fight scene . In addition , Steven Fonti 's chicken fight sequence was also nominated for , and won , the Annie Award hosted by ASIFA @-@ Hollywood at the 35th annual award ceremony for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Storyboarding in an Animated Television Production . 
 = Pleasure Beach Bridge = 
 The Pleasure Beach Bridge is a movable Warren through @-@ truss bridge in Bridgeport , Connecticut . Completed in 1927 , it functioned as a toll bridge until the Great Depression , when it was transferred to the city of Bridgeport . Its service life came to an end after it was badly damaged by fire in 1996 , cutting off access to Pleasure Beach . In the decade following the fire , several bonds to fund a new bridge were proposed , but ultimately fell through . Pleasure Beach has become the subject of debate , whether it will become an undisturbed protected salt match or be revitalized . An alternate method of access via water taxi service , first made possible by a grant in 2009 , was not realized until 2013 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Pleasure Beach Bridge is a riveted Warren through @-@ truss , consisting of longitudinal members joined only by angled cross @-@ members , forming alternately inverted equilateral triangle @-@ shaped spaces along the length . The bridge is supported by timber pilings . The swing span is made of two separate Warren through @-@ trusses that pivots on concrete pier . The operator 's house is located on the mainland approach . The bridge spans a length of 105 ft ( 32 m ) , by 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) wide , and was rated with an eight @-@ ton limit . Its wooden construction resulted in the timbers creaking and shifting under the weight of passing cars . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to the bridge 's construction , Pleasure Island was accessible only by ferry . In 1907 , the Pleasure Beach Ferry Company was given the rights to build a movable toll bridge . A series of trestles were built across the tidal flats with a swing span across the dredged channel . The swing span was constructed in 1927 , but in the Great Depression the Beach Ferry Company transferred control of the bridge to the city of Bridgeport . The tolls were removed and the bridge continued to be used after Pleasure Beach 's closing in 1968 , until the 1996 fire . Repairs were made to the bridge in 1988 with money from the state . In 1994 , the need to replace the bridge resulted in a state and federal promise of $ 20 million , but this was rejected by the Connecticut Department of Transportation in 1995 . 
 The bridge caught fire on June 16 , 1996 , when a cigarette butt or match ignited the wooden structure . The fire began around 2 : 20 p.m. and burned for over three hours . The bridge was raised to an open position ; but the fire badly charred a 200 ft ( 61 m ) section of the bridge . The bridge and Pleasure Beach was then closed . Estimates of the cost of constructing a new bridge or causeway varies between $ 9 million to $ 26 million . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The reconstruction of the bridge has been a perennial subject . George Gunther , strong advocate for a new Pleasure Beach Bridge , petitioned for the eight consecutive years to replace the bridge . In 2005 , the bridge was slated to have $ 13 @.@ 5 million bond grant by the State of Connecticut that was termed " legislative pork " . In 2007 , a bond for $ 4 million to build a retractable pedestrian bridge was highlighted , but not constructed . 
 The damage and closure of the bridge resulted in concerns over Pleasure Beach 's fate . The Connecticut Audubon Society seeks to create Connecticut 's largest , undisturbed protected salt match . The area has been designated an " Important Bird Area " and the purchase of surrounding land is underway . A local firm , Stantec , has been retained for a study for revitalizing Pleasure Beach ; the accessibility to Pleasure Beach is a key issue . In 2009 , the city of Bridgeport received a $ 1 @.@ 9 million grant for a water taxi service that was delayed repeatedly into 2013 . 
 = Zoo Station ( song ) = 
 " Zoo Station " is a song by the rock band U2 . It is the opening track from their 1991 album Achtung Baby , a record on which the group reinvented themselves musically by incorporating influences from alternative rock , industrial , and electronic dance music . As the album 's opening track , " Zoo Station " introduces the band 's new sound , delivering industrial @-@ influenced percussion and several layers of distorted guitars and vocals . Similarly , the lyrics suggest the group 's new intents and anticipations . The introduction , featuring an " explosion " of percussion and a descending glissando for a guitar hook , was meant to make the listener think the album was mistakenly not U2 's latest record or that their music player was broken . 
 The song 's lyrics were inspired by a surrealistic story about Berlin from World War II that lead vocalist Bono heard , when overnight bombing damaged the zoo and allowed animals to escape and wander around the city 's rubble . Bono was also inspired by the city 's Berlin Zoologischer Garten railway station and used it as a metaphor for a reuniting Germany . " Zoo Station " was performed as the opening song at every concert on U2 's Zoo TV Tour . The song received positive reviews from critics , many of whom analysed the song as a representation of the band 's reinvention . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 Following difficult recording sessions at Hansa Studios in Berlin in late 1990 , U2 undertook the second phase of the recording sessions for Achtung Baby in Dublin . They struggled with the song " Lady With the Spinning Head " ( later released as a B @-@ side ) , but three separate tracks , " Zoo Station " , " Ultraviolet ( Light My Way ) " and " The Fly " , were derived from it . The band ultimately decided to take " Zoo Station " in a more industrial direction than " Lady With the Spinning Head " . 
 " Zoo Station " came together near the end of the recording sessions when audio engineer Flood was mixing the song and introduced distortion to the drums . The song 's direction was largely influenced by the production team of Daniel Lanois , Brian Eno , and Flood . Lead vocalist Bono had been disappointed with his vocals from early recording sessions for the album and told the production team , " Let 's just try something that 's gonna put me in a completely different place " . After they distorted his voice to make it sound as if it were coming from a megaphone , Bono was inspired to sing in a persona , as the effect gave his vocals a different " emotional feel " . Flood mixed the final track with the assistance of Shannon Strong . Along with Robbie Adams , Strong also assisted Flood with engineering . Lanois provided additional guitar during recording . 
 With Achtung Baby , the group sought to recover some of the Dadaist characters and stage antics they had dabbled with in the late 1970s as teenagers . U2 had abandoned these ideas for more literal themes in the 1980s . However , for the new album , the band was interested in no longer making obvious sense . Accordingly , the lyrics for " Zoo Station " were inspired by the surrealism of a story about Berlin during World War II that Bono heard . Animals escaped the city 's zoo after it was damaged in overnight bombing , and as a result , rhinoceroses , pelicans and flamingoes wandered around the next morning while people were sifting through the rubble . Bono was also inspired by Berlin Zoologischer Garten railway station , also known as " Zoo station " , previously the main railway station in West Berlin . The station was notorious as a haunt for drug dealers , prostitutes and pimps , pick @-@ pockets and transients , particularly prior to German reunification , when it was run by the East German railway . He compared the song to the station , saying " it was written as an opening track , the beasts breaking out of their cages " , and was interested in using the zoo as a metaphor and he took further inspiration from the subway station representing Europe at a crossroads . 
 During recording , Eno created several prototype mixes of the song . The Edge recalled how these different mixes assisted the band in creating the final version of the track . One of these early versions was later released under the title " Bottoms ( <unk> No <unk> Yume ) " as a bonus track on the UK and Japanese promotional releases of the experimental 1995 album Original Soundtracks 1 by Passengers , a side project by U2 and Eno , as well as a B @-@ side on some versions of the " Miss Sarajevo " single . " Bottoms ( <unk> No <unk> Yume ) " is an instrumental track and was described by The Edge as a " crazy " mix . He added " ' Bottoms ' was done in Japan , and we just built on that mix . Sometimes you can end up with something completely distinctive . " 
 Although " Zoo Station " was not released as a single , it was included on a 12 @-@ inch promotional recording to promote U2 's Zoo TV Tour in North America , along with studio and remix versions of " Lady with the Spinning Head " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 As the first track on an album that was a major reinvention for the band , " Zoo Station " was an introduction to U2 's new sound . The song features layers of distorted guitar and vocals , and industrial @-@ influenced percussion . Irish rock journalist Bill Graham cites David Bowie 's album , Low , as a major influence on " Zoo Station " , which he called a " new brand of glam rock " with " Spartan rhythms and sudden flurries of melody " . 
 The song is played at a tempo of 130 beats per minute in a 4 / 4 time signature , but only one element of the song 's introduction , a marimba @-@ like texture , is played in common time . This sound , which has been compared to that of a clock ticking , was achieved by picking the guitar 's D string behind the bridge and the <unk> . On the second half of the third beat , the song 's signature guitar riff , a distorted descending glissando , enters . The glissando descends past the octave it begins in by a major second before returning to it . After the second time it is played , an " explosion " of percussion is heard , playing on beat four of every second measure on two occasions . This percussion sound , played by Flood , enters early the third time , being played on beat two . The drums then enter , before stopping and starting again . Much like the song 's guitar sounds , the drums ' timbre is noticeably different from previous U2 songs as it exhibits a " cold , processed sound , something like beating on a tin can " . Amidst layers of various guitar sounds , the bass enters , the part played in the introduction and verses consisting of repeating G and A notes , mimicking the ascending portion of the guitar riff after the glissando overshoots the octave . After the bass begins , the song 's regular groove is established . At 0 : 45 , the chord progression changes . Fifteen seconds later , the song returns to the previous chord progression and the introduction ends . 
 Guitarist The Edge explained that some of the sounds in the introduction that resemble keyboards were actually created by him on guitar . Of the song 's introduction , bassist Adam Clayton says , " When people put on the record , we wanted their first reaction to be either ' this record is broken ' or ' this can 't be the new U2 record , there 's been a mistake . ' So there is quite a dramatic extended intro where you just don 't know what you are listening to . " Author Albin Zak , in his book The Poetics of Rock , says of the introduction , " Before any words are sung , the sounds alone alert the listener that the band has moved into new expressive territory . " 
 After the introduction , the song follows a conventional verse @-@ chorus form . The first verse begins one minute into the song , with Bono announcing , " I 'm ready , I 'm ready for the laughing gas " . During the verses , he sings primarily in a medium @-@ to @-@ low range and his vocals are treated with heavy processing , which takes out the bottom of the sound and " emasculate [ s ] " his voice . The processing also introduces a wavering quality to his vocals . The guitar glissando continues to be played during the verses . The first chorus begins at 1 : 44 , and the music mirrors the change in chord progression from the introduction 's last 15 seconds . During the chorus , the bassline becomes more dynamic , playing descending quarter notes of G – F ♯ – D – C – D – C – A – G – A , before resuming the previous G and A pattern . Bono 's vocals also become more dynamic in the chorus , featuring layers of both " open @-@ throated " singing and monotone lyric recitation , as well as both processed and unprocessed vocals . 
 Along with introducing the band 's new sound , the song opens the album as a statement of intent . Lyrically , new anticipations and appetites are suggested ( " I 'm ready for what 's next " ) , as is a willingness to throw caution to the wind and take risks ( " I 'm ready to let go of the steering wheel " ) . Some of the lyrics , particularly those in the bridge before the final chorus , use the eponymous subway station as a metaphor for time : " Time is a train / Makes the future the past / Leaves you standing in the station / Your face pressed up against the glass " . Bono cites the enjoyment of his first child born in 1989 as a major influence on Achtung Baby , as was his wife 's second pregnancy during the album 's 1991 recording . Bono says babies influenced the lines from the first verse , " I 'm ready to say I 'm glad to be alive / I 'm ready , I 'm ready for the push " . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Upon the release of Achtung Baby , " Zoo Station " was praised by many critics . Steve Morse of The Boston Globe said the song was one on which " sonic assaults are teamed with dreamily processed vocals that recall Beatles psychedelia " . The Orlando Sentinel called it " blistering " and praised the low mixing of Bono 's vocals , which allowed The Edge 's " new versatility " on guitar to draw more attention . BBC Music enjoyed " The Edge 's guitar squall and electronics " creating a " dense sound [ that ] is irresistible " , noting that " Zoo Station " was one track where the strategy " creates moods rather than hummable tunes " . Jon Pareles of The New York Times stated that the song " announces a change , starting with a metallic clank , a buzzing guitar slide and a repeated electronic crunch — nothing ethereal " . He also noted that Bono 's voice was " electronically masked and the band 's old style traded for a pushy bassline and a percussive stomp , although U2 can 't resist some sweeter interludes " . 
 Rolling Stone was complimentary of The Edge , comparing his style of guitar playing on the song to using a rhythm instrument by " repeating a dark , buzzing phrase that drives the beat " . Allmusic reviewed the track favourably , saying " there are layers to Bono 's lyrics " and that by the end of the track , the song and the band are " soaring " . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune likened the song 's introduction to " trying to out @-@ demolish Ministry " with " grating metal @-@ on @-@ metal percussion and a belching guitar " . He commented that the " rude awakening " that the song provides on the album as the opening track could only compare with the " fingernails @-@ on @-@ chalkboard guitar <unk> " of Neil Young 's " Hey Hey , My My ( Into the Black ) " from Rust Never Sleeps . The song subsequently appeared as one of seven U2 songs in the 2006 music reference book 1001 Songs : The Great Songs of All Time and the Artists , Stories , and Secrets . 
 " Zoo Station " is featured in the 2002 British comedy @-@ drama film About a Boy . In one scene , the main character , Will ( Hugh Grant ) , turns up the volume of the song as a " childless effort " to ignore Marcus ( Nicholas Hoult ) , a boy ringing Will 's doorbell , prompting Marcus to ring it in unison with the beat of the song . 
 The song was covered by American industrial rock band Nine Inch Nails on the 2011 cover album AHK @-@ toong BAY @-@ bi Covered . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Zoo Station " made its live debut on the opening night of the Zoo TV Tour on 29 February 1992 in Lakeland , Florida , and was performed as the opening song at each of the 156 Zoo TV concerts . During performances of " Zoo Station " , Bono appeared on @-@ stage silhouetted against a giant screen of blue and white video noise , making his entrance as his leather @-@ clad stage persona " The Fly " , often goose @-@ stepping his way onto the stage . The Edge described the visual imagery displayed for the song in the context of Zoo TV 's " sensory overload " that was intended as a commentary on mass media : " ' Zoo Station ' is four minutes of a television that 's not tuned in to any station , but giving you interference and ' <unk> ' and almost a TV picture . " 
 " Zoo Station " was not played during the subsequent PopMart and Elevation Tours , but it returned to the group 's setlists on the Vertigo Tour . The song was most often performed during the first encore , along with other Achtung Baby / Zoo TV @-@ era songs , as part of a mini @-@ Zoo TV set paying homage to the band 's 1990s era . It made its last appearance in November 2006 and was not played live again until the September 24 , 2015 concert on the Innocence + Experience Tour . 
 Live performances of the song appear on the video releases Zoo TV : Live from Sydney and Vertigo 2005 : Live from Chicago . A live version of " Zoo Station " from the Vertigo Tour also appears as a B @-@ side on the maxi single for " Window in the Skies " . 
 = Lost Luggage ( video game ) = 
 Lost Luggage is an action video game developed and released in 1982 for the Atari 2600 by Texas @-@ based studio Games by Apollo . The player controls <unk> working at an airport and tries to collect pieces of luggage that fall overhead from a frantic luggage carousel . A two @-@ player mode , in which the second player controls the direction the luggage falls , is also available . 
 Programmer Ed Salvo was inspired to make Lost Luggage when he was waiting for his luggage at the Dallas / Fort Worth International Airport , and the game took around four weeks to produce . Reviewers criticized the game 's similarity to Activision 's Kaboom ! — which itself is based on Avalanche — believing Lost Luggage to be an inferior clone . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Lost Luggage is an action game in which the player controls <unk> porters who are attempting to collect falling luggage from a wildly unpredictable baggage carousel . The objective is to collect all the suitcases that fall from the carousel before they hit the ground . The player starts with three suitcases , which act as lives , and whenever a suitcase hits the floor , the player loses one . If all of the player 's suitcases are lost , the game ends . 
 There are two difficulty levels , and depending on the difficulty selected , players can control one <unk> or two at once . There is also a two @-@ player competitive mode where the second player controls the direction of the flying baggage . Another mode , featuring " terrorist suitcases " , is available ; enabling this mode will cause black suitcases to appear mixed with the regular baggage . These black suitcases will cause the game to instantly end if they touch the floor , regardless of the player 's current number of collected suitcases . 
 = = Development = = 
 Lost Luggage was developed by Games by Apollo , a video game studio based in Richardson , Texas , which targeted the game at people who traveled regularly , believing that they would like its content . At the time of Lost Luggage 's development , the company employed five people . The game was conceived by programmer Ed Salvo . He had been at the Dallas / Fort Worth International Airport after a meeting with Apollo founder Pat Roper and was waiting at the carousel for his luggage to arrive . Later , Salvo discussed the concept of the game with Roper , and they came up with the idea to have the carousel " spewing <unk> . " 
 Afterwards , Salvo presented artist Ernie Runyon with a rough sketch of his ideas for the game . The crew of Apollo brainstormed titles for half an hour before deciding on Lost Luggage ; Runyon later remembered one of the proposed titles was " Airport Mayhem " . Runyon programmed the game with help from Salvo . He has stated he would have liked to include a luggage train , but there was not enough room in the 4 @-@ kilobyte cartridge . Salvo had difficulties with collision detection and synchronizing the character movements with the joystick , which took one week to fix . Due to a hardware issue , a graphical bug would also occur whenever a suitcase was captured , which was solved by compiling the game on another computer . 
 The sound effects and music for Lost Luggage were created by Larry Minor . According to Runyon , the game was the first to integrate music on the 2600 as opposed to only sound effects . Salvo estimated that Lost Luggage took a total of four weeks to complete . A four @-@ minute advertising jingle was made by Byron Parks for the game . Apollo founder Pat Roper was " fishing for ad material " , and Parks belonged to a sound studio which Roper also owned . The jingle was never used , and in a 2013 interview Runyon recalled that he did not " know or remember where it was intended for use . " 
 Following the release of Lost Luggage , Runyon departed Games by Apollo , making it the only game he worked on at the studio . Salvo eventually left as well . The studio filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy on November 12 , 1982 , due to pressure from its advertising agency Benton & Bowles , to which Apollo owed $ 2 @.@ 5 million ( out of a $ 5 million total debt ) . Although Roper expected the company to return in a " smaller form " , Apollo closed in 1983 after reorganization attempts failed . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Games by Apollo released Lost Luggage in September 1982 . Two versions were released , differentiated by the color of the label . Cartridges with blue labels feature an opening sequence in which the character takes out the three starting suitcases . In the green @-@ labeled version , the game may be restarted by pressing the fire button , which does nothing in the blue @-@ labeled version . Neither Salvo nor Runyon were aware of the existence of this version . Runyon speculated that Salvo may have found more space after tweaking the game and added the features , while Salvo did not " remember doing any of this and I can 't conceive of anyone at Apollo messing with the game after it went to production . " 
 Lost Luggage received mixed reviews upon release . Bill Kunkel and Arnie Katz wrote in a 1982 issue of the magazine Electronic Games that Lost Luggage did not have " the spark of greatness " . While they praised the game for shifting away from " the typical SF shoot @-@ out " and said that it was " solid " and " playable " , they remarked on its plain @-@ looking graphics and said that " even the greatest concept cannot make a great game when it isn 't blended with an outstanding type of play action . " Writing for Video , Kunkel and Katz commented on the game 's " incredibly cute touches " , but suggested that Apollo may have better " <unk> [ ed ] on the frills " in favor of additional gameplay challenges . A reviewer for the magazine TV Gamer recommended the game for children , but felt that seasoned video game players would enjoy Kaboom ! more . More positive opinions were from Videogaming Illustrated , which described the game as the most charming of Apollo 's releases , and Texas Monthly , which described it as a " fiendish little amusement . " 
 Modern reviews have been largely critical – Brett Alan Weiss , writing for AllGame , considered the game to be a " slower , less intense , less enjoyable " version of Kaboom ! . He criticized the lack of support for the paddle controller , and stated that not even the two @-@ player and terrorist modes made the game enjoyable . In his book Classic Home Video Games , Weiss wrote that Lost Luggage was a " fleeting pleasure " , opining that " the airplanes flying overhead look nice , but the rest of the game is ordinary in appearance " and that the difficulty curve and action were poor . Writing for Atari HQ , Keita Iida commented that " there are good Kaboom ! clones ( <unk> ) and then there are bad ones ( this one ) . " Iida believed that if the game was not as similar to Kaboom ! then it would be " mildly amusing " , but that the better alternatives hampered it . 
 = Mount Adams ( Washington ) = 
 Mount Adams , known by some Native American tribes as Pahto or Klickitat , is a potentially active stratovolcano in the Cascade Range . It is the second @-@ highest mountain in the U.S. state of Washington , after Mount Rainier . Adams is a member of the Cascade Volcanic Arc , and is one of the arc 's largest volcanoes , located in a remote wilderness approximately 34 miles ( 55 km ) east of Mount St. Helens . The Mount Adams Wilderness comprises the upper and western part of the volcano 's cone . The eastern side of the mountain is part of the Yakama Nation . 
 Adams ' asymmetrical and broad body rises 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) above the Cascade crest . Its nearly flat summit was formed as a result of cone @-@ building eruptions from separated vents . Air travelers flying the busy routes above the area sometimes confuse Mount Adams with nearby Mount Rainier , which has a similar flat @-@ topped shape . 
 The Pacific Crest Trail traverses the western flank of the mountain . Although Adams has not erupted in over 1 @,@ 000 years , it is not considered extinct . 
 = = Geographic Setting and Description = = 
 = = = General = = = 
 Mount Adams stands 37 miles ( 60 km ) east of Mount St. Helens and about 50 miles ( 80 km ) south of Mount Rainier . It is 30 miles ( 48 km ) north of the Columbia River and 55 miles ( 89 km ) north of Mount Hood in Oregon . The nearest major cities are Yakima , 50 miles ( 80 km ) to the northeast , and the Portland metropolitan area , 60 miles ( 97 km ) to the southwest . Between half and two thirds of Adams is within the Mount Adams Wilderness of the Gifford Pinchot National Forest . The remaining area is within the Mount Adams Recreation Area of the Yakama Indian Reservation . While many of the volcanic peaks in Oregon stand astride the Cascade Crest , Adams is the only active volcano in Washington to do so and is further east than all the rest of Washington ’ s volcanoes except Glacier Peak . 
 Adams is one of the long lived volcanoes in the Cascade Range with minor activity beginning 900 @,@ 000 years ago and major cone building activity beginning 520 @,@ 000 years ago . The whole mountain has been completely eroded by glaciers to an elevation of 8 @,@ 200 feet ( 2 @,@ 500 m ) twice during its lifetime and the current cone was built during the most recent major eruptive period 40 @,@ 000 @-@ 10 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 Standing at 12 @,@ 281 feet ( 3 @,@ 743 m ) , Adams towers about 9 @,@ 800 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) over the surrounding countryside . It is the second highest mountain in Washington and third in the Cascade Range . And because of the way it was built , it is the largest volcano in Washington and second in the Cascades , behind only Mount Shasta . Its large size is further reflected in its 18 miles ( 29 km ) diameter base that has a prominent north @-@ south trending axis . 
 Adams is the headwaters for two major rivers , the Lewis River and White Salmon River . The many streams that emanate from the glaciers and from springs at its base flow into two more major river systems , the Cispus River and the Klickitat River . The streams on the north and west portions of Adams feed the Cispus River , which joins the Cowlitz River near Riffe Lake , and the Lewis River . Trending southward , the White Salmon River has its source on the lower flanks of the west side of Adams and gains additional input from more streams along the southwest side of the mountain . Streams on the east side all flow to the Klickitat River . Streams on all sides , at some point in their courses , provide essential irrigation water for farming and ranching . Two rivers , the Klickitat and White Salmon , are nearly completely free flowing with only small barriers for irrigation ( White Salmon ) and flow control ( Klickitat ) . The other two , the Cispus and Lewis Rivers , have been impounded further downstream for flood control and power generation purposes . 
 Mount Adams is the second most isolated , in terms of access , stratovolcano in Washington ; Glacier Peak is the most isolated . There are only two major highways that pass close to it . Highway 12 passes about 25 miles to the north of Adams as it crosses the Cascades . Highway 141 comes within 13 miles of Adams as it follows the White Salmon River valley up from the Columbia River to the small town of Trout Lake . From either highway , one has to take generally decent Forest Service roads to get closer to the mountain . The main access roads , FR 23 , FR 82 , FR 80 , and FR 21 , are paved for part of their length . Most all other roads are gravel or dirt with varying degrees of maintenance . Access to the Mount Adams Recreation Area is by way of FR 82 , which becomes BIA 285 at the reservation boundary . BIA 285 is known to be extremely rough and often only suitable for trucks or high clearance vehicles . Two small towns , Glenwood and Trout Lake , sit in valleys less than 15 miles from the summit , Glenwood on the southeast quarter and Trout Lake on the southwest quarter . 
 Its size , distance from major cities , and its tendency to be forgotten or ignored by people less familiar with the Pacific Northwest , has led some people to call Mount Adams “ The Forgotten Giant of Washington . ” 
 On a clear day from the summit , other visible volcanoes in the Cascade Range include Mount Rainier , Mount Baker , and Glacier Peak to the north , Mount Hood , Mount Jefferson , the Three Sisters , Mount Thielsen , Mount Scott , Diamond Peak , and Mount McLoughlin to the south in Oregon , and Mount Saint Helens to the west . 
 = = = Summit area = = = 
 Contrary to legend , the flatness of Adams ' current summit area is not due to the loss of the volcano 's peak . Instead it was formed as a result of cone @-@ building eruptions from separated vents . A false summit , <unk> Peak , rises 11 @,@ 657 feet ( 3 @,@ 553 m ) on the south side of the nearly half @-@ mile ( 800 m ) wide summit area . The true summit is about 600 feet ( 180 m ) higher on the gently sloping north side . A small lava and scoria cone marks the highest point . Suksdorf Ridge is a long buttress trending from the false summit down to an elevation of 8 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 000 m ) . This structure was built by repeated lava flows in the late Pleistocene . The Pinnacle forms the northwest false summit and was created by erosion from the Adams and White Salmon glaciers . On the east side , The Castle is a low prominence that sits at the top of Battlement Ridge . The summit crater is filled with snow and is open on its west rim . 
 = = = Flank terrain features = = = 
 Prominent ridges descend from the mountain on all sides . On the north side , the aptly named North Cleaver comes down from a point below the summit ice cap heading almost due north . The Northwest Ridge and West Ridge descend from the Pinnacle northwest and west respectively . Stagman Ridge descends west southwest from a point about halfway up the west side and turns more southwest at about 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 830 m ) . South of Stagman Ridge lies Crofton Ridge . Crofton gradually becomes very broad as it descends southwesterly from the tree line . MacDonald Ridge , on the south side , starts at about tree line below the lower end of Suksdorf Ridge and descends in a southerly direction . Three prominent ridges descend from the east side of the mountain . The Ridge of Wonders is furthest south and ends at an area away from the mountain called The Island . Battlement Ridge is very rugged and descends from high on the mountain . The furthest ridge north on the east side , Victory Ridge , descends from a lower elevation on the mountain than Battlement Ridge beneath the precipitous Roosevelt Cliff . Lava Ridge , starting at about the same location as the North Cleaver , descends slightly east of north . 
 Several rock prominences exist on the lower flanks of Adams . The Spearhead is an abrupt rocky prominence near the bottom of Battlement Ridge . Burnt Rock , The Hump , and The Bumper are three smaller rocky prominences at or below the tree line on the west side . 
 = = = Glaciers = = = 
 Glaciers cover a total of 2 @.@ 5 % of Adams ' surface , but during the last ice age about 90 % of the mountain was glaciated . Mount Adams has 209 perennial snow and ice features and 12 officially named glaciers . The total ice @-@ covered area makes up 9 @.@ 3 square miles ( 24 km2 ) , while the area of actual named glaciers is 7 @.@ 7 sq mi ( 20 km2 ) . Most of the largest remaining glaciers ( including the Adams , Klickitat , Lyman , and White Salmon ) originate from Adams ' summit ice cap . 
 On the northwest face of the mountain , Adams Glacier cascades down a steep channel in a series of icefalls before spreading out and terminating at around the 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 130 m ) elevation , where it becomes the source of the Lewis River and Adams Creek , a tributary of the Cispus River . Its eastern lobe ends at a small glacial tarn , Equestria Lake . In the Cascades , Adams Glacier is second in size only to Carbon Glacier on Mount Rainier . 
 The Pinnacle , White Salmon , and Avalanche glaciers on the west side of the mountain are less thick and voluminous , and are generally patchy in appearance . They all originate from glacial cirques below the actual summit . Although the White Salmon Glacier does not originate from the summit ice cap , it does begin very high on the mountain at about 11 @,@ 600 feet ( 3 @,@ 540 m ) . In the early 1900s , a portion of it descended from the summit ice cap , but volume loss has separated it . Some of its glacial ice feeds the Avalanche Glacier below it to the southwest while the rest tumbles over some large cliffs to its diminutive lower section to the west . The White Salmon and Avalanche Glaciers feed the many streams of the Salt Creek and Cascade Creek drainages , which flow into the White Salmon River . The Pinnacle Glacier is the source of a fork of the Lewis River as well as Riley Creek , which is also a tributary of the Lewis River . 
 The south side of the mountain along Suksdorf Ridge is moderately glacier @-@ free , with the only glaciers being the relatively small Gotchen Glacier and the Crescent Glacier . The south side , however , does have some perennial snowfields on its slopes . The Crescent Glacier is the source of Morrison Creek ; and , although it does not feed it directly , the Gotchen Glacier is the source of Gotchen Creek . Both creeks drain to the White Salmon River . 
 The rugged east side has four glaciers , the Mazama Glacier , Klickitat Glacier , Rusk Glacier , and the Wilson Glacier . During the last Ice Age , they carved out two immense canyons : the Hellroaring Canyon and the Avalanche Valley . This created the Ridge of Wonders between the two . Of the four glaciers on the east side , the Mazama Glacier is the furthest south and begins between the Suksdorf Ridge and Ridge of Wonders at about 10 @,@ 500 feet ( 3 @,@ 200 m ) . Near its terminus , it straddles the Ridge of Wonders and a small portion feeds into the Klickitat Glacier . The glacier gains more area from additional glacier ice that collects from drifting snow and avalanches below the Suksdorf Ridge as the ridge turns south . The Mazama Glacier terminates at about 8 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 440 m ) and is the source of Hellroaring Creek , which flows over several waterfalls before it joins Big Muddy Creek . Klickitat Glacier on the volcano 's eastern flank originates in a 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) wide cirque and is fed by two smaller glaciers from the summit ice cap . It terminates around 6 @,@ 600 feet ( 2 @,@ 010 m ) , where it becomes the source of Big Muddy Creek , a tributary of the Klickitat River . The Rusk Glacier does not start from the summit ice cap , but starts at 10 @,@ 500 feet ( 3 @,@ 200 m ) below the Roosevelt Cliff and is fed by avalanching snow and ice from the summit cap . It is enclosed on the south by Battlement Ridge and Victory Ridge on the north and terminates at about 7 @,@ 100 feet ( 2 @,@ 160 m ) . It is the source of Rusk Creek , which flows over two waterfalls before joining the Big Muddy on its way to the Klickitat . The Wilson Glacier , like the Rusk Glacier , starts below the Roosevelt Cliff and is fed by avalanching snow and ice ; however , the Wilson Glacier starts slightly higher at about 10 @,@ 800 feet ( 3 @,@ 290 m ) . It is also fed by an arm of the Lyman Glacier as it flows down from the summit ice cap . The Wilson Glacier terminates at 7 @,@ 500 feet ( 2 @,@ 290 m ) where it is the source of Little Muddy Creek , another tributary of the Klickitat . 
 The north side is distinguished by two major glaciers , the Lyman and Lava Glaciers . Like the Adams Glacier , the Lyman Glacier is characterized by deep crevasses and many icefalls as it cascades down from the summit ice cap . It is divided into two arms by a very rugged ridge at 10 @,@ 200 feet ( 3 @,@ 110 m ) and terminates at 7 @,@ 400 feet ( 2 @,@ 260 m ) . The Lava Glacier originates in a large cirque below the summit at about 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 050 m ) , sandwiched between the North Cleaver on the west and the Lava Ridge to the east . It terminates at about 7 @,@ 600 feet ( 2 @,@ 320 m ) . The Lava and Lyman Glaciers are the source of the Muddy Fork of the Cispus River . 
 The total glacier area on Mount Adams decreased 49 % , from 12 @.@ 2 square miles ( 31 @.@ 5 km2 ) to 6 @.@ 3 square miles ( 16 @.@ 2 km2 ) , between 1904 and 2006 , with the greatest loss occurring before 1949 . Since 1949 , the total glacier area has been relatively stable with a small amount of decline since the 1990s . 
 = = = Surrounding area = = = 
 Mount Adams is surrounded by a variety of other volcanic features and volcanoes . It stands near the center of a north @-@ south trending volcanic field that is about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) wide and 30 miles ( 48 km ) long , from just south of the Goat Rocks to Guler Mountain , the vent furthest south in the field . This field includes over 120 vents ; about 25 of these are considered flank volcanoes of Mount Adams . The largest flank volcano is a basaltic shield volcano on Adams east base called Goat Butte . This structure is at least 150 @,@ 000 years old . Little Mount Adams is a symmetrical cinder cone on top of the Ridge of Wonders on Adams ' southeast flank . 
 Potato Hill is a cinder cone on Adams ' north side that was created in the late Pleistocene and stands 800 feet ( 240 m ) above its lava plain . Lavas from its base flowed into the Cispus Valley where they were later modified by glaciers . At the 7 @,@ 500 feet ( 2 @,@ 290 m ) level on Adams ' south flank is South Butte . The lavas associated with this structure are all younger than Suksdorf Ridge but were emplaced before the end of the last ice age . 
 Several relatively young obvious lava flows exist in the area around Adams . Most of these flows are on the north side of the mountain and include the flow in the Mutton Creek area , Devils Garden , the Takh Takh Meadows Flow , and the much larger Muddy Fork Lava Flow to the north of Devils Garden . Only one obvious flow appears on the south slopes of Adams , the A. G. Aiken Lava Bed . Other smaller flows exist in various locations around the mountain as well . 
 The many other vents and volcanoes encompassed by the Mount Adams field include <unk> Butte and Red Butte on the north , King Mountain , Meadow Butte , Quigley Butte , and Smith Butte on the south , with others interspersed throughout . 
 Located a few miles north of Adams is Goat Rocks Wilderness and the heavily eroded ruins of a stratovolcano that is much older than Adams . Unlike Adams , the Goat Rocks volcano was periodically explosive and deposited ash 2 @.@ 5 million years ago that later solidified into 2 @,@ 100 @-@ foot ( 640 m ) thick tuff layers . 
 In the area surrounding Mount Adams , many underground caves have formed around inactive lava vents . These caves are usually close to the surface and can be hundreds of feet deep and wide . A few of the more well known caves include the Cheese Cave , Ice Cave , and <unk> Caves . Cheese Cave has the largest bore of the caves near Adams with a diameter of 40 – 50 feet ( 12 – 15 m ) and a length of over 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) . Ice cave , which is made up of several sections created by several sinkholes , has an ice section that is 120 feet ( 37 m ) long and 20 – 30 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 – 9 @.@ 1 m ) in diameter and noted for its beautiful ice formations . From the same entrance , the tube continues another 500 feet ( 150 m ) to the west . <unk> Cave is a massive network of lava tubes . It the most complex lava tube cave in the United States with 14 @,@ 441 feet ( 4 @,@ 402 m ) of passage . These caves are all just outside of Trout Lake . These and many other caves in the Trout Lake area were at one time part of a huge system that originated at the Indian Heaven volcanic field . The most obscure caves around Adams are the <unk> on the southeast side near Island Cabin Campground . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Adams is made of several overlapping cones that together form an 18 @-@ mile ( 29 km ) diameter base which is elongated in its north @-@ south axis and covers an area of 250 square miles ( 650 km2 ) . The volcano has a volume of 85 cubic miles ( 350 km3 ) placing it second only to Mount Shasta in that category among the Cascade stratovolcanoes . Mount Adams was created by the subduction of the Juan de Fuca plate , which is located just off the coast of the Pacific Northwest . 
 Mount Adams was born in the mid to late Pleistocene and grew in several pulses of mostly lava @-@ extruding eruptions . Each eruptive cycle was separated from one another by long periods of dormancy and minor activity , during which , glaciers eroded the mountain to below 9 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) . Potassium @-@ argon dating has identified three such eruptive periods ; the first occurring 520 @,@ 000 to 500 @,@ 000 years ago , the second 450 @,@ 000 years ago , and the third 40 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 years ago . Most of these eruptions and therefore most of the volcano , consist of lava flows with little tephra . The loose material that makes up much of Adams ' core is made of brecciated lava . 
 Andesite and basalt flows formed a 20 @-@ to @-@ 200 @-@ foot ( 6 to 60 m ) thick circle around the base of the Mount Adams , and filled existing depressions and ponded in valleys . Most of the volcano is made of andesite together with handful of dacite and pyroclastic flows which erupted early in Adams ' development . The present main cone was built when Adams was capped by a glacier system in the last ice age . The lava that erupted was shattered when it came in contact with the ice and the cone interior is therefore made of easily eroded andesite fragments . Since its construction , constant emissions of heat and caustic gases have transformed much of the rock into clays ( mostly kaolinite ) , iron oxides , sulfur @-@ rich compounds and quartz . 
 The present eruptive cone above 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) was constructed sometime between 40 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 years ago . Since that time the volcano has erupted at least ten times , generally from above 6 @,@ 500 feet ( 2 @,@ 000 m ) . One of the more recent flows issued from South Butte and created the 4 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) long by 0 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) wide A.G. Aiken Lava Bed . This flow looks young but has 3 @,@ 500 @-@ year @-@ old Mount St. Helens ash on it , meaning it is at least that old . Of a similar age are the Takh Takh Meadows and Muddy Fork lava flows . The lowest vent to erupt since the main cone was constructed is Smith Butte on the south slope of Adams . The last lava known to have erupted from Adams is an approximately 1000 @-@ year @-@ old flow that emerged from a vent at about 8 @,@ 200 feet ( 2 @,@ 500 m ) on Battlement Ridge . 
 The Trout Lake Mudflow is the youngest large debris flow from Adams and the only large one since the end of the last Ice Age . The flow dammed Trout Creek and covered 25 miles ( 40 km ) of the White Salmon River valley . <unk> water later formed Trout Lake . The Great Slide of 1921 started close to the headwall of the White Salmon Glacier and was the largest avalanche on Adams in historic time . The slide fell about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) and its debris covered about 1 square mile ( 2 @.@ 6 km2 ) of the upper Salt Creek area . Steam vents were reported active at the slide source for three years , leading to speculation that the event was started with a small steam explosion . This was the only debris flow in Mount Adams ' recorded history , but there are five known lahars . 
 Since then , thermal anomalies ( hot spots ) and gas emissions ( including hydrogen sulfide ) have occurred especially on the summit plateau and indicate that Adams is dormant , not extinct . Future eruptions from Adams will probably follow patterns set by previous events and will thus be flank lava flows of andesite or basalt . Because the primary products were andesite , the eruptions that occur on Adams tend to have a low to moderate <unk> and present less of a hazard than the violent eruptions of St. Helens and some of the other Cascade volcanoes . Since the interior of the main cone is little more than a pile of fragmented lava and hydrothermally @-@ altered rock , there is a potential for very large landslides and other debris flows . 
 In 1997 , Adams experienced two slides seven weeks apart that were the largest slides in the Cascades , ignoring the catastrophic landslide eruption of Mount St. Helens , since a slide that occurred on Little Tahoma in 1963 . The first occurred at the end of August and consisted of mainly snow and ice with some rock . It fell from a similar location and in a similar path to the slide of 1921 . The second slide that year occurred in late October and originated high on Battlement Ridge just below The Castle . It consisted of mainly rock and flowed three miles down the Klickitat Glacier and the Big Muddy Creek streambed . Both slides were estimated to have moved as much as 6 @.@ 5 million cubic yards ( 5 @.@ 0 million cubic metres ) of material . 
 The Indian Heaven volcanic field is located between St. Helens and Adams and within the Indian Heaven Wilderness . Its principal feature is an 18 @-@ mile ( 29 km ) long linear zone of shield volcanoes , cinder cones , and flows with volumes of up to 23 cubic miles ( 96 km3 ) with the highest peak , <unk> Rock . The shield volcanoes , which form the backbone of the volcanic field , are located on the northern and southern sides of the field . Mount St. Helens and Mount Adams are on the western and the eastern sides . 
 To the east , across the Klickitat River , lies the Simcoe Mountains volcanic field . This area contains many small shield volcanoes and cinder cones of mainly alkalic intraplate basalt with fractionated intermediate alkalic products , subordinate <unk> mafic lavas , and several rhyolites as secondary products . There are about 205 vents that were active between 4 @.@ 2 million and 600 thousand years ago . 
 Seismic activity around Adams is very low and it is one of the quietest volcanoes in Oregon and Washington . It is monitored by the Pacific Northwest Seismic Network and the Cascades Volcano Observatory via a seismic station on the southwest flank of the mountain . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Like many other Cascade volcanoes , Mount Adams offers many recreational activities , including mountain climbing , hiking and backpacking , berry picking , camping , boating , fishing , rafting , photography , wildlife viewing , and scenic driving among other things . 
 The 47 @,@ 122 acres ( 19 @,@ 070 ha ) Mount Adams Wilderness along the west slope of Mount Adams offers an abundance of opportunities for hiking , backpacking , backcountry camping , mountain climbing and equestrian sports . Trails in the wilderness pass through dry east @-@ side and moist @-@ west side forests , offering spectacular views of Mt . Adams and its glaciers , tumbling streams , open alpine forests , parklands , and a variety of wildflowers speckled among lava flows and <unk> . A Cascades Volcano Pass from the United States Forest Service ( USFS ) is required for activities above 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) from June through September . 
 On the north side , the Midway High Lakes Area , which lies mostly outside the wilderness area , is one of the more popular areas around Mount Adams . The area is made up of four large lakes , Council Lake , <unk> Lake , <unk> Lake , and Horseshoe Lake ; one small lake , Green Mountain Lake ; and a group of small lakes , Chain of Lakes . The area offers developed and primitive camping as well as a good number of trails for hiking and backpacking . Most trails are open to horses and many outside the wilderness are open to motorcycles . More scenery similar to what is encountered in the Mount Adams Wilderness abounds . The area also offers boating and fishing opportunities on several of the lakes . 
 On the south side of Adams , the Morrison Creek area provides additional opportunities for hiking , backpacking , biking , and equestrian sports with several long loop trails . A few small primitive campgrounds exist in the area including the <unk> Creek Shelter . Generally , there are trailheads at these campgrounds . 
 On the southeast side of the mountain , the Mount Adams Recreation Area , another very popular area , offers activities such as hiking , camping , picnicking , and fishing . The area features Bird Creek Meadows , a popular picnic and hiking area noted for its outstanding display of wildflowers , and exceptional views of Mount Adams and its glaciers , as well as Mount Hood to the south . Some areas of the Yakama Indian Reservation are open for recreation , while other areas are open only to members of the tribe . 
 = = = Climbing = = = 
 Each year , thousands of outdoor enthusiasts attempt to summit Mount Adams . The false summits and broad summit plateau have disheartened many climbers as this inscription on a rock at <unk> ’ s Peak indicates . “ You are a <unk> if you think this is the summit . Don ’ t crab , the mountain was here first . ” <unk> and ice axes are needed on many routes because of glaciers and the route ’ s steepness . Aside from crevasses on the more difficult glacier routes , the biggest hazard is the loose rocks and boulders which are easily dislodged and a severe hazard for climbers below . These falling rocks are especially dangerous for climbers on the precipitous east faces and the steep headwalls of the north and west sides . Routes in those areas should only be climbed early in the season under as ideal conditions as can be had . Other hazards faced by climbers on Adams include sudden storms and clouds , avalanches , altitude sickness , and inexperience . Climbing Mount Adams can be dangerous for a variety of reasons and people have died in pursuit of the summit while many others have had close calls . 
 = = = = Routes = = = = 
 There are 25 main routes to the summit with alternates of those main routes . They range in difficulty from the relatively easy non @-@ technical South Spur ( South Climb ) route to the extremely challenging and dangerous Victory Ridge , Rusk Glacier <unk> , and Wilson Glacier <unk> routes up Roosevelt Cliff . 
 = = = Hiking = = = 
 While the summit is the main draw for many who visit Adams , many trails pass through the area around Mount Adams where visitors can find stunning vistas , local history , profuse displays of wildflowers , fantastic lava formations , picturesque waterfalls , and many other hidden secrets . 
 One such trail is the unofficially named “ Round the Mountain Trail ” that encircles Mount Adams and is approximately 35 miles ( 56 km ) long . It is called the “ Round the Mountain Trail ” unofficially because it is made up of three different named trails and an area where there is no trail . The 8 – 10 miles ( 13 – 16 km ) section of the trail on the Yakama Indian Reservation may require special permits . 
 Many trails access the “ Round the Mountain Trail ” in the Mount Adams Wilderness . On the south , the Shorthorn Trail # 16 leaves from near the Morrison Creek Campground and the South Climb Trail # 183 starts at Cold Springs Trailhead / Campground and heads up the South Spur , the most popular climbing route to the summit . On the west side , there are three trails going up : the Stagman Ridge Trail # 12 , Pacific Crest Trail # 2000 , and the Riley Creek Trail # 64 . There are four trails providing access to the “ Round the Mountain Trail ” on north side : the Divide Camp Trail # 112 , Killen Creek Trail # 113 , Muddy Meadows Trail # 13 , and the Pacific Crest Trail again as it heads down the mountain to the north . These trails accessing the “ Round the Mountain Trail ” generally gain between 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 460 m ) and 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) in between 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) and 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) . Trails are mostly snow @-@ covered from early winter until early summer . Other popular trails in the Mount Adams Wilderness include the Lookingglass Lake Trail # 9A , High Camp Trail # 10 , Salt Creek Trail # 75 , Crofton Butte Trail # 73 , and the Riley Connector Trail # 64A . 
 In the Mount Adams Recreation Area , many of the trails are geared toward leisurely walks through beautiful scenery and are located in the Bird Creek Meadows area . There are many loop trails at Bird Creek Meadows , including the Trail of the Flowers # 106 in the main picnic area . Trails travel through meadows and past cold mountain streams and waterfalls , including Crooked Creek Falls . Hikers can access the Hellroaring Overlook , where they can view Hellroaring Meadows , a glacial valley about 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) down from the viewpoint precipice . From here , hikers can gaze up 5 @,@ 800 feet ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) at Mount Adams , the Klickitat Glacier , and various waterfalls tumbling off of high cliffs below the glaciers terminus . Little Mount Adams 6 @,@ 821 ft ( 2 @,@ 079 m ) is a symmetrical cinder cone on top of the Ridge of Wonders , and rises from the northeast end of Hellroaring Meadow and the Hellroaring Creek valley . It used to offer a trail from Bench Lake at the bottom of the canyon to the east base of the peak , but this trail has recently been abandoned . To reach the top , hikers must traverse rocky terrain ; and if they exist , user @-@ made trails . 
 High Lakes Trail # 116 , the namesake of the Midway High Lakes Area , crosses the relatively flat area on the north side of the mountain following a trail the Yakama Native Americans used for picking huckleberries . Like many other trails around Adams , this trail has spectacular views of the mountain . Other trails , like the Takh Takh Meadows Trail # 136 , pass through picturesque meadows and old lava flows . One of the longest trails on the Gifford Pinchot , Boundary Trail # 1 , has a terminus in the Midway High Lakes area at Council Lake . Other trails in the area include the Council Bluff Trail # 117 , Green Mountain Trail # 110 , and East Canyon Trail # 265 . 
 Several long trails pass through the Morrison Creek area on the south side of the mountain . The Snipes Mountain Trail # 11 follows the eastern edge of the A. G. Aiken Lava Bed from the lower end for 6 miles to the Round the Mountain Trail . The Cold Springs Trail # 72 follows the western edge for 4 miles . Other trails in the area include the Gotchen Trail # 40 , Morrison Creek Trail # 39 , and <unk> Trail # 71 . 
 = = = Camping = = = 
 Campgrounds near Mount Adams are open during the snow @-@ free months of summer . Campgrounds in the area include the <unk> Lake Campground , offering views across the lake of Mount Adams ; <unk> Lake ; Horseshoe Lake ; Killen Creek ; Council Lake ; and <unk> Horse Camp . Adams Fork Campground and Twin Falls Campground are located along the Lewis and Cispus Rivers . Most lakes within the Midway High Lakes Area offer scenic views of Mount Adams and its glaciers . Adams Fork Campground , Cat Creek Campground , and Twin Falls Campground are located nearer to Mount Adams and are just a few of the many campgrounds along the scenic Lewis and Cispus Rivers . 
 In the Morrison Creek area , there are three designated campgrounds : Morrison Creek Campground , Mount Adams Horse Camp , and the <unk> Creek Shelter . Many climbers use the Cold Springs Trailhead as a campground as well . 
 There are three campgrounds in the Mount Adams Recreation Area . A campground is located at Bird Lake , Mirror Lake , and Bench Lake . Bench Lake is the largest campground of the three and has excellent views up the Hellroaring Canyon . 
 Further down the southeast slope of Adams , the Washington State Department of Natural Resources ( DNR ) has two campgrounds along Bird Creek : Bird Creek Campground and Island Cabin Campground . Island Cabin is also used in winter by snowmobilers . 
 Several of the campgrounds in the National Forest and all campgrounds in the Mount Adams Recreation Area require fees . The campgrounds on DNR lands require a Discover Pass . 
 = = = Winter Recreation = = = 
 For winter recreation , there are a number of Washington state sno @-@ parks on the south side that are popular with snowmobilers and cross @-@ country skiers . There are three sno @-@ parks on Mount Adams south slope : Snow King , <unk> , and Smith Butte Sno @-@ parks . The south side of the mountain , especially the A.G. Aiken Lava Bed , is especially popular with snowmobilers and skiers . The Mount Adams Recreation Highway ( FR 80 ) is plowed all the way to <unk> and Snow King Sno @-@ parks at about 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) elevation for most of the year , as long as there is enough money in the Forest Service 's winter budget . Smith Butte Sno @-@ park , at about 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) , is accessible in low @-@ snow years . Most of the time , the road is not plowed all the way to Smith Butte . The Forest Service does this in order to not dry up the forest service 's snowplowing funds . 
 While the south side has several sno @-@ parks near Adams , the north side has only one nearby , the Orr Creek Sno @-@ park . This sno @-@ park provides winter access to the Midway High Lakes Area . All the sno @-@ parks in the area require a Washington state Sno @-@ Park Permit . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Native American Legends = = = 
 Native Americans in the area have composed many legends concerning the three " smoking mountains " that guard the Columbia River . According to the Bridge of the Gods tale , Wy 'east ( Mount Hood ) and Pahto ( Mount Adams ; also called <unk> or Klickitat by native peoples ) were the sons of the Great Spirit . The brothers both competed for the love of the beautiful La @-@ wa @-@ la @-@ clough ( Mount St. Helens ) . When La @-@ wa @-@ la @-@ clough chose Pahto , Wy 'east struck his brother hard so that Pahto 's head was flattened and Wy 'east took La @-@ wa @-@ la @-@ clough from him ( thus attempting to explain Adams ' squat appearance ) . Other versions of the story state that losing La @-@ wa @-@ la @-@ clough caused Pahto such grief that he dropped his head in shame . 
 In a legend from the Klickitats , the chief of the gods , <unk> Saghalie , came to The Dalles with his two sons . The sons quarreled about who would settle where . To settle the dispute , Saghalie shot an arrow to the west and to the north and told his sons to find them and to settle where the arrows had fallen . So one settled in the Willamette Valley and the other in the area between the Yakima and Columbia Rivers and they became the ancestors of the Multnomah and Klickitat tribes respectively . To separate the tribes , Saghalie raised the Cascade Mountains . He also created the “ Bridge of the Gods " as a way for the tribes to meet with one another easily . A “ witch @-@ woman , ” whose name was Loowit , lived on the bridge and had control of the only fire in the world . She wanted to give the tribes fire to improve their condition and Saghalie consented . He was so pleased with Loowit ’ s faithfulness that he offered Loowit whatever she wanted . She asked for youth and beauty and Saghalie granted her wish . Suitors came from near and far until finally she could not decide between Klickitat and Wiyeast . Klickitat and Wiyeast went to war over the matter until finally <unk> decided to punish them for creating such chaos . He broke the Bridge of the Gods and put the three lovers to death . However , in order to honor their beauty , he raised up three mountains : Wiyeast ( Hood ) , Klickitat ( Adams ) , and Loowit ( St. Helens ) . 
 In a similar legend from the Klickitats , there was a large inland sea between the Cascades and the Rocky Mountains . The Native Americans lived on the sea and each year they would hold two large <unk> at Mount Multnomah , one in the spring and one in the fall . The demigod Koyoda <unk> lived among them and settled disputes among the living things of the earth , including the mountains Pa @-@ toe ( Adams ) and Yi @-@ east ( Hood ) , sons of the Great Spirit Soclai Tyee . For many years , peace prevailed over the land . Then a beautiful squaw mountain moved to the valley between Pa @-@ toe and Yi @-@ east . She fell in love with Yi @-@ east , but liked to flirt with Pa @-@ toe . This caused the two mountains to quarrel with each other and it quickly escalated into an all out brawl . Ignoring Koyoda ’ s calls for peace , they belched forth smoke and ash and threw hot rocks at each other . Some time later , they paused for a rest and discovered the catastrophe they had caused . The forests and meadows had been burnt to the ground and many animals and other living things had been killed . The earth had been shaken so severely that a hole had been created in the mountains and the sea had drained away and the Bridge of the Gods was formed . The squaw mountain had hid herself in a cave during the battle and because they could no longer find her , they were about to resume fighting . However , while they had been fighting , Koyoda went to Soclai and told him what was happening . Soclai arrived in time to stop them from resuming their quarrel . He decreed that the squaw mountain should remain in the cave forever and the Bridge of the Gods was to be a covenant of peace between the mountains that he would cause to fall if they ever resumed their quarrel . He also placed an ugly old woman , known as Loo @-@ wit , as a mountain to guard the bridge and remind the brothers that beauty is never permanent . After many years , the signs of the great battle and the evidence of the inland sea had disappeared and there was happiness and contentment over the earth . The squaw mountain wished to come out of her cave and grew very lonely . In an effort to ease her loneliness , Soclai sent the Bats , a tribe of beautiful birds , to be her companions . Yi @-@ east eventually learned that the Bats were her guardians and carried out secret communication with the squaw mountain through them . He befriended Loo @-@ wit and crossed the bridge at night to meet with the squaw mountain . One night , he stayed too long and had to hurry to get back to his proper place . He caused the ground to shake so much in his haste that a large rock fell and blocked the entrance to the cave . When Soclai found this , he was furious with the Bats and punished them by turning them into bats that are seen today . He allowed the squaw mountain to remain out of the cave on her promise to be good , but would not allow her and Yi @-@ east to be married , fearing the inevitable quarrel that might start again . He did promise to look for a mate for Pa @-@ toe , hoping this would initiate a lasting peace . However , because of his many duties , he forgot this promise and the two mountains were only held in check by his threats . Eventually , when Soclai was in another part of the world , they resumed their quarrel and created chaos again . Their violence broke the Bridge of the Gods and destroyed the landscape again . Loo @-@ wit , in her attempts to stop the two brothers , was badly burned and scarred ; and when the bridge collapsed , she fell with it . Finally , Pa @-@ toe won the battle and Yi @-@ east admitted defeat . Soclai returned from where he had been , but he was too late to avert the disaster . He found Loo @-@ wit and because she had been faithful in her guardianship , he rewarded her by giving her her greatest desire , youth and beauty . Having received this gift , she moved to the west side of the Cascades and remains there to this day as Mount St. Helens . Since Pa @-@ toe won the battle , the squaw mountain belonged to him . She was heart broken , but took her place at his side . She soon fell at his feet and into a deep sleep from which she never awoke . She is now known as Sleeping Beauty . Pa @-@ toe became so sad that he caused her deep sleep , he lowered his own head in remorse . 
 The <unk> also have a legend attempting to explain Adams ’ squat appearance . Long ago , the Sun was a man and he had five wives who were mountains : Plash @-@ Plash ( the Goat Rocks ) , <unk> ( the Simcoe Mountains ) , Pahto ( Adams ) , Rainier , and St. Helens . Because she was the third wife to be greeted by the Sun in the morning , Pahto became jealous . She broke down both Plash @-@ Plash and <unk> , but left Rainier and St. Helens alone . She was happy that she was now the first to be greeted , but wanted more , so she crossed the Columbia and took plants and animals from the mountains there . The other mountains were afraid of her , but Klah <unk> ( the Three Sisters ) convinced Wyeast ( Hood ) to confront Pahto . Wyeast initially tried being nice , but Pahto would have none of it . So Wyeast hit her head and knocked it off , creating Devils Garden . Wyeast then shared what Pahto had taken with the rest of the mountains . After this , Pahto became mean and she would send thunderstorms , heavy rain , and snow to the valleys below . The Great Spirit had been watching all this time and came to Pahto . He gave her a new head in the form of White Eagle and his son Red Eagle and he reminded her that she was his daughter . Pahto repented and promised to stop being mean and greedy . 
 In many of the legends of the Cascade Mountains , there are <unk> that live on them and Adams is no exception . This particular thunderbird was named Enumtla and he terrorized the inhabitants of the land . Speelyi , the Klickitat coyote god , came along one day and they implored him to do something . Speelyi transformed himself into a feather and waited . It did not take long for Enumtla to see the feather and investigate . Being suspicious , he thundered at the feather with no effect . He paused and suddenly the magic feather let loose a terrific volley of thunder and lightning and stunned Enumtla . Speelyi then managed to overpower Enumtla and decreed that the thunderbird could no longer terrify the people , could only thunder on hot days , and could not destroy with lightning . 
 Several other tribes have legends involving battles and disagreements between the great peaks . The Cowlitz and Chehalis have a legend where Rainier and St. Helens were female mountains and quarreled over Adams , the male mountain . In a different legend from the Cowlitz , St. Helens was the man and Pahto ( Adams ) and <unk> ( Rainier ) were his wives and the two wives quarreled with each other . A thunderbird legend from the <unk> has a terrific battle between the thunderbird , <unk> , and his five wives , Tahoma ( Rainier ) , Pahto ( Adams ) , Ah @-@ kee @-@ kun ( Hood ) , Low @-@ we @-@ lat @-@ Klah ( St. Helens ) , and Simcoe . Pahto and Tahoma were badly beaten , Ah @-@ kee @-@ kun and Low @-@ we @-@ lat @-@ Klah escaped without injury , and Simcoe suffered the greatest injury for starting the battle . 
 = = = Exploration = = = 
 Adams was known to the Native Americans as Pahto ( with various spellings ) and Klickitat . In various tribal languages ( Plateau Penutian , Chinookan , Salishan ) , Pahto means high up , very high , standing up , or high sloping mountain . The Klickitat name is of Klickitat origin and comes from the Chinookan for beyond . 
 In 1805 , on the journey westward down the Columbia , the Lewis and Clark Expedition recorded seeing the mountain ; noting that it was “ a high mountain of <unk> hight covered with snow ” and thought it “ perhaps the highest pinnacle in America . ” They initially misidentified it as Mount St. Helens , which had been previously discovered and named by George Vancouver . On the return journey in 1806 , they recorded seeing both , but did not give Adams a name , only calling it “ a very high humped mountain ” . This is the earliest recorded sighting of the volcano by European explorers . 
 For several decades after Lewis and Clark sighted the mountain , people continued to get Adams confused with St. Helens , due in part to their somewhat similar appearance and similar latitude . In the 1830s , Hall J. Kelley led a campaign to rename the Cascade Range as the President 's Range and rename each major Cascade mountain after a former President of the United States . Mount Adams was not known to Kelley and was thus not in his plan . Mount Hood , in fact , was designated by Kelley to be renamed after President John Adams and St. Helens was to be renamed after George Washington . In a mistake or deliberate change by mapmaker and proponent of the Kelley plan , Thomas J. Farnham , the names for Hood and St. Helens were interchanged . And , likely because of the confusion about which mountain was St. Helens , he placed the Mount Adams name north of Mount Hood and about 40 miles ( 64 km ) east of Mount St. Helens . By what would seem sheer coincidence , there was in fact a large mountain there to receive the name . Since the mountain had no official name at the time , Kelley 's name stuck even though the rest of his plan failed . However , it was not official until 1853 , when the Pacific Railroad Surveys , under the direction of Washington Territory governor Isaac I. Stevens , determined its location , described the surrounding countryside , and placed the name on the map . 
 Since its discovery by explorers , the height of Adams has also been under debate . The topographer for the Pacific Railroad Surveys , Lt. Johnson K. Duncan , and George Gibbs , ethnologist and naturalist for the expedition , thought it was about the same height as St. Helens . Its large , uneven size apparently contributed to the underestimation . The Northwest Boundary Survey listed Adams as having an elevation of 9 @,@ 570 feet ( 2 @,@ 920 m ) while a later US Coast and Geodetic Survey gave it an elevation of 11 @,@ 906 feet ( 3 @,@ 629 m ) . The height was more closely determined in 1895 by members of the Mazamas mountaineering club , William A. Gilmore , Professor Edgar McClure , and William Gladstone Steel . Using a boiling point thermometer , mercurial barometer , and an aneroid barometer , they determined the elevation to be 12 @,@ 255 , 12 @,@ 402 , and 12 @,@ 150 feet ( 3 @,@ 735 , 3 @,@ 780 , and 3 @,@ 703 m ) respectively . None of these numbers were used on any map because that same year , 1895 , the US Geological Survey ( USGS ) , using a triangulation method , also measured the height of several mountains in the Cascades and they measured Adams as having an elevation of 12 @,@ 470 feet ( 3 @,@ 800 m ) . The USGS further refined their measurement sometime in late 1909 or early 1910 to 12 @,@ 307 feet ( 3 @,@ 751 m ) and again in 1970 to 12 @,@ 276 feet ( 3 @,@ 742 m ) for the release of the Mount Adams East 1 : 24000 quadrangle . The current elevation , 12 @,@ 281 feet ( 3 @,@ 743 m ) , is generated by the new method , <unk> , for calculating altitudes . 
 Claude Ewing Rusk , a local settler and mountaineer , was one of those most familiar with Adams and he was instrumental in many of the names given to places around the mountain . In 1890 , he , his mother Josie , and his sister Leah completed a circuit of the mountain and explored , to some extent , all ten of its principle glaciers . This was the first recorded circuit of Adams by a woman and likely the first recorded circuit by anyone . While they were on the east side , they named Avalanche Valley . Later , in 1897 , after they had completed an ascent of Adams , they went to the Ridge of Wonders and his mother , awestruck by the scene , named it as such . 
 No detailed descriptions of Adams or its glaciers existed until Professor William Denison Lyman and Horace S. Lyman published descriptions of three of its glaciers and various other features of the southern flanks of the mountain in 1886 . The White Salmon / Avalanche , Mazama , and Klickitat Glaciers were those described . They also postulated Adams to be the source of some of the Columbia River basalt flows . They thought that Adams was within what was originally an enormous caldera that was about one hundred miles across . The southern boundary of this enormous caldera was the anticline ridge that forms the southern border of the Glenwood Valley . Modern geology has since dismissed this theory . From information collected on an outing of the Mazamas in 1895 , Professor Lyman expanded his descriptions of those three glaciers in 1896 . Adams was finally properly surveyed in 1901 , when Rusk led noted geologist / glaciologist Harry Fielding Reid to Adams ' remote location . Reid conducted the first systematic study of the volcano and also named its most significant glaciers , Pinnacle , Adams , Lava , Lyman , and Rusk with suggestions from Rusk . He also named Castle Rock ( The Castle ) , Little Mount Adams , and Red Butte . Reid noted that it was apparent that the glaciers of Adams had been significantly larger during the Little Ice Age . The geologic history of Adams would have to wait another 80 years before it was fully explored . 
 On the 1895 Mazamas expedition , the first <unk> between several of the peaks of the Cascades was attempted with some success . A party on Mount Hood was able to communicate back and forth with the party on Mount Adams , but the parties on Rainier , Baker , Jefferson , and Diamond Peak were not successful , mainly because of dense smoke and logistical problems . 
 The first ascent of Mount Adams was in 1854 by Andrew Glenn Aiken , Edward Jay Allen , and Andrew J. Burge . While most sources list the aforementioned names , at least one substitutes Colonel Benjamin Franklin Shaw for Andrew Burge . Their route was likely up the North Cleaver because that summer they were improving a newly designated military road that passes through Naches Pass , which is to the north of Adams . 
 While the north and south faces of Adams are climbed easily , the west and east faces of the mountain were deemed impossible to climb because of the steep cliffs and ice cascades . To some , this assumption was a challenge and for years , C. E. Rusk searched for a way to climb the east face . On one of these excursions , in 1919 , Rusk named the Wilson Glacier , Victory Ridge , and the Roosevelt Cliff . It was on this trip that Rusk decided that the Castle held the easiest route up . In 1921 , 67 years after the first ascent of Adams , a group from the <unk> mountaineering club , led by Rusk , completed the first ascent of the precipitous east face of the mountain . Their route took them up the Rusk Glacier , onto Battlement Ridge , up and over The Castle , and across the vast , heavily crevassed eastern side of the summit ice cap . One of the party , Edgar E. Coursen , said that the route was “ thrilling to the point of extreme danger . ” Others in the party were Wayne . E. Richardson , Clarence Truitt , Rolland Whitmore , Robert E. Williams , and Clarence <unk> . Three years later , in 1924 , a group of three men from the Mazamas finally climbed the west face of Adams . This route is straightforward , but made difficult by icefalls , mud slips , and easily started rock avalanches . 
 Some of the caves around Adams were subject to commercial ventures . In the 1860s , ice was gathered from the Ice Cave and shipped to Portland and The Dalles in years of short supply elsewhere . Oddly , a “ claim ” to the cave using mining laws was used in order to gain exclusive access to the ice . Cheese Cave was used for potato storage in the 1930s and later was home to the Guler Cheese Company , which produced , for a number of years in the 1950s , a bleu cheese similar to the Roquefort produced in Roquefort @-@ sur @-@ <unk> , France . A legend from the Klickitats regarding the formation of the caves , involves a man and his wife who were of gigantic stature . The man left his wife and took married a mouse , which became a woman . His wife was furious and because she threatened to kill the man and the “ mouse @-@ wife , ” they hid further up the mountain at a lake . The man ’ s wife assumed they were underground and began digging for them . In the process , she dug out the many caves in the area . Eventually , she reached the place where they were and the man allowed her to kill the “ mouse @-@ wife ” to save his own life . Her blood colored the rocks of the lake red and the place was known as <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ se , which is from the Native American word for mouse . Eventually , the wife killed the man as well and lived alone in the mountains . 
 Adams was the feature of a 1915 documentary “ When the Mountains Call . ” This film documented the journey from Portland to the summit and showed many of the sights along the way . 
 = = = Forest Service Operations = = = 
 Adams and the lands surrounding it were initially set aside as part of the Mount Rainier Forest Reserve under the Department of the Interior in 1897 . Eight years later , in 1905 , the Bureau of Forestry , later the Forest Service , was created under the Department of Agriculture and all the Forest Reserves were transferred to the new agency . In 1907 , the Forest Reserves were renamed to National Forests and in 1908 , the Rainier National Forest was divided among three Forests . The southern half became the Columbia National Forest . The name was changed in 1949 to honor the first Chief of the Forest , Gifford Pinchot . In 1964 , the lands around Mount Adams were set aside as a wilderness . 
 Adams is home to the oldest building on the Gifford Pinchot National Forest , the Gotchen Creek Guard Station just south of the A. G. Aiken Lava Bed . Built in 1909 , it served as the administrative headquarters of the Mount Adams District until 1916 . It was built along a major grazing trail to allow for easy monitoring of the thousands of sheep grazed on the lower slopes . Later , in the 1940s , as the amount of grazing decreased , the station housed the Forest Guards responsible for the area . In 2008 , it was wrapped in protective foil as a precautionary method to shield it from a large wildfire , the Cold Springs Fire , although the fire did not come near enough to burn it . Wildfires in 2012 ( Cascade Creek Fire ) and 2015 ( Cougar Creek Fire ) also required this precaution , and neither of them came close enough either . 
 In 1916 , the Forest Service began preparations to establish the highest fire lookout in the Pacific Northwest at the top of Adams . This was part of an endeavor that began in 1915 on Mount Hood and 1916 on St. Helens The idea was to situate lookouts far above all low @-@ lying hills and mountains to give the lookouts an immense area for observation without obstructions . Being at 12 @,@ 281 feet ( 3 @,@ 743 m ) , the new lookout would also be the third highest in the world and still is . In 1917 , building materials were moved to the base of the mountain and in 1918 , Dan Lewis packed the building materials and lumber to the lower portion of Suksdorf Ridge . The following summer was spent hauling the building materials to the top . The four men assigned the job , Arthur “ Art ” Jones , Adolph Schmid , Julius Wang , and Jessie Robbins , had a difficult task ahead of them until they engineered a way to quickly and , for the most part , safely bring the building materials up the slope using a <unk> / rope technique . Construction of the standard D @-@ 6 building with a ¼ second story cupola began in the summer of 1920 and was completed a year later by Art , Adolph , James Huffman and Joe Guler . It was manned as a lookout during the last year of its construction through 1924 . After which it was abandoned because of the difficulties of operating a lookout that high and because lower level clouds , smoke , and haze frequently and effectively blocked the view of the lower elevations . Arthur Jones was likely the one person most involved in the project , spending five seasons on the mountain . Others who worked on the project or staffed the lookout include Rudolph Deitrich , the last lookout , and Chaffin “ Chafe ” Johnson . 
 After the lookout at the summit was abandoned , the Forest Service changed strategies from a few lookouts very high up to many lookouts on lower peaks . They placed many lookouts around Adams including one on the southwest slopes of Adams at <unk> Meadows , one on Goat Butte , one on Council Bluff above Council Lake , and many other places further from the mountain . Eventually these lookouts became obsolete as airplanes became the cheaper method to spot fires . Most all of these lookouts have since been abandoned and most all have been removed or left to disintegrate . One , Burley Mountain , is staffed every summer and another , Red Mountain , was restored in 2010 and decisions regarding its future are pending . Two lookouts remain nearby on the Yakama Indian Reservation . One , Satus Peak , is staffed every season and the other , Signal Peak , is staffed during periods of high fire danger . 
 = = = Sulfur Mine = = = 
 In 1929 , Wade Dean formed the Glacier Mining Company and filed mining claims to the sulfur on Adams ' 210 @-@ acre ( 85 @.@ 0 ha ) summit plateau . Beginning in 1932 , the first assessment work was done . The initial test pits were dug by hand , but this proved to be dangerous work and an alternative was needed to drill through the up to 210 feet ( 64 m ) thick ice cap more safely . The answer was a diamond tipped drilling machine , but , being a heavy machine , it could not be carried up the newly completed horse and mule trail like other supplies . So it winched itself up the mountain using a series of <unk> anchors . 168 pack string trips led by John Perry were made over the course of the mining activities . The crew stayed in the abandoned Forest Service lookout , a tight fit for the usual eight men and their equipment . This problem was alleviated somewhat in the later years of the project when an enclosed 8 by 12 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 by 3 @.@ 7 m ) lean @-@ to was added to the cabin . Another smaller lean @-@ to was added later . The conditions and weather above 12 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) could be incredibly variable with the highest temperature of 110 ° F ( 43 ° C ) recorded 12 hours before the lowest temperature of − 48 ° F ( − 44 ° C ) . This preliminary mining continued for several years until 1937 when the last crew worked from the summit lookout . For many years after , Dean attempted to periodically restart this venture and in 1946 , he and Lt. John Hodgkins made several landings by airplane on the summit ice cap . Although sulfur was found , the amount of the ore that was able to be mined in a season was only enough to make up the cost of getting it off the mountain and was not enough to be competitive . Part of this stemmed from Dean ’ s desire that if operations were expanded , an ore as well as passenger transport system was needed , and his desire that Adams not be significantly scarred by the operation . The project was fully abandoned in 1959 . Adams is the only large Cascade volcano to have its summit exploited by commercial miners . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Because of its remote location and relative inaccessibility , climate records are poor . The nearest weather station , Potato Hill , has only been measuring precipitation since 1982 and temperatures since 1989 . Temperature and precipitation records from Glenwood and Trout Lake , both considerably lower in elevation and further from the mountain , are more complete and go back further , 1948 at Glenwood and 1924 at Trout Lake . Snowfall records from the three snow stations on Adams cover a number of years but are discontinuous and are limited to the northwest side . The Potato Hill station was monitored monthly from 1950 @-@ 1976 and was replaced in 1982 with the automated precipitation sensor . It was upgraded in 1983 to report snow water equivalent and it was upgraded again in 2006 to report snow depth . The Council Pass station was monitored monthly from 1956 @-@ 1978 and the Divide Meadow station was monitored monthly from 1962 @-@ 1978 . Divide Meadow was the most representative of the snow depth on the west side of Adams because it was the highest station on the flanks of the mountain . 
 Like the rest of the high Cascade mountains , Adams receives a large amount of snow , but because it lies further east than many of its Washington compatriots , it receives less than one might expect for a mountain of its height . Although snowfall is not measured directly , it can be estimated from the snow depth ; and since the Potato Hill station was upgraded to report daily snow depth in 2006 , there has been an average of 216 inches ( 550 cm ) of snow every year . Also since 2006 , the most snow to fall in a day was 28 inches ( 71 cm ) ( Feb 26 , 2011 ) , in a month , 92 inches ( 230 cm ) ( Dec 2007 ) , and in a year , 288 inches ( 730 cm ) ( 2012 ) . 
 By April , there is , on average , 91 inches ( 230 cm ) of snow on the ground at Potato Hill . The average monthly snow depth at Potato Hill has not changed much from the records collected from 1950 @-@ 1976 with only a small decrease in January , February , and May and a small increase in March and April . Records from Council Pass and Divide Meadow also show depth increasing throughout the winter , peaking in April . These two stations average a greater amount of snow than Potato Hill , with an average of 102 inches ( 260 cm ) at Council Pass and 141 inches ( 360 cm ) at Divide Meadow by April . Divide Meadow generally receives the most snow with a record depth of 222 inches ( 560 cm ) in 1972 . The snowpack at Potato Hill starts building in late October to early November and the last of the snow generally melts by the beginning of June , but occasionally lingers into July . 
 Temperatures and precipitation can be highly variable around Adams , due in part to its geographic location astride the Cascade Crest , which gives it more of a continental influence than some of its neighbors . At Potato Hill , December is the coldest month with an average high of 46 ° F ( 8 ° C ) and an average low of 5 ° F ( − 15 ° C ) . July is the hottest month with an average high of 84 ° F ( 29 ° C ) and an average low of 33 ° F ( 1 ° C ) . The highest recorded temperature is 91 ° F ( 33 ° C ) in 1998 and the lowest is − 16 ° F ( − 27 ° C ) in 2010 . Average annual precipitation is 66 @.@ 9 inches ( 1 @,@ 700 mm ) with January being the wettest month at 10 @.@ 3 inches ( 26 cm ) , slightly above November and December . Potato Hill averages 158 precipitation days with 51 snow days . In Trout Lake , the coldest month is January with an average high of 36 ° F ( 2 ° C ) and an average low of 22 ° F ( − 6 ° C ) . July is the hottest month with an average high of 83 ° F ( 28 ° C ) and an average low of 48 ° F ( 9 ° C ) . The highest recorded temperature is 108 ° F ( 42 ° C ) in 1939 and the lowest is − 26 ° F ( − 32 ° C ) in 1930 . Average annual precipitation is 43 @.@ 7 inches ( 1 @,@ 110 mm ) with January being the wettest month with 8 @.@ 2 inches ( 210 mm ) . In Glenwood , the coldest month is December with an average high of 37 ° F ( 3 ° C ) and an average low of 23 ° F ( − 5 ° C ) . August is the hottest month with an average high of 81 ° F ( 27 ° C ) and an average low of 42 ° F ( 6 ° C ) . The highest recorded temperature is 101 ° F ( 38 ° C ) in 1994 and the lowest is − 27 ° F ( − 33 ° C ) in 1983 . Average annual precipitation is 29 @.@ 9 inches ( 760 mm ) with December being the wettest month with 6 inches ( 150 mm ) . 
 The climate of Adams places it and the immediate area in two different level three eco @-@ regions : the Cascades eco @-@ region and the Eastern Cascades Slopes and Foothills eco @-@ region . Within these two eco @-@ regions are five level four eco @-@ regions : the Western Cascade Mountain Highlands , Cascade Crest Montane Forest , and Cascades Subalpine / Alpine within the Cascades eco @-@ region and the Yakima Plateau and Slopes and Grand Fir Mixed Forest within the Eastern Cascades Slopes and Foothills eco @-@ region . Adams is unique among the Washington volcanoes in that it is in two level three eco @-@ regions as well as being the only one within the Cascade Crest Montane Forest . 
 = = Flora and Fauna = = 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 The climate of Adams gives it a large amount of diversity within its forests . On the west side , down in the lower valleys , grand fir and Douglas fir dominate the forest with Western hemlock and Western red cedar as well . On the east side , Douglas fir and ponderosa pine are dominant with some patches of dense lodgepole pine . Western hemlock and Western red cedar also occur , but are limited to creek and river bottoms . Grand fir is present on sites with better moisture retention . At middle elevations on the west side , grand fir is increasingly replaced by Pacific silver fir and noble fir ; and on the east side , lodgepole becomes much more prevalent . Above a certain elevation , lodgepole pine also appears in areas on the west side as well . As elevation increases further , the forest changes again with subalpine fir , Engelmann spruce , and mountain hemlock becoming the dominant tree species on all sides of the mountain . Eventually , the last trees to disappear from the mountainside are the highly cold tolerant whitebark pine and mountain hemlock . Other conifers , 18 species in all , that play a lesser role than the dominant species are Western white pine , Sitka spruce , Western larch , Pacific yew , Alaska cedar , and mountain juniper . Adams is also home to many hardwoods as well including the tree species big leaf maple , Oregon white oak , quaking aspen , black cottonwood , and red alder . Large shrubs / small trees include the dwarf birch , Suksdorf ’ s hawthorn , California hazelnut , bitter cherry , vine maple , Douglas maple , and blue elderberry and contribute to a vibrant fall display . 
 Big Tree , ( also known as Trout Lake Big Tree ) , is a massive ponderosa pine tree in majestic , old growth pine and fir forests at the southern base of Mount Adams . The tree rises to a lofty 202 feet ( 62 m ) with a diameter of 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) , and is one of the largest known ponderosa pine trees in the world . As of 2015 , however , the tree has been stressed by attacks from pine beetles . 
 The large diversity of the flora around Adams is even more apparent in the herbage and , including the tree and shrub species previously mentioned , totals at least 843 species . This is more than any other mountain in the Pacific Northwest . The first extensive list of flora from the area around Mount Adams was published in 1896 by William Suksdorf and Thomas Howell and listed 480 species . Suksdorf had taken it upon himself to catalogue as many species around Adams as he could and the list was the result of his extraordinary collection efforts . This was the most complete list for over a century and has finally been updated by David <unk> and Susan McDougall to the current 843 species with hundreds of additional species listed . Adams is home to many rare plants including tall bugbane , Suksdorf ’ s monkeyflower ( <unk> <unk> ) , northern <unk> ( <unk> borealis ) , Brewer ’ s <unk> ( Potentilla <unk> ) , and mountain blue @-@ eyed grass . The plant diversity is most evident in the many meadows and wetlands on the flanks of Adams . The notable Bird Creek Meadows includes in its famous display , magenta paintbrush , <unk> ragwort , <unk> , lupines , <unk> , mountain heathers , and many others . In wetlands , generally at lower elevations , one can find bog blueberry , highbush cranberry , sundew , purple cinquefoil , and <unk> bladderwort , in addition to many sedges and rushes . Subalpine and alpine meadows and parklands , while not as prolific as the meadows and wetlands of lower elevations , have a beautiful display as well with <unk> , Cascade rockcress , subalpine buttercup , Sitka valerian , alpine false <unk> , elegant Jacob ’ s ladder , and various <unk> as prominent players . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 Adams is home to a fairly wide variety of animal species . Several hoofed mammals call the mountain home : mountain goats , Roosevelt elk , black @-@ tailed deer , and mule deer . Large carnivores include cougar , black bear , coyote , bobcat , and the Cascade mountain fox , an endemic subspecies of the red fox . There have also been sightings of wolverine and unconfirmed reports of wolves . Many small mammals also make Adams their home . Squirrels and chipmunks are numerous throughout the forest . Douglas squirrels , least chipmunks , and Townsend 's chipmunks live throughout the forest with golden @-@ mantled ground squirrels and California ground squirrels occupying drier areas as well . These squirrels are preyed upon by the elusive and secretive pine martens that also call Adams their home . Hoary marmots and pikas make their home on open rocky areas at any altitude while the elusive snowshoe hare lives throughout the forest . 
 The profusion of wildflowers attracts a large number of pollinators including butterflies such as Apollos , <unk> , <unk> , snowflakes , painted ladies , garden whites , swallowtails , skippers , admirals , <unk> , blues , and fritillaries . 
 Many birds call Adams home or a stopover on their migration routes . Songbirds include three species of chickadee , two kinglets , several thrushes , warblers , sparrows , and finches . One unique songbird to the high elevations is the gray @-@ crowned rosy finch , who can be found far up the mountain , well above the tree line . Raptors that live in the forest and meadows include Accipiters , red @-@ tailed hawks , golden and bald eagles , ospreys , great horned owls , and falcons . The many snags around the mountain provide forage and nesting habitat for the many species of woodpeckers that live there including the hairy woodpecker , downy woodpecker , and white @-@ headed woodpecker . Jays such as the stellar jay and gray jay are common and the gray jay is an especially familiar character , as they will boldly investigate campers and hikers . Another familiar character of the higher elevation forests is the Clark ’ s nutcracker with its distinctive call . Swallows and swifts are frequently seen flying just above the water of lakes and some larger streams . Common mergansers and several other species of water birds can be found on many of the lakes as well . The American dipper with its unique way of bobbing about along streams and then ducking into the water is a common sight . Several grouse species , the sooty , spruce , and ruffed grouse and the white @-@ tailed ptarmigan , call the forests and the lower slopes of the mountain home . 
 The streams and lakes around Adams offer a number of fish for the angler to seek out . The two most common species , Eastern brook trout and rainbow trout ( Columbia River redband trout ) , are in nearly every lake and stream . Brown trout and cutthroat trout appear in most of the lakes in the High Lakes Area and three lakes are home to tiger trout . All the lakes in the High Lakes Area are periodically replanted with varying species of trout . Bull trout can be found in the upper reaches of the Klickitat and Lewis Rivers . Westslope cutthroat trout can be found the Klickitat and cutthroat trout are found in the Lewis River and upper reaches of the Cispus River . Whitefish can be found in the Klickitat , Lewis , and Cispus Rivers . Because of barriers to fish passage ( dams on the Lewis and Cowlitz Rivers , falls on the White Salmon River ) , the only river where anadromous fishes can reach the streams around Adams is the Klickitat River . Chinook salmon , Coho salmon , and steelhead , in several different runs , make for the upper reaches of the Klickitat , including those around Adams , every year . 
 The <unk> Lake National Wildlife Refuge lies at the base of Mount Adams . The refuge covers 6 @,@ 500 acres ( 2 @,@ 600 ha ) and contains conifer forests , grasslands , and shallow wetlands . Protected wildlife includes deer , elk , beaver , coyote , otter , small rodents , bald eagle , greater sandhill crane , and the Oregon spotted frog . It and the lands nearby are home to several rare and threatened species of plants and animals including the previously mentioned Oregon spotted frog and greater sandhill crane , Suksdorf ’ s milk vetch , rosy owl 's @-@ clover , Oregon coyote thistle , Mardon skipper , peregrine falcon , and Western gray squirrel . 
 = The Legend of Zelda : A Link Between Worlds = 
 The Legend of Zelda : A Link Between Worlds is an action @-@ adventure game developed and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo 3DS handheld game console . It is the seventeenth installment in The Legend of Zelda series and a successor to the 1991 Super Nintendo Entertainment System title The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past . Announced in April 2013 , A Link Between Worlds was released in Europe and North America in November 2013 . A month later , the game was released in Japan under the title The Legend of Zelda : Triforce of the Gods 2 ( Japanese : ゼルダの伝説 <unk> , Hepburn : Zeruda no Densetsu : Kamigami no <unk> Tsū ) . 
 Players assume the role of a young boy named Link , who is tasked with restoring peace to the kingdom of Hyrule , after a malevolent sorcerer named Yuga captures Princess Zelda and escapes through a rift to the ruined world of Lorule . Yuga seeks to kidnap the Seven Sages and use their power to resurrect the Demon King , Ganon . Link is granted with the ability to merge onto walls as a painting after obtaining a magical bracelet and encountering Yuga . This new ability allows Link to reach previously inaccessible areas and travel between Hyrule and Lorule . 
 Concept development for the game began with a small team in 2009 . During this phase , the unique gameplay mechanic of Link merging onto walls was prototyped . However , development suffered several setbacks with production of the game ceasing entirely in late 2010 , as core team members were reassigned to different projects . A year later , development restarted and after several failed pitches to series creator , Shigeru Miyamoto , the game entered full production in 2012 . Changing the established conventions of the series became a goal for the game 's designers ; this led to a change in the game 's structure , allowing players to tackle and clear the majority of dungeons in any order they choose , and the introduction of the item rental system . 
 Upon release , the game received critical acclaim and sold over 2 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide within five months of release . The game 's audio , dungeon and puzzle design , open structure , and level of difficulty were highly praised by critics . The introduction of new features such as the wall @-@ merging mechanics and item rental system were well received , with reviewers complimenting how well they integrated with the existing gameplay formula . The game also received multiple awards and nominations from video game and media publications . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Legend of Zelda : A Link Between Worlds is an action @-@ adventure game presented in stereoscopic 3D polygonal graphics , with gameplay predominantly experienced from a top @-@ down perspective . Players control a young boy named Link , who embarks on an adventure to rescue the Seven Sages and defeat Yuga , the game 's primary antagonist . The game is set in two kingdoms — Hyrule and Lorule — both of which bear an open world structure and similar layout , but contrast in style and tone . A Link Between Worlds is seen as a successor to the 1991 Super Nintendo Entertainment System title The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past , and is similar in many aspects . The worlds of Hyrule and Lorule in A Link Between Worlds are analogous to A Link to the Past 's depiction of Hyrule and the Dark World . A number of items , enemies , and audio tracks featured in A Link to the Past return in A Link Between Worlds . 
 The top screen of the Nintendo 3DS displays hearts , an energy gauge , and an action icon . Link 's life energy decreases when he is hit by an enemy and can be replenished by collecting hearts that can be found in a variety of ways , such as defeating enemies or breaking pots . The energy gauge governs item and ability usage , it depletes on use and replenishes over time . The action icon notifies the player of interactive objects . A map of the kingdoms is displayed on the bottom screen of the Nintendo 3DS , showing Link 's current position and marked locations . The bottom screen is also used to view and select Link 's gear and items . 
 Friendly and enemy non @-@ player characters inhabit the two worlds . Friendly characters can provide Link with assistance or side @-@ quests to complete . Link wields a sword and shield , which can be used to defeat enemies and deflects their attacks . Other combat items from past Zelda games return , such as the bow , the fire rod , bombs , and more . However , unlike previous games , the methods for obtaining and using these items is different . Rather than finding them in dungeons , they are rented or purchased from a merchant , named Ravio . Should Link fall in battle , his rented items will be returned to Ravio . They also do not require ammunition , instead their use is limited by the replenishing energy gauge . Link 's total life energy can be increased by collecting heart pieces . His weapons can be upgraded by completing a side quest that involves searching for small hidden creatures and returning them to their parent . Link can also participate in several minigames to earn rupees , Hyrule 's currency . 
 As with many previous The Legend of Zelda games , solving puzzles and clearing dungeons remains a fundamental part of the gameplay . Progression through A Link Between Worlds is more open @-@ ended than previous titles , with the possibility of tackling many of the game 's dungeons in any order . Certain dungeon obstacles will require the use of the rented or purchased items . Towards the end of each dungeon , Link will encounter a boss that must be defeated . A unique mechanic that the game introduces is Link 's ability to merge onto walls and move horizontally along them . Link is presented as a mural when he is merged on a wall , and upon merging , the game 's perspective shifts to a side view to follow Link around corners . While merged to a wall , Link 's energy gauge will deplete . The mechanic can be used for traversing the environment , reaching seemingly inaccessible areas , and avoiding hazards . It plays a key role in solving many of the game 's puzzles and dungeons . Wall merging is also used as a means for travelling between Hyrule and Lorule , via fissures that connect the two kingdoms . 
 The game makes use of the Nintendo 3DS ' Play Coin and StreetPass systems . Play Coins can be used to request a tip from Hint Ghosts that are located at points of interest . If another system that has played the game is passed by via StreetPass , a shadow version of their Link will appear somewhere on the field . Players can fight against these Links , which are AI @-@ controlled opponents based on their game 's data . Winning against Shadow Links earns a rupee bounty based on their difficulty , and achievements can be earned for fulfilling certain conditions . A more challenging Hero mode is unlocked upon completing the main adventure . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The Legend of Zelda : A Link Between Worlds takes place in a fictional fantasy setting . Within the series ' timeline , A Link Between Worlds falls between the events of The Legend of Zelda : Link 's Awakening and the original title , The Legend of Zelda . The game is set in the two kingdoms : Hyrule , a location used in many past Zelda games , and Lorule , a new kingdom that acts as dark twin to Hyrule . A legend of Hyrule tells of the events prior to A Link Between Worlds . Ganon sought to dominate the kingdom using the power of a sacred relic , the Triforce . However , he was defeated by a legendary hero and sealed away by the Seven Sages . The Triforce was divided into three , to prevent evil from rising again . One part stayed with the royal family , one part returned to Ganon , and the third part took its rightful place in the heart of the hero and his descendants . Lorule was once a kingdom that also possessed a Triforce . However , it was destroyed in an attempt to stop Lorule 's people fighting for its power . Without a Triforce , Lorule decayed and became a ruined land . In A Link Between Worlds , Hyrule is ruled by Princess Zelda , while Lorule is ruled by her counterpart , Hilda . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Link , who is the apprentice of a blacksmith , goes to deliver a sword to a captain at Hyrule Castle , only to encounter a mysterious figure named Yuga , who transforms a descendant of a Sage , Seres , into a painting . After being knocked out during the fight , Link is found by a merchant named Ravio , who gives him a bracelet in exchange for being allowed to stay in his home , and tells him to report what had happened to Princess Zelda . After going to Hyrule Castle , Zelda gives Link the Pendant of Courage and instructs him to seek out the pendants of Power and Wisdom in order to gain the power of the Master Sword . Along the way , Link encounters Yuga again and is turned into a painting himself . However , thanks to Ravio 's bracelet , Link is protected from Yuga 's spell and gains the ability to merge with walls and move around as a painting . After finding the other pendants and obtaining the Master Sword , Link returns to Hyrule Castle where he witnesses Yuga transform Zelda into a painting . Link pursues Yuga through a dimensional crack , arriving in the twisted decaying kingdom of Lorule . There , Yuga uses Zelda and the descendants of the Seven Sages , who he had all trapped inside paintings , to revive Ganon and fuse with him , obtaining the Triforce of Power in the process . Just then , Link is assisted by Princess Hilda , the ruler of Lorule , who traps Yuga in magic bonds . 
 Hilda instructs Link to find and rescue the Seven Sages , who have been scattered across her kingdom , in order to gain the Triforce of Courage . With help from Ravio 's services , Link accomplishes this and returns to Lorule Castle , where he discovers Hilda taking the Triforce of Wisdom from Zelda . Hilda reveals that Lorule fell into ruin after her ancestors destroyed their own Triforce . Deciding that in order to restore her kingdom back to its former glory , she needs Hyrule 's Triforce , arranging everything so that Link would bring it to her . Hilda attempts to use Yuga to obtain the Triforce of Courage from Link , but Yuga betrays her and turns her into a painting , stealing the Triforce of Wisdom for himself . With Zelda 's help , Link manages to defeat Yuga . He then restores Zelda and Hilda from their paintings . As Hilda feels bitter over her loss , Ravio , who is revealed to be Link 's counterpart , convinces her that stealing Hyrule 's Triforce isn 't the right way to save Lorule , having secretly sought out Link to help her see the light . After Link and Zelda return to Hyrule , they use the power of their Triforce to restore Lorule 's Triforce and bring Lorule back to its full glory . With his quest completed , Link returns the Master Sword to its resting place once more . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Concept and production = = = 
 In late 2009 , following the completion of The Legend of Zelda : Spirit Tracks for the Nintendo DS , the majority of its development team were immediately assigned to work on The Legend of Zelda : Skyward Sword for the Wii . However , three members of the Spirit Tracks team began working on a new handheld title in the Zelda series for the upcoming Nintendo 3DS console . <unk> Shikata and Shiro Mouri were two of the three members working on the new game . During this early phase , they had not considered developing a sequel to The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past ; instead they were building a game around the theme of " communication " . Around six months into the project , they presented their concept for the game to series creator Shigeru Miyamoto . It was poorly received , with Miyamoto calling the idea outdated . So , the team of three decided to rethink the concept of the game from the very beginning . 
 At this point , Shikata proposed the idea of Link being able to enter and merge onto walls ; this feature would eventually become one of the title 's unique gameplay aspects . Within a day , Mouri had created an initial prototype to demonstrate the feature , and seeing it in action led to an influx of ideas . Link was able to transform from a 3D character to a 2D character by entering walls , and then move smoothly around corners to reach places he previously could not . This ability opened up possibilities for creating new puzzles and using new mechanics . At this stage in the project , they were still considering the new game to be an extension of Zelda games on the Nintendo DS , so the prototype itself used the same viewpoint and design of Link from Spirit Tracks . Around October 2010 , the prototype was presented to Miyamoto , who approved of the new concept and was happy for development to begin . However , within two weeks of entering production , core members of the development team were reassigned to work on launch games for Nintendo 's Wii U console which was scheduled for release in 2012 . With the team disbanded , development of the game ceased . 
 In November 2011 , Skyward Sword released for the Wii , and Zelda series producer Eiji Aonuma began thinking about the next project in the series . While Nintendo had released a remake of The Legend of Zelda : Ocarina of Time for the Nintendo 3DS , demand for a new and original Zelda title to be released on the 3DS was growing . Aonuma chose to revisit the idea of Link entering walls , as it had already been prototyped . With Shikata and Mouri still engaged in the development of Wii U launch games , Aonuma decided to revive the project without its core members , thirteen months after it had been initially shelved . Kentaro Tominaga was brought onto the team to continue where Shikata had left off . He refined the system of entering walls and designed some small dungeons , which he presented to Miyamoto in May 2012 . Tominaga planned to create fifty more small dungeons that would utilise the wall @-@ entering mechanic , however Miyamoto criticised this approach and instead suggested basing the new game on A Link to the Past . Aonuma then proposed combining the wall @-@ entering mechanic with the top @-@ down perspective and landforms of A Link to the Past . He felt that the shift in perspective when entering a wall would be complimented by the stereoscopic 3D capabilities of the Nintendo 3DS . Aonuma converted the two @-@ dimensional landforms of A Link to the Past into three @-@ dimensional space and then the team placed Link into the setting with the wall @-@ entering mechanic to test the feature . After several more presentations to Miyamoto , development of the project was finally allowed to progress in July 2012 . The development team began expanding before the end of 2012 , with people joining from other finished projects ; Shikata rejoined as director and Mouri returned as assistant director and lead programmer . Development of the game was completed in October 2013 . 
 = = = Technical and design = = = 
 Delay issues aside , the development team encountered further challenges in the creation of the game . Implementing the top @-@ down perspective became a particular issue and resulted in a lot of trial and error . With a true top @-@ down view , players would be unable to see characters ' faces and bodies . To circumvent this issue , objects in the world were tilted at an angle so that they were more visible in the top @-@ down view . Mouri requested that the game run at sixty frames per second instead of thirty to stabilise the stereoscopic 3D and <unk> movement animations . While doubling the frame rate increased the processing load , it allowed the developers to implement a feature where players could select items by dragging and dropping them from their inventory using the Nintendo 3DS 's touchscreen and stylus ; at thirty frames per second this feature felt too sluggish for the stylus 's movement . 
 Rethinking the conventions of a Zelda game became an important theme as development progressed . In previous Zelda games , the player would go into a dungeon , obtain a new item , and then move onto the next dungeon in a specific order . The development team felt that this formula was flawed as a player could get stuck on a dungeon and would be unable to progress further in the game . They wanted to give the player more freedom in the ways they could advance through the game , allowing them to tackle dungeons in any order and clear multiple dungeons in parallel , but this meant that the method for acquiring items had to be changed . They opted for a system where players could rent or purchase items using the game 's currency , rupees . In the final game , rented items are returned to the merchant when the player is defeated , however the team had considered other ideas for returning rented items , such as setting a timer on the rental period and imposing fees if they were returned late . The development team found out about the existence of the Nintendo 2DS console during the game 's production . As the Nintendo 2DS lacked 3D capabilities , the team decided to revise some of the game 's dungeon designs to be certain that they could be completed without the 3D effect enabled . 
 The designers thought that Link 's appearance should change when Link entered a wall and the perspective switched from a top @-@ down view to side view . They chose to make Link a mural while he was on a wall ; this led to the creation of Yuga , the game antagonist , a sorcerer that can transform himself and others into paintings . Aonuma mentioned that the idea of Link turning into a mural was inspired by Phantom Ganon jumping into paintings during his encounter in Ocarina of Time . As the game 's story takes place long after the events of a A Link to the Past and the player travels between the two worlds of Hyrule and Lorule , the development team chose A Link Between Worlds instead of A Link to the Past 2 for the game 's English @-@ language title . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 A Link Between Worlds features original music along with tracks from A Link to the Past . Ryo Nagamatsu composed and orchestrated new music for A Link Between Worlds , and played the flute music featured in the game 's milk bar . He also composed arrangements and adapted Koji Kondo 's original music from A Link to the Past . Nagamatsu wanted to balance arrangements of past music with completely new music to please both old and new players . He began by revisiting old tracks and thinking how he could best adapt them for A Link Between Worlds soundtrack . He was eager to include choral performances as a way to add tension to the eerie and unpleasant scenes in the game . Nagamatsu performed the vocals and made use of multitrack recording to layer the different vocals tracks . The audio team decided not use a live orchestra for recording the game 's music , the primary reason for this was to create optimal sound for the Nintendo 3DS . The reverberations and low @-@ pitch sounds created by a live orchestra were not suitable for the Nintendo 3DS speakers . The majority of the string music was created using a synthesizer , with Toru Minegishi playing guitar on one track . 
 = = Release = = 
 In April 2013 , during a Nintendo Direct presentation , a new The Legend of Zelda game was announced for the Nintendo 3DS with a release date scheduled for late 2013 . The game was described by Nintendo as a successor to the Super Nintendo Entertainment System title , The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past , set within the same game world but featuring new mechanics , new dungeons , and an original story . Shortly after the presentation , Nintendo released a gameplay video on the Nintendo eShop . Later in June , at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2013 , the English title for the game was revealed as The Legend of Zelda : A Link Between Worlds . In Japan , the game was titled The Legend of Zelda : Triforce of the Gods 2 . At the Seattle showing of " The Legend of Zelda : Symphony of the Goddesses Second Quest " concert tour in 2013 , A Link Between Worlds was playable along with The Legend of Zelda : The Wind Waker HD . 
 A Link Between Worlds released in Europe and North America on November 22 , 2013 , and later in Japan on December 26 , 2013 . The European version of the game contained a reversible cover sleeve ; the inside cover featuring multicoloured art and the outside cover featuring the golden @-@ hued version . Alongside the game 's launch , Nintendo released a bundle including a copy of the game and a themed Nintendo 3DS XL with the Triforce logo on . In 2015 , A Link Between Worlds was re @-@ released under the Nintendo Selects label , along with five other Nintendo 3DS titles . In early 2015 , Nintendo released the original soundtrack for A Link Between Worlds on CD in Europe via Club Nintendo . Music from the soundtrack was included in the 2015 concert tour " The Legend of Zelda : Symphony of the Goddesses Master Quest " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Legend of Zelda : A Link Between Worlds received critical acclaim upon release . Aggregate review website Metacritic assigned a score of 91 out of 100 based on reviews from 81 critics , making it the second highest scoring Nintendo 3DS game in 2013 , falling just behind Fire Emblem Awakening . It is also the fourth highest scoring Nintendo 3DS game of all time on Metacritic . Sales tracker Media Create reported that A Link Between Worlds was the top selling video game during its first week of launch in Japan , surpassing 224 @,@ 000 sales . As of March 31 , 2014 , A Link Between Worlds has sold 2 @.@ 51 million copies worldwide . It became the ninth first @-@ party Nintendo 3DS title to surpass 1 million units sold in the United States , achieving 1 @.@ 09 million sales as of August 2014 . 
 Many critics saw A Link Between Worlds as a worthy successor to A Link to the Past , but also remarked that the game was outstanding in its own right . The game was commended for making enhancements to core and traditional elements of the series . New additions and changes to the established formula were also welcomed . Polygon reviewer Arthur Gies called it the best Zelda game in past twenty years , and GamesRadar writer Lorenzo Veloria said that it was essential title for every Nintendo 3DS owner . Reception towards the game 's puzzles was overwhelming positive ; praise was directed towards how well the wall @-@ merging mechanic had been incorporated into dungeon puzzles and integrated into every area of the game . Keza MacDonald of IGN thought A Link Between Worlds was the best puzzle game that Nintendo had ever created . Game Informer writer Dan Ryckert noted that some of the game 's dungeons and boss encounters were among the best in the franchise 's history . The level of difficulty present in the puzzles and dungeons was met with approval ; the challenge was described as a perplexing experience rather than a frustrating one by GameSpot editor Martin Gaston . 
 Discussing the usage of A Link to the Past 's version of Hyrule in A Link Between Worlds , Veloria thought that while revisiting familiar places was a nostalgic experience , the mystery of exploring new areas was absent and having to retread the same game world again was " somewhat unsatisfying " . Gaston called the loose structure and openness of the game a " revelatory change " , and was glad to see that some restrictions in previous Zelda titles were not present in A Link Between Worlds . The introduction of the item rental system was well received , with many reviewers pointing out that the system granted players with more freedom . Ryckert loved having items available from the beginning , says that it allowed him to experiment in combat . Both MacDonald and Gies agreed that losing rented items upon defeat added another layer of challenge and consequence to the game . Nintendo Life reviewer , Martin Watts found that streamlining the item system allowed the game to place a greater emphasis aspects such as exploration , solving puzzles and boss fights . However , Veloria expressed that not being able to find key items in dungeons was a drawback of the system . 
 Reviewers agreed that A Link Between Worlds excelled at making use of the console 's 3D capabilities . However , the game 's art direction was divisive among critics , with some writers expressing dislike for the graphics , and others calling the visuals gorgeous . The game 's music composition was complimented ; Ryckert called the game 's soundtrack one of the best in gaming , and Veloria though it was some of the best in the series , praising both the new compositions and the adapted renditions music from A Link to the Past . 
 = American Airlines Flight 11 = 
 American Airlines Flight 11 was a domestic passenger flight that was hijacked by five al @-@ Qaeda members on September 11 , 2001 , as part of the September 11 attacks . One , Mohamed Atta , deliberately crashed it into the North Tower of the World Trade Center in New York City , killing all 92 people aboard and an unknown number in the building 's impact zone . The aircraft involved , a Boeing 767 @-@ <unk> , registration <unk> , was flying American Airlines ' daily scheduled morning transcontinental service from Logan International Airport , in Boston , Massachusetts , to Los Angeles International Airport , in Los Angeles , California . 
 Fifteen minutes into the flight , the hijackers injured at least three people ( possibly killing one ) , forcibly breached the cockpit , and overpowered the captain and first officer . Atta , an al @-@ Qaeda member and licensed commercial pilot , took over the controls . Air @-@ traffic controllers noticed the flight was in distress when the crew was no longer responding . They realized the flight had been hijacked when Mohamed Atta 's announcements for passengers were transmitted to air traffic control . On board , flight attendants Amy Sweeney and Betty Ong contacted American Airlines , and provided information about the hijackers and injuries to passengers and crew . 
 The aircraft crashed into the North tower of the World Trade Center at 08 : 46 : 40 local time . Countless people in the streets of New York City witnessed the strike , but few video recordings captured the moment . Documentary film maker Jules <unk> captured the only known footage of the initial impact from start to finish . Before the hijacking was confirmed , news agencies began to report on the incident and speculated that the crash had been an accident . The impact and subsequent fire caused the North Tower to collapse 102 minutes after the crash , resulting in hundreds of additional casualties . During the recovery effort at the World Trade Center site , workers recovered and identified dozens of remains from Flight 11 victims , but many body fragments could not be identified . 
 = = Flight = = 
 The American Airlines Flight 11 aircraft was a Boeing 767 @-@ <unk> delivered in 1987 , registration number <unk> . The capacity of the aircraft was 158 passengers , but the September 11 flight carried 81 passengers and 11 crew members . This was a light load at 58 @.@ 2 percent capacity , but higher than the average load factor for Flight 11 on Tuesday mornings of 39 percent in the months preceding September 11 . The 11 crew members were Captain John Ogonowski , First Officer Thomas McGuinness , and flight attendants Barbara <unk> , Jeffrey <unk> , Sara Low , Karen Martin , Kathleen Nicosia , Betty Ong , Jean Roger , Dianne Snyder , and Amy Sweeney . 
 All 92 people on board were killed , including David Angell ( the creator and executive producer of the television sitcom Frasier ) , his wife Lynn Angell , and actress Berry Berenson , the widow of Anthony Perkins . Family Guy creator Seth MacFarlane had been scheduled to be on the flight but arrived at the airport late . Actor Mark Wahlberg was also scheduled to be on the flight but canceled his ticket at the last minute . Actress <unk> Littrell , wife of Backstreet Boys singer Brian Littrell , had also previously been booked on the flight , but like Wahlberg , changed her plans last minute . 
 = = = Boarding = = = 
 Mohamed Atta , the ringleader of the attacks , and a fellow hijacker , Abdulaziz al @-@ Omari , arrived at Portland International Jetport at 05 : 41 Eastern Daylight Time on September 11 , 2001 . They boarded Colgan Air Flight <unk> , which was scheduled to depart at 06 : 00 from Portland , Maine , and fly to Boston . Both hijackers had first class tickets with a connecting flight to Los Angeles ; Atta checked in two bags , Omari none . When they checked in , the Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening System ( CAPPS ) selected Atta for extra luggage scrutiny , but he boarded without incident . The flight from Portland departed on time and arrived in Boston at 06 : 45 . Three other hijackers , Waleed al @-@ Shehri , Wail al @-@ Shehri , and Satam al @-@ Suqami , arrived at Logan Airport at 06 : 45 , having left their rental car in the airport parking facility . At 06 : 52 , Marwan al @-@ Shehhi , the hijacker pilot of United Airlines Flight 175 , made a call from a pay phone in Logan Airport to Atta 's cell phone . 
 Since they were not given boarding passes for Flight 11 in Portland , Atta and Omari checked in and went through security in Boston . In the rushed check @-@ in after the flight from Portland , airline officials did not load Atta 's bags on Flight 11 . Suqami , Wail al @-@ Shehri , and Waleed al @-@ Shehri also checked in for the flight in Boston . Wail al @-@ Shehri and Suqami each checked one bag ; Waleed al @-@ Shehri did not check any bags . CAPPS selected all three for a detailed luggage check . As the CAPPS ' screening was only for luggage , the three hijackers did not undergo any extra scrutiny at the passenger security checkpoint . 
 By 07 : 40 , all five hijackers were aboard the flight , scheduled to depart at 07 : 45 . Mohamed Atta sat in business class seat 8D with Abdulaziz al @-@ Omari in 8G and Suqami in 10B . Waleed al @-@ Shehri and Wail al @-@ Shehri sat in first class seats 2B and 2A . At 07 : 46 , one minute behind schedule , the aircraft received clearance to push back from Gate B32 , and was cleared to taxi to the runway at 07 : 50 . The aircraft began its takeoff run from Logan International Airport at 07 : 59 from runway 4R . 
 = = = Hijacking = = = 
 The 9 / 11 Commission estimated that the hijacking began at 08 : 14 , when the pilots stopped responding to requests from the Boston Air Route Traffic Control Center ( Boston ARTCC ) . It is believed that Waleed al @-@ Shehri made the first move . At 08 : 13 : 29 , as the aircraft was passing over central Massachusetts at 26 @,@ 000 feet ( 7 @,@ 900 m ) , the pilots responded to a request from Boston ARTCC to make a 20 @-@ degree turn to the right . At 08 : 13 : 47 , Boston ARTCC told the pilots to ascend to a cruising altitude of 35 @,@ 000 feet ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) but received no response . At 08 : 16 , the aircraft leveled off at 29 @,@ 000 feet ( 8 @,@ 800 m ) and shortly thereafter deviated from its scheduled path . Boston ARTCC made multiple attempts to talk to Flight 11 without reply , and at 08 : 21 , the flight stopped transmitting its Mode @-@ C transponder signal . 
 According to flight attendants Amy Sweeney and Betty Ong , who contacted American Airlines during the hijacking , the hijackers had stabbed flight attendants Karen Martin and Barbara <unk> and slashed the throat of passenger Daniel Lewin . Lewin , an American @-@ Israeli Internet entrepreneur , had served as an officer in the elite Sayeret Matkal special operations unit of the Israel Defense Forces . Lewin was seated in 9B , and Suqami was directly behind him in 10B . The 9 / 11 Commission suggested that Suqami may have stabbed and killed Lewin after he attempted to stop the hijacking . Lewin is believed to be the first fatality in the 9 / 11 attacks . During a four @-@ minute call to the American Airlines operations center , Ong provided information about lack of communication with the cockpit , lack of access to the cockpit , and passenger injuries . She provided the seat locations of the hijackers , which later helped investigators to determine their identities . 
 At 08 : 24 : 38 , Atta tried to make an announcement to the passengers , but pressed the wrong button and sent the message to Boston ARTCC . Air traffic controllers heard Atta announce , " We have some planes . Just stay quiet and you 'll be O.K. We are returning to the airport . " At 08 : 24 : 56 , he announced " Nobody move . Everything will be okay . If you try to make any moves , you 'll endanger yourself and the airplane . Just stay quiet . " As before , Atta thought he was speaking to only the passengers , but his voice was picked up and recorded by air traffic controllers . After the transmissions by Atta and the inability to contact the airliner , air traffic controllers at Boston ARTCC realized the flight had been hijacked . At 08 : 26 , the plane turned south . At 08 : 32 , the Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) Command Center in Herndon , Virginia , notified FAA headquarters . 
 At 08 : 33 : 59 , Atta announced , " Nobody move , please . We are going back to the airport . Don 't try to make any stupid moves . " At 08 : 37 : 08 , the pilots of United Airlines Flight 175 verified Flight 11 's location and heading to flight control . Boston ARTCC bypassed standard protocols and directly contacted the North American Aerospace Defense Command ( NORAD ) Northeast Air Defense Sector ( NEADS ) in Rome , New York . NEADS called on two F @-@ 15 fighter jets at Otis Air Force Base in Mashpee , Massachusetts , to intercept . Officials at Otis spent a few minutes getting authorization for the fighters to take off . Atta completed the final turn towards Manhattan at 08 : 43 . The order to dispatch the fighters at Otis was given at 08 : 46 , and the F @-@ 15s took off at 08 : 53 , roughly seven minutes after American Airlines Flight 11 had already crashed into the North Tower of the World Trade Center . Of the four hijacked aircraft on 9 / 11 , the nine minutes of advance notification about the hijacking of Flight 11 was the most time that NORAD had to respond before the aircraft crashed into its target . 
 = = = Crash = = = 
 At 08 : 46 : 30 , Mohamed Atta intentionally crashed American Airlines Flight 11 into the northern facade of the North Tower ( Tower 1 ) of the World Trade Center . The aircraft , traveling at about 404 knots ( 465 mph ; 748 km / h ) and carrying about 10 @,@ 000 U.S. gallons ( 38 @,@ 000 L ) of jet fuel , hit between the 93rd and 99th floors of the North Tower . 
 Witnesses saw the plane flying at low altitude over Manhattan and thought the aircraft was in distress . Lieutenant William Walsh of the FDNY ( who appears in the documentary film 9 / 11 ) witnessed the aircraft : " We were under the impression – he looked like he was going down , but we didn 't hear any mechanical difficulty . We couldn 't figure out why an American Airlines plane would be so low in downtown Manhattan . We sort of expected him to veer off and go into the Hudson . But he just rose a little bit , his altitude , leveled off , and he was headed straight for the Trade Center . So just before he got to the Trade Center , it seemed as though he gained power . We were just watching this airplane on target for the World Trade Center . All of a sudden , boom ! He disappears into the Trade Center . " 
 The damage caused to the North Tower destroyed any means of escape at the impact zone or above it . All stairwells and elevators from the 92nd floor up were rendered impassable , trapping 1 @,@ 344 people . According to the Commission Report , hundreds were killed instantly by the impact ; the rest were trapped and died from the subsequent fire and smoke , the eventual collapse , or ( in some cases ) after jumping or falling from the building . Elevator shafts channeled burning jet fuel through the building . At least one elevator shaft carried burning fuel downward , exploding on the 77th floor , the 22nd floor , and at street level on the West Side Lobby . 
 Jules <unk> , a French cameraman , and Pavel <unk> , a Czech immigrant , videotaped the crash . A webcam set up by Wolfgang <unk> at an art exhibit in Brooklyn to take images of Lower Manhattan every four seconds also captured images of Flight 11 crashing into the North Tower . A WNYW <unk> left rolling on the ground also captured audio of the crash and video of the immediate aftermath . 
 News organizations at first reported an explosion or incident at the World Trade Center . CNN broke into a commercial at 08 : 49 with the headline that read " World Trade Center Disaster " . Carol Lin , who was the first anchor to break the news of the attacks , said : 
 Yeah . This just in . You are looking at obviously a very disturbing live shot there . That is the World Trade Center , and we have unconfirmed reports this morning that a plane has crashed into one of the towers of the World Trade Center . CNN Center right now is just beginning to work on this story , obviously calling our sources and trying to figure out exactly what happened , but clearly something relatively devastating happening this morning there on the south end of the island of Manhattan . That is once again , a picture of one of the towers of the World Trade Center . 
 Later , in an on @-@ air phone call from his office at the CNN New York bureau , CNN vice @-@ president of finance Sean Murtagh reported that a large passenger commercial jet had hit the World Trade Center . Eventually , other television networks interrupted regular broadcasting with news of the crash . President George W. Bush was arriving at Emma E. Booker Elementary School in Sarasota , Florida . Initial news reports speculated that the crash had been an accident until United Airlines Flight 175 was flown into the South Tower just 17 minutes after Flight 11 made impact . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the crash , the North Tower burned for 102 minutes before collapsing at 10 : 28 A.M. Although the impact itself caused extensive structural damage , the long @-@ lasting fire ignited by jet fuel was blamed for the structural failure of the tower . In addition to the aircraft passengers and building occupants , hundreds of rescue workers also died when the tower collapsed . Cantor Fitzgerald L.P. , an investment bank on floors 101 – 105 of the World Trade Center One , lost 658 employees , considerably more than any other employer . 
 Rescue workers at the World Trade Center site began to discover body fragments from Flight 11 victims within days of the attack . Some workers found bodies strapped to airplane seats and discovered the body of a flight attendant with her hands bound , suggesting the hijackers might have used plastic handcuffs . Within a year , medical examiners had identified the remains of 33 victims who had been on board Flight 11 . They identified two other Flight 11 victims , including the lead flight attendant Karen Martin , after body fragments were discovered near Ground Zero in 2006 . In April 2007 , examiners using newer DNA technology identified another Flight 11 victim . The remains of two hijackers , potentially from Flight 11 , were also identified and removed from Memorial Park in Manhattan . The remains of the other hijackers have not been identified and are buried with other unidentified remains at this park . 
 Suqami 's passport survived the crash and landed in the street below . <unk> in jet fuel , it was picked up by a passerby who gave it to a New York City Police Department ( NYPD ) detective shortly before the South Tower collapsed . Investigators retrieved Mohamed Atta 's luggage , which had not been loaded onto the flight . In it they found Omari 's passport and driver 's license , a videocassette for a Boeing 757 flight simulator , a folding knife , and pepper spray . In a recording , a few months later in Afghanistan , Al Qaeda 's leader , Osama bin Laden , took responsibility for the attack . The attack on the World Trade Center exceeded even bin Laden 's expectations : he had expected only the floors above the plane strikes to collapse . The flight recorders for Flight 11 and Flight 175 were never found . 
 After the attacks , the flight number for flights on the same route with the same takeoff time was changed to American Airlines Flight 25 . These flights now use a Boeing 737 instead of a Boeing 767 . An American flag is flown on the jet bridge of gate B32 from which Flight 11 departed Logan Airport . As of May 2016 , the closest identical American Airlines flight is Flight 166 , which leaves at 8 : 10 am . The flight often pushes back very close or next to Gate B32 . 
 On April 26 , 2013 , a piece of the wing flap mechanism from a Boeing 767 was discovered wedged between two buildings at Park Place , near where other landing gear parts were found . 
 At the National September 11 Memorial , the names of the 87 victims of Flight 11 are inscribed on the North Pool , on Panels N @-@ 1 and N @-@ 2 , and Panels N @-@ 74 – N @-@ 76 . 
 = = = Nationalities of people on the plane = = = 
 Note : This list does not include the nationalities of the five hijackers . 
 = Blues for the Red Sun = 
 Blues for the Red Sun is the second studio album by American rock band Kyuss , released in 1992 . While the album received mainly favorable reviews , it fared poorly commercially , selling only 39 @,@ 000 units . It has since become a very influential album within the stoner rock genre . 
 Blues for the Red Sun was the last Kyuss album to feature founding bassist Nick Oliveri , who was replaced by Scott Reeder shortly after recording had been completed . Reeder had previously played with The Obsessed . 
 = = Touring , promotion , and release = = 
 In support of the album , Kyuss went on tour with such established groups as Faith No More , White Zombie , and Danzig . In early 1993 , the band was chosen by Metallica to be an opening act for nine shows in Australia . Aside from their first show with Metallica , the group only used half the P.A. system for the other eight concerts . 
 The music videos for the songs " Green Machine " and " Thong Song " received moderate rotation on MTV 's Headbangers Ball and on MuchMusic in Canada . The album also received airplay on such album @-@ oriented radio stations as KNAC , KISW , <unk> , and <unk> . The album was released by the independent record label , Dali , which was later bought out by Elektra Records . It ended up selling only 39 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Musical style and influence = = 
 Blues for the Red Sun incorporates acid rock , grunge , psychedelic rock , space rock , and doom metal , and has been compared to such acts as Black Sabbath , Hawkwind , Blue Cheer , and Alice in Chains . The album is considered a pioneer to the stoner metal genre . Daniel <unk> , the author of The Encyclopedia of Heavy Metal , has written that the album has influenced " countless " bands . Many consider Blues for the Red Sun " the template for 21st @-@ century bands that have followed in the pioneering wake of Kyuss " . Martin Popoff similarly credits the band with the creation of a " certain core sample " of stoner rock , in part due to an " uncompromising <unk> " that was composed of more than " tar @-@ pitted Sabbath riffs " . Exclaim ! credited the album for opening " the way for bands like Monster Magnet and a whole host of other desert grunge practitioners " . Melissa Auf der Maur has said that she attempted to " knock @-@ off " Blues for the Red Sun for her single " Followed the Waves " , to the point that she recruited the band 's rhythm section to play on the track and Chris Goss to produce . Other fans of the album include Dave Grohl and Metallica . 
 Steve Taylor , the author of A to X of Alternative Music , wrote that , in comparison to the music , " lyrics can 't really compete " , and went on to call the album 's lyrics " stoned immaculate phrases " . Rolling Stone described the lyrics of " Thong Song " — a song about flip @-@ flops — as " deathless " . 
 Guitarist Josh Homme plugged down @-@ tuned guitars into bass amplifiers for the distortion featured on the album . Wah @-@ wah pedals were also used by Homme on Blues for the Red Sun . Wayne Robins of Newsday described Homme 's riffs as " post @-@ Hendrix guitar flurries " . Several of the songs on Blues for the Red Sun have slow tempos and groove @-@ laden rhythms . " Green Machine " features a bass guitar solo , and the album features several instrumental tracks . A number of songs on the album also credit lyrics to John Garcia , but have no discernible lyrics or even vocals . It is possible that the only word written by Garcia is the uttered " yeah " at the very end of the album . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The album received acclaim from both fans and critics . Steve Taylor considers it the best album Kyuss ever made . AllMusic 's Eduardo Rivadavia gave the album four and a half out of five stars and called the album , " a major milestone in heavy music . " In particular he praised producer Chris Goss , who had also been the singer @-@ guitarist for Masters of Reality , for its " unique heavy / light formula . " <unk> Frost of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a B + . Rolling Stone considered " Green Machine " and " Thong Song " to be the albums highlights and also thought that the production had greatly improved from the band 's previous album , Wretch . Kerrang ! also gave the album a favorable review . College Music Journal claimed that the album was " raw and unorthodox " and , like Rivadavia , complimented Chris Goss for the production . Q called it " one of the landmark metal albums of the ' 90s , " and rewarded it a perfect five out of five stars . Guitar Player magazine added Green Machine in their 1995 article titled " 50 Heaviest Riffs Of All Time " 
 Spin ranked Blues for the Red Sun 10th on their list of the " 10 Best Albums You Didn 't Hear in ' 92 . " In 2002 , Spin put the album in 36th place on their list of the " 40 Greatest Metal Albums of All Time . " IGN listed the album as an honorable mention on their list of the " Top 25 Metal Albums . " Chad Bowar of About.com named the album the 8th best heavy metal album of 1992 and went on to write that Blues for the Red Sun , " was a landmark album that influenced a lot of bands . " MusicRadar included the album on " The 50 Greatest Heavy Metal Albums of All Time " and ranked it in 48th place . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits 
 Kyuss 
 John Garcia – lead vocals ( all but 13 ) 
 Josh Homme – guitar 
 Nick Oliveri – bass , lead vocals ( 13 ) 
 Brant Bjork – drums , album concept 
 Additional personnel 
 Chris Goss – producer 
 Joe Barresi – engineer , mixing 
 Mike <unk> – engineer , mixing 
 Brian Jenkins – engineer , drum engineering 
 Jeff Sheehan – engineer , assistant engineer 
 Howie Weinberg – mastering 
 Skiles – art direction 
 Michael Anderson – photography 
 = Welsh Springer Spaniel = 
 The Welsh Springer Spaniel is a breed of dog and a member of the spaniel family . Thought to be comparable to the old Land Spaniel , they are similar to the English Springer Spaniel and historically have been referred to as both the Welsh Spaniel and the Welsh Cocker Spaniel . They were relatively unknown until a succession of victories in dog trials by the breed increased its popularity . Following recognition by The Kennel Club in 1902 , the breed gained the modern name of Welsh Springer Spaniel . The breed 's coat only comes in a single colour combination of white with red markings , usually in a piebald pattern . Loyal and affectionate , they can become very attached to family members and are wary of strangers . Health conditions are limited to those common among many breeds of dog , although they are affected more than average by hip dysplasia and some eye conditions . They are a working dog , bred for hunting , and while not as rare as some varieties of spaniel , they are rarer than the more widely known English Springer Spaniel with which they are sometimes confused . 
 = = History = = 
 The actual date of origin of the Welsh Springer Spaniel cannot be traced , however dogs resembling the breed with its distinctive red and white coat are frequently depicted in old pictures and prints . This type of dog was known as the Land Spaniel , and is considered to be similar to the modern Welsh Springer . John Caius , writing in 1570 , said " Spaniels whose <unk> are white and if marked with any <unk> they are commonly red " . It is thought that these Spaniels may have made their way into the Welsh valleys where local sportsman and hunters managed to conserve them in a pure state . 
 At one time called the Welsh Starter , it was used to spring game , originally for hunters using falcons . The traditional red and white colour of the Welsh Springer was once also found in English dogs , but by the early 20th century any such dogs were considered to have " died out long ago " . 
 The Welsh Springer Spaniel was also at one time called the Welsh Spaniel , and also at one point was included in the Kennel Club ( UK ) studbook as Cocker Spaniels , and was known as the Welsh Cocker . During the 19th century were several different varieties of Cocker Spaniel , including the English , the Welsh and the Devonshire as the term was used to describe the size of the dog rather than the breed . Unusually , in John George Wood 's 1865 book The Illustrated Natural History , an image is described showing a Welsh Cocker Spaniel as a solid coloured dark spaniel . The same inscription is used in the 1867 work The Dog in Health and Disease by Stonehenge and he further describes the Welsh Cocker and the Devonshire Cocker as " both being of a deep @-@ liver colour " . The Welsh Springer was relatively unknown during the 19th Century , but this changed in 1900 when Mr. A. T. Williams of <unk> @-@ y @-@ <unk> won the team stake at the Sporting Spaniel Club Trials . The trials were held on Mr. Williams ' own estate , and it was thought that when his team defeated eight well known teams it was because of the home advantage . This was disproved when dogs from the same kennel went on to win in successive years around the UK . His conformation show champion dog Corrin was the first Welsh Springer Spaniel to be photographed . 
 Welsh Springers were recognised by The Kennel Club , after the breed had gained popularity , in 1902 under the new name of Welsh Springer Spaniel . Until then the breed was shown alongside the English Springer Spaniel . The Welsh Springer Spaniel was transported to America in the late 19th century and gained recognition by the American Kennel Club in 1906 . 
 World War I caused problems for the breed in the United Kingdom , and when the war was over there were no dogs whose parents had registered pedigrees . The breed restarted with the remaining unregistered dogs , and it is these dogs that formed the modern day breed . The breeders in the 1920s and 1930s developed these dogs into the type of Welsh Springer Spaniel which remains today . The Welsh Springer Spaniel Club ( UK ) was formed in 1923 , registrations slowly increased between the wars but all records held by the breed club were destroyed in an air raid during World War II . Following the two World Wars , it was thought that no Welsh Springers remained in the United States . The breed was reintroduced , and the descendants of those dogs make up the breed today in the United States and Canada . The breed was officially imported into Australia in 1973 . 
 In 2000 , The Kennel Club registered 424 Welsh Springer Spaniels , compared with 12 @,@ 599 English Springer Spaniels and 13 @,@ 445 English Cocker Spaniels . Numbers remained steady , with 420 Welsh Springer Spaniels being registered in 2004 , however numbers of English Springer Spaniels increased to 14 @,@ 765 and English Cocker Spaniels to 16 @,@ 608 . Numbers remain closer to the American Cocker Spaniel which registered 610 in 2000 , and 599 in 2004 . The breed remains more popular than some other breeds of Spaniel , including the Clumber Spaniel , Field Spaniel , Sussex Spaniel and Irish Water Spaniel . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Appearance = = = 
 The Welsh Springer Spaniel is a compact , solidly built dog , bred for hard work and endurance . Their body can give the impression of length due to its obliquely angled forequarters and developed hindquarters . The build of the Welsh Springer Spaniel should be slightly off square , meaning that the length of the dog should be slightly greater than the height at the withers . However , some dogs may be square , and this is not penalised in the show ring as long as the height is never greater than the length . Traditionally a docked breed , dependant on legislation in the country of origin , and where allowed the dew claws can be removed . 
 In conformation showing , eyes should be brown in colour ; yellow eyes do sometimes occur but are penalised in the show ring . Ears are small , pendulous ( suspended and hanging ) , vine @-@ shaped and with a light setter @-@ like feathering . Nostrils are well developed and are black or any shade of brown ; a pink nose is penalised in the AKC standard for the show ring , in Britain the colour is not specified in The Kennel Club 's breed standard . In showing , a scissors bite is preferred with an undershot jaw severely penalised . Unlike the English Springer Spaniel and English Cocker Spaniel , there is no divergence into show and field styles of the breed . 
 Male dogs are 18 to 19 inches ( 46 to 48 cm ) high at the withers , with females a little smaller at 17 to 18 inches ( 43 to 46 cm ) . On average , members of the breed weigh between 35 to 45 lb ( 16 to 20 kg ) . The back of the legs , chest , and underside of the body are feathered , and the ears and tail are lightly feathered . The only colour is a rich red @-@ and @-@ white . Any pattern is acceptable and any white area may be flecked with red ticking . 
 Welsh Springers are often confused with the English Springer Spaniel , but there are marked differences . The Welsh Springer is slightly smaller , and its reddish markings on a white background as opposed to the English Springers black or liver @-@ coloured markings . Both breeds are admired for their hunting abilities and their trademark trait of " springing " at game . This can be seen during play also , as a dog may " spring " on his toy . Some experts believe that the Welsh Springer Spaniel and the Brittany share the same ancestry as there is a great deal of resemblance between the two breeds . The colours of the Welsh Springer , while exclusive from the English Springer , appear in the Brittany and the Brittany and Welsh Springers are both of similar sizes . The Welsh Springer is larger than the English Cocker Spaniel . 
 = = = Temperament = = = 
 The Welsh Springer Spaniel is active , loyal , and affectionate . They may meet strangers barking when in their territory , or act aloof , cautious or wary . The breed is well known for being friendly and demonstrative to all members of the family , especially children , and accepting other pets of the household with a friendly , playful attitude . 
 The breed is quick to learn but can be headstrong , though with correct training can become very obedient . The Welsh Springer was bred for work and endurance , and as with many breeds of hunting dogs requires a regular exercise routine to keep them healthy and content . Without adequate exercise , a Welsh Springer Spaniel may appear hyperactive . Some Welsh Springers can become clingy towards their owners and suffer separation anxiety when alone . 
 = = Health = = 
 The Welsh Springer is generally a healthy breed , but some can suffer conditions common to many breeds such as hip dysplasia , Canine glaucoma and like other dogs with pendulous ears , they are prone to ear infections such as otitis externa . In a survey of over a hundred breeds of dog conducted in 1997 , the Welsh Springer Spaniel was ranked 14th for worst hip score , with the average score of the breed being 18 @.@ 45 . The average lifespan is 12 to 15 years . 
 = = = Eye disorders = = = 
 Welsh Springers can be prone to entropion , which is a disorder that affects the eyelids . The condition causes them to curl inwards , pressing the eyelashes against the surface of the eye itself and causing them to scratch it . This can lead to irritation and damage to the cornea . In most cases it only affects the lower eyelid on one or both eyes , but in some cases the upper eyelid can be affected as well . Symptoms can include tearing , squinting , the rubbing of the eyes , thick discharge from the eyes and rolling of the eyelid along with wetness on the hairs next to the eyelids . There is no medical treatment for entropion , and surgical correction may be necessary depending on the severity of the case . This condition may be present soon after birth , or later in life as a secondary condition to other eye related diseases or infections . Other breeds also affected by the condition include the Chow Chow , Great Dane , Golden Retriever and the English Springer Spaniel . 
 Narrow / closed angle glaucoma is an autosomal dominant inheritable trait in the breed . It is a leading cause of blindness in dogs , and is where there is increased fluid pressure within the eye . If the fluid is not reduced , the pressure causes permanent damage to the retina and optic nerve . Loss of eyesight can happen as quickly as within 24 hours if the pressure if elevated enough , or slowly over time if it is only a mild elevation . The sudden , rapid elevation of pressure is more common with narrow / closed angle glaucoma which is more common to the breed than the slower open angle glaucoma . Symptoms can include redness in the eye , the eye itself looking cloudy , sensitivity to light and the dog may rub at their eye , or even rub it along other objects and carpet as the condition is moderate to extremely painful . Treatment can vary depending on the severity of the condition but if inherited glaucoma appears in one eye then it usually occurs in the other eye eventually . 
 = Cavalier King Charles Spaniel = 
 The Cavalier King Charles Spaniel is a small spaniel classed as a toy dog by The Kennel Club and the American Kennel Club . It originated in the United Kingdom and is one of the more popular breeds in many countries . Since 2000 , it has grown in popularity in the United States and ranks as the 18th most popular pure @-@ breed in the United States ( 2013 Registration Statistics ) . It has a silky , smooth coat and commonly a smooth undocked tail . The breed standard recognizes four colours : Blenheim ( chestnut and white ) , Tricolor ( black / white / tan ) , Black and Tan , and Ruby . The breed is generally friendly , affectionate and good with both children and other animals ; however , they require a lot of human interaction . The expected average lifespan of a Cavalier King Charles Spaniel is under ten years . 
 The King Charles changed inordinately in the late 17th century , when it was interbred with flat @-@ nosed breeds . Until the 1920s , the Cavalier shared the same history as the smaller King Charles Spaniel . Breeders attempted to recreate what they considered to be the original configuration of the breed , a dog resembling Charles II 's King Charles Spaniel of the Restoration . Various health issues affect this particular breed . 
 Cavalier King Charles Spaniel descends from small toy Spaniels like the pug he was brought to Scotland from continental Europe in the 1500s where he became a fashionable lap dog for the noble class . 
 King Charles II was a huge fan and lent his name to the breed . 
 = = History = = 
 During the early part of the 18th century , John Churchill , 1st Duke of Marlborough , kept red and white King Charles type spaniels for hunting . The duke recorded that they were able to keep up with a trotting horse . His estate was named Blenheim in honour of his victory at the Battle of Blenheim . Because of this influence , the red and white variety of the King Charles Spaniel and thus the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel became known as the Blenheim . 
 Attempts were made to recreate the original King Charles Spaniel as early as the turn of the 20th century , using the now extinct Toy Trawler Spaniels . These attempts were documented by Judith Blunt @-@ Lytton , 16th Baroness Wentworth , in the book " Toy Dogs and Their Ancestors Including the History And Management of Toy Spaniels , Pekingese , Japanese and Pomeranians " published under the name of the " Hon. Mrs Neville Lytton " in 1911 . 
 = = = Divergence from King Charles Spaniel = = = 
 In 1926 , the American Roswell Eldridge offered a dog show class prize of twenty @-@ five pounds each as a prize for the best male and females of " Blenheim Spaniels of the old type , as shown in pictures of Charles II of England 's time , long face , no stop , flat skull , not inclined to be domed , with spot in centre of skull . " The breeders of the era were appalled , although several entered what they considered to be sub @-@ par King Charles Spaniels in the competition . Eldridge died before seeing his plan come to fruition , but several breeders believed in what he said and in 1928 the first Cavalier club was formed . The first standard was created , based on a dog named " Ann 's Son " owned by Mostyn Walker , and the Kennel Club recognised the variety as " King Charles Spaniels , Cavalier type " . 
 The Second World War caused a drastic setback to the emerging breed , with the vast majority of breeding stock destroyed because of wartime hardship and food shortages . For instance , in the Ttiweh Cavalier Kennel , the population of sixty dogs dropped to three during the 1940s . Following the war , just six dogs would survive as the new beginning from which all present @-@ day Cavaliers descend . These dogs were Ann 's Son , his litter brother <unk> Timothy , Carlo of Ttiweh , Duce of Braemore , <unk> of <unk> and Aristide of Ttiweh . The numbers increased gradually , and in 1945 the Kennel Club first recognised the breed in its own right as the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel . 
 The history of the breed in America is relatively recent . The first recorded Cavalier living in the United States was brought from the United Kingdom in 1956 by W. Lyon Brown , together with Elizabeth Spalding and other enthusiasts , she founded the Cavalier King Charles Club USA which continues to the present day . In 1994 , the American Cavalier King Charles Spaniel Club was created by a group of breeders to apply for recognition by the American Kennel Club . The Cavalier would go on to be recognised by the American Kennel Club in 1995 , and the <unk> became the parent club for Cavaliers . 
 = = Description = = 
 Historically the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel was a lap dog and is small for a spaniel , with fully grown adults comparable in size to adolescents of other larger spaniel breeds . Breed standards state that height of a Cavalier should be between 12 to 13 inches ( 30 to 33 cm ) with a proportionate weight between 10 to 18 pounds ( 4 @.@ 5 to 8 @.@ 2 kg ) . The tail is usually not docked , and the Cavalier should have a silky coat of moderate length . Standards state that it should be free from curl , although a slight wave is allowed . <unk> can grow on their ears , feet , legs and tail in adulthood . Standards require this be kept long , with the feathering on the feet a particularly important aspect of the breed 's features . 
 The Cavalier King Charles Spaniel and the English Toy Spaniel can be often confused with each other . In the United Kingdom , the English Toy Spaniel is called the King Charles Spaniel while in the United States , one of the colours of the Toy Spaniel is known as King Charles . The two breeds share similar history and only diverged from each other about 100 years ago . There are several major differences between the two breeds , with the primary difference being the size . While the Cavalier weighs on average between 10 to 18 pounds ( 4 @.@ 5 to 8 @.@ 2 kg ) , the King Charles is smaller at 9 to 12 pounds ( 4 @.@ 1 to 5 @.@ 4 kg ) . In addition their facial features while similar , are different ; the Cavalier 's ears are set higher and its skull is flat while the King Charles 's is domed . Finally the muzzle length of the Cavalier tends to be longer than that of its King Charles cousin . 
 = = = Colour = = = 
 The breed has four recognized colours . Cavaliers which have rich chestnut markings on a pearly white background are known as Blenheim in honour of Blenheim Palace , where John Churchill , 1st Duke of Marlborough , raised the predecessors to the Cavalier breed in this particular colour . In some dogs there is a chestnut spot in the middle of the forehead : this is called the " <unk> " spot . The Blenheim spot is also known as the mark of the " Duchess Thumb Print " , based on the legend that Sarah Churchill , Duchess of Marlborough while awaiting news of her husband 's safe return from the Battle of Blenheim , pressed the head of an expecting dam with her thumb , resulting in five puppies bearing the lucky mark after news that the battle had been won . Black and Tan are dogs with black bodies with tan highlights , particularly eyebrows , cheeks , legs and beneath the tail . Black and Tan is referred to as " King Charles " in the King Charles Spaniel . Ruby Cavaliers should be entirely chestnut all over , although some can have some white in their coats which is considered a fault under American Kennel Club conformation show rules . The fourth colour is known as Tricolour , which is black and white with tan markings on cheeks , inside ears , on eyebrows , inside legs , and on underside of tail . This colour is referred to as " Prince Charles " in the King Charles Spaniel . 
 = = = Popularity = = = 
 According to statistics released by The Kennel Club , Cavaliers were the sixth most popular dog in the United Kingdom in 2007 with 11 @,@ 422 registrations in a single year . Labrador Retrievers were the most popular with 45 @,@ 079 registrations in that year . Their popularity is on the rise in America ; in 1998 they were the 56th most popular breed but in both 2007 and 2008 they were the 25th most popular . They ranked higher in some individual US cities in the 2008 statistics , being eighth in both Nashville and Minneapolis @-@ St.Paul , seventh in Boston , Atlanta and Washington D.C. , and sixth in both New York City and San Francisco . The breed 's popularity has continued to grow , ranking in 18th place in 2013 . In 2009 , the Cavalier was the fourth most popular breed in Australia with 3 @,@ 196 registrations behind only Labrador Retrievers , German Shepherd Dogs and Staffordshire Bull Terriers . In addition , there are also national breed clubs in Belgium , Canada , Czech Republic , Denmark , Finland , France , Germany , Netherlands , New Zealand , Norway , South Africa , Spain and Sweden . 
 = = Temperament = = 
 The breed is highly affectionate , playful , extremely patient and eager to please . As such , dogs of the breed are good with children and other dogs . Cavaliers are not shy about socialising with much larger dogs . They will adapt quickly to almost any environment , family , and location and suit city and country life . Their ability to bond with larger and smaller dogs makes them ideal in houses with more than one breed of dog as long as the other dog is trained . Cavaliers rank 44th in Stanley Coren 's The Intelligence of Dogs , being of average intelligence in working or obedience . Cavaliers are naturally curious and playful , but also enjoy simply cuddling up on a cushion or lap , making them excellent companion or lap dogs for medical patients and the elderly . 
 Cavaliers are active and sporting . Cavaliers are successful in conformation shows , obedience and agility and they also make wonderful therapy dogs due to their sweet , gentle natures . The breed is adaptable in their need for exercise , happy with either sleeping on the couch or taking long walks . 
 They have an instinct to chase most things that move including vehicles on busy streets , and so most Cavaliers will never become " street @-@ wise " . As they tend to regard all strangers as friends , members of the breed will usually not make good guard dogs . Spaniels have a strong hunting instinct and may endanger birds and small animals . However , owners have reported that through training their Cavaliers live happily with a variety of small animals including hamsters and gerbils . 
 The Cavaliers coat requires weekly brushing , but no trimming . However , some owners prefer to trim their Cavaliers long feathers and slippers which can become very dirty when walking or playing outside . 
 = = Health = = 
 Cavaliers can notably suffer from mitral valve disease , which leads to heart failure . This appears in many Cavaliers at some point in their lives and is the most common cause of death . Some serious genetic health problems , including early @-@ onset mitral valve disease ( MVD ) , the potentially severely painful syringomyelia ( SM ) , hip dysplasia , luxating <unk> , and certain vision and hearing disorders are health problems for this breed . As today 's Cavaliers all descend from only six dogs , any inheritable disease present in at least one of the original founding dogs can be passed on to a significant proportion of future generations . This is known as the founder effect and is the likely cause of the prevalence of MVD in the breed . The health problems shared with this breed include mitral valve disease , luxating patella , and hereditary eye issues such as cataracts and retinal dysplasia . Cavaliers are also affected by ear problems , a common health problem among spaniels of various types , and they can suffer from such other general maladies as hip dysplasia , which are common across many types of dog breeds . 
 = = = Mitral valve disease = = = 
 Nearly all Cavaliers eventually suffer from disease of the mitral valve , with heart murmurs which may progressively worsen , leading to heart failure . This condition is polygenic ( affected by multiple genes ) , and therefore all lines of Cavaliers worldwide are susceptible . It is the leading cause of death in the breed . A survey by The Kennel Club of the United Kingdom showed that 42 @.@ 8 % of Cavalier deaths are cardiac related . The next most common causes are cancer ( 12 @.@ 3 % ) and old age ( 12 @.@ 2 % ) . The condition can begin to emerge at an early age and statistically may be expected to be present in more than half of all Cavalier King Charles Spaniels by age 5 . It is rare for a 10 @-@ year @-@ old Cavalier not to have a heart murmur . While heart disease is common in dogs generally – one in 10 of all dogs will eventually have heart problems – mitral valve disease is generally ( as in humans ) a disease of old age . The " hinge " on the heart 's mitral valve loosens and can gradually deteriorate , along with the valve 's flaps , causing a heart murmur ( as blood seeps through the valve between heartbeats ) then congestive heart failure . The Cavalier is particularly susceptible to early @-@ onset heart disease , which may be evident in dogs as young as one or two years of age . 
 Veterinary geneticists and <unk> have developed breeding guidelines to eliminate early @-@ onset mitral valve disease in the breed , but it is unclear if a statistically significant number of breeders follow these guidelines . The chairperson of the UK <unk> Club said in 2009 : " There are many members who are still not prepared to health check their breeding stock , and of those who do , it would appear that many would not hesitate to breed from affected animals . " The MVD breeding protocol recommends that parents should be at least 2 @.@ 5 years old and heart clear , and their parents ( i.e. , the puppy 's grandparents ) should be heart clear until age 5 . 
 = = = Syringomyelia = = = 
 Syringomyelia ( SM ) is a condition affecting the brain and spine , causing symptoms ranging from mild discomfort to severe pain and partial paralysis . It is caused by a malformation in the lower back of the skull which reduces the space available to the brain , compressing it and often forcing it out ( <unk> it ) through the opening into the spinal cord . This blocks the flow of cerebral spinal fluid ( CSF ) around the brain and spine and increases the fluid 's pressure , creating turbulence which in turn is believed to create fluid pockets , or syrinxes ( hence the term syringomyelia ) , in the spinal cord . Syringomyelia is rare in most breeds but has become widespread in the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel , with international research samples in the past few years consistently showing over 90 % of cavaliers have the malformation , and that between 30 – 70 % have syrinxes . However , most dogs with syrinxes are not symptomatic . Although symptoms of syringomyelia can present at any age , they typically appear between six months and four years of age in 85 % of symptomatic dogs , according to Clare <unk> , a research scientist . Symptoms include sensitivity around the head , neck , or shoulders , often indicated by a dog whimpering or frequently scratching at the area of his neck or shoulder . Scratching is often unilateral – restricted to one side of the body . Scratching motions are frequently performed without actually making physical contact with the body ( " air scratching " ) . The scratching behavior appears involuntary and the dog frequently scratches while walking – without stopping – in a way that is very atypical of normal scratching ( " bunny hopping " ) . Scratching typical of SM is usually worse when the dog is wearing a collar , is being walked on leash , or is excited , and first thing in the morning or at night . 
 Not all dogs with SM show scratching behavior . Not all dogs who show scratching behavior appear to suffer pain , though several leading researchers , including Dr Clare <unk> in the UK and Drs Curtis Dewey and Dominic Marino in the US , believe scratching in SM cavaliers is a sign of pain and discomfort and of existing neurological damage to the dorsal horn region of the spine . If onset is at an early age , a first sign may be scratching and / or rapidly appearing scoliosis . If the problem is severe , there is likely to be poor proprioception ( awareness of body position ) , especially with regard to the forelimbs . <unk> and falling results from this problem . Progression is variable though the majority of dogs showing symptoms by age four tend to see progression of the condition . 
 A veterinarian will rule out basic causes of scratching or discomfort such as ear mites , fleas , and allergies , and then , primary secretory otitis media ( PSOM – glue ear ) , as well as spinal or limb injuries , before assuming that a Cavalier has SM . PSOM can present similar symptoms but is much easier and cheaper to treat . Episodic Falling Syndrome can also present similar symptoms . An MRI scan is normally done to confirm diagnosis of SM ( and also will reveal PSOM ) . If a veterinarian suspects SM he or she will recommend an MRI scan . <unk> give scanned dogs a signed certificate noting its grade . 
 = = = Episodic Falling ( EF ) = = = 
 Episodic Falling causes " exercise @-@ induced paroxysmal <unk> " meaning that there is increased muscle tone in the dog and the muscles cannot relax . Previously thought to be a muscular disorder , it is now known to be neurological ; recently it has been discovered to be caused by a single recessive gene and a genetic test is available . Except for severe cases , episodes will be in response to exercise , excitement or similar exertions . Although EF is often misdiagnosed as epilepsy , which typically results in loss of consciousness , the dog remains conscious throughout the episode . Severity of symptoms can range from mild , occasional falling to freezing to seizure @-@ like episodes lasting hours . Episodes can become more or less severe as the dog gets older and there is no standard pattern to the attacks . The onset of symptoms usually occurs before five months but can appear at any age . It is similar to Scotty Cramp , a genetic disorder in Scottish Terriers . About 1 % of Cavaliers are affected by the condition , with 19 % being carriers . Dogs with whole coloured coats were more likely to be affected than dogs with parti @-@ coloured coats . 
 = = = <unk> and <unk> = = = 
 As many as half of all Cavalier King Charles Spaniels may have a congenital blood disorder called idiopathic asymptomatic thrombocytopenia , an abnormally low number of platelets in the blood , according to recent studies in Denmark and the United States . Platelets , or <unk> , are disk @-@ shaped blood elements which aid in blood clotting . Excessively low numbers are the most common cause of bleeding disorders in dogs . The platelets in the blood of many Cavalier King Charles Spaniels are a combination of those of normal size for dogs and others that are abnormally oversized , or <unk> . <unk> also is a congenital abnormality found in at least a third of <unk> . These large platelets function normally , and the typical Cavalier does not appear to experience any health problems due to either the size or fewer numbers of its platelets . 
 = = = Hip and knee disorders = = = 
 Hip dysplasia ( HD ) is a common genetic disease that affects Cavalier King Charles Spaniels . It is not present at birth but develops with age . Hip dysplasia is diagnosed by X @-@ rays , but it is not usually evident in X @-@ rays of Cavaliers until they mature . Even in adult spaniels with severe HD , X @-@ rays may not always indicate the disease . In a series of evaluations by the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals , the Cavalier was ranked 78th worst out of 157 breeds . The worst affected breeds were the Bulldog , Pug and Dogue de Bordeaux . 
 Cavaliers can be subject to a genetic defect of the femur and knee called luxating patella . This condition is most often observed when a puppy is 4 to 6 months old . In the most serious cases , surgery may be indicated . The grading system for the patella runs from 1 ( a tight knee ) , to 4 ( a knee so loose that its cap is easily displaced ) . If a cavalier has a grade 1 – 2 , physical rehabilitation therapy and exercise may reduce the grading and potentially avoid surgery . The grades 3 – 4 are most severe where surgery will most likely be needed to correct the problem to avoid the development of arthritis and lameness in the limb . 
 = = = Eye problems = = = 
 A disorder commonly found in Cavaliers is keratoconjunctivitis sicca , colloquially known as " dry eye " . The usual cause of this condition is an autoimmune reaction against the dog 's lacrimal gland ( tear gland ) , reducing the production of tears . According to the Canine Inherited Disorders Database , the condition requires continual treatment and if untreated may result in partial or total blindness . This disorder can decrease or heal over time . 
 A 1999 study of Cavaliers conducted by the Canine Eye Registration Foundation showed that an average of 30 % of all Cavalier King Charles Spaniels evaluated had eye problems . They include hereditary cataracts , corneal dystrophy , <unk> , entropion , microphthalmia , progressive retinal atrophy , and retinal dysplasia . 
 = = = Ear disorders = = = 
 Primary Secretory Otitis Media ( PSOM ) , also known as glue ear , consists of a highly viscous mucus plug which fills the dog 's middle ear and may cause the tympanic membrane to bulge . PSOM has been reported almost exclusively in Cavaliers , and it may affect over half of them . Because the pain and other sensations in the head and neck areas , resulting from PSOM , are similar to some symptoms caused by syringomyelia ( SM ) , some examining veterinarians have mis @-@ diagnosed SM in Cavaliers which actually have PSOM and not SM . 
 Cavalier King Charles Spaniels may be predisposed to a form of congenital deafness , which is present at birth , due to a lack of formation or early degeneration of receptors in the inner ear , although this is relatively rare . In addition , more recent studies have found Cavaliers that develop a progressive hearing loss , which usually begins during puppyhood and progresses until the dog is completely deaf , usually between the ages of three and five years . The progressive nature of this form of deafness in Cavaliers is believed to be caused by degeneration of the hearing nerve rather than the lack of formation or early degeneration of the inner ear receptors . 
 = = Urban myth = = 
 An urban legend claims that Charles II issued a special decree granting King Charles Spaniels permission to enter any establishment in the UK , overriding " no dog except guide dogs " rules . A variant of this myth relates specifically to the Houses of Parliament . This myth is sometimes instead applied to the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel . 
 The UK Parliament website states : " Contrary to popular rumour , there is no Act of Parliament referring to King Charles spaniels being allowed anywhere in the Palace of Westminster . We are often asked this question and have thoroughly researched it . " Similarly , there is no proof of any such law covering the wider UK . A spokesman for the Kennel Club said : " This law has been quoted from time to time . It is alleged in books that King Charles made this decree but our research hasn 't tracked it down . " 
 = Riesling = 
 Riesling is a white grape variety which originated in the Rhine region of Germany . Riesling is an aromatic grape variety displaying flowery , almost perfumed , aromas as well as high acidity . It is used to make dry , semi @-@ sweet , sweet , and sparkling white wines . Riesling wines are usually <unk> pure and are seldom <unk> . As of 2004 , Riesling was estimated to be the world 's 20th most grown variety at 48 @,@ 700 hectares ( 120 @,@ 000 acres ) ( with an increasing trend ) , but in terms of importance for quality wines , it is usually included in the " top three " white wine varieties together with Chardonnay and Sauvignon blanc . Riesling is a variety which is highly " terroir @-@ expressive " , meaning that the character of Riesling wines is greatly influenced by the wine 's place of origin . 
 In cool climates ( such as many German wine regions ) , Riesling wines tend to exhibit apple and tree fruit notes with noticeable levels of acidity that are sometimes balanced with residual sugar . A late @-@ ripening variety that can develop more citrus and peach notes is grown in warmer climates ( such as Alsace and parts of Austria ) . In Australia , Riesling is often noted for a characteristic lime note that tends to emerge in examples from the Clare and Eden Valley in South Australia . Riesling 's naturally high acidity and pronounced fruit flavors give wines made from the grape exceptional aging potential , with well @-@ made examples from favorable vintages often developing smokey , honey notes , and aged German Rieslings , in particular , taking on a " petrol " character . 
 In 2006 , Riesling was the most grown variety in Germany with 20 @.@ 8 % and 21 @,@ 197 hectares ( 52 @,@ 380 acres ) , and in the French region of Alsace with 21 @.@ 9 % and 3 @,@ 350 hectares ( 8 @,@ 300 acres ) . In Germany , the variety is particularly widely planted in the Mosel , Rheingau , Nahe and Pfalz wine regions . There are also significant plantings of Riesling in Austria , Serbia , Czech Republic , Slovakia , Luxembourg , northern Italy , Australia , New Zealand , Canada , South Africa , China , Ukraine , Washington , California and New York . 
 = = History = = 
 Riesling has a long history , and there are several written references to the variety dating from the 15th century , although with varying orthography . The earliest of these references dates from March 13 , 1435 , when the storage inventory of the high noble Count John IV. of Katzenelnbogen in Rüsselsheim ( a small principality on the Rhine , close to today 's Rheingau ) lists " 22 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> in die <unk> " ( " 22 shillings for Riesling vine cuttings for the vineyard " ) . The spelling <unk> is repeated in many other documents of the time . The modern spelling Riesling was first documented in 1552 when it was mentioned in Hieronymus Bock 's Latin herbal . 
 A map of <unk> in Alsace from 1348 contains the text zu dem <unk> , but it is not certain that this reference is to the grape variety . However , in 1477 , Riesling was documented in Alsace under the spelling <unk> . In <unk> in Austria , there is a small stream and a small vineyard both called <unk> , which are claimed locally to have given Riesling its name . However , there seems to be no documentary evidence to back this up , so this claim is not widely believed to be correct . 
 = = = Parentage = = = 
 Earlier , Riesling was sometimes claimed to have originated from wild vines of the Rhine region , without much support to back up that claim . More recently , DNA fingerprinting by Ferdinand Regner indicated that one parent of Riesling is <unk> blanc , known to the Germans as <unk> <unk> , a variety that , while rare today , was widely grown by the French and German peasantry of the Middle Ages . The other parent is a cross between a wild vine and Traminer . It is presumed that the Riesling was born somewhere in the valley of the Rhine , since both <unk> and Traminer have a long documented history in Germany , but with parents from either side of the Adriatic the cross could have happened anywhere on the way . 
 It has also been suggested , but not proved , that the red @-@ skinned version of Riesling is the forerunner of the common , " white " Riesling . The genetic differences between white and red Riesling are minuscule , as is also the case between Pinot noir and Pinot gris . 
 = = Longevity = = 
 Riesling wines are often consumed when young , when they make a fruity and aromatic wine which may have aromas of green or other apples , grapefruit , peach , gooseberry , honey , rose blossom or cut green grass , and usually a crisp taste due to the high acidity . However , Riesling 's naturally high acidity and range of flavours make it suitable for extended aging . International wine expert Michael Broadbent rates aged German Rieslings , some hundreds of years old , highly . Sweet Riesling wines , such as German <unk> are especially suited for <unk> since the high sugar content provides for additional preservation . However , high quality dry or off @-@ dry Riesling wine is also known to have not just survived but also been enjoyable at an age exceeding 100 years . 
 The <unk> of Bremen , Germany , stores various German wines , including Riesling based wines , in barrel back to the 1653 vintage . 
 More common aging periods for Riesling wines would be 5 – 15 years for dry , 10 – 20 years for semi @-@ sweet and 10 @-@ 30 + for sweet versions . 
 = = = Petroleum notes in aged Riesling wines = = = 
 On release , certain Riesling wines reveal a striking petrol note ( goût de <unk> in French ) which is sometimes described with associations to kerosene , lubricant or rubber . While an integral part of the aroma profile of mature Riesling and sought after by many experienced drinkers , it may be off @-@ putting to those unaccustomed to it , and those who primarily seek young and fruity aromas in their wine . The negative attitude to petrol aromas in young Riesling , and the preference for fruitier young wines of this variety , seem more common in Germany than in Alsace or on the export market , and some German producers , especially the volume @-@ oriented ones , have even gone so far as to consider the petrol notes a defect which they try to avoid , even at the cost of producing wines that are less suited to extended cellar aging . In that vein , the German Wine Institute has gone so far as to omit the mentioning of " petrol " as a possible aroma on their German @-@ language Wine Aroma Wheel , which is supposed to be specially adapted to German wines , and despite the fact that professor Ann C. Noble had included petrol in her original version of the wheel . 
 The petrol note is considered to be caused by the compound 1 @,@ 1 @,@ 6 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 @,@ 2 @-@ <unk> ( TDN ) , which during the aging process is created from carotenoid precursors by acid hydrolysis . The initial concentration of precursors in the wine determines the wine 's potential to develop TDN and petrol notes over time . From what is known of the production of carotenoids in grapes , factors that are likely to increase the TDN potential are : 
 Ripe grapes , i.e. , low yields and late harvest 
 High sun exposure 
 Water stress , which is most likely in regions which do not practice irrigation , and there primarily in certain dry vineyard sites in hot and dry years 
 High acid content 
 These factors are usually also considered to contribute to high quality Riesling wines , so the petrol note is in fact more likely to develop in top wines than in simpler wines made from high @-@ yielding vineyards , especially those from the New World , where irrigation is common . 
 = = Noble rot = = 
 The most expensive wines made from Riesling are late harvest dessert wines , produced by letting the grapes hang on the vines well past normal picking time . Through evaporation caused by the fungus Botrytis cinerea ( " noble rot " ) or by freezing , as in the case of ice wine ( in German , <unk> ) , water is removed and the resulting wine is felt to offer richer layers on the palate . These concentrated wines have more sugar ( in extreme cases hundreds of grams per litre ) , more acid ( to give balance to the sugar ) , more flavour , and more complexity . These elements combine to make wines which are amongst the most long lived of all white wines . The beneficial use of " noble rot " in Riesling grapes was discovered in the late 18th century at Schloss Johannisberg . Permission from the Abbey of Fulda ( which owned the vineyard ) to start picking Riesling grapes arrived too late and the grapes had begun to rot ; yet it turned out that the wine made from them was still of excellent quality . 
 = = Production regions = = 
 Riesling is considered one of the grape varieties that best expresses the terroir of the place where it is grown . It is particularly well suited for slate and sandy clay soil . 
 = = = Germany = = = 
 Originating in German soil today Riesling is Germany ’ s leading grape variety , known for its characteristic “ transparency ” in flavour and presentation of terroir , and its balance between fruit and mineral flavours . In Germany , Riesling normally ripens between late September and late November , and late harvest Riesling can be picked as late as January . 
 Three common characteristics of German Riesling are that they are rarely blended with other varieties and usually never exposed to oak flavour ( despite some vintners fermenting in " neutral " oak barrels ) . To this last item there is an exception with some <unk> in the wine regions of Palatinate ( Pfalz ) and Baden experimenting with new oak aging . The warmer temperatures in those regions produce heavier wines with a higher alcohol content that can better contend with the new oak . While clearer in individual flavours when it is young , a German Riesling will harmonize more as it ages , particularly around ten years of age . 
 In Germany , sugar levels at time of harvest are an important consideration in the wine 's production with <unk> levels measuring the sweetness of the wine . Equally important to <unk> is the balance of acidity between the green tasting malic acid and the more citrus tasting tartaric acid . In cool years , some growers will wait until November to harvest in hopes of having a higher level of ripeness and subsequent tartaric acid . 
 Before technology in wineries could stabilize temperatures , the low temperatures in winter of the northern German regions would halt fermentation and leave the resulting wines with natural sugars and a low alcohol content . According to local tradition , in the Mosel region the wine would then be bottled in tall , tapered , and green hock bottles . Similar bottles , although brown , are used for Riesling produced in the Rhine region . 
 Riesling is also the preferred grape in production of Deutscher <unk> , German sparkling wine . 
 Riesling wines from Germany cover a vast array of tastes from sweet to off @-@ dry <unk> to dry <unk> . Late harvest Rieslings can ripen to become very sweet dessert wines of the <unk> ( BA ) and <unk> ( TBA ) class . 
 = = = Alsace = = = 
 Riesling is on record as being planted in the Alsace region by 1477 when its quality was praised by the Duke of Lorraine . Today over a fifth of Alsace 's vineyards are covered with Riesling vines , mostly in the Haut @-@ Rhin district , with the varietal Riesling d 'Alsace being very different from neighboring German Riesling . This is partly from difference in the soil with the clay Alsatian soil being more <unk> calcareous than the slate composition of Rheingau . The other differences come in wine making styles , with the Alsatian preferring more French @-@ oriented methods that produce wines of higher alcohol content ( normally around 12 % ) and more roundness due to longer time spent in neutral oak barrels or steel tanks . In contrast to German wine laws , Alsatian <unk> can be <unk> , a process in which the alcoholic content is increased through the addition of sugar to the must . 
 In contrast to other Alsatian wines , Rieslings d 'Alsace are usually not meant to be drunk young , but many are still best in the first years . Rieslings d 'Alsace tend to be mostly very dry with a cleansing acidity . They are thick @-@ bodied wines that coat the palate . These wines age exceptionally well with a quality vintage aging up to 20 years . This is beneficial since the flavours in an Alsace wine will often open up after three years , developing softer and fruitier flavours . Riesling is very suitable for the late harvest <unk> <unk> and the <unk> Sélection de Grains Nobles , with good acidity keeping up the sweetness of the wine . 
 In addition to Muscat , Gewürztraminer and Pinot gris , Riesling is one of the acceptable varieties whose planting is allowed in Alsace grand <unk> sites . 
 = = = Australia and New Zealand = = = 
 In 1838 William Macarthur planted Riesling vines near Penrith in New South Wales . Riesling was the most planted white grape in Australia until the early 1990s when Chardonnay greatly increased in popularity . Riesling still flourishes in The Great Southern ( in particular Mt Barker , Frankland River and <unk> ) , Clare Valley , in particular the areas of <unk> and around the Polish Hill River , and the cooler Eden Valley and High Eden regions .. The warmer Australian climate produces thicker skinned grapes , sometimes seven times the thickness of German grown grape . The grapes ripening in free drain soil composed of red soil over limestone and shale , producing a lean wine that as it matures produces <unk> , honeycomb and lime aromas and flavors . It is common for Australian Rieslings to be fermented at low temperatures in stainless steel tanks with no oxidation of the wine and followed by earlier bottling . 
 Australian Rieslings are noted for their oily texture and citrus fruit flavors in their youth and a smooth balance of freshness and acid as they age . The <unk> Rieslings have immense levels of flavor concentrations that have been favorably compared to lemon marmalade . 
 Riesling was first planted in New Zealand in the 1970s and has flourished in the relatively cool climate of the Marlborough area and for late harvests in the Nelson region . In comparison to Australian Riesling , New Zealand produces lighter and more delicate wines that range from sweet to dry . Home of cool climate wines , Central Otago , has recently emerged as another area producing terroir driven wines . 
 = = = Austria = = = 
 Riesling is the second leading white grape varietal after the indigenous Grüner Veltliner . Austrian Riesling is generally thick bodied , coating the palate and producing a strong clarity of flavour coupled with a mouthwatering aroma . A particular Austrian Riesling trademark is a long finish that includes hints of white pepper . It flourishes in the cool climate and free @-@ draining granite and mica soil of the <unk> region where Austrian wine laws allow for irrigation . With levels normally around 13 % it has a relatively high alcohol content for Riesling and is generally at its peak after 5 years . Austrian Riesling is not known for its sweetness and is mostly dry with very few grapes affected by botrytis . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 In the late nineteenth century German immigrants brought with them Riesling vines , named Johannisberg Riesling to qualify them as “ legitimate ” German Riesling . New York , particularly in the Finger Lakes region , was one of the earliest U.S. producers of Riesling . Plantings started to appear in California by 1857 and followed in Washington State in 1871 . 
 New York Riesling generally has a characteristic effervescent light body with a similarly light , mellow flavor . The wine can be dynamic though rarely robust , and ranges from dry to sweet . New York is also a notable producer of Riesling @-@ based Ice Wine , although a large majority of New York Ice Wine is made from Vidal blanc and <unk> . 
 In California , Riesling lags far behind Chardonnay in popularity and is not as commonly planted . A notable exception is the growing development of high quality Late Harvest dessert wines . So far , the Late Harvest wines most successfully produced are in the Anderson and Alexander Valleys where the weather is more likely to encourage the needed botrytis to develop . The Riesling that does come out of California tends to be softer , fuller , and having more diverse flavours than a " typical " German Riesling . 
 In the Pacific Northwest there is a stark contrast in Riesling production . The grape is currently on the rise in Washington State but on the decline in neighboring Oregon . Riesling from this area ranges from dry to sweet , and has a crisp lightness that bodes well for easy drinking . Often there will be an easily detectable peach and mineral complex . Some Washington State winemakers , such as Chateau Ste . Michelle , are adapting German @-@ style Riesling production methods , and even partnering with well @-@ known German vintners like Dr. Ernest <unk> to create specialty wines such as the Eroica Riesling . With annual productions of over 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cases a year , Chateau Ste . Michelle is the worldwide leader in the production of Riesling wines by volume . In 2007 Pacific Rim Winemakers , another Pacific Northwest winery and owned by Randall <unk> of Bonny Doon , has built the first wine facility in Red Mountain AVA dedicated completely to Riesling production . 
 In Michigan , whose Old Mission Peninsula and Leelanau Peninsula AVAs ( near Traverse City ) are known for their ice wine , Riesling is a fairly common variety , in part on account of its suitability for that purpose . 
 Riesling is grown in other regions as well , including colder parts of relatively warm states such as Oklahoma ( where it has even been made into an <unk> ) and Texas . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 In Ontario , Riesling is commonly used for <unk> , where the wine is noted for its breadth and complexity . Niagara is a major producer of ice wine in general , putting it neck @-@ and @-@ neck with Germany . Late Harvest wines and some sparkling wines are produced with Riesling in Niagara but it is table wines from dry to off @-@ dry that hold the largest share of production . The climate of the region is typically quite warm in the summertime which adds a layer of richness in the wines . It is interesting that the founder of St. <unk> in the Mosel , Herman Weiss , was an early pioneer in Niagara 's modern viticulture , selling his strain of Mosel clone Riesling to many producers in west Niagara ( these vines are well over 20 years old now ) . This clone and Niagara 's summer heat make for uniquely bright wines and often show up in interesting dry styled versions . Many producers and wine critics will argue that Niagara 's best offerings come from the Niagara Escarpment region which encompasses the Short Hills Bench , 20 Mile Bench and Beamsville Bench . 
 In British Columbia , Riesling is commonly grown for use in <unk> , table wine , and <unk> style sparkling wines , a notable example of which is <unk> Brut . 
 In Nova Scotia , particularly in the Annapolis Valley region , Riesling is showing significant promise , being shaped by the warm summer days with cool nights and the extension of the growing season that is being observed . The Maritime climate combined with glacial soils contribute to the interesting expressions that are showing . 
 = = = Other regions = = = 
 Riesling is also widely grown in Italy , particularly Friuli @-@ Venezia Giulia , South Africa , Chile and Central Europe , particularly Romania and Moldova . 
