 = = = Civil suit and special election = = = 
 The 6 @-@ lane proposal caused several opposition groups , led by the Citizens Against R.H. Thomson ( <unk> ) , to launch a civil suit to halt further planning for the Bay Freeway . The two citizens groups opposed what they claimed was improper planning and financing , described as " a series of shortcut procedures and hearings to give the design rubber @-@ stamp approval " , and that the project did not conform to the voter @-@ approved 1960 proposal for a " Mercer Street Connection " . <unk> was named the plaintiff in the case , using funds largely from an anonymous single donor that were originally meant for opposing the R.H. Thomson Expressway . King County Superior Court Judge <unk> M. Ringold ruled on November 3 , 1971 , that the Bay Freeway was a major deviation from the voter @-@ approved 1960 plan , with its cost increasing seven @-@ fold from the original 1960 proposal to $ 28 million , forcing the city of Seattle to reconsider its plans for the project . The Council Committee of the Whole unanimously voted the following month to hold a special referendum seeking approval of the Bay Freeway , as well as endorsement of the city council 's decision to cancel the R.H. Thomson Expressway , scheduled for February 8 , 1972 . 
 The final environmental impact statement for the project was published by the City of Seattle Department of Engineering on January 24 , 1972 , two weeks before the election . It included three alternatives , all elevated between Valley and Mercer streets from Aurora Avenue to I @-@ 5 . Construction would begin the following spring , with a completion date in early 1975 . A rapid transit alternative was deemed " not probable in the near future " for the corridor , though express bus service was considered . A depressed roadway was rejected outright , as it could only achieve a grade of 6 % at 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 914 @.@ 40 m ) , required a larger amount of right @-@ of @-@ way acquisition and relocation of utilities , and it was located below the water table , making it too expensive to be feasible . 
 Referendum 1 , which sought approval of the Bay Freeway , was rejected by a margin of 52 @,@ 748 to 42 @,@ 502 on February 8 , 1972 , effectively cancelling the project . In the aftermath of the vote , opponents of the project urged the city council to look into alternate solutions for the " Mercer Street mess " . 
 The Seattle City Council officially terminated the Bay Freeway project by passing an ordinance on May 1 , 1972 , to halt condemnation proceedings related to properties in the freeway 's proposed corridor . 
 = = = Aftermath and subsequent proposals = = = 
 As a result of the vote in February 1972 , the State Highway Department transferred $ 5 @.@ 7 million in trust funds meant for the Bay Freeway to expanding U.S. Route 195 between Spokane and Pullman in Eastern Washington . State Highway Director George H. Andrews warned that the dual cancellation of the Bay Freeway and R.H. Thomson Expressway , the latter having been defeated on the same day , would overload I @-@ 5 far beyond its design capacity , particularly in serving freight traffic near the Industrial District . Seattle Mayor Wes <unk> predicted that congestion on Mercer Street would continue to worsen , stating that " there is no real alternative to the Bay Freeway " , criticizing the rejection as a part of a " nationwide reaction to freeways and concrete " . 
 Mercer Street had previously been split into a couplet , with westbound traffic diverted to Valley Street one block north , as a temporary solution to Seattle Center congestion in 1968 . Between then and 1990 , the city of Seattle has had 58 studies proposing various methods of reducing congestion on Mercer Street , all of them rejected by the Seattle City Council . Among the most notable proposals include a four @-@ block , $ 100 million tunnel that was supported by Mayor Charles Royer in the late 1980s , and the " Broad Street <unk> " plan to lower Broad and Mercer streets and add a park lid at the south end of Lake Union . The failed Seattle Commons levy , which proposed building a 61 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 25 km2 ) urban park in the South Lake Union neighborhood in 1995 , included plans for a below @-@ grade freeway along Mercer Street estimated to cost $ 93 @.@ 8 million . 
 The Seattle Department of Transportation secured $ 190 @.@ 5 million in early 2010 to fund its " Mercer Corridor Project " , which proposed improving traffic flow by restoring westbound lanes on Mercer Street . A groundbreaking ceremony was held the following September , with construction on the project starting shortly thereafter , hoping to reduce congestion on Mercer Street . After two years of construction , the expanded six @-@ lane Mercer Street opened to traffic on August 27 , 2012 , allowing for two @-@ way traffic between Dexter Avenue North and I @-@ 5 to be carried by Mercer Street for the first time in 44 years . The two @-@ way segment was extended west to 9th Avenue North on May 30 , 2014 , removing the final section of one @-@ way traffic on Mercer Street , while also permanently closing Broad Street in preparation for the Alaskan Way Viaduct replacement tunnel project . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 This list reflects the final incarnation of the Bay Freeway , as proposed before the 1972 referendum . The entire highway was in Seattle , King County . 
 = <unk> = 
 The stapes / <unk> / or stirrup is a bone in the middle ear of humans and other mammals which is involved in the conduction of sound vibrations to the inner ear . The stirrup @-@ shaped small bone is on and transmits these to the oval window , medially . The stapes is the smallest and lightest named bone in the human body , and is so @-@ called because of its resemblance to a stirrup ( Latin : <unk> ) . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The stapes is the third bone of the three ossicles in the middle ear . The stapes is a stirrup @-@ shaped bone , and the smallest in the human body . It rests on the oval window , to which it is connected by an annular ligament . The stapes is described as having a base , resting on the oval window , as well as a head that articulates with the incus . These are connected by anterior and posterior limbs ( Latin : crura ) . The stapes articulates with the incus through the <unk> joint . The stapes is the smallest bone in the human body , and measures roughly 3 x <unk> , greater along the head @-@ base span . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The stapes develops from the second pharyngeal arch during the sixth to eighth week of embryological life . The central cavity of the stapedius is due to the presence <unk> of the stapedial artery , which later regresses . 
 = = = Animals = = = 
 The stapes is one of three ossicles in mammals . In non @-@ mammalian four @-@ legged animals , the bone homologous to the stapes is usually called the columella ; however , in reptiles , either term may be used . In fish , the homologous bone is called the hyomandibular , and is part of the gill arch supporting either the spiracle or the jaw , depending on the species . The equivalent term in amphibians is the pars media <unk> . 
 = = = Variation = = = 
 The stapes appears to be relatively constant in size in different ethnic groups . In 0 @.@ 01 @-@ 0 @.@ 02 % of people , the stapedial artery does not regress , and persists in the central foramen . In this case , a pulsatile sound may be heard in the affected ear , or there may be no symptoms at all . Rarely , the stapes may be completely absent . 
 = = Function = = 
 Situated between the incus and the inner ear , the stapes transmits sound vibrations from the incus to the oval window , a membrane @-@ covered opening to the inner ear . The stapes is also stabilized by the stapedius muscle , which is innervated by the facial nerve . 
 = = Clinical relevance = = 
 Otosclerosis is a congenital or spontaneous @-@ onset disease characterized by abnormal bone remodeling in the inner ear . Often this causes the stapes to adhere to the oval window , which impedes its ability to conduct sound , and is a cause of conductive hearing loss . Clinical otosclerosis is found in about 1 % of people , although it is more common in forms that do not cause noticeable hearing loss . Otosclerosis is more likely in young age groups , and females . Two common treatments are <unk> , the surgical removal of the stapes and replacement with an artificial prosthesis , and <unk> , the creation of a small hole in the base of the stapes followed by the insertion of an artificial prosthesis into that hole . Surgery may be complicated by a persistent stapedial artery , fibrosis @-@ related damage to the base of the bone , or obliterative otosclerosis , resulting in obliteration of the base . 
 = = History = = 
 The stapes is commonly described as having been discovered by the professor Giovanni Filippo Ingrassia in 1546 at the University of Naples , although this remains the nature of some controversy , as Ingrassia 's description was published posthumously in his 1603 anatomical commentary In <unk> <unk> de <unk> <unk> et <unk> <unk> . Spanish anatomist Pedro Jimeno is first to have been credited with a published description , in Dialogus de re medica ( 1549 ) . The bone is so @-@ named because of its resemblance to a stirrup ( Latin : stapes ) , an example of a late Latin word , probably created in mediaeval times from " to stand " ( Latin : <unk> ) , as stirrups did not exist in the early Latin @-@ speaking world . 
 = French Sudan = 
 French Sudan ( French : Soudan Français ; Arabic : <unk> <unk> as @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> ) was a French colonial territory in the federation of French West Africa from around 1880 until 1960 , when it became the independent state of Mali . The colony was formally called French Sudan from 1890 until 1899 and then again from 1921 until 1958 , and had a variety of different names over the course of its existence . The colony was initially established largely as a military project led by French troops , but in the mid @-@ 1890s it came under civilian administration . 
 A number of administrative reorganizations in the early 1900s brought increasing French administration over issues like agriculture , religion , and slavery . Following World War II , the African Democratic Rally ( RDA ) under Modibo Keita became the most significant political force pushing for independence . 
 Mali initially retained close connections with France and joined in a short @-@ lived federation with Senegal in 1959 , but ties to both countries quickly weakened . In 1960 , the French Sudan colony formally became the Republic of Mali and began to distance itself further from Senegal and France . 
 = = Colonial establishment = = 
 French Sudan originally formed as a set of military outposts as an extension of the French colony in Senegal . Though the area offered France little economic or strategic gain , the military effectively advocated greater conquest in the region . This was partly due to a fascination with the great empires , such as the Mali Empire and the <unk> Empire that rose to prominence in the area , and partly due to the promotional opportunities that military conquest offered for French military personnel . 
 French conquest began in 1879 , when Joseph Gallieni was dispatched to the area to establish a fort and survey the land for a railroad from Dakar in Senegal to the Niger River . This was followed with the establishment of a number of French forts and political alliances with specific leaders in the region in the early 1880s . The administrative structure of the area was still largely under control of the French Governor of Senegal , and the most significant colonization were simply the military forts and outposts , including the important one established at Kayes in 1881 by Gustave <unk> @-@ Desbordes . Though the civilian administration of the French governor of Senegal formally ruled the area , military officers in the region largely bypassed these leaders and answered directly to commanding officers in Paris . Desbordes gradually took over more territory , often using inter @-@ ethnic rivalries and political tension among leaders in the area to appoint French @-@ supportive leaders . 
 French civilian administrators struggled with the military leaders , and the two forces went through a number of leadership changes over the territory , until Louis Archinard was appointed military governor in 1892 . Archinard led military campaigns against <unk> Ture , <unk> Tall , and other resistant leaders in the region , with varying success . Archinard 's campaigns were often executed through direct military control , without civilian oversight . As costs increased , the French administration decided to replace Archinard 's control over the area with a civilian governor , Louis Albert <unk> . 
 = = Administration and jurisdiction = = 
 The region was governed under a number of different names between 1880 and 1960 . The area was Upper River from 1880 until 18 August 1890 , when it was renamed French Sudan , with its capital at Kayes . On 10 October 1899 , French Sudan was divided , with the southern <unk> joining coastal colonies , and the rest split into two administrative areas called Middle Niger and Upper Senegal . In 1902 , the region again was organized as a unified colony under the name Senegambia and Niger ( <unk> et Niger ) . The name changed again in 1904 to Upper Senegal and Niger ( Haut Sénégal et Niger ) . Finally , in 1921 , the name changed back to French Sudan ( Soudan Français ) . 
 Borders and administration of the colony similarly changed a number of times . Originally , and for the initial period , the colony vacillated between military administration and civilian administration from Senegal . In 1893 , French Sudan formally came under civilian administration , which lasted until 1899 . At that point , a reorganization of the colony split 11 southern provinces to other French colonies like French Guinea , the Ivory Coast and Dahomey . 
 The area that was not reorganized was governed in two administrations linked to other French colonies . Following this , the territory of the colony was reestablished in 1902 . Though the borders shifted slightly , there was little territorial change until 1933 . At that point , the colony of the French Upper Volta ( Haute @-@ Volta , modern Burkina Faso ) dissolved , and the northern territory was added to French Sudan . 
 In 1947 , Upper Volta was reestablished , and the French Sudan borders became those that eventually became the borders of Mali . Kayes was the original capital city from the 1890s until 1908 , when the capital moved to Bamako , where it remains . 
 = = Agriculture = = 
 The colony supported mostly rain @-@ fed agriculture , with limited irrigation for its first 30 years . The only cash crops were nuts gathered close to the railroad between Kayes and Bamako . However , following successful tests of growing Egyptian cotton in West Africa during World War I , Émile <unk> began to campaign for the construction of a large irrigation system along the Niger river . Starting in 1921 , significant irrigation projects around <unk> and later at <unk> @-@ Camp and the <unk> Cercle began to bring water . The French believed this project could rival the major cotton growing centers of Egypt and the United States . 
 Unlike other agricultural projects in French West Africa , the French Sudan irrigation project initially relied on families voluntarily resettling along lines established by the colonial authority . Unable to attract enough volunteers , the colonial authorities began to try forced resettlement to the cotton project . The Office du Niger was founded in 1926 as the main organization facilitating planned , irrigated agricultural projects . Farmers resisted forced resettlement and petitioned for permanent land rights to the irrigated land ( which was usually held as property of the Office du Niger ) . Despite these efforts , a significant cash crop economy did not develop in the French Sudan . 
 = = Religious policy = = 
 Like much of the rest of French West Africa , the colony had a number of policies regarding Islam and the Muslim communities . The Arabic language and Islamic law were preferred in the colony by the French in the establishment of colonial government , largely because both were codified , and thus easy to standardize . 
 Though they maintained a formal neutrality policy in regards to religion , the French colonial administration began to regulate Islamic education in the early 1900s . In addition , fear of a pan @-@ Islamism political rise throughout North Africa and the Sahel led the French to adopt policies that aimed to prevent the spread of Islam beyond where it already existed and to prevent Muslim leaders from governing non @-@ Muslim communities . Indigenous religions and Christianity existed under less formal policies , and French efforts often used these to balance the spread of Islam in the region . 
 In the 1940s , a religious movement called Allah <unk> began in the San Cercle based upon the visions of a single person . Local administrators allowed the Allah <unk> movement to spread and practice , seeing it as a potential limiting influence on the spread of Islam farther south . In the late 1950s , Muslim protests and riots throughout the colony further contributed to a growing independence movement . 
 = = Slavery policy = = 
 Like much of the rest of French West Africa , authorities enforced explicit rules in an attempt to end slavery in the region . In 1903 , the government instructed French administrators to not use slave as an administrative category anymore . This was followed in 1905 by a formal French decree that ended slavery throughout French West Africa . 
 Almost a million slaves in French West Africa responded to this by moving away from their masters and settling elsewhere . The French supported these efforts by creating settlements around the Niger River and digging wells for communities elsewhere so they could farm away from their former masters . 
 This process affected the Southern and Western parts of present @-@ day Mali most significantly , but in the Northern and Eastern parts of the colony large numbers of slaves remained in servitude to their masters . According to rough estimates , throughout the area of present @-@ day Mali about one @-@ third of former slaves moved away from the slavery relationship , while two @-@ thirds remained with their masters . In the 1920s , most Tuareg households still had slaves who tended to the house and animals . 
 Though slavery persisted , some aspects of the relationship changed with the French administration . Escaped slaves could find official protection by French authorities in the cities for a limited time . Slaves could sometimes renegotiate the terms of their servitude in the changed political situation . Some were willing to agree to remain in servitude if they received control over their family life and some land to pass to their children . In addition , the French administration actively worked to end slave raiding and the most clear manifestations of the slave trade , greatly reducing those means of acquiring slaves . However , for many decades after the 1905 abolition of slavery , the practice continued in much of French Sudan . 
 = = Independence = = 
 Following the passage of the Loi Cadre by the French National Assembly in 1956 , many of the colonies in French West African began to hold elections to increase the self @-@ determination of their territories . In the first elections held in French Sudan in 1957 , the African Democratic Rally ( Rassemblement Démocratique Africain , commonly known as the RDA ) won the elections in French Sudan , as well as winning majorities in neighboring Ivory Coast , French Guinea , and the Upper Volta . Following the French constitutional referendum of 1958 , of which received an overwhelming majority in support , the République <unk> declared itself a republic with internal autonomy on 24 November 1958 . The Sudanese Republic , as the area was now called , was the second colony after Madagascar to join the French Community , which provided it internal autonomy while linking its currency , foreign policy and defense with France . 
 In early January 1959 , there were plans for a federation linking the Sudanese Republic with Senegal , Dahomey , and the Upper Volta in a federation of autonomous states . By April , however , neither Dahomey 's nor Upper Volta 's legislatures had ratified the federation , and so the Mali Federation was formed with only the Sudanese Republic and Senegal . In 1959 , Modibo Keïta 's RDA party won all 70 seats in the legislative elections in the Sudanese Republic and joined forces with the dominant party in Senegal , headed by Léopold Sédar Senghor . The federation achieved independence on 20 June 1960 within the French Community ; however , divisions between Senghor and Keïta on the governance of the federation resulted in its dissolution on 20 August 1960 . The area of French Sudan formally proclaimed itself the Republic of Mali and , with increasing radicalization of Keita , left the French Community in September 1960 . 
 = 2006 New York City plane crash = 
 The 2006 New York City plane crash occurred on October 11 , 2006 , when a Cirrus <unk> general aviation , fixed @-@ wing , single @-@ engine light aircraft crashed into the Belaire Apartments in New York City at about 2 : 42 p.m. local time ( 18 : 42 UTC ) . The aircraft struck the north side of the building , located on the Upper East Side of Manhattan , causing a fire in several apartments , which was extinguished within two hours . 
 Both people aboard the aircraft were killed in the accident : New York Yankees pitcher Cory Lidle and his certified flight instructor Tyler Stanger . Twenty @-@ one people were injured , including eleven firefighters . An apartment resident , Ilana <unk> , was hospitalized for a month with severe burns incurred when the post @-@ impact fire engulfed her apartment . 
 According to the Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) , the Cirrus <unk> aircraft , tail number <unk> , was owned by Lidle . On May 1 , 2007 , the National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) stated that the probable cause of the crash was pilot error . The NTSB was unable to determine which person was flying the aircraft at the time of the crash . 
 = = Flight = = 
 The aircraft departed from Teterboro Airport in Teterboro , New Jersey , at 2 : 29 pm local time ( 18 : 29 UTC ) . Lidle planned on flying to Tennessee , where he had a hotel room booked for the night , then to Dallas , Texas , and finally on to his home in California . 
 Radar measurements show that , immediately before the crash , Lidle 's aircraft was flying at 112 mph ( 180 km / h ) at 700 feet ( 210 m ) altitude in the East River VFR corridor , an area which former NTSB official Peter Goelz described as " very tricky " due to its narrow width and frequent congestion . The VFR corridor ends abruptly at the northern tip of Roosevelt Island . Aircraft must receive an air traffic control clearance to proceed beyond the boundaries of the corridor , or else make a sharp U @-@ turn and return the way they came . Lidle 's plane flew north along the corridor almost to the end before executing a turn and hitting the north face of the building along the river . 
 = = Crash = = 
 The airplane struck the Belaire , a 42 @-@ story condominium tower at 524 East 72nd Street , at approximately 30 stories above the ground . The plane hit the apartment owned by Dr. Parviz <unk> and his wife Ilana , the latter of whom was seated in the room when the plane crashed and sustained shrapnel injuries and burns . Her housekeeper was also present and helped her escape . 
 There was no indication that the aircraft 's Ballistic Recovery Systems emergency parachute , designed to bring the small plane down safely , was deployed . New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg said the plane circled the Statue of Liberty before flying north up the East River and disappeared from radar near the Queensboro Bridge . The FAA confirmed that the plane was flying under visual flight rules ( VFR ) and had attracted no special attention from air traffic controllers or NORAD before the crash . The aircraft took a hard U @-@ shaped turn before it hit the building . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 In an interview Lidle gave about a month earlier , he stated he had been a pilot for seven months and had flown about 95 solo hours . The crash garnered extra attention because of superficial similarities to the September 11 attacks in New York City ( whose fifth anniversary had occurred one month earlier ) . U.S. officials said that NORAD scrambled fighter aircraft over numerous American and Canadian cities for Combat Air Patrol , and that U.S. President George W. Bush was informed about the situation , but that these were precautionary measures only . The FBI quickly announced there was no reason to suspect that the crash was an act of terrorism . 
 LaGuardia Airport and John F. Kennedy International Airport did not experience delays from the crash . Police cordoned off several blocks at the peak of the confusion , but subway and ferry services continued without interruption . The FAA initially imposed a temporary flight restriction on an area within one nautical mile ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) of the scene , from ground level to 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 460 m ) altitude . This restriction was lifted the next day , though New York Governor George Pataki called for permanent restrictions . 
 On October 13 , 2006 , two days after the crash , the FAA banned all fixed @-@ winged aircraft from the East River corridor unless in contact with local air traffic control . The new rule , which took effect immediately , required all small aircraft ( with the exception of helicopters and certain seaplanes ) to seek the approval of and stay in contact with air traffic control while in the corridor . The FAA cited safety concerns , especially unpredictable winds from between buildings , as the reason for the change . 
 The news story about the crash produced by WWOR @-@ TV with Joshua Eure as Executive Producer won a 2007 Emmy Award in the Spot News category . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 On October 11 , the National Transportation Safety Board dispatched a six @-@ member " Go Team " from Washington , D.C. to New York City , which arrived at the scene in the evening to take fuel samples and examine clues found in the debris . These included the aircraft 's bent propeller , a charred memory chip , the <unk> parachute , and Lidle 's flight log book . The NTSB accident number is <unk> . 
 The NTSB 's final hearing on May 1 , 2007 determined that " the pilots ’ inadequate planning , judgment , and airmanship in the performance of a 180 @-@ degree turn maneuver inside of a limited turning space " caused the crash . The investigation was unable to determine whether Lidle or Stanger was at the controls . Although there was 2 @,@ 100 feet ( 640 m ) of space available , the aircraft used only about 1 @,@ 700 feet ( 520 m ) of width in which to make the 180 @-@ degree turn — but this distance was effectively reduced to 1 @,@ 300 feet ( 400 m ) by the 13 @-@ knot ( 24 km / h ) easterly winds that day . A bank angle of at least 53 degrees would be required to successfully execute a 180 @-@ degree turn in this distance . If the required bank was not initiated early then , as the turn progressed , the bank angle would have needed to have been increased , possibly resulting in an aerodynamic stall . The investigation was unable to determine if the plane was stalled at the time of the crash . An animation of the flight path combining radar data with a Coast Guard video of the East River was also presented . 
 A lawsuit brought by Lidle 's family against the manufacturer of the aircraft , Cirrus Design , alleging faulty design , was rejected by a jury in May 2011 . 
 = Eraserhead = 
 Eraserhead is a 1977 American surrealist body horror film written and directed by filmmaker David Lynch . Shot in black @-@ and @-@ white , Eraserhead is Lynch 's first feature @-@ length film , coming after several short works . The film was produced with the assistance of the American Film Institute ( AFI ) during the director 's time studying there . Starring Jack Nance , Charlotte Stewart , Jeanne Bates , Judith Anna Roberts , Laurel Near , and Jack Fisk , it tells the story of Henry Spencer ( Nance ) , who is left to care for his grossly deformed child in a desolate industrial landscape . Throughout the film , Spencer experiences dreams or hallucinations , featuring his child and the Lady in the Radiator ( Near ) . 
 Eraserhead spent several years in principal photography because of the difficulty of funding the film ; donations from Fisk and his wife Sissy Spacek kept production afloat . The film was shot on several locations owned by the AFI in California , including Greystone Mansion and a set of disused stables in which Lynch lived . Lynch and sound designer Alan Splet spent a year working on the film 's audio after their studio was soundproofed . The film 's soundtrack features organ music by Fats Waller and includes the song " In Heaven " , penned for the film by Peter Ivers . 
 Initially opening to small audiences and little interest , Eraserhead gained popularity over several long runs as a midnight movie . Since its release , the film has earned positive reviews . The surrealist imagery and sexual undercurrents have been seen as key thematic elements , and the intricate sound design as its technical highlight . Thematic analysis of the film has also highlighted these issues and has elaborated on Spencer 's fatalism and inactivity . In 2004 , the film was preserved in the National Film Registry by the United States Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Man in the Planet ( Jack Fisk ) pulls levers in his home in space , while the head of Henry Spencer ( Jack Nance ) floats in the sky . A giant spermatozoon @-@ like creature emerges from Spencer 's mouth , floating into the void . The Man in the Planet appears to control the creature with his levers , eventually making it fall into a pool of water . 
 In an industrial cityscape , Spencer walks home with his groceries . He is stopped outside his apartment by the Beautiful Girl Across the Hall ( Judith Anna Roberts ) , who informs him that his girlfriend , Mary X ( Charlotte Stewart ) , has invited him to dinner with her family . Spencer leaves his groceries in his apartment , which is filled with piles of dirt and dead vegetation . That night , Spencer visits X 's home , conversing awkwardly with her mother ( Jeanne Bates ) . At the dinner table , he is asked to carve a chicken that X 's talkative father , Bill ( Allen Joseph ) has " made " ; the bird writhes on the plate and gushes blood . After dinner , Spencer is cornered by X 's mother , who tries to kiss him . She tells him that X has had his child and that the two must marry . X , however , is not sure if what she bore is a child . 
 The couple move into Spencer 's one @-@ room apartment and begin caring for the child — a <unk> bundle with an inhuman , snakelike face , resembling the spermatozoon @-@ like creature . The infant refuses all food , crying incessantly and intolerably . The sound drives X hysterical , and she leaves Spencer and the child . Spencer attempts to care for the child , and he learns that it struggles to breathe and has developed painful sores . 
 Spencer begins experiencing visions , again seeing the Man in the Planet , as well as the Lady in the Radiator ( Laurel Near ) , who sings to him as she stomps upon spermatozoon @-@ like creatures . After a sexual encounter with the Beautiful Girl Across the Hall , Spencer has a vision where he is decapitated by a creature resembling the child , revealing a stump underneath that resembles the child 's face . Soon afterwards , Spencer 's head sinks into a pool of blood and falls from the sky , landing on a street below . A boy finds it , bringing it to a pencil factory to be turned into <unk> . 
 Spencer seeks out the Beautiful Girl Across the Hall , but finds her with another man . Crushed , Spencer returns to his room , where the child is crying . He takes a pair of scissors and for the first time removes the child 's swaddling . It is revealed that the child has no skin ; the bandages held its internal organs together , and they spill apart after the rags are cut . The child gasps in pain , and Spencer cuts its organs with the scissors . The wounds gush a thick liquid , covering the child . The power in the room overloads ; as the lights flicker on and off the child grows to huge proportions . When the lights burn out completely , the child 's head is replaced by the planet . Spencer appears amidst a billowing cloud of eraser shavings . The side of the planet bursts apart , and inside , the Man in the Planet struggles with his levers , which are now emitting sparks . Spencer is embraced warmly by the Lady in the Radiator , as both white light and white noise crescendo before the film suddenly ends . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Writer and director David Lynch had previously studied for a career as an artist , and he had created several short films to animate his paintings . By 1970 , however , he had switched his focus to film @-@ making , and at the age of 24 he accepted a scholarship at the American Film Institute 's Center for Advanced Film Studies . Lynch disliked the course and considered dropping out , but he changed his mind after he was offered the chance to produce a script of his own devising . He was given permission to use the school 's full campus for film sets ; he converted the school 's disused stables into a series of sets and lived there . In addition , Greystone Mansion , also owned by the AFI , was used for many scenes . 
 Lynch had initially begun work on a script titled Gardenback , based on his painting of a hunched figure with vegetation growing from its back . Gardenback was a surrealist script about adultery , which featured a continually growing insect representing one man 's lust for his neighbor . The script would have resulted in a roughly 45 @-@ minute @-@ long film , which the AFI felt was too long for such a figurative , nonlinear script . In its place , Lynch presented Eraserhead , which he had developed based on a daydream of a man 's head being taken to a pencil factory by a small boy . Several board members at the AFI were still opposed to producing such a surrealist work , but they were persuaded when Dean Frank Daniel threatened to resign if it were to be vetoed . Lynch 's script for Eraserhead was influenced by his reading as a film student ; Franz Kafka 's 1915 novella The Metamorphosis and Nikolai Gogol 's 1836 short story " The Nose " were strong influences on the screenplay . 
 The script is also thought to have been inspired by Lynch 's fear of fatherhood ; his daughter Jennifer had been born with " severely clubbed feet " , requiring extensive corrective surgery as a child . Jennifer has said that her own unexpected conception and birth defects were the basis for the film 's themes . The film 's tone was also shaped by Lynch 's time living in a troubled neighborhood in Philadelphia . Lynch and his family spent five years living in an atmosphere of " violence , hate and filth " . The area was rife with crime , inspiring the bleak urban backdrop of Eraserhead . Describing this period of his life , Lynch said , " I saw so many things in Philadelphia I couldn 't believe ... I saw a grown woman grab her breasts and speak like a baby , complaining her nipples hurt . This kind of thing will set you back " . Film critic Greg Olson , in his book David Lynch : Beautiful Dark , posits that this time contrasted starkly with the director 's childhood in the Pacific Northwest , giving the director a " bipolar , Heaven @-@ and @-@ Hell vision of America " which has subsequently shaped his films . 
 Initial casting for the film began in 1971 , and Jack Nance was quickly selected for the lead role . However , the staff at the AFI had underestimated the project 's scale — they had initially green @-@ lit Eraserhead after viewing a twenty @-@ one page screenplay , assuming that the film industry 's usual ratio of one minute of film per scripted page would reduce the film to approximately twenty minutes . This misunderstanding , coupled with Lynch 's own meticulous direction , caused the film to remain in production for a number of years . In an extreme example of this labored schedule , one scene in the film begins with Nance 's character opening a door — a full year passed before he was filmed entering the room . Nance , however , was dedicated to producing the film and retained the unorthodox hairstyle his character sported for the entirety of its gestation . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Buoyed with regular donations from Lynch 's childhood friend Jack Fisk and Fisk 's wife Sissy Spacek , production continued for several years . Additional funds were provided by Nance 's wife Catherine E. Coulson , who worked as a waitress and donated her income , and by Lynch himself , who delivered newspapers throughout the film 's principal photography . During one of the many lulls in filming , Lynch was able to produce the short film The Amputee , taking advantage of the AFI 's wish to test new film stock before committing to bulk purchases . The short piece starred Coulson , who continued working with Lynch as a technician on Eraserhead . Eraserhead 's production crew was very small , composed of Lynch ; sound designer Alan Splet ; cinematographer Herb Cardwell , who died during production and was replaced with Frederick Elmes ; production manager and prop technician Doreen Small ; and Coulson , who worked in a variety of roles . 
 The physical effects used to create the deformed child have been kept secret . The projectionist who worked on the film 's dailies was blindfolded by Lynch to avoid revealing the prop 's nature , and he has refused to discuss the effects in subsequent interviews . The prop — which Nance had nicknamed " Spike " — featured several working parts ; its neck , eyes and mouth were capable of independent operation . Lynch has offered cryptic comments on the prop , at times stating that " it was born nearby " or " maybe it was found " . It has been speculated by The Guardian 's John Patterson that the prop may have been constructed from a skinned rabbit or a lamb 's fetus . The child has been seen as a precursor to elements of other Lynch films , such as John Merrick 's make @-@ up in 1980 's The Elephant Man and the <unk> of 1984 's Dune . 
 During production , Lynch began experimenting with a technique of recording dialogue that had been spoken phonetically backwards and reversing the resulting audio . Although the technique was not used in the film , Lynch returned to it for " Episode 2 " , the third episode of his 1990 television series Twin Peaks . Lynch also began his interest in Transcendental Meditation during the film 's production , adopting a vegetarian diet and giving up smoking and alcohol consumption . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Lynch worked with Alan Splet to design the film 's sound . The pair arranged and fabricated soundproof blanketing to insulate their studio , where they spent almost a year creating and editing the film 's sound effects . The soundtrack is densely layered , including as many as fifteen different sounds played simultaneously using multiple reels . Sounds were created in a variety of ways — for a scene in which a bed slowly dissolves into a pool of liquid , Lynch and Splet inserted a microphone inside a plastic bottle , floated it in a bathtub , and recorded the sound of air blown through the bottle . After being recorded , sounds were further augmented by alterations to their pitch , reverb and frequency . 
 After a poorly received test screening , in which Lynch believes he had mixed the soundtrack at too high a volume , the director cut twenty minutes of footage from the film , bringing its length to 89 minutes . Among the cut footage is a scene featuring Coulson as the infant 's midwife , another of a man torturing two women — one again played by Coulson — with a car battery , and one of Spencer toying with a dead cat . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack to Eraserhead was released by I.R.S. Records in 1982 . The two tracks included on the album feature excerpts of organ music by Fats Waller and the song " In Heaven " , written for the film by Peter Ivers . The soundtrack was re @-@ released on August 7 , 2012 , by Sacred Bones Records in a limited pressing of 1 @,@ 500 copies . The album has been seen as presaging the dark ambient music genre , and its presentation of background noise and non @-@ musical cues has been described by Pitchfork Media 's Mark Richardson as " a sound track ( two words ) in the literal sense " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Eraserhead 's sound design has been considered one of its defining elements . Although the film features several hallmark visuals — the deformed infant and the sprawling industrial setting — these are matched by their accompanying sounds , as the " incessant mewling " and " evocative aural landscape " are paired with these respectively . The film features several constant industrial sounds , providing low @-@ level background noise in every scene . This fosters a " threatening " and " unnerving " atmosphere , which has been imitated in works such as David Fincher 's 1995 thriller Seven and the Coen brothers ' 1991 drama Barton Fink . The constant low @-@ level noise has been perceived by James Wierzbicki in his book Music , Sound and Filmmakers : Sonic Style in Cinema as perhaps a product of Henry Spencer 's imagination , and the soundtrack has been described as " ruthlessly negligent of the difference between dream and reality " . The film also begins a trend within Lynch 's work of relating diegetic music to dreams , as when the Lady in the Radiator sings " In Heaven " during Spencer 's extended dream sequence . This is also present in " Episode 2 " of Twin Peaks , in which diegetic music carries over from a character 's dream to his waking thoughts ; and in 1986 's Blue Velvet , in which a similar focus is given to Roy Orbison 's " In Dreams " . 
 The film has also been noted for its strong sexual themes . Opening with an image of conception , the film then portrays Henry Spencer as a character who is terrified of , but fascinated by , sex . The recurring images of sperm @-@ like creatures , including the child , are a constant presence during the film 's sex scenes ; the apparent " girl next door " appeal of the Lady in the Radiator is abandoned during her musical number as she begins to violently smash Spencer 's sperm creatures and aggressively meets his gaze . David J. Skal , in his book The Monster Show : A Cultural History of Horror , has described the film as " depict [ ing ] human reproduction as a desolate freak show , an occupation fit only for the damned " . Skal also posits a different characterization of the Lady in the Radiator , casting her as " desperately eager for an unseen audience 's approval " . In his book David Lynch Decoded , Mark Allyn Stewart proposes that the Lady in the Radiator is in fact Spencer 's subconscious , a manifestation of his own urge to kill his child , who embraces him after he does so , as if to reassure him that he has done right . 
 As a character , Spencer has been seen as an everyman figure , his blank expression and plain dress keeping him a simple archetype . Spencer displays a pacifistic and fatalistic inactivity throughout the film , simply allowing events to unfold around him without taking control . This passive behavior culminates in his sole act of instigation at the film 's climax ; his apparent act of infanticide is driven by his life of being domineered and controlled . Spencer 's inactivity has also been seen by film critics Colin Odell and Michelle Le Blanc as a precursor to Lynch 's 1983 – 92 comic strip The Angriest Dog in the World . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Eraserhead premièred at the Filmex film festival in Los Angeles , on March 19 , 1977 . On its opening night , the film was attended by twenty @-@ five people ; twenty @-@ four viewed it the following evening . However , Ben Barenholtz , head of distributor Libra Films International , persuaded local theater Cinema Village to run the film as a midnight feature , where it continued for a year . After this , it ran for ninety @-@ nine weeks at New York 's Waverly Cinema , had a year @-@ long midnight run at San Francisco 's Roxie Theater from 1978 to 1979 , and achieved a three @-@ year tenure at Los Angeles ' <unk> Theatre between 1978 and 1981 . The film was a commercial success , grossing $ 7 million in the United States . Eraserhead was also screened as part of the 1978 BFI London Film Festival , and the 1986 Telluride Film Festival . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Eraserhead was released on VHS on August 7 , 1982 , by Columbia Pictures . The film was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray by Umbrella Entertainment in Australia ; the former was released on August 1 , 2009 , and the latter on May 9 , 2012 . The Umbrella Entertainment releases include an 85 @-@ minute feature on the making of the film . Other home media releases of the film include DVD releases by Universal Pictures in 2001 , Subversive Entertainment in 2006 , Scanbox Entertainment in 2008 , and a DVD and Blu @-@ ray release by The Criterion Collection in September 2014 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon Eraserhead 's release , Variety offered a negative review , calling it " a sickening bad @-@ taste exercise " . The review expressed incredulity over the film 's long gestation and described its finale as unwatchable . Comparing Eraserhead to Lynch 's next film The Elephant Man , Tom Buckley of The New York Times felt that while the latter was a well @-@ made film with an accomplished cast , the former was not . Buckley called Eraserhead " <unk> pretentious " , and felt that the film 's horror aspects stemmed solely from the appearance of the deformed child rather than from its script or performances . Writing in 1984 , Lloyd Rose of The Atlantic felt that Eraserhead demonstrated that Lynch was " one of the most unalloyed surrealists ever to work in the movies " . Rose described the film as being intensely personal , finding that unlike previous surrealist films , such as Luis Buñuel 's 1929 work Un Chien Andalou or 1930 's L 'Age d 'Or , Lynch 's imagery " isn 't reaching out to us from his films ; we 're sinking into them " . In a 1993 review for the Chicago Tribune , Michael Wilmington described Eraserhead as unique , feeling that the film 's " intensity " and " nightmare clarity " were a result of Lynch 's attention to detail in its creation due to his involvement in so many roles during its production . In the 1995 essay Bad Ideas : The Art and Politics of Twin Peaks , critic Jonathan Rosenbaum felt that Eraserhead represented Lynch 's best work . Rosenbaum felt that the director 's artistic talent declined as his popularity grew , and contrasted the film with Wild at Heart — Lynch 's most recent feature film at that time — saying " even the most cursory comparison of Eraserhead with Wild at Heart reveals an artistic decline so precipitous that it is hard to imagine the same person making both films " . 
 Twenty @-@ first century critical opinion of the film is widely positive . Eraserhead holds an average rating of 91 % on review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , representing the distillation of 55 reviews , with the critical consensus " David Lynch 's surreal Eraserhead uses detailed visuals and a creepy score to create a bizarre and disturbing look into a man 's fear of parenthood . " Writing for Empire magazine , Steve Beard rated the film five stars out of five . He felt that it was " a lot more radical and enjoyable than [ Lynch 's ] later Hollywood efforts " and highlighted its mix of surrealist body horror and black comedy . The BBC 's Almar Haflidason awarded Eraserhead three stars out of five , describing it as " an unremarkable feat by [ Lynch 's ] later standards " . Haflidason felt that the film was a gathering of loosely related ideas , adding that it is " so consumed with surreal imagery that there are almost limitless possibilities to read personal theories into it " ; the reviewer 's own take on these themes were that they represented a fear of personal commitment and featured " a strong sexual undercurrent " . A reviewer writing for Film4 rated Eraserhead five stars out of five , describing it as " by turns beautiful , annoying , funny , exasperating and repellent , but always bristling with a nervous energy " . The Film4 reviewer felt that Eraserhead was unlike most films released to that point , save for the collaborations between Luis Buñuel and Salvador Dalí ; however , Lynch denies having seen any of these before Eraserhead . Writing for The Village Voice , Nathan Lee praised the film 's use of sound , writing " to see the film means nothing — one must also hear it " . He described the film 's sound design as " an intergalactic seashell cocked to the ears of an acid @-@ tripping <unk> " . 
 The Guardian 's Peter Bradshaw similarly lauded the film , also awarding it five stars out of five . Bradshaw considered it to be a beautiful film , describing its sound design as " industrial groaning , as if filmed inside some collapsing factory or gigantic dying organism " . He highlighted the film 's body horror elements , comparing it to Ridley Scott 's 1979 film Alien . Keith Phipps , writing for AllRovi , also gave the film a rating of five stars out of five ; he highlighted the disturbing sound design of the film and described it as " an open metaphor " . He felt that Eraserhead " sets up the obsessions that would follow [ Lynch ] through his career " , adding his belief that the film 's surrealism enhanced the understanding of the director 's later films . In an article for The Daily Telegraph , film @-@ maker Marc Evans praised both the sound design and Lynch 's ability " to make the ordinary seem so odd " , considering the film an inspiration on his own work . A review of the film in the same newspaper compared Eraserhead to the works of Irish playwright Samuel Beckett , describing it as a chaotic parody of family life . Manohla Dargis , writing for The New York Times , called the film " less a straight story than a surrealistic assemblage " . Dargis felt that the film 's imagery evoked the paintings of Francis Bacon and the Georges Franju 1949 documentary Blood of the Beasts . Film Threat 's Phil Hall called Eraserhead Lynch 's best film , believing that the director 's subsequent output failed to live up to it . Hall highlighted the film 's soundtrack and Nance 's " <unk> " physical comedy as the film 's stand @-@ out elements . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 2004 , Eraserhead was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the United States Library of Congress . Selection for the Registry is based on a film being deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . Eraserhead was one of the subjects featured in the 2005 documentary Midnight Movies : From the Margin to the Mainstream , which charted the rise of the midnight movie phenomenon in the late 1960s and 1970s ; Lynch took part in the documentary through a series of interviews . The production covers six films which are credited as creating and popularizing the genre ; also included are Night of the Living Dead , El Topo , Pink Flamingos , The Harder They Come , and The Rocky Horror Picture Show . In 2010 , the Online Film Critics Society compiled a list of the 100 best directorial débuts , listing what they felt were the best first @-@ time feature films by noted directors . Eraserhead placed second in the poll , behind Orson Welles ' 1941 Citizen Kane . 
 Lynch collaborated with most of the cast and crew of Eraserhead again on later films . Frederick Elmes served as cinematographer on Blue Velvet , 1988 's The Cowboy and the Frenchman , and 1990 's Wild at Heart . Alan Splet provided sound design for The Elephant Man , Dune , and Blue Velvet . Jack Fisk directed episodes of Lynch 's 1992 television series On the Air and worked as a production designer on 1999 's The Straight Story and 2001 's Mulholland Drive . Coulson and Nance appeared in Twin Peaks , and made further appearances in Dune , Blue Velvet , Wild at Heart , and 1997 's Lost Highway . 
 Following the release of Eraserhead , Lynch attempted to find funding for his next project , Ronnie Rocket , a film " about electricity and a three @-@ foot guy with red hair " . Lynch met film producer Stuart Cornfeld during this time . Cornfeld had enjoyed Eraserhead and was interested in producing Ronnie Rocket ; he worked for Mel Brooks and Brooksfilms at the time , and when the two realized that Ronnie Rocket was unlikely to find sufficient financing , Lynch asked to see some already @-@ written scripts to consider for his next project . Cornfeld found four scripts that he felt would interest Lynch ; on hearing the title of The Elephant Man , the director decided to make it his second film . 
 While working on The Elephant Man , Lynch met American director Stanley Kubrick , who revealed to Lynch that Eraserhead was his favorite film . Eraserhead also served as an influence on Kubrick 's 1980 film The Shining ; Kubrick reportedly screened the film for the cast and crew to " put them in the mood " that he wanted the film to achieve . Eraserhead is also credited with influencing the 1990 Japanese cyberpunk film Tetsuo : The Iron Man , the experimental 1990 horror film Begotten , and Darren Aronofsky 's 1998 directorial debut Pi . Swiss surrealist H. R. Giger cited Eraserhead as " one of the greatest films [ he had ] ever seen " , and said that it came closer to realizing his vision than even his own films . According to Giger , Lynch declined to collaborate with him on Dune because he felt Giger had " stolen his ideas " . 
 = Runaway Scrape = 
 The Runaway Scrape events took place mainly between September 1835 and April 1836 , and were the evacuations by Texas residents fleeing the Mexican Army of Operations during the Texas Revolution , from the Battle of the Alamo through the decisive Battle of San Jacinto . The ad interim government of the new Republic of Texas and much of the civilian population fled eastward ahead of the Mexican forces . The conflict arose after Antonio López de Santa Anna abrogated the 1824 constitution of Mexico and established martial law in Coahuila y Tejas . The Texians resisted and declared their independence . It was Sam Houston 's responsibility , as the appointed commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Provisional Army of Texas ( before such an army actually existed ) , to recruit and train a military force to defend the population against troops led by Santa Anna . 
 Residents on the Gulf Coast and at San Antonio de Béxar began evacuating in January upon learning of the Mexican army 's troop movements into their area , an event that was ultimately replayed across Texas . During early skirmishes , some Texian soldiers surrendered , believing that they would become prisoners of war — but Santa Anna demanded their executions . The news of the Battle of the Alamo and the Goliad massacre instilled fear in the population and resulted in the mass exodus of the civilian population of Gonzales , where the opening battle of the Texian revolution had begun and where , only days before the fall of the Alamo , they had sent a militia to reinforce the defenders at the mission . The civilian refugees were accompanied by the newly forming provisional army , as Houston bought time to train soldiers and create a military structure that could oppose Santa Anna 's greater forces . Houston 's actions were viewed as cowardice by the ad interim government , as well as by some of his own troops . As he and the refugees from Gonzales escaped first to the Colorado River and then to the Brazos , evacuees from other areas trickled in and new militia groups arrived to join with Houston 's force . 
 The towns of Gonzales and San Felipe de Austin were burned to keep them out of the hands of the Mexican army . Santa Anna was intent on executing members of the Republic 's interim government , who fled from Washington @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Brazos to Groce 's Landing to Harrisburg and New Washington . The government officials eventually escaped to Galveston Island , and Santa Anna burned the towns of Harrisburg and New Washington when he failed to find them . Approximately 5 @,@ 000 terrified residents of New Washington fled from the Mexican army . After a little over a month of training the troops , Houston reached a crossroads where he ordered some of them to escort the fleeing refugees farther east while he took the main army southeast to engage the Mexican army . The subsequent Battle of San Jacinto resulted in the surrender of Santa Anna and the signing of the Treaties of Velasco . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Changes in Mexico : 1834 - 1835 = = = 
 In 1834 , Mexican president Antonio López de Santa Anna shifted from a Federalist political ideology to creating a <unk> government and revoked the country 's Constitution of 1824 . That constitution had not only established Coahuila y Tejas as a new Mexican state , but had also provided for each state in Mexico to create its own local @-@ level constitution . After eliminating state @-@ level governments Santa Anna had in effect created a dictatorship and put Coahuila y Tejas under the military rule of General Martín Perfecto de Cos . When Santa Anna made Miguel Barragán temporary president , he also had Barragán install him as head of the Mexican Army of Operations . Intending to put down all rebellion in Coahuila y Tejas , he began amassing his army on November 28 , 1835 , soon followed by General Joaquín Ramírez y Sesma leading the Vanguard of the Advance across the Rio Grande in December . 
 = = = Temporary governments in Texas : November 1835 - March 1836 = = = 
 Stephen F. Austin was commander of the existing unpaid volunteer Texian army , and at his urging the Consultation of 1835 convened in San Felipe de Austin on November 3 of that year . Their creation of a provisional government based on the 1824 constitution established the General Council as a legislative body with each municipality allotted one representative . Henry Smith was elected governor without any clearly defined powers of the position . Sam Houston was in attendance as the elected representative from Nacogdoches , and also served as commander of the Nacogdoches militia . Edward Burleson replaced Austin as commander of the volunteer army on December 1 . 
 On December 10 , the General Council called new elections to choose delegates to determine the fate of the region . The Consultation approved the creation of the Provisional Army of Texas , a paid force of 2 @,@ 500 troops . Houston was named commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the new army and issued a recruitment Proclamation on December 12 . The volunteer army under Burleson disbanded on December 20 . 
 Harrisburg was designated the seat of a deeply divided provisional government on December 30 . Most of the General Council wanted to remain part of Mexico , but with the restoration of the 1824 constitution . Governor Smith supported the opposing faction who advocated for complete independence . Smith dissolved the General Council on January 10 , 1836 , but it was unclear if he had the power to do that . He was impeached on January 11 . The power struggle effectively shut down the government . 
 The Convention of 1836 met at Washington @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Brazos on March 1 . The following day , the 59 delegates created the Republic of Texas by affixing their signatures to the Texas Declaration of Independence . Houston 's military authority was expanded on March 4 , to include " the land forces of the Texian army both Regular , Volunteer , and Militia . " The delegates elected the Republic 's ad interim government on March 16 , with David G. Burnet as president , Lorenzo de Zavala as vice president , Samuel P. Carson as secretary of state , Thomas Jefferson Rusk as secretary of war , Bailey Hardeman as secretary of the treasury , Robert Potter as secretary of the navy , and David Thomas as attorney general . 
 = = Battle of Gonzales : October 2 , 1835 = = 
 The Battle of Gonzales was the onset of a chain of events that led to what is known as the Runaway Scrape . The confrontation began in September 1835 , when the Mexican government attempted to reclaim a bronze cannon that it had provided to Gonzales in 1831 to protect the town against Indian attacks . The first attempt by Corporal Casimiro De León resulted in De León 's detachment being taken prisoners , and the cannon being buried in a peach orchard . James C. Neill , a veteran who had served at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend under Andrew Jackson , was put in charge of the artillery after it was later dug up and wheel mounted . When Lieutenant Francisco de Castañeda arrived accompanied by 100 soldiers and made a second attempt at repossessing the cannon , Texians dared the Mexicans to " come and take it " . John Henry Moore led 150 Texian militia on October 2 in successfully repelling the Mexican troops . A " Come and Take It " flag was later fashioned by the women of Gonzales . The cannon was moved to San Antonio de Béxar and became one of the artillery pieces used by the defenders of the Alamo . 
 The immediate result of the Texian victory at Gonzales was that two days later the number of volunteers had swelled to over 300 , and they were determined to drive the Mexican army out of Texas . Simultaneously , a company of volunteers under George M. Collinsworth captured the Presidio La Bahía from the Mexicans on October 9 at the Battle of Goliad . The Mexican government 's response to the unrest in Texas was an October 30 authorization of war . On the banks of the Nueces River 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from San Patricio on November 4 during the Battle of Lipantitlán , volunteers under Ira Westover captured the fort from Mexican troops . 
 = = Béxar : 1835 - 1836 = = 
 = = = Siege of Béxar and its aftermath : October 1835 - February 1836 = = = 
 By October 9 , Cos had taken over San Antonio de Béxar . Stephen F. Austin sent an advance scout troop of 90 men under James Bowie and James Fannin to observe the Mexican forces . While taking refuge at Mission Concepción on October 28 , they repelled an attack by 275 Mexicans under Domingo Ugartechea during the battle . Austin continued to send troops to Béxar . Bowie was ordered on November 26 to attack a Mexican supply train alleged to be carrying a payroll . The resulting skirmish became known as the Grass Fight , after it was discovered that the only cargo was grass to feed the horses . When Austin was selected to join Branch T. Archer and William H. Wharton on a diplomatic mission to seek international recognition and support , Edward Burleson was named as commander . On December 5 , James C. Neill began distracting Cos by firing artillery directly at the Alamo , while Benjamin Milam and Frank W. Johnson led several hundred volunteers in a surprise attack . The fighting at the Siege of Béxar continued until December 9 when Cos sent word he wanted to surrender . Cos and his army were sent back to Mexico , but would later unite with Santa Anna 's forces . 
 Approximately 300 of the Texian garrison at Béxar departed on December 30 to join Frank W. Johnson and James Grant on the Matamoros Expedition , in a planned attack to seize the port for its financial resources . Proponents of this campaign were hoping Mexican Federalists would oust Santa Anna and restore the 1824 constitution . When Sesma crossed the Rio Grande , residents of the Gulf Coast began fleeing the area in January 1836 . Santa Anna ordered General José de Urrea on February 16 to secure the Gulf Coast . About 160 miles ( 260 km ) north of Matamoros at San Patricio , Urrea 's troops ambushed Johnson and members of the expedition on February 27 at the Battle of San Patricio . Sixteen Texians were killed , six escaped , and 21 were taken prisoner . Urrea 's troops then turned southwest by some 26 miles ( 42 km ) to Agua Dulce Creek and on March 2 attacked a group of the expedition led by Grant , killing all but 11 , six of whom were taken prisoner . Five of the men escaped the Battle of Agua Dulce and joined Fannin who wanted to increase the defense force at Goliad . 
 = = = Battle of the Alamo : February 23 – March 6 , 1836 = = = 
 Neill was promoted to lieutenant colonel during his participation in the Siege of Béxar , and 10 days later Houston placed him in charge of the Texian garrison in the city . In January residents had begun evacuating ahead of Santa Anna 's approaching forces . Neill pleaded with Houston for replenishment of troops , supplies and weaponry . The departure of Texians who joined the Matamoros Expedition had left Neill with only about 100 men . At that point Houston viewed Béxar as a military liability and did not want Santa Anna 's advancing army gaining control of any remaining soldiers or artillery . He dispatched Bowie with instructions to remove the artillery , have the defenders abandon the Alamo mission and destroy it . Upon his January 19 arrival and subsequent discussions with Neill , Bowie decided the mission was the right place to stop the Mexican army in its tracks . He stayed and began to help Neill prepare for the coming attack . Lieutenant Colonel William B. Travis arrived with reinforcements on February 3 . When Neill was given leave to attend to family matters on February 11 , Travis assumed command of the mission , and three days later he and Bowie agreed to a joint command . Santa Anna crossed the Rio Grande on February 16 , and the Mexican army 's assault on the Alamo began February 23 . Captain Juan Seguín left the mission on February 25 , carrying a letter from Travis to Fannin at Goliad requesting more reinforcements . Santa Anna extended an offer of amnesty to Tejanos inside the fortress ; a non @-@ combatant survivor , Enrique Esparza , said that most Tejanos left when Bowie advised them to take the offer . In response to Travis ' February 24 letter To the People of Texas , 32 militia volunteers formed the Gonzales Ranging Company of Mounted Volunteers and arrived at the Alamo on February 29 . 
 If you execute your enemies , it saves you the trouble of having to forgive them . 
 = = Flight : March – April 1836 = = 
 = = = Houston begins forming his army = = = 
 As the closest settlement to San Antonio de Béxar , Gonzales was the rallying point for volunteers who responded to both the Travis letter from the Alamo and Houston 's recruitment pleas . Recently formed groups came from Austin and Washington counties and from the Colorado River area . Volunteers from Brazoria , Fort Bend and Matagorda counties organized after arriving in Gonzales . The Kentucky Rifle company under Newport , Kentucky business man Sidney Sherman had been aided by funding from Cincinnati , Ohio residents . 
 Alamo commandant Neill was in Gonzales purchasing supplies and recruiting reinforcements on March 6 . When Seguin learned en route that Fannin would be unable to reach the Alamo in time , he immediately began mustering an all @-@ Tejano company of scouts . His men combined with Lieutenant William Smith 's and volunteered to accompany Neill 's recruits . They encountered the Mexican army 18 miles ( 29 km ) from the Alamo on March 7 , and Neill 's men turned back while the Seguin @-@ Smith scouts moved forward . As the scouts neared the Alamo , they met only silence . Andrew <unk> and Anselmo Bergara from Seguin 's other detachment inside the Alamo showed up in Gonzales on March 11 , telling of their escape and delivering news of the slaughter . Their stories were discounted ; Houston , who had arrived that same day , denounced them as Mexican spies . 
 Smith and Seguin confirmed the fate of the mission upon their return . Houston dispatched orders to Fannin to abandon Goliad , blow up the Presidio La Bahía fortress , and retreat to Victoria , but Fannin delayed acting on those orders . Believing the approach of Urrea 's troops brought a greater urgency to local civilians , he sent 29 men under Captain Amon B. King to help evacuate nearby Refugio . 
 Houston promptly began organizing the troops at Gonzales into the First Regiment under Burleson who had arrived as part of the Mina volunteers . A second regiment would later be formed when the army grew large enough . As others began to arrive , individual volunteers not already in another company were put under Captain William <unk> Patton . Houston had 374 volunteers and their commanders in Gonzales on March 12 . 
 Santa Anna sent Susanna Dickinson with her infant daughter Angelina , Travis ' slave Joe , and Mexican Colonel Juan Almonte 's cook Ben to Gonzales , with dispatches written in English by Almonte to spread the news of the fall of the Alamo . Scouts Deaf Smith , Henry Karnes and Robert Eden Handy encountered the survivors 20 miles ( 32 km ) outside of Gonzales on March 13 . When Karnes returned with the news , almost immediately 25 volunteers deserted . Wailing filled the air when Dickinson and the others reached the town with their first @-@ hand accounts . 
 There was not a soul left among the citizens of Gonzales who had not lost a father , husband , brother or son ... That terrible massacre had , for a time , struck terror into every heart . 
 Although civilian evacuations had begun in January for the Gulf Coast and San Antonio de Béxar , the Texian military was either on the offensive or standing firm until the smaller Gulf Coast skirmishes happened in February . Houston was now facing a choice of whether to retreat to a safe place to train his new army , or to meet the enemy head @-@ on immediately . He was wary of trying to defend a fixed position – the debacle at the Alamo had shown that the new Texian government was unable to provide sufficient provisions or reinforcements . 
 = = = The burning of Gonzales = = = 
 Houston called for a Council of War . The officers voted that the families should be ordered to leave , and the troops would cover the retreat . By midnight , less than an hour after Dickinson had arrived , the combined army and civilian population began a frantic move eastward , leaving behind everything they could not immediately grab and transport . Much of the provisions and artillery were left behind , including two 24 @-@ pounder cannons . Houston ordered Salvador Flores along with a company of Juan Seguin 's men to form the rear guard to protect the fleeing families . Couriers were sent to other towns in Texas to warn that the Mexican army was advancing . 
 The retreat took place so quickly that many of the Texian scouts did not fully comprehend it until after the town was evacuated . Houston ordered Karnes to burn the town and everything in it so nothing would remain to benefit the Mexican troops . By dawn , the entire town was in ashes or flames . 
 Volunteers from San Felipe de Austin who had been organized under Captain John Bird on March 5 to reinforce the men at the Alamo had been en route to San Antonio de Béxar on March 13 when approximately 10 miles ( 16 km ) east of Gonzales they encountered fleeing citizens and a courier from Sam Houston . Told of the Alamo 's fall , Bird 's men offered assistance to the fleeing citizens and joined Houston 's army at Bartholomew D. McClure 's plantation on the evening of March 14 . 
 At Washington @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Brazos , the delegates to the convention learned of the Alamo 's fall on March 13 . The Republic 's new ad interim government was sworn in on March 17 , with a department overseeing military spy operations , and adjourned the same day . The government then fled to Groce 's Landing where they stayed for several days before moving on to Harrisburg on March 21 where they established temporary headquarters in the home of widow Jane Birdsall Harris . 
 King 's men at Refugio had taken refuge in Mission Nuestra Señora de la Rosario when they were subsequently attacked by Urrea 's forces . Fannin sent 120 reinforcements under William Ward , but the March 14 Battle of Refugio cost 15 Texian lives . Ward 's men escaped , but King 's men were captured and executed on March 16 . 
 = = = Colorado River crossings = = = 
 = = = = Burnam 's = = = = 
 Upon learning of the flight , Santa Anna sent General Joaquín Ramírez y Sesma with 700 men to pursue Houston , and 600 men under General Eugenio <unk> as reinforcements . Finding only burned remains at Gonzales , Sesma marched his army toward the Colorado River . 
 The Texian army camped March 15 – 18 on the Lavaca River property of Williamson Daniels where they were joined by combined forces under Joe Bennett and Captain Peyton R. <unk> . Fleeing civilians accompanied Houston 's army turning north at the Navidad River as they crossed to the east side of the Colorado River at Burnam 's Crossing . The ferry and trading post , as well as the family home of Jesse Burnam , were all burned at Houston 's orders on March 17 to prevent Santa Anna 's army from making the same crossing . 
 = = = = Beason 's and DeWees = = = = 
 Beason 's Crossing was located where Columbus is today . DeWees Crossing was 7 miles ( 11 km ) north of Beason 's . From March 19 through March 26 , Houston split his forces between the two crossings . Additional Texian volunteer companies began arriving at both crossings , including three companies of Texas Rangers , the Liberty County Volunteers and the Nacogdoches Volunteers . 
 Sesma 's battalion of approximately 725 men and artillery camped on the opposite side of the Colorado , at a distance halfway between the two Texian camps . To prevent Sesma 's troops from using the William DeWees log cabin , Sherman ordered it burned . Three Mexican scouts from Sesma 's army were captured by Sherman 's men , and although Sherman argued for an attack on Sesma 's troops , Houston was not ready . 
 Fannin had begun evacuating Presidio La Bahía on March 19 . The estimated 320 troops were low on food and water , and the breakdown of a wagon allowed Urrea 's men to overtake them at Coleto Creek , ending in Fannin 's surrender on March 20 . Peter Kerr , who had served with Fannin and claimed to have been held prisoner , arrived at DeWees on March 25 . Houston announced Fannin 's surrender , but would later claim to have uncovered evidence that Kerr was a spy for the Mexicans . 
 The Texian army was a force of 810 volunteers and staff at this point , but few had any military training and experience . Faced with past desertions , discipline flaws , and individual indecisiveness of volunteers in training , Houston knew they were not yet ready to engage the Mexican army . Compounding the situation were the civilian refugees dependent upon the army for their protection . The news of Fannin 's capture , combined with his doubts about the readiness of the Texian army , led Houston to order a retreat on March 26 . Some of the troops viewed the decision as cowardice with Sesma sitting just on the other side of the Colorado , and several hundred men deserted . 
 ... the only army in Texas is now present ... There are but few of us , and if we are beaten , the fate of Texas is sealed . The salvation of the country depends upon the first battle had with the enemy . For this reason , I intend to retreat , if I am obliged to go even to the banks of the Sabine . 
 = = = Brazos River training camp = = = 
 = = = = Groce 's Landing = = = = 
 Texian survivors of the Battle of Coleto Creek believed their surrender agreement with Urrea would , at worst , mean their deportation . Santa Anna , however , adhered to the 1835 Tornel Decree that stated the insurrection was an act of piracy fomented by the United States , and ordered their executions . Although he personally disagreed with the need to do so , Urrea carried out his commander 's orders on March 27 . Of the estimated 370 Texians being held , a few managed to escape the massacre . The remainder were shot , stabbed with bayonets and lances and clubbed with gun butts . Fannin was shot through the face and his gold watch stolen . The dead were cremated on a pyre . 
 It would be a week before word of the Goliad massacre reached Sam Houston . The retreating Texian army stopped at San Felipe de Austin on March 28 – 29 to stock up on food and supplies . Houston 's plan to move the army north to Groce 's Landing on the Brazos River was met with resistance from captains Wyly Martin and Moseley Baker , whose units balked at further retreat . Houston reassigned Martin 25 miles ( 40 km ) south to protect the Morton Ferry crossing at Fort Bend , and Baker was ordered to guard the river crossing at San Felipe de Austin . 
 News of approaching Mexican troops and Houston 's retreat caused panic among the population in the counties of Washington , Sabine , Shelby and San Augustine . Amid the confusion of fleeing residents of those counties , two volunteer groups under captains William Kimbro and Benjamin Bryant arrived to join Houston on March 29 . Kimbro was ordered to San Felipe de Austin to reinforce Baker 's troops , while Bryant 's men remained with the main army . 
 After an erroneous scouting report of approaching Mexican troops , Baker burned San Felipe de Austin to the ground on March 30 . When Baker claimed Houston had given him an order to do so , Houston denied it . Houston 's account was that the residents burned their own property to keep it out of the hands of the Mexican army . San Felipe de Austin 's residents did as those before them in escaping the Mexican army , and fled to the east . 
 During a two @-@ week period beginning March 31 , the Texian army camped on the west side of the Brazos River in Austin County , near Groce 's Landing ( also known as Groce 's Ferry ) . As Houston led his army north towards the landing , the unrelenting rainy weather swelled the Brazos and threatened flooding . Groce 's was transformed into a training camp for the troops . Major Edwin Morehouse arrived with a New York battalion of recruits who were immediately assigned to assist Wyly Martin at Fort Bend . Civilian men who were fleeing the Mexicans enlisted at Groce 's , and displaced civilian women in the camp helped the army 's efforts by sewing shirts for the soldiers . 
 Samuel G. Hardaway , a survivor of Major William Ward 's group who had escaped the Battle of Refugio and re @-@ joined Fannin at the Battle of Coleto , also managed to escape the Goliad massacre . As he fled Goliad , he was eventually joined by three other survivors , Joseph Andrews , James P. <unk> and M. K. Moses . Spies for the Texian army discovered the four men and took them to Baker 's camp near San Felipe de Austin on April 2 . Several other survivors of the Goliad massacre were found on April 10 by Texian spies . Survivors Daniel Murphy , Thomas Kemp , Charles Shain , David Jones , William Brenan and Nat Hazen were taken to Houston at Groce 's Landing where they enlisted to fight with Houston 's army . 
 Houston learned of the Goliad massacre on April 3 . Unaware that Secretary of War Rusk was already en route to Groce 's with orders from President Burnet to halt the army 's retreat and engage the enemy , he relayed the Goliad news by letter to Rusk . 
 The enemy are laughing you to scorn . You must fight them . You must retreat no further . The country expects you to fight . The salvation of the country depends on your doing so . 
 Empowered to remove Houston from command and take over the army himself , Rusk instead assessed Houston 's plan of action as correct , after witnessing the training at Groce 's . Rusk and Houston formed the Second Regiment on April 8 to serve under Sherman , with Burleson retaining command of the First Regiment . 
 = = = = Yellowstone steamboat = = = = 
 The steamboat Yellowstone under the command of Captain John <unk> Ross was impressed into service for the Provisional Army of Texas on April 2 , and initially ferried patients across the Brazos River when Dr. James Aeneas Phelps established a field hospital at Bernardo Plantation . Three days later , Santa Anna joined with Sesma 's troops , and had them build flatboats to cross the Brazos as the Mexicans sought to overtake and defeat the Texians . Wyly Martin reported on April 8 that Mexican forces had divided and were headed both east to Nacogdoches and southeast to Matagorda . Houston reinforced Baker 's post at San Felipe de Austin on April 9 , as Santa Anna continued moving southeast on April 10 . 
 The Texian army was transported by the Yellowstone over to the east side of the Brazos on April 12 , where they set up camp at the Bernardo Plantation . After walking 50 miles ( 80 km ) from Harrisburg , future president of the Republic Mirabeau B. Lamar arrived at Bernardo to enlist as a private in Houston 's army and suggested using the steamer for guerilla warfare . 
 Had it not been for its service , the enemy could never have been overtaken until they had reached the Sabine ... use of the boat enabled me to cross the Brazos and save Texas . 
 With Baker guarding the crossing at San Felipe de Austin , and Martin guarding the Morton Ferry crossing at Ford Bend , Santa Anna opted on April 12 to cross the Brazos halfway between at Thompson 's Ferry , with Sesma 's men and artillery crossing over the next day . The Mexican army attacked the steamer numerous times in an attempt to capture it , but Ross successfully used cotton bales to protect the steamer and its cargo , and was able to keep the Yellowstone away from Mexican control . Houston released the steamboat from service on April 14 , and it continued to Galveston . 
 = = = Burning of Harrisburg and the crucial crossroads = = = 
 The ad interim government departed Harrisburg on the steamboat Cayuga for New Washington ahead of Santa Anna 's April 15 arrival , thwarting his plans to eliminate the entire government of the Republic of Texas . Three printers still at work on the Telegraph and Texas Register told the Mexican army that everyone in the government had already left , and Santa Anna responded by having the printers arrested and the printing presses tossed into Buffalo Bayou . After days of looting and seeking out information about the government , Santa Anna ordered the town burned on April 18 . He later tried to place the blame for the destruction on Houston . 
 Before the Texian army left Bernardo Plantation , they welcomed the arrival of two cannons cast in November 1835 by Greenwood and Webb in Cincinnati , Ohio , funded entirely by the people of that city as a donation to the Texas Revolution . The idea had arisen as a suggestion from Robert F. Lytle , one of the businessmen who helped fund Sherman 's Kentucky Riflemen . Arriving in New Orleans after a lengthy trip from Ohio on the Mississippi River , the cannons were transported to the Gulf Coast aboard the Pennsylvania schooner . The cannons were nicknamed the " Twin Sisters " , perhaps in honor of the twins Elizabeth and Eleanor Rice traveling aboard the Pennsylvania , who were to present the cannons upon their arrival at Galveston in April 1836 . At Galveston , Leander Smith had the responsibility of transporting the cannons from Harrisburg to Bernardo Plantation in Waller County . Along the way , Smith recruited 35 men into the army . Lieutenant Colonel James Neill was put in charge of the cannons once they arrived in camp . 
 Martin and Baker abandoned the river crossings on April 14 and re @-@ joined Houston 's army which had marched from Bernardo to the Charles <unk> Plantation near present @-@ day Hempstead in Waller County . As news spread of the Mexican army 's movements , residents of Nacogdoches and San Augustine began to flee east towards the Sabine River . After refusals to continue with the army , Martin was ordered by Houston to accompany displaced families on their flight eastward . Hundreds of soldiers left the army to help their families . The main army parted from the refugees at this point , and acting Secretary of War David Thomas advised Houston to move southward to secure Galveston Bay . Houston , however , was getting conflicting advice from the cabinet members . President Burnet had sent Secretary of State Carson to Louisiana in hopes of getting the United States army and individual state militias involved in the Texas fight for independence . While he attempted to secure such involvement , Carson sent a dispatch to Houston on April 14 advising him to retreat all the way to the Louisiana @-@ Texas border on the Sabine River , and bide his time before engaging the Mexican army . 
 The Texian army camped west of present @-@ day <unk> on April 15 , at Sam <unk> 's homestead . They departed the next morning and 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) east reached a crucial crossroads . One road led east to Nacogdoches and eventually the Sabine River and Louisiana , while the other road led southeast to Harrisburg . The army was concerned that Houston would continue the eastward retreat . Although Houston discussed his decision with no one , he led the army down the southeast road . Rusk ordered that a small group of volunteers be split from the army to secure Robbins 's Ferry on the Trinity River . Houston 's troops stopped overnight on April 16 at the home of Matthew Burnet , and the next morning continued marching towards Harrisburg , 25 miles ( 40 km ) southeast . 
 With the refugee families being accorded a military escort eastward and Houston marching southeast , the retreat of the Provisional Army of Texas was over . On the march which would lead to San Jacinto , moving the heavy artillery across rain @-@ soaked terrain slowed down the army 's progress . The army had previously been assisted in moving the Twin Sisters with oxen borrowed from refugee Pamela Martin when she believed the army was fleeing towards Nacogdoches . When she learned the army was headed towards Harrisburg and a confrontation with the Mexican army , she reclaimed her oxen . The Texian army had expanded to twenty @-@ six companies by the time they reached Harrisburg on April 18 and saw the destruction Santa Anna had left behind . 
 = = = New Washington = = = 
 On orders of Santa Anna after the burning of Harrisburg , Almonte went in pursuit of the ad interim government at New Washington . During their flight the Republic officials switched from steamer to ferry to skiff . On the final leg of the trip , Almonte finally had them in his sights , but refused to fire after he saw Mrs. Burnet and her children on the skiff . In addition to letting the government get away one more time , Almonte 's spies had misread Houston 's troop movements and Santa Anna was told that the Texian army was still retreating eastward , this time through Lynchburg . 
 New Washington was looted and burned on April 20 by Mexican troops , and as many as 5 @,@ 000 civilians fled , either by boat or across land . Those attempting to cross the San Jacinto River were bottlenecked for three days , and the vicinity around the crossing transformed into a refugee camp . Burnet ordered government assistance all across Texas for fleeing families . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In a troop movement that took all night on a makeshift raft , the Texian army crossed Buffalo Bayou at Lynchburg April 19 with 930 soldiers , leaving behind 255 others as guards or for reasons of illness . The idea had been floated of leaving the Twin Sisters behind as protection , but Neill was adamant that the cannons be taken into the battle . In an April 20 skirmish the day before the main battle Neill was severely wounded , and George Hockley took command of the heavy artillery . Estimates of the Mexican army troop strength on the day of the main battle range from 1 @,@ 250 to 1 @,@ 500 . 
 The Texians attacked in the afternoon of April 21 while Santa Anna was still under the misconception that Houston was actually retreating . He had allowed his army time to relax and feed their horses , while he took a nap . When he was awakened by the attack , he immediately fled on horseback , but was later captured when Sergeant James Austin Sylvester found him hiding in the grass . Houston 's own account was that the battle lasted " about eighteen minutes " , before apprehending prisoners and confiscating armaments . When the Twin Sisters went up against the Mexican army 's Golden Standard cannon , they performed so well that Hockley 's unit was able to capture the Mexican cannon . 
 The Yellowstone saw war service for the Republic one more time on May 7 , when it transported Houston and his prisoner Santa Anna , along with the government Santa Anna tried to extinguish , to Galveston Island . From there , the government and Santa Anna traveled to Velasco for the signing of the treaties . Houston had suffered a serious wound during the battle , and on May 28 boarded the schooner Flora for medical treatment in New Orleans . 
 Not until news of the victory at San Jacinto spread did the refugees return to their homesteads and businesses , or whatever was left after the destruction caused by both armies . Throughout Texas , possessions had been abandoned and later looted . Businesses , homes and farms were wiped out by the devastation of war . Often there was nothing left to go back to , but those who went home began to pick up their lives and move forward . San Felipe de Austin never really recovered from its total destruction . The few people who returned there moved elsewhere , sooner or later . Secretary of War Rusk would later commend the women of Texas who held their families together during the flight , while their men volunteered to fight : " The men of Texas deserve much credit , but more was due the women . Armed men facing a foe could not but be brave ; but the women , with their little children around them , without means of defense or power to resist , faced danger and death with unflinching courage . " 
 = The Beginning or the End = 
 The Beginning or the End ( 1947 ) is an American docudrama film about the development of the atomic bomb in World War II , directed by Norman <unk> , starring Brian Donlevy and Hume Cronyn , and released by Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) . The film dramatizes the creation of the atomic bomb in the Manhattan Project and the bombing of Hiroshima . 
 The film originated in October 1945 as a project of actress Donna Reed and her high school science teacher , Edward R. Tompkins , who was a chemist at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory . Bob Considine wrote the treatment , which was sent to the MGM studio script writers . The title was supplied by President Harry S. Truman . At the time there was a legal requirement that permission be obtained to depict living well @-@ known public figures . Many refused , but others , such as J. Robert Oppenheimer , co @-@ operated . Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , the director of the Manhattan Project , was hired as a consultant for $ 10 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 121 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . 
 Although the filmmakers put considerable effort into historical accuracy , particularly in details , the film is known for some key distortions of history . An entirely fictional sequence was added in which Truman agonizes over whether to authorize the attack ; anti @-@ aircraft shells are shown bursting around the Enola Gay on its bombing run over Hiroshima ; and it is said that leaflets were dropped on Hiroshima for ten days in advance of the mission warning the citizens of the forthcoming raid . The film received mixed reviews , and did not earn its money back . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1945 , physicist and atomic scientist Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer ( Hume Cronyn ) praises the discovery of atomic energy , but also warns of its dangers . American scientists such as Matt Cochran ( Tom Drake ) , working under the guidance of Dr. Enrico Fermi ( Joseph Calleia ) and Dr. Marré ( Victor <unk> ) , have split the atom , and essentially beaten the Germans in the race to create an atomic bomb . With the assistance of Albert Einstein ( Ludwig Stössel ) , they inform President Franklin D. Roosevelt ( Godfrey Tearle ) that a monumental discovery has been made . 
 In 1941 , with the United States at war , Roosevelt authorizes up to two billion dollars for the Manhattan Project to develop an atomic bomb . In December 1942 , at the University of Chicago , under the watchful eyes of observers such as Colonel Jeff Nixon ( Robert Walker ) and international experts , scientists create the first chain reaction , under a stadium at the campus . 
 Nixon is assigned to General Leslie Groves ( Brian Donlevy ) , who is placed in charge of the project . Groves has to bring together the scientific , industrial and defense communities to build the atomic bomb . In 1945 , following the death of Roosevelt , the new president , Harry S. Truman ( Art Baker ) , continues to support the atomic project , now moved to Los Alamos , New Mexico . When refined uranium @-@ 235 is obtained , the first atomic bomb is built and tested successfully in the New Mexico desert . Facing stiff resistance in the Pacific War , Truman orders the use of the atomic bomb against Japan in July 1945 . 
 Cochran and Nixon are assigned to accompany the crew transporting the bomb to Tinian . While assembling the bomb , the scientist comes into contact with radioactive material and dies . The following day , on August 6 , 1945 , the Enola Gay , a Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress bomber , drops an atomic bomb on Hiroshima . After the mission , Nixon returns home to break the news of her husband 's death to Cochran 's wife . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 The idea for The Beginning or the End originated in October 1945 with Donna Reed , a Hollywood actor , and her high school science teacher , Edward R. Tompkins , a chemist at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory . According to The Hollywood Reporter issues of December 1945 and January 1946 , MGM , Paramount and 20th Century Fox were all interested in making a film about the Manhattan Project . Paramount 's Hal B. Wallis was already working on his own version , titled Top Secret , but agreed to merge his project with MGM 's and hand over his story and research , offering to serve as an adviser on the MGM treatment in return for a fixed fee and a percentage of the box office gross . 
 The Beginning or the End had a number of working titles , including Atom Bomb , The Manhattan Project and Top Secret . Bob Considine was hired to produce a treatment , which he sent to the studio script writers . The script underwent a number of revisions , with Ayn Rand being one of the writers . Her contributions include the montage of Hitler 's conquests , a sequence in which a dying informant sends a message to Albert Einstein , and the sequence in which President Franklin Roosevelt authorizes the Manhattan Project . Other writers involved with the script were Robert Smith , Frank " <unk> " Wead , Norman Krasna , David Hawkins , John Lee Mahin and Glenn Tryon . Producer Samuel Marx wrote the opening narration . Marx and Donna Reed 's husband Tony Owen met with President Harry S. Truman to secure his approval . At their meeting , Truman is reported to have said : " Gentlemen , make a motion picture . Tell the people of this nation that for them it is the beginning or the end , " thereby supplying the movie with its title . 
 H. T. <unk> from the National Bureau of Standards , Tompkins , and W. Bradford Shank from the Los Alamos National Laboratory acted as technical advisers . Relations between MGM and the scientists soon became strained , as the scientists began asking for multiple script changes , and Tompkins eventually resigned . Oppenheimer sent David Hawkins , a philosophy professor from the University of California to act as a mediator between Marx and the scientists . Although the original intention was that a substantial sum of money would be donated to scientists ' associations like the Federation of Atomic Scientists , in the end , no scientific organizations accepted any money . Tompkins received $ 100 ( equivalent to $ 1 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . At the time there was a legal requirement that permission be obtained to depict living well @-@ known public figures . Lise Meitner , Niels Bohr and Sir James Chadwick all refused to allow their names to be used in the The Beginning or the End , which Marx regarded as unfortunate , as it made the film 's Manhattan Project scenes look like an all @-@ American affair . 
 The loss of Bohr caused important sequences to be deleted . The script originally had Bohr , rescued from the Germans in Copenhagen , bring a shocked Oppenheimer news that the German nuclear weapon project was supplying expertise to its Japanese counterpart . A German U @-@ boat carrying a fictional scientist travels to Japan where he joins the Japanese project in Hiroshima . Vannevar Bush objected to the way the script depicted him as having doubts about whether the atomic bomb could be built in time or could fit into an aircraft . Bush insisted that he never had any doubts . The script was changed to soften this . In the film , when Bush tells Roosevelt that he has a top secret matter to discuss , the President 's dog Fala leaves the room . 
 Oppenheimer raised no objection to the sequence in the film in which he told Brigadier General Thomas Farrell that the odds of a runaway explosion destroying the planet were less than one in a million , although he let MGM know it never happened . The cultured Oppenheimer 's main concern was that the script was poor , with characters that were " stilted , lifeless , and without purpose or insight . " 
 Military technical advisers for The Beginning or the End included Colonel William A. Considine , Groves 's assistant in charge of in charge of Security and Public Relations , Major Glen W. <unk> , Major Paul Van Sloun and Lieutenant Colonel Charles W. Sweeney , the pilot of Bockscar , the bomber that dropped the second atomic bomb on Nagasaki . Scientists were alarmed by reports that the dashing actor Clark Gable was being considered for the role of Groves , but were relieved when Brian Donlevy was cast in the role , as he normally played a villain . Indeed , most of the cast were best known for film noir : Hume Cronyn for The Postman Always Rings Twice ; Joseph Calleia , for Gilda and Deadline at Dawn ; and Ludwig Stössel for Fritz Lang 's Cloak and Dagger . Groves 's cooperation was secured by hiring him as a primary consultant , for $ 10 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 121 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . The portly Groves apparently had no objection to his portrayal by the slim and handsome Donlevy , except for the way in which he was shown bossing industrialists around . He had a scene in which he warned Roosevelt that the invasion of Japan would be opposed by Japanese nuclear weapons deleted . 
 Eleanor Roosevelt objected to the casting of Lionel Barrymore as her late husband , due to political remarks that Barrymore had made about the president in 1944 . Marx delayed Barrymore 's scenes while she had a chance to read and respond to a letter Barrymore sent her explaining that his remarks had been misinterpreted , but she was not placated , and Barrymore was replaced in the role by Godfrey Tearle . The War Department and the White House reviewed the script , and both asked for changes . The Army had a scene where an Army major made a pass at a girl deleted , as it felt that this was poor conduct for an officer . 
 The casual way that Truman and Groves were shown to decide to use the bomb , with Truman stating that " I think more of our American boys than I do of all our enemies " , while accurate , troubled Walter Lippmann , who felt that it could lead to foreigners being fearful of atomic weapons being in American hands . An entirely fictional sequence was therefore added in which Truman agonizes over whether to authorize the attack or not . In it Truman asserts that dropping the bomb will shorten the war , and a " year less of war will mean life for ... from 300 @,@ 000 to half a million of America 's finest youth " . 
 The motion picture censors asked for further cuts . <unk> references to Mexicans were removed , as was an off @-@ color joke about the effects of exposure to radioactive substances ( " Is it true if you fool around with that stuff you don 't like girls anymore ? " " Not that I 've noticed " ) , and one about politics ( " I got it confidential − we 're makin ' the front ends of horses . We ship ' em to Washington to hook on to the other end . " ) 
 Principal photography for The Beginning or the End began on April 29 , 1946 , and continued until July 25 with retakes beginning on August 9 , 1946 . The production premiered in Washington , D.C. on February 19 , 1947 , with the national release of the film following on March 7 , 1947 . 
 = = Historical accuracy = = 
 The filmmakers put considerable effort into historical accuracy , particularly in details such as military uniforms and the details of the Enola Gay and its crew . Nine of the actors who portrayed the Enola Gay crew were actual veterans of World War II . The technical details of atomic processes and the bomb 's design are wildly inaccurate by intention . In 1947 , these details were highly classified . One inaccuracy , independent of necessary military secrecy , is the portrayal of anti @-@ aircraft shells bursting around the aircraft on the bombing run , as the attack on Hiroshima was not opposed . 
 The film twice refers to specific leaflet drops on the target for ten days in advance of the mission warning the citizens of the forthcoming raid . " We 've been dropping warning leaflets on them for ten days now " , one crew member remarks , " That 's ten days more warning than they gave us before Pearl Harbor . " There was no leaflet specifically warning of an atomic attack . In his review in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists , physicist Harrison Brown called this " the most horrible falsification of history " . Historians have debated whether any leaflets were dropped at all . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Although The Beginning or the End was the first film to depict the story of the atomic bomb , both critics and the public were confused by the attempt to merge real events in a docudrama form . Bosley Crowther of The New York Times commented , " ... despite its generally able reenactments , this film is so laced with sentiment of the silliest and most theatrical nature that much of its impressiveness is marred . " Variety described the film as a " portentous tale in broad strokes of masterful scripting and production " , and a " sum credit of everybody concerned that the documentary values are sufficiently there without becoming static " . In his Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists review , Harrison Brown considered the movie " poor " , with a romantic angle " insipid in the extreme " , but was most troubled by way scientific equipment was " over @-@ glamorized " in the film , which he felt gave " a completely false impression of how scientists work . " The review in Time was less positive , noting that , " even as entertainment ... the picture seldom rises above cheery imbecility . " 
 According to MGM records , The Beginning or the End was made on a budget of $ 2 @,@ 632 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 31 @,@ 939 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) , but earned $ 1 @,@ 221 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 14 @,@ 817 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) in the United States and Canada and $ 721 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 8 @,@ 749 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) elsewhere , resulting in a loss to the studio of $ 1 @,@ 596 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 19 @,@ 367 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . 
 = The Man from Jupiter = 
 " The Man from Jupiter " is the fourth episode of the third season of the American animated television series Archer . It originally aired on January 19 , 2012 , in the United States on FX . Sterling Archer ( H. Jon Benjamin ) is introduced to Burt Reynolds , who is involved in a relationship with his mother Malory Archer ( Jessica Walter ) . Sterling tries several attempts to end their relationship . Meanwhile , a group of Cuban hitmen set out to kill Sterling . 
 The episode was directed and written by series creator Adam Reed . Reynolds was announced as a guest star for the episode in October 2011 . He edited much of the episode 's script , after receiving it from Reed . " The Man from Jupiter " was well received by television commentators , who praised the episode 's cultural references , character development , and the storylines . Upon airing , it attracted 1 @.@ 309 million viewers and a 0 @.@ 7 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . It subsequently became the eleventh highest @-@ rated cable program of the day . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Sterling Archer ( H. Jon Benjamin ) drinks at a bar and after he unsuccessfully attempts to pick up a woman for sex , a man nearby laughs at Archer 's incident . When Sterling threatens him , the man easily subdues him . Sterling suddenly realizes that the man is his idol , Burt Reynolds . After gushing to Burt about how much of a fan he is , Archer learns that — much to his horror — Burt is dating his mother Malory Archer ( Jessica Walter ) . A shocked Sterling passes out in the establishment , and by the next day is seen with a black eye . Sterling assumes that it was an " involuntary reaction " . 
 Malory informs Sterling that a group of Cuban hitmen have established a warrant against him , which makes Sterling even more irate . Burt then calls Malory and asks her out to a movie premiere that night . Later that day , however , Malory gets a letter from Reynolds , saying that he is leaving her for a younger woman and moving back " to Tinseltown " . However , Lana Kane ( Aisha Tyler ) quickly figures out that the letter was written by Sterling himself ( citing how no star actor uses the term " Tinseltown " ) . She quickly figures out that Sterling visited Burt , knocking him out with knock @-@ out gas , and taking him to his apartment . Lana , along with Cyril Figgis and Ray Gillette ( Adam Reed ) , go to try to reason with Sterling . Once there , they encounter the Cuban hit squad , who believe Gillette is the real Sterling based on the recon photo they have ( taken during the events of " <unk> " ) and a firefight begins . Meanwhile , Sterling holds Burt hostage , promising to never let him date his mother again , but he is interrupted by the firefight between the ISIS agents and the Cubans . As they drive off , Sterling prepares to go after them , but Burt says that Sterling won 't be able to catch up to them and that he can . Sterling agrees to a bet : If Burt can 't catch up to them , he will leave for Hollywood and never call Malory again , and if he does , he can be allowed to continue dating Malory . 
 Sterling agrees to this , which results in a hectic car chase that frightens Sterling some , despite Burt 's expert driving that allows him to achieve many Hollywood driving stunts . During this , Burt tells Sterling that he needs to stop thinking of Malory as just his mother and rather think of her as a person with emotional ( and sexual ) needs , and that he should think about her happiness and not his . This seems to sway Sterling and at that point , Burt has been able to catch up to the ISIS agents and the Cubans and saves the ISIS agents . With that , the group drives back to a heartbroken Malory . Sterling apologizes for writing the phony letter and Burt takes Malory on their date to the movie premiere . 
 = = Production = = 
 Burt Reynolds makes a guest appearance on " The Man from Jupiter " , as the love interest of Malory Archer . His guest appearance was formally announced in October 2011 . Prior to his appearance , Reynolds was referenced in several episodes of the series . Series creator Adam Reed opined : " I think the only person on the planet who 's a bigger fan of Burt Reynolds than me is Sterling Archer . Archer constantly tries to imitate Burt and always raves about Burt 's movies and all @-@ around awesomeness . So to have Burt recording voice @-@ overs for the show was just amazing . " After receiving the episode 's script from Reed , Reynolds made several edits ; while editing the script of the episode , Reynolds added a scene in which Sterling reveals that his career choice was largely influenced by his films . " We sent him the script beforehand and he noted the script up pretty good . But it was all to make it more self @-@ deprecating . " Reed , a fan of Reynolds , said that working with him was a great experience . " It was such a surreal experience being in the room with Burt Reynolds , my childhood hero , " he affirmed . " Just hearing him read the stuff that I wrote , it was pretty great . " 
 The episode title is a reference to the television series The Man from U.N.C.L.E. and the town of Jupiter , Florida , which is where Reynolds spent most of his childhood . Sterling proclaims that his career path was largely influenced by Reynolds ' film career , particularly his work in the musical film At Long Last Love ( 1975 ) and the spy cinema Operation C.I.A. ( 1965 ) . Reed stated , " Archer says [ that ] Operation C.I.A. is why [ he ] became a spy . And he 's [ Reynolds ] like , ' Really , I thought that movie sucked . ' " A sequence which features Sterling strapping Reynolds onto a <unk> reflects homage to the thriller film The Silence of the Lambs ( 1991 ) . The song " East Bound and Down " by Jerry Reed is presented in the episode , while Sterling makes several references to several American cinematic works from the 1970s . Jesse Carp of Cinema Blend wrote : " I should start by saying that this episode played particularly well for me because I ’ m a huge fan of 1970s American cinema — the good and the bad — so all of those references that Archer soon starts throwing at Reynolds , I 'm catching and loving every second of it . " " The Man from Jupiter " contains several scenes that are reminiscent to those in the action film Gator ( 1976 ) . Carp wrote that " it isn 't long before the Reynolds ' sweet talking and charisma <unk> Archer and soon the pair are talking plot possibilities for the last film in the Gator trilogy . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The Man from Jupiter " was originally broadcast on January 19 , 2012 , in the United States on FX . Upon airing , it attained 1 @.@ 309 million viewers and a 0 @.@ 7 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . The installment became the eleventh high @-@ rated cable television program of the day , scoring higher than the documentary series The First 48 on A & E but obtaining lower ratings than the satirical television program The Daily Show on Comedy Central . " The Man from Jupiter " achieved record @-@ breaking demographic ratings ; it became the third @-@ most viewed cable telecast of all time amongst men in the 18 – 34 demographic , as well as key men in the 18 – 49 group . In comparison to the season two premiere , " Swiss Miss " , ratings in the 18 – 49 demographic during the first fifteen minutes vaulted 31 % to 689 @,@ 000 viewers . Although ratings showed similar increases during the second quarterly hour , ratings in the 18 – 49 demographic declined 21 % from the previous season premiere , translating to 220 @,@ 000 viewers . Overall , ratings amongst key adults in the 18 – 49 group declined 4 % from " Swiss Miss " to 950 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " The Man from Jupiter " was widely lauded by television commentators . In his A- review , Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club felt that the episode contained many great moments and felt that it was a strong opening for the season . VanDerWerff wrote : " Archer has always been a show I enjoyed more for the fast @-@ paced dialogue and weird office plots , but every so often , the show does something pretty awesome , even on what 's probably a fairly limited budget , and it turns out an action sequence that you just won 't see on most other animated shows . FX has usually chosen to open seasons with these big action episodes , for fairly obvious reasons , and this one has the added benefit of Burt Reynolds hanging out as another potential ratings bump . " VanDerWerff noted that the storyline between Sterling Archer and his mother Mallory Archer was the highlight of " The Man from Jupiter " ; " Archer 's so often at odds with her because he 's unable to see her as a person and not just his mother , as Reynolds expresses while roaring down the highway at dangerously high speeds . Until Archer accepts that Malory has needs — some of them sexual — he ’ s always going to be trapped in a weird , co @-@ dependent relationship with her . Archer isn 't a show that tries to shove tons and tons of deep character moments into its episodes , which makes it all the better when it does do so . The show usually nails those little moments , and this was no exception . " Creative Loafing journalist Scott Harrel asserted , " If the debut episode is any indication , you can expect another satisfying season from this intelligent , imaginative and button @-@ pushing mix of high and low humor . " Ross Bonaime of Paste issued the installment an 8 @.@ 8 out of ten rating , signifying a " commendable " rating . Bonaime affirmed that Reed adequately developed the characters , citing that " The Man from Jupiter " further established greater expectations for the series . 
 Carp evaluated the script as " impeccably written " , adding that " The Man from Jupiter " was a hilarious episode . Cites of adulation stemmed from the animation , which Carp described it as " likely the best you 'll see anywhere on television . " He wrote , " It 's just so unique the way they use state of the art 3D computer animation to create a retrofitted look . It takes them months to animate each episode and the hard work really pays off in the unique visuals of the show . " Writing for TV Fanatic , Eric Hochberger stated that " if this week combined with the mini @-@ series was any indication , we 're in for a damn strong season of Archer . " 
 Reynolds ' appearance was critically acclaimed . VanDerWerff professed that he was surprised that it was executed well , as he avouched that shows featuring guest appearances ruin the chemistry of the main cast . " Episodes with big special guest stars can often ruin the rhythm of the main gang , but I was surprised at how readily the show incorporated Reynolds into the storyline , to the point where he almost felt like an organic part of the ensemble , " avouched VanDerWerff . " The fact that he 's still dating Malory at the end of the episode implies that he might pop back in as the season proceeds , and I wouldn 't be adverse to that happening , where many special guest stars might make me roll my eyes in irritation . " He praised the chemistry between Reynolds and Benjamin , and commended Reynolds for having the will power to poke fun at himself . Carp echoed similar sentiments ; " H. Jon Benjamin alone is a voice @-@ over superstar [ ... ] but combined with Reynolds and the rest of the cast , that was some animated magic and a fantastic way to kick off the third season . " Bonaime thought that Reynolds was " fine with being self @-@ deprecating , and he gives some fantastic moments with Archer . " HitFix 's Alan Sepinwall enjoyed how Reynolds was utilized in " The Man from Jupiter " . " There are times when it can feel awkward when a show spends an episode sucking up to a very special guest star , but it worked here because so much of Archer 's personality — and so much of the show 's approach to action — feels inspired by all those movies Reynolds did in the ' 70s and early ' 80s when he was the biggest movie star in the world . 
 = 2007 ACC Championship Game = 
 The 2007 Dr. Pepper ACC Championship Game featured the Boston College Eagles and the Virginia Tech Hokies in a regular @-@ season college football game that determined the conference 's champion for the 2007 season . Virginia Tech defeated Boston College 30 – 16 to win the ACC football championship . The game , held at Jacksonville Municipal Stadium in Jacksonville , Florida , was a rematch of a regular @-@ season game that took place on October 25 , in Blacksburg , Virginia . In that game , Boston College , courtesy of a late @-@ game comeback by quarterback Matt Ryan , won 14 – 10 . 
 Following the loss , Virginia Tech won five straight games to win the Coastal Division of the ACC , while Boston College stumbled , losing two games before defeating the Clemson Tigers to win the Atlantic Division and representation in the Championship Game . Most pre @-@ game media coverage of the event cast the game as an opportunity for Virginia Tech to avenge its earlier loss . In addition , the winner of the game would be awarded an automatic bid to the Bowl Championship Series 2008 Orange Bowl game in Miami , Florida on January 3 , 2008 . Despite Boston College 's earlier win over Virginia Tech , spread bettors favored Virginia Tech by five points . 
 In the opening quarter of the game , the Eagles took a 7 – 0 lead on a 51 @-@ yard fumble return for a touchdown . The Eagles ' offense dominated the first half of the game statistically , but failed to add to its early lead until the second quarter , when a field goal made it 10 – 0 . Virginia Tech answered with a touchdown of their own , but Boston College responded with a seven @-@ play , 74 @-@ yard touchdown drive of its own . Then came perhaps the most pivotal play of the game . During the extra point kick following the Boston College touchdown , Virginia Tech 's Duane Brown blocked the kick , which was caught by the Hokies ' cornerback Brandon Flowers , who returned it 75 yards for a defensive two @-@ point conversion . 
 The play changed the momentum of the game . Virginia Tech added a tying touchdown before halftime , and after a scoreless third quarter , two Matt Ryan interceptions resulted in 14 points for Virginia Tech and a 30 – 16 Virginia Tech win . With the victory , the Hokies earned their second Atlantic Coast Conference football championship in four years and their first Orange Bowl bid since 1996 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The ACC Championship Game matches the winner of the Coastal and Atlantic Divisions of the Atlantic Coast Conference . A conference championship game was added in 2005 , as a result of the league 's expansion the previous year , adding former Big East members Miami , Virginia Tech , and Boston College . With the addition of Boston College , the ACC consisted of 12 teams , allowing it to hold a conference championship game under NCAA rules . 
 Florida State defeated Virginia Tech , 27 – 22 in the first ACC Championship game . The following year , the game , held in Jacksonville , Florida , pitted Wake Forest against Georgia Tech , with Wake Forest winning 9 – 6 . Before the 2007 season began , most sports writers and pollsters predicted that Florida State would win the Atlantic Division while Virginia Tech would win the Coastal Division , setting up a rematch of the 2005 ACC Championship Game . 
 In October , Florida State lost back @-@ to @-@ back ACC conference games to Wake Forest and Miami , eliminating them from contention for their division title . Boston College , which had finished second in the preseason Atlantic Division poll , was ranked No. 2 in the country after Florida State 's loss to Miami . Virginia Tech , which suffered a 48 – 7 defeat at the hands of then @-@ No. 2 LSU , nevertheless remained at the top of the Coastal Division standings as the Eagles passed the Seminoles for the Atlantic Division lead . 
 On October 25 , Boston College traveled to Blacksburg , Virginia , home of Virginia Tech , for a Thursday night game broadcast on ESPN . In heavy rain , Virginia Tech 's defense dominated for most of the game . As time ran down , however , Boston College quarterback Matt Ryan orchestrated two late @-@ game touchdown drives , scoring 14 points in the final 2 minutes to win 14 – 10 . The victory seemingly sealed Boston College 's route to a national championship game , while the loss potentially jeopardized Virginia Tech 's chances of being selected to play in the ACC Championship Game . Over the next two weeks , however , Boston College was upset by Florida State and Maryland . The Eagles rallied to win their final two games — against Miami and Clemson — to clinch the division title . Virginia Tech , meanwhile , was undefeated through the remainder of its schedule , including a division @-@ clinching win over its archrival , Virginia . This meant that the ACC Championship Game in Jacksonville would be a rematch between these two division champions . 
 = = Pre @-@ game buildup = = 
 In the weeks leading up to the game , there was much media discussion of the future site of the game due to Jacksonville 's expiring contract to host the ACC Championship . The media also discussed whether Virginia Tech would be out for revenge against Boston College after its last @-@ second defeat in Blacksburg on October 25 . Despite its previous loss , spread bettors favored Virginia Tech to win the game , with most favoring the Hokies by 4 @.@ 5 – 5 points . 
 The game was the 15th contest between Boston College and Virginia Tech and was their second of the 2007 season . The first meeting , which took place in 1993 in the Big East conference , resulted in a 48 – 34 Boston College win . Between 1993 and 2003 , Boston College and Virginia Tech played annually as part of their conference schedules . The teams did not meet in 2004 following Virginia Tech 's move to the Atlantic Coast Conference . When Boston College followed in 2005 , the schools resumed meeting during the regular season , playing in 2005 , 2006 , and 2007 . 
 = = = Off @-@ field issues = = = 
 Following the 2006 ACC Championship Game , the Gator Bowl Association , which administered the ACC Championship Game during its first two years of existence , was awarded a one @-@ year extension to its two @-@ year contract to host the game . The 2006 game suffered from poor attendance , resulting in over $ 1 million in losses for the Gator Bowl Association . In the off @-@ season , the Gator Bowl Association declared that if sales did not improve for the 2007 ACC Championship game , the game 's Jacksonville future would be in jeopardy . Attendance for the 2006 game was low due to high travel costs stemming from Jacksonville 's distance from the participating schools , and the 2007 participants — Boston College and Virginia Tech — faced the same problem . 
 With Jacksonville 's future as host in doubt , representatives from Charlotte , North Carolina , Tampa , Florida , and Jacksonville visited the ACC offices to lobby to host the 2008 game . Orlando , Florida , which had been an early contender to host the 2008 game , was eliminated from consideration before the meetings took place . As kickoff drew closer , the Gator Bowl Association expressed displeasure with the poor ticket sales , saying that nearly 20 @,@ 000 tickets remained unsold as of the week of the game and that if it was not a sellout , the game would likely not remain in Jacksonville . 
 = = = Offensive matchups = = = 
 Media attention was also directed at the teams ' offensive capabilities . Boston College quarterback Matt Ryan was named the Atlantic Coast Conference Player of the Year in the week leading up to the game . In the first half of the 2007 season , Ryan had been prominently mentioned in candidate lists for the Heisman Trophy , college football 's highest individual award . Although Ryan 's late @-@ game comeback in their previous game against Virginia Tech had made him a front @-@ runner , the team 's two subsequent losses to unranked teams dropped him from contention for the Heisman . Excellent performances in a division @-@ clinching win at Clemson and against Miami seemed to return Ryan to Heisman @-@ candidate form , however , and heading into the ACC Championship Game , Ryan appeared to be the biggest offensive threat for Boston College . 
 Virginia Tech 's offense was led by an unusual two @-@ quarterback system , as junior Sean Glennon shared time with freshman Tyrod Taylor . While Glennon proved to be a better pocket passer , Taylor 's quickness enabled him to scramble out of trouble and gain positive yardage even when no open receivers were available for passes . Until the final game of the season , either Taylor or Glennon was hampered by injury and limited the two @-@ quarterback system 's effectiveness . Although the two @-@ quarterback system proved effective against Virginia , there were still questions about how well such an unusual setup would work in the ACC Championship Game . 
 On the ground , Taylor 's offensive scrambling , while effective , was not Virginia Tech 's primary rushing weapon . Running back Brandon Ore , Virginia Tech 's starter at the position , would need to have a good game , analysts predicted , if the Hokies wanted to win the game . Ore , who suffered several injuries during the 2006 season , failed to produce meaningful offensive yardage until late in the season , disappointing many fans who hoped he would repeat his excellent 2006 performance on the field . With a 146 @-@ yard performance against Virginia in the final game of the regular season , Ore seemed to have regained his 2006 form and promised success in the ACC Championship Game . 
 The Boston College ground offense was led by running back Andre Callender , who had perhaps his biggest game of the year during the division @-@ clinching match against Clemson two weeks earlier . In that game , Callender finished with 92 receiving yards and 75 rushing yards . Due to the success of Matt Ryan 's passing attack , however , Callender was used mostly as a backfield receiver and was the team 's leading receiver statistically during the 2007 season . In the regular season , Callender amassed 905 yards rushing , 613 yards receiving , and 13 total touchdowns . Callender 's normal backup , running back A.J. Brooks , was suspended for the ACC Championship Game . 
 = = = Defensive matchups = = = 
 Virginia Tech 's defense was considered stronger than that of Boston College . For the ACC Championship Game , Virginia Tech returned senior linebacker Vince Hall to the starting lineup . Hall had sat out four straight games , including the previous Boston College match , after suffering a broken forearm and wrist . ESPN named Hall and Xavier Adibi , Tech 's other senior linebacker , the " best linebacker duo in the country " . 
 On Virginia Tech 's defensive secondary , Brandon Flowers , one of Tech 's starting cornerbacks , was a second @-@ team All @-@ ACC defensive selection and had five interceptions in the season . Assisting Flowers would be Victor " Macho " Harris , who had also netted five interceptions during the regular season . During the 2007 season , Sports Illustrated called the two " maybe the finest cornerback duo in America . " 
 At the end of the regular season , Boston College was ranked 26th nationally in total defense , and 2nd nationally in run defense . Its pass defense , however , was ranked 106th in the country , and since Boston College was without senior cornerback <unk> Tribble , who was recovering from a sprained knee ligament , it was expected that the Eagles ' linebackers would have to play a very good game to stop Virginia Tech 's passing offense . Jo @-@ <unk> Dunbar , who had been named to the preseason watch list for the Bronko Nagurski Trophy ( awarded to the top defensive player in the country ) was expected to fill the gaps and stop both rushing and passing elements of Virginia Tech 's offense . 
 In addition , safety Jamie Silva would have to play a strong game to support the Boston College cornerback replacing the injured Tribble . Silva , an All @-@ ACC defensive selection , led the team with five interceptions and was very good in moving up to stop the run as well . On the defensive line , defensive end Nick Larkin was a quarterfinalist for the Lott Trophy , an award given to the defensive player with the most " defensive impact " nationally . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The 2007 ACC Championship Game kicked off at 13 : 10 EST in Jacksonville , Florida . At kickoff , the weather was partly cloudy , with winds from the northeast at 18 miles per hour ( 29 km / h ) . The air temperature was 69 ° F ( 21 ° C ) . The official attendance estimate was 53 @,@ 212 , but by most accounts the actual attendance was far lower . Virginia Tech fans made up most of the crowd , and fewer than 5 @,@ 000 Boston College fans were present at the game . The game was broadcast on ABC and netted a television rating of 4 @.@ 1 , placing it behind the SEC Championship Game and the Big 12 Championship Game , which earned ratings of 5 @.@ 9 and 6 @.@ 6 , respectively . 
 The Marching Virginians , Virginia Tech 's marching band , and the " Screaming Eagles " , the Boston College Marching Band , played the national anthem before the game . The pre @-@ game coin toss involved two members of the Wounded Warrior Project , a program that assists the physical rehabilitation of wounded American combat veterans returning to the United States from fighting overseas . One soldier from Virginia and another from Massachusetts were chosen to throw the ceremonial coin that would determine the game 's starting possession . Supervising the coin toss was referee Jack Childress , who had also officiated the inaugural ACC Championship Game . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Virginia Tech won the opening coin toss and deferred its option to the second half . Boston College received the opening kickoff , which was downed in the end zone for a touchback . Starting at their own 20 @-@ yard line , the Eagles advanced down the field as quarterback Matt Ryan completed several passes and running back Andre Callender contributed several long runs . A pass interference call against Virginia Tech , coupled with a 10 @-@ yard run by Callender , put Boston College at the Virginia Tech 26 @-@ yard line . After three consecutive incomplete passes , Eagles kicker Steve Aponavicius attempted a 36 @-@ yard field goal . During the field goal , Virginia Tech special teams player Duane Brown broke through the Eagles ' line and blocked the kick , giving Virginia Tech possession of the ball . 
 Virginia Tech 's offense , led by quarterback Sean Glennon , began their first possession at their own 37 @-@ yard line . However , a sack , a tackle for loss , and an incomplete pass denied the Hokies ' offense positive yardage and they were forced to punt . Tech punter Brent Bowden managed a 54 @-@ yard kick that forced the Eagles to start at their own 14 @-@ yard line , but three big plays of 16 , 19 , and 19 yards drove the Eagles deep into Virginia Tech territory . As before , however , Virginia Tech 's defense stiffened and Boston College was forced into a fourth down . Instead of attempting a long field goal , the Eagles instead attempted to convert the fourth down but were foiled by an incomplete pass . 
 On the Hokies ' second offensive possession , quarterback Tyrod Taylor took the field in place of Sean Glennon . Two successful passes and two short runs resulted in two first downs and Virginia Tech advanced the ball across the 50 @-@ yard line and into Boston College territory . As Taylor attempted to scramble for yet another short run , however , he was tackled behind the line of scrimmage and fumbled the ball . The loose ball was scooped up by Boston College defender Jamie Silva , who returned it 51 yards for a touchdown . The touchdown and subsequent extra point were the first points of the game and gave Boston College a 7 – 0 lead with 4 minutes remaining in the quarter . 
 After the kickoff , Virginia Tech 's offense again failed to advance the ball . After a three @-@ and @-@ out , the Hokies again punted . The ball traveled 44 yards , forcing the Eagles to start at their own 21 @-@ yard line . As the quarter came to a close , the Eagles drove the ball deep into Virginia Tech territory . At the end of the first quarter , Boston College led 7 – 0 . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 At the beginning of the second quarter , the Hokies ' defense began to stiffen . Aided by a 10 @-@ yard holding penalty against the Eagles , Matt Ryan was forced to complete a 14 @-@ yard pass on 4th @-@ and @-@ 9 to earn a first down and keep the drive alive . Three incomplete passes followed , however , and the Eagles again settled for a field goal attempt . This time , the 37 @-@ yard kick sailed through the uprights , giving Boston College a 10 – 0 lead with 11 : 20 remaining in the first half . 
 Virginia Tech 's first offensive drive of the second quarter began on an auspicious note as quarterback Sean Glennon completed a 16 @-@ yard pass to wide receiver Josh Morgan . Following the play , a Boston College player committed a personal foul , which added 15 yards to the end of the pass . Another long pass by Glennon , coupled with yet another Boston College penalty , put Virginia Tech deep into the red zone , and the Hokies scored on a 5 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Morgan . With 8 : 15 remaining in the first half , Virginia Tech narrowed Boston College 's lead to just three points . 
 On the ensuing possession , Boston College needed only seven plays and just under three minutes to travel 74 yards . The drive culminated in a 14 @-@ yard quarterback scramble for a touchdown . Duane Brown , who had blocked the first Boston College field goal attempt , again charged through the Boston College offensive line and blocked the extra point attempt . This time , the ball bounced into the hands of Virginia Tech 's Brandon Flowers , who returned it 75 yards for a defensive two @-@ point conversion . The play kept Boston College 's lead within a single touchdown and extra point . With 5 : 27 remaining in the half , the score was now 16 – 9 in favor of Boston College . 
 Tech quarterback Sean Glennon 's first pass of the new possession , long throw downfield , was intercepted by Boston College defender Jamie Silva . The length of the pass meant that Boston College did not have good field position following the turnover . After earning a quick first down , the Eagles were stopped and forced to punt . With 2 : 13 remaining before halftime , the Hokies had one more offensive opportunity . 
 Beginning at their own 20 @-@ yard line , the Virginia Tech offense marched down the field . Running back Branden Ore ran 11 yards for a first down , and two long passes from Sean Glennon to wide receiver Eddie Royal put the Hokies into scoring position . After failing to gain first downs with short runs , Virginia Tech was forced to use its timeouts to stop the clock and the first half from ending before they had a chance to score . On a 3rd @-@ and @-@ 7 from the Boston College 13 @-@ yard line , Glennon finally connected with wide receiver Josh Hyman , who crossed into the end zone for a touchdown . The extra point tied the game , 16 – 16 . 
 With no time left to mount an answering drive , Boston College received the kickoff and let time run out . Heading into halftime , the two teams were tied , 16 – 16 . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 Because they deferred their selection to the second half during the opening coin toss , Virginia Tech received the ball to begin the half . The Hokies continued to rotate between quarterbacks Sean Glennon and Tyrod Taylor during the possession , and picked up two first downs , one through the air and the other on the ground . After Glennon was sacked at the 50 @-@ yard line , however , the drive sputtered and the Hokies were forced to punt the ball . 
 Boston College , in their first possession of the second half , fared even worse than Virginia Tech did . Two incomplete passes and a 5 @-@ yard delay of game penalty forced Boston College into a three @-@ and @-@ out possession that resulted in a punt . On its second possession , Virginia Tech had a three @-@ and @-@ out drive , thanks in part to an 11 @-@ yard sack of Sean Glennon by Boston College 's Kevin Atkins . 
 After receiving the punt , Boston College quarterback Matt Ryan connected on a 31 @-@ yard pass to wide receiver Brandon Robinson . As before , however , the offense stalled . On 4th @-@ and @-@ 1 from the Virginia Tech 30 @-@ yard line , Ryan attempted a pass that fell incomplete , turning the ball over on downs . As a result of pressure applied by the Boston College defense , the Hokies continued to have difficulty moving the ball . 
 The Hokies were forced to punt again , and Brent Bowden 's 50 @-@ yard punt stuck the Eagles deep in their own territory . The drive began with a five @-@ yard penalty against Boston College and culminated two plays later in a six @-@ yard loss on a sack of Matt Ryan by Hokie defender Barry Booker . Boston College punted , but the kick by Johnny Ayers traveled just 34 yards before sailing out of bounds . 
 Virginia Tech had good starting field position at their own 44 @-@ yard line . One quick first down later , the clock ran out on the third quarter . As neither team had scored in the quarter , the score remained tied at 16 – 16 . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 Despite starting almost at midfield , the offensive drive that began at the end of the third quarter failed to reach field goal range , and the Hokies were forced to punt . Boston College 's offense fared no better , however , and punted after a three @-@ and @-@ out possession . The ball was downed at the Virginia Tech 16 @-@ yard line , and the Hokies began their first full offensive possession of the fourth quarter . 
 After an incomplete pass from quarterback Tyrod Taylor , the Hokies got their first big offensive break of the second half . On a designed play , Taylor scrambled for 31 yards , the largest play in the game for the Hokies . Two successful runs by running back Branden Ore followed , earning the Hokies 23 more yards and pushing the offense deep into Boston College territory . A false @-@ start penalty set the Hokie offense back , but on the next play , quarterback Sean Glennon connected with wide receiver Eddie Royal on a 24 @-@ yard strike for a touchdown . The touchdown and extra point were the first points of the second half and gave Virginia Tech a 23 – 16 lead with 6 : 30 remaining in the game . 
 Boston College began its second possession of the fourth quarter knowing it had to score a touchdown to tie the game . Quarterback Matt Ryan had his best success of the day , connecting on seven of ten passes during the drive and picking up 58 yards . All of the Eagles ' yardage on the drive came through the air , and with 2 : 25 remaining , the Eagles found themselves at the Virginia Tech 14 @-@ yard line . Facing a fourth down and needing four yards for a first down , Matt Ryan fell back to attempt a pass . The throw was intercepted by Virginia Tech 's Vince Hall . 
 Starting at its own 10 @-@ yard line , Virginia Tech ran three straight running plays in an effort to run the clock down and prevent Boston College from having enough time to conduct another offensive drive . After the third run was stopped for no gain , however , the Hokies were forced to punt the ball . Boston College now had 28 seconds to score a touchdown and either tie the game with an extra point or win it with a two @-@ point conversion . 
 The Boston College drive began on its own 35 @-@ yard line . With little time remaining , Boston College would have to complete one or more Hail Mary passes . Although the odds of completing one such pass , let alone several , were very low , many Virginia Tech fans remained worried , as Boston College had previously beaten the Hokies in similar circumstances earlier in the season . Matt Ryan 's first two passes fell incomplete , and his third was intercepted by Virginia Tech 's Xavier Adibi and returned 40 yards for a Virginia Tech touchdown . 
 The score came with 11 seconds remaining and gave Virginia Tech its final lead , 30 – 16 . With no chance to win , Boston College elected to let the clock run out after receiving the kickoff . Virginia Tech won the 2007 ACC Championship , 30 – 16 . 
 = = Final statistics = = 
 Virginia Tech quarterback Sean Glennon was named the game 's Most Valuable Player . Glennon finished the game having completed 18 of his 27 passes , earning 174 passing yards , three touchdowns ( 18 points ) , and one interception . Boston College quarterback Matt Ryan had finished 33 of 52 for 305 yards and two interceptions , no passing touchdowns , and one rushing touchdown . 
 Each team finished with two turnovers — Virginia Tech fumbled the ball once and threw one interception , while Boston College 's offense threw two . Each team earned seven points off of turnovers , and Virginia Tech blocked two kicks . The two blocked kicks effectively netted five points for Virginia Tech , as the blocked field goal prevented Boston College from scoring three points , and the other blocked kick was returned 75 yards for a rare defensive two @-@ point conversion . The two blocked kicks by Virginia Tech were the first and second blocked kicks in ACC Championship Game history , and Boston College 's fumble return for a touchdown was the first fumble recovery and defensive touchdown in ACC Championship Game history . 
 = = = Virginia Tech statistical recap = = = 
 Two @-@ thirds of Virginia Tech 's 300 total offensive yardage came via passes from quarterbacks Sean Glennon ( 174 yards ) and Tyrod Taylor ( 28 yards ) . Glennon 's three passing touchdowns tied an ACC Championship Game record set by former Virginia Tech quarterback Marcus Vick in 2005 . Glennon also set the ACC Championship Game record for pass completion percentage ( 66 @.@ 7 % ) by completing 18 of his 27 passes . Taylor , meanwhile , set ACC Championship Game records for longest run and longest quarterback run with a 31 @-@ yard scramble in the second quarter that helped set up the tying touchdown for Virginia Tech . Taylor finished the game with 36 rushing yards , the third @-@ most of any player in the game . 
 On the ground , Taylor 's performance was supplemented by Tech running back Branden Ore , who led all rushers with 55 yards on 19 rushes . Fourteen of Ore 's 55 yards came on a single play halfway through the fourth quarter when the Boston College 's defensive line gave way , admitting Tech 's runner into the defensive secondary . The run helped set up Virginia Tech 's go @-@ ahead touchdown later in the fourth quarter . Capping Tech 's ground game were complimentary performances by Kenny Lewis and Sean Glennon , each of whom earned fewer than 10 yards , but picked up first downs on two plays . 
 Leading all Tech receivers was Josh Morgan , who caught eight passes for 55 yards and a touchdown . Eddie Royal also had an excellent game for the Hokies , catching two long passes of 18 yards and 11 yards on subsequent plays in the second quarter . Royal 's 2 catches drove the Hokies deep into Boston College territory , setting up a 13 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Josh Hyman that tied the game at halftime . Royal 's biggest play , however , came halfway through the fourth quarter when he caught the go @-@ ahead touchdown pass from Sean Glennon . The 24 @-@ yard reception was Royal 's longest catch of the day , and the touchdown gave the Hokies a lead they would not relinquish for the rest of the game . 
 Though its offense performed well , it was Virginia Tech 's special teams and defense that earned it the win . Duane Brown 's twin blocked kicks were the first blocks recorded in ACC Championship Game history and were the 116th and 117th blocked kicks recorded at Virginia Tech under head coach Frank Beamer . In addition to the blocks , Tech special teams excelled on punts and kickoffs . Tech punter Brent Bowden finished the day with seven punts for a total of 324 yards . A 54 @-@ yard kick in the first quarter was the fourth @-@ longest punt in ACC Championship Game history . 
 On defense , linebacker Vince Hall , in his second game after recovering from a broken forearm , led all defensive players with 11 tackles . Hall also recorded an interception in the late stages of the fourth quarter that allowed Virginia Tech to run down the clock and force Boston College into a hasty offense . Tied for third overall was Tech 's Xavier Adibi , who recorded nine tackles ( one for loss ) and caught the game @-@ ending interception . Adibi returned the interception 40 yards for a defensive touchdown that sealed the victory for the Hokies . 
 = = = Boston College statistical recap = = = 
 Though Boston College lost the game on the scoreboard , it won almost every statistical category . Quarterback Matt Ryan outperformed both Hokie quarterbacks combined in passing yardage , throwing for 305 yards . Ryan was extremely accurate through the air in the fourth quarter , throwing eight straight complete passes , an ACC Championship Game record . Ryan also was surprisingly successful on the ground , rushing for Boston College 's touchdown of the game — a 14 @-@ yard sprint in the second quarter that put Boston College ahead 16 – 7 . 
 In the first half , the Eagles offense recorded 20 first downs . In the second half , it managed just four first downs , three of which came in one drive in the fourth quarter . As a result of second @-@ half pressure from Virginia Tech , Ryan was forced into two late @-@ game interceptions , including one that was returned for a Virginia Tech defensive touchdown . 
 Ryan finished the game with 35 rushing yards , just one short of Hokie quarterback Tyrod Taylor , who had been highly promoted as a runner heading into the game . Ryan finished fourth among all rushers , and Eagle running back Andre Callender , the sole running back on the Eagles ' roster , finished second , rushing for 51 yards in the game . Callender game @-@ long 11 @-@ yard run helped set up the Eagles for a field goal attempt early in the second quarter . 
 Callender 's true success , however , was in the passing game , where he accrued 92 yards , putting him first among all receivers in the game . Callender 's 13 catches were an ACC Championship Game record and were the fourth @-@ highest total for a receiver in any game in ACC history . Wide receiver Kevin Challenger finished the game with 4 catches for 45 yards , while the Eagles ' Rich Gunnell finished the game with 54 yards . Surprisingly for the number of receiving yards recorded by the Eagles in the game , no Boston College receiver caught a touchdown . 
 Boston College punter Johnny Ayres kicked four punts a total of 159 yards , including one long kick that traveled 55 yards and set the mark for the third @-@ longest punt in ACC Championship Game history . Kicker Steve Aponavicius successfully kicked a 37 @-@ yard field goal early in the second <unk> but after his second kick was blocked , Boston College head coach Jeff Jagodzinski seemed reluctant to try long field goals and instead sent in the offense to attempt to convert the fourth down . Out of four tries , only one fourth down was converted into a first down . 
 On defense , Boston College had more success than predicted by pre @-@ game coverage . Jamie Silva 's fumble return for a touchdown was the first defensive score in ACC Championship Game history . Silva finished the game with five tackles ( one for loss ) , one interception , the forced fumble , and the defensive touchdown . DeLeon <unk> , meanwhile , was the Eagles ' leading tackler , recording 10 stops including one tackle for loss . Altogether , the Eagles recorded four sacks and nine tackles for loss , holding the Hokie offense in check for most of the game . 
 = = Post @-@ game effects = = 
 Virginia Tech 's victory in the ACC Championship Game had far @-@ reaching sporting consequences for the 2007 – 2008 college football bowl season and in the future site of the ACC Championship Game . The 2007 game injected approximately $ 10 million into the Jacksonville economy . Thousands of hotel rooms were filled by fans traveling to the game , and the impact they created was larger than that of the previous year 's game , which featured teams that had shorter distances to travel and whose fans had generated less demand for overnight accommodation . Despite the fact that fans spent more in 2007 than at any previous ACC Championship Game , poor ticket sales at the box office necessitated a move . 
 = = = 2008 ACC Championship Game = = = 
 After poor attendance in the ACC Championship Game at Jacksonville for the second straight year , ACC officials and representatives of the conference 's member schools elected not to extend the Gator Bowl Association 's contract to host the game . On December 12 , the ACC announced that Tampa , Florida would host the game in 2008 and 2009 and Charlotte , North Carolina would host the game in 2010 and 2011 . 
 The cities were chosen based on bids presented to the ACC and its member schools . Each city requested and was granted a two @-@ year contract , locking the ACC into the locations well in advance of the actual games . Tampa was chosen as the site of the 2008 game because Charlotte was scheduled to hold the annual convention of the Association for Career and Technical Education at the same time as the game , and adequate hotel space would not be ready in time for the two events . 
 = = = Bowl effects = = = 
 With its win , Virginia Tech clinched an automatic bid to the 2008 Orange Bowl . This caused ripple effects in the bowl destinations for virtually every bowl @-@ eligible ACC team . In the 2007 season , the ACC had guaranteed tie @-@ ins with eight bowl games . 
 The ACC 's representatives to these bowls were picked in a hierarchical system that allowed the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl to have the first selection after the Orange Bowl 's automatic pick of the winner of the ACC Championship Game . Following the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl were the Gator Bowl , Champs Sports Bowl , Music City Bowl , Meineke Car Care Bowl , Emerald Bowl , and Humanitarian Bowl , in that order . The ACC 's agreement with the bowls dictated that the bowls would select the highest @-@ ranking ACC team left after the bowls with higher selections made their pick . Bowls would be allowed to skip the highest remaining team only if the next team was within one conference win of the highest remaining team . Therefore , a bowl could select a 5 – 3 team over a 6 – 2 team , but could not select a 4 – 4 team over a 6 – 2 team . 
 With Virginia Tech earning an automatic bid to the Orange Bowl , the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl had the first pick of the remaining ACC teams . Boston College , by virtue of its loss in the ACC Championship Game , was the highest remaining team , but Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl representatives instead chose to invite Clemson , which had finished behind Boston College in the Atlantic Division standings . In making their decision , Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl representatives cited Boston College 's poor attendance at the ACC Championship Game in Jacksonville . The Gator Bowl , which is also held in Jacksonville , was reluctant to choose a team that had participated in the ACC Championship Game out of feat that the team 's fans would be unwilling to return to Jacksonville so quickly . The Gator Bowl Association requested and received a waiver from the league 's strict bowl selection rules and selected Virginia over Boston College . 
 The Champs Sports Bowl was thus forced to select Boston College . Boston College players and fans , owing to the decreased status of the Champs Sports Bowl when compared with the Orange , Chick @-@ fil @-@ A , and Gator Bowls , were disappointed with the selection and match against Michigan State . Had Boston College won the ACC Championship Game , it would have earned the automatic bid to the Orange Bowl , and Virginia Tech would have been selected by the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl , which had earlier expressed an interest in inviting the Hokies to the game for a second straight year . Clemson would have been bumped down to the Gator Bowl , and Virginia would have been forced into the Champs Sports Bowl . 
 = Vernon C. Bain Correctional Center = 
 The Vernon C. Bain Center ( <unk> ) , also known as the Vernon C. Bain Maritime Facility , is an 800 @-@ bed jail barge used to hold inmates for the New York City Department of Corrections . It was built in New Orleans along the Mississippi River for $ 161 million in Avondale Shipyard , and brought to New York in 1992 to reduce overcrowding in the island 's land @-@ bound buildings for a lower price . Nicknamed " The Boat " by prison staff and inmates , it is designed to handle inmates from medium- to maximum @-@ security in 16 dormitories and 100 cells . 
 Currently the only barge in use , the Vernon C. Bain Center is the third prison barge that the New York Department of Corrections has used . In its history , the prison has served traditional inmates , juvenile inmates and is currently used as a holding and temporary processing center . The added security of the prison being on water has prevented at least four attempted escapes . The barge is named in memorial for warden Vernon C. Bain who died in an automobile accident . In 2014 , the prison barge was named the world 's largest prison barge in operation by the Guinness World Records . 
 = = History = = 
 In the late 1980s , the New York City Department of Correction experienced overcrowding issues in its prison complexes . The idea of temporarily alleviating the issues of a growing inmate population and dwindling space by outfitting prison ships was conceived under the administration of then Mayor Edward I. Koch . Their solution was to develop usable prison space with maritime cells and avoid complaints about building jails in densely populated neighborhoods . 
 In 1988 , the Bibby Resolution , and her sister ship Bibby Venture , were bought by the New York City Department of Correction in to serve as the first two prison ships . Both ships were previously used as British troop carriers before being re @-@ purposed into prison ships . In 1994 both ships were sold , leaving the Bain Correctional Center and two converted Staten Island ferries , the <unk> and Kean , docked at Rikers Island to be used when overcrowding became an issue . 
 The construction of the Vernon C. Bain Center prison barge began in 1989 at Avondale Shipyard by Avondale Industries and was supposed to be finished in 1990 at the price of $ 125 @.@ 6 million . Due to unanticipated construction problems including issues with the ventilation system , the finished barge was delivered 18 months late and $ 35 million over budget . On January 26 , 1992 , the recently outfitted barge prison was brought through the Long Island Sound by the tugboat , Michael <unk> , after an 1800 nautical mile trip . The new barge was named for well @-@ liked and respected warden Vernon C. Bain , who had died in an automobile accident . 
 One of the first captains of the barge under the Department of Corrections had previously been employed by the same tugboat company and had earlier captained the tugboat that hauled the barge to its current location . The new crew of the prison barge , who were placed in accordance with Coast Guard regulations , worked on the empty barge to learn the vessel operations , including the electrical and fire fighting systems . The barge officially opened for use and began accepting inmates later in 1992 . 
 From the time the barge was constructed , there has been controversy about its cost . The final price was more than $ 35 million over budget , which attracted negative attention . The assistant correction commissioner , John H. Shanahan , claimed the price difference was because the Department of Corrections " never designed this kind of passenger vessel before and unfortunately there was a mistake in the original contract . " William Booth , the <unk> of the Board of Corrections , said at the time that the prison barge would be the last barge the Department of Corrections would build because the process was too expensive and too uncertain . The Board of Corrections is an independent body that monitors city @-@ owned prisons . 
 The prison barge was temporarily closed in August 1995 due to less crowded city jails , caused by a decline in arrests and inmate transfers . In late 1996 , the prison was slated for reopening due to the rise in arrests from a campaign targeting drugs and drug dealers . The six @-@ month campaign expected more than seven thousand additional arrests than usual , but the ship was not reopened until 1998 when it was used by the Department of Juvenile Justice . The Bain Center is currently used as a processing facility for inmates in the Department of Corrections system . There are three other processing facilities that each handle specific boroughs . 
 = = = Juvenile detention = = = 
 A surge in the need for juvenile detention space caused the New York City Department of Juvenile Justice to lease space at the Bain Correction Center in 1998 . At the time , there were over five thousand juveniles aged thirteen to eighteen years old in secure detention in New York . The barge had been unused since August 1995 but had been maintained and was ready to house inmates again . The center was used to solve the space problem and to assist in the closure of Spofford Juvenile Center . The temporary space was used for juvenile inmate processing and temporary housing for inmates from prior to transfer . Children were moved out of the Bain Center and back into the Spofford facility in 1999 . In January 2000 , the Department of Juvenile Justice , after completing renovations to other buildings , moved out of the center . 
 = = = Escapes = = = 
 The first time a prisoner tried to escape from the Bain was in 1993 , when a 38 @-@ year @-@ old prisoner was able to escape while he was supposed to be cleaning ice from the parking lot in front of the ship . The guard who was responsible for the inmate was suspended without pay due to the incident . 
 Prior to 2002 , an inmate tried to escape from the prison 's recreation area by climbing the 30 @-@ foot fence equipped with razor wire . The guards ' uniform boots prevented them from climbing the fence in pursuit , so they threw basketballs at the inmate to stop his escape , but he was able to successfully climb over it . He dove into the East River , where he was promptly picked up and returned by a police watercraft that was dispatched to the scene . 
 Another escape occurred in February 2004 when the girlfriend of an inmate gave him a handcuff key . The inmate was handcuffed by one wrist to another inmate , but he was able to , without any prison employee noticing , remove the cuffs and free himself . The inmate was able to cling to the undercarriage of a prisoner transport bus to ride away from the facility . He let go of the bus in the South Bronx and walked away , but was apprehended nearly a month later . Six officers and a captain were given administrative leave due to the incident . The corrections commissioner said the escape was caused by a combination of the inmate 's quick thinking and the officers ' sloppy work . 
 In early 2013 , an inmate charged with petty larceny successfully slipped out of his handcuffs as he arrived at the Bain Center . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The 625 @-@ foot long by 125 @-@ foot wide flatbed barge is equipped with 14 dormitories and 100 cells for inmates . For recreation , there is a full @-@ size gym with basketball court , weight lifting rooms and an outdoor recreation facility on the roof . There are three worship chapels , a modern medical facility and a library open to inmate use . The 47 @,@ 326 @-@ ton facility was on the water , so when it opened , a minimum of three maritime crew was maintained under Coast Guard regulations . According to John <unk> , the barge 's first captain , in 2002 , " the Coast Guard , after years of monitoring the prison barge , finally accepted the reality that that it was , de facto , a jail and not a boat . " The prison barge is located approximately 5 miles away from SUNY Maritime college . 
 = They Saved Lisa 's Brain = 
 " They Saved Lisa 's Brain " is the twenty @-@ second episode of The Simpsons ' tenth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 9 , 1999 . After writing a thoughtful letter to the Springfield Shopper , Lisa is invited to join the Springfield chapter of Mensa . When Mayor Quimby later flees Springfield , the group takes control of the town , hoping to improve the lives of <unk> through the rule of the smartest . 
 " They Saved Lisa 's Brain " was directed by Pete Michels and written by Matt Selman , although the idea for the episode was pitched by former staff writer George Meyer . It featured the first official appearance of Lindsey Naegle and was the first episode in which theoretical physicist and cosmologist Stephen Hawking guest @-@ starred as himself . The Simpsons staff wanted Hawking to guest @-@ star because they needed someone who would be smarter than all of Springfield 's Mensa members , and because they had heard that he was a fan of the show . The episode features references to Star Trek , painter Vincent van Gogh and architect Frank Lloyd Wright , and mentions the theory of the universe being toroidal , the same shape as a doughnut . 
 In its original broadcast , " They Saved Lisa 's Brain " was seen by approximately 6 @.@ 8 million viewers , a very low amount for the series . Following the episode 's broadcast , Selman made a controversial statement about East St. Louis , which was pronounced the least livable city in the United States in the episode . While the episode received mixed reviews from critics , Hawking 's appearance garnered critical acclaim , and has since appeared in several lists of best guest appearances on The Simpsons . Hawking has since appeared in three episodes , and an action figure based on his cameos in the series has been produced . Although Hawking has stated that he enjoyed guest @-@ starring on The Simpsons , he has also mentioned that his cameos have made many people mistake him for a fictional character . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A low @-@ fat pudding , Grandma <unk> 's , is the sponsor of a Springfield contest that promises a luxurious trip to the most disgusting and dimwitted contest participant in town . Many Springfield residents enter the contest , but things do not go well when one of the judges , Rainier Wolfcastle , declares himself the winner for " being seen with you freaks " . The contest ends in a riot and Lisa ends up hit in the face twice with pudding . She denounces Springfield for its anti @-@ intellectualism in an open letter that ends up in the newspaper , for which no one reads . This impresses the Springfield Mensa chapter , which accepts her for membership after Principal Skinner shared her placement tests and she brought them a pie for their latest meeting . 
 Lisa joins Mensa alongside Comic Book Guy , Dr. Hibbert , Principal Skinner , Professor Frink , and Lindsay Naegle . After the pleasantries , Lisa finds herself at home alongside the Mensa members , whose sense of humor is so esoteric that it is said to be enjoyed by the " Dennis Miller ratio " of Americans . After being bullied out of their reserved gazebo at a park by drunks and Chief Wiggum , they fear that Springfield 's quality is poor because of the city 's stupidest residents having power over their civic institutions . The Mensa group goes to confront Mayor Quimby about the gazebo incident , until he escapes from the city when he mistakenly thinks the group has evidence about his corruption . The town 's constitution states that in the absence of the mayor , the town is to be governed by the smartest by <unk> . Now in control of Springfield , the group hopes that things will become much better . 
 Once in control , however , the group allows power to go to their heads . At first they efficiently implement their ideas for Springfield , which include banning green traffic lights and playing only classical music at the dog races , which elevates Springfield past East St. Louis on the list of America 's 300 Most Livable Cities . However , they begin to internally fight over other ideas such as having theaters for shadow puppets and a broccoli juice program , and their wildly unpopular plans at a public meeting ( including the banning of all contact sports and Comic Book Guy 's plan to limit breeding to every 7 years ) further expose the rifts inside the group . 
 The Springfield townspeople , angered by the new laws , surround the intellectuals in an angry mob and bring an end to Mensa 's rule . Stephen Hawking has shown up to see what the Mensa group is up to and makes it clear he is unimpressed ; however , he saves Lisa from being seriously injured by the angry townspeople . In the end , Hawking and Homer meet at Moe 's Tavern for a drink . Homer imitates Hawking in an attempt to make him pay the tab and gets punched by a boxing glove on a spring , which is concealed in Hawking 's wheelchair . 
 In the episode 's other storyline , Homer steals a gift certificate during the post @-@ contest and has erotic photos taken of himself as a gift to Marge , who gets distracted by the interior design Homer did in their basement . 
 = = Production = = 
 " They Saved Lisa 's Brain " was written by Matt Selman and directed by Pete Michels . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 9 , 1999 . Although the episode 's first draft was written by Selman , the idea for the episode was pitched by former staff writer George Meyer . In the episode 's setpiece , Homer and Bart participate in a gross out contest , while Marge and Lisa are in the audience . According to Selman , the writers took inspiration from real gross out contests , which were " sweeping the nation " at the time . Before the contest in the episode , the spectators are given free samples of a pudding called Grandma <unk> 's . The name of the pudding was inspired by a brand of pies called Aunt Freshly , which the Simpsons writers usually ate at the time . 
 The episode features the first official appearance of Lindsey Naegle , a sleazy businesswoman who has since become a recurring character in the series . While different versions of the character had appeared in the series before , namely in the season 8 episode " The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show " , the season 9 episode " Girly Edition " , and the season 10 episode " Make Room for Lisa " , the character 's final design was first seen in " They Saved Lisa 's Brain " . The episode also mentions the character 's name for the first time . Naegle 's name was partly based on Selman 's agent Sue Neagle , and Lindsey was chosen as the first name because Selman thought it sounded " annoying " and " pretentious " . Naegle is voiced by Tress MacNeille , who Selman described as a " huge asset " to the series , and stated that she " breathes life " into the character . 
 " They Saved Lisa 's Brain " features English theoretical physicist and cosmologist Stephen Hawking as himself . According to executive producer and current showrunner Al Jean , Hawking was asked to guest @-@ star because " we [ they ] were looking for someone much smarter than all the Mensa members [ in Springfield ] " , and so they " naturally thought of him " . Selman added that the Simpsons staff had heard that Hawking was a fan of the show , and that Hawking 's family members wanted him to guest @-@ star . Bill Mann of The Press Democrat argued that Hawking was chosen to guest star in order to boost the series ' ratings during the May " sweeps " . Mann wrote that " sweeps " are " used to set local TV ad rates for the months ahead " . 
 In her book Stephen Hawking : a biography , Kristen Larsen wrote that Hawking almost missed his recording session , as his wheelchair broke down two days before his flight to Los Angeles , where the recording took place . In order to make the necessary repairs , Hawking 's graduate assistant Chris Burgoyne , aided by a technician , worked a 36 ‑ hour shift . Hawking was 40 minutes late when he arrived in Los Angeles . When he met the Simpsons staff , he apologized , saying " Sorry for being late . " According to Selman , Hawking was very humble regarding the episode 's jokes about him , and stated that he " took a lot of shots " at himself . The only note that Hawking gave regarding the script was that he did not want to be portrayed as drunk in the episode 's last scene , in which he is discussing astronomy with Homer in Moe 's tavern . 
 Because of his motor neurone disease , Hawking is unable to speak , and he communicates using a custom @-@ made computer . With small movements of his body , Hawking writes a text onto the computer , which is then spoken by a voice <unk> . Because of this , Hawking had to write all his lines on his computer , while the staff recorded them by placing a microphone in front of the computer 's speaker . " It 's easy to do a fake Stephen Hawking in your comedy TV show " , Selman said in the DVD commentary for the episode . " Any computer can sound just like his computer , but every line that we wrote for him , he typed in himself and we recorded with our microphones as if had come out of a regular mouth . " Some of Hawking 's lines were difficult to record . In particular , the word " Fruitopia " was difficult for Hawking 's computer to " put together " correctly , and it " took forever " to make the word sound right from the voice synthesizer . 
 = = Themes and cultural references = = 
 In their book The Simpsons and philosophy : the d 'oh ! of Homer , William Irwin , Mark T. Conard and Aeon J. Skoble wrote that " They Saved Lisa 's Brain " in detail explores " the possibility of a utopian alternative to politics as usual in Springfield " . They described " They Saved Lisa 's Brain " as an " epitome " of The Simpsons diverse comedic humor , and wrote that it can be " enjoyed in two levels " , as both " broad farce " and " intellectual satire " . As an example of the episode 's farcical humor , they referred to the episode 's subplot , which , they wrote , " contains some of the grossest humor in the long history of The Simpsons . " At the same time , the episode is " filled " with what they described as " subtle cultural allusions " , such as the design of Mensa group 's locale , which is based on American architect Frank Lloyd Wright 's house . Likewise , Lisa 's challenge to Springfield calls attention to the " cultural limitations of small @-@ town America " , while the episode also argues that intellectual disdain for the common man can be carried too far and that theory can " all too easily lose touch with common sense " . They also argued that the episode , as well as the series as a whole , offers a kind of intellectual defense of the common man against intellectuals , which they opined " helps explain its popularity and broad appeal [ ... ] [ " They Saved Lisa 's Brain " ] defends the common man against the intellectual , in a way that both the common man and the intellectual can understand and enjoy . " 
 In the last scene in the episode , Hawking and Homer are seen discussing the universe in Moe 's tavern . Scully stated that the scene was included because it " was a chance to get the world 's smartest man and the world 's stupidest man in the same place " . In the scene , Hawking tells Homer " Your theory of a donut @-@ shaped universe is intriguing ... I may have to steal it . " In his book What 's science ever done for us ? : what The Simpsons can teach us about physics , robots , life and the universe , Paul Halpern wrote that in mathematics , a " donut @-@ shape " , the three @-@ dimensional generalization of a ring , is referred to as a torus . The generalization of a torus , any closed curve spun in a circle around an axis , is called a <unk> . According to Halpern , Hawking 's line references the fact that there are " genuine " scientific theories that the universe is toroidal . 
 One of the judges for the gross out contest in the episode 's is Madeleine Albright , who was the current US Secretary of State at the time . During the riot that follows the contest , a travelling exhibition of Van Gogh 's paintings is burned to flames . In the episode 's subplot , Homer hires a photographer to take erotic pictures of him . The design of the photographer was based on American portrait photographer Annie Leibovitz . The song that plays during the photographing scenes is " I 'm Too Sexy " by English pop trio Right Said Fred . During the rules and regulations announcement , Comic Book Guy declares that sexual intercourse will only be permitted once every seven years in Springfield . This is a reference to pon farr , a term used in the Star Trek franchise to describe the <unk> effect of the estrous cycle that affects the fictional race Vulcans every seven years . His taunting of " I am smart , much smarter than you , Hib @-@ bert ! " is also to the tune of the Star Trek fanfare . The episode also mentions actress Geena Davis and cartoonist Mell Lazarus , both of whom are members of Mensa . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast and controversy = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on May 9 , 1999 , " They Saved Lisa 's Brain " received a 6 @.@ 8 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 6 @.@ 8 million viewers . It finished in 54th place in the ratings for the week of May 3 – 9 , 1999 . The episode 's viewership was considered very low by the Boston Herald , who noted that it reached " historic lows " in the ratings . 
 In a scene in the episode , Comic Book Guy announces that Springfield is in 299th place on a list of the United States ' 300 most livable cities , with East St. Louis being in last place . A journalist for a " local East St Louis [ news ] paper " noticed this , and called Selman to ask him why they were " taking a shot at East St Louis " . Selman jokingly replied : " because it 's a crack @-@ ridden slum " . After the interview , he went on vacation in Greece for two weeks . While Selman was on vacation , executive producer and the episode 's showrunner Mike Scully received a phone call from The Simpsons publicist Antonia Coffman , who reported that Selman 's comment on East St Louis had been taken " very seriously " by the newspaper . The Simpsons staff received several angry letters from East St Louis ' residents , demanding an apology . Because Selman was out of reach , the other staff members had to take care of the controversy . 
 When Selman returned , Scully scolded him and told him that he had to apologize to the mayor of East St Louis , who , unbeknownst to Selman , was portrayed by Marc Wilmore . Wilmore , a former writer on the television comedy The PJ 's , had been asked by Scully to participate in a practical joke , in which he would play the mayor of East St Louis and confront Selman about his controversial statement . According to Selman , Wilmore gave an " Oscar @-@ worthy performance " . " I was terrified " , he stated in the DVD commentary for the episode , " [ we had ] a twenty @-@ minute discussion in which [ Wilmore ] said that [ his ] children were teased at school [ because of Selman 's comments ] , and that the Fox affiliate were gonna be thrown off the air ... " According to Wilmore , Selman immediately blamed the other writers . Said Selman , " Well , everyone participates , you know [ ... ] Have you never heard of the word ' collaboration ' ? " Selman realized the joke when he turned around and saw " all the other writers laughing " . " I was so relieved " , he said , " I was soaked with sweat [ ... ] I had betrayed my fellow writers , tried to get them in trouble , and they all knew me for the turn @-@ coat that I was . " 
 As compensation for his involvement with the joke , Wilmore was given a role in the season 11 episode " It 's a Mad , Mad , Mad , Mad Marge " , in which he played a psychologist . In 2002 , Wilmore became a writer on The Simpsons . 
 = = = Re @-@ release and critical reception = = = 
 On August 7 , 2007 , " They Saved Lisa 's Brain " was released as part of The Simpsons - The Complete Tenth Season DVD box set . Mike Scully , Matt Selman , Ron Hauge , Rich Appel , Marc Wilmore and Pete Michels participated in the DVD 's audio commentary of the episode . Following its home video release , the episode received mixed reviews from critics . Giving the episode a positive review , DVD Town 's James Plath described it as one of the season 's better episodes . Ian Jane of DVD Talk wrote that , while episodes that revolve around Lisa tend to be " less popular " than others , he considered " They Saved Lisa 's Brain " to be " well done " . Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide gave the episode a mixed review , writing " I like the fact that ' Brain ' pokes some fun at Mensa , one of the more smug , self @-@ congratulatory groups to be found . The show manages a few good laughs as it goes after various pretensions . " However , he added that " the show peters out after a while " , and that it " never becomes particularly memorable " . A reviewer for Currentfilm.com wrote that , while the episode " isn 't without its charms " , it " just don 't hold up very well " . Jake MacNeill of Digital Entertainment News wrote that the episode is " great if you think <unk> are funny " , and added that it was one of the season 's worst episodes . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood of I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide described it as a " retread " of the season 9 episode " Lisa the Simpson " . They wrote " Once we 're past the How Low Will You Go show , the episode takes a nose @-@ dive until the last few minutes . " They concluded their review by calling the episode " Very , very tedious . " 
 On the other hand , Stephen Hawking 's appearance in the episode was acclaimed by critics . Although they generally disliked the episode , Martyn and Wood wrote that Hawking 's cameo " saves [ the episode ] from being very boring " . Plath called the performance " very funny " , while Jane described it as " great " . Hawking reached seventh place in UGO 's list of The Simpsons 's " Top 11 Guest Stars " , and finished in fourteenth place in " The Simpsons 20 best guest voices of all time " by Ryan Stewart of The Boston Phoenix . Stewart wrote that Hawking 's line " " Your theory of a doughnut @-@ shaped universe intrigues me , Homer . I may have to steal it " was a " memorable " quote from the episode . Ethan Alter of The Morning Call described Hawking 's cameo as one of the series ' ten best , and wrote that Hawking 's best line in the episode was " I wanted to see your Utopia , but now I see it is more of a Fruitopia . " Writing for IGN , Eric Goldman , Dan Iverson and Brian Zoromski placed Hawking at number sixteen on their list " Top 25 Simpsons Guest Appearances " . They wrote that he had a " fairly major " role in the episode , and that he had " several great lines " . 
 In an article written for the Modern Day Pirates titled " In Search of The Last Classic Simpsons Episode " , author Brandon listed " They Saved Lisa 's Brain " as a contender for the latest episode that made him feel like he was " watching The Simpsons in their heyday " . He notes that " [ Stephen Hawking ] ( or his computer ) put a great final moment to the show and was not overused and <unk> over like some guest stars that would come ( I ’ m looking at you Green Day ) . " 
 = = = Hawking 's response = = = 
 After the episode aired , Hawking told the Simpsons staff that he " loved " all the jokes and in an interview with The Guardian in 2005 , he stated that his guest appearances on The Simpsons were " great fun " . An action figure based on Hawking 's appearance in The Simpsons has been produced , with the figurine 's computer screen reading " If you 're looking for trouble , you 've found it " , a line from " They Saved Lisa 's Brain " . Since " They Saved Lisa 's Brain " , Hawking has guest @-@ starred three times on The Simpsons . In 2005 , he appeared in the season 16 episode " Don 't Fear the <unk> " ; in 2007 , he starred in the season 18 episode " Stop or My Dog Will Shoot " ; and in 2010 , he appeared in the Season 22 premiere " Elementary School Musical " . 
 However , Hawking has also expressed dissatisfaction regarding the impact on his notoriety caused by his appearance in the episode . In a debate with physicist Brian Cox in The Guardian , Hawking was asked what the most common misconception about his work was . He replied , " People think I 'm a Simpsons character . " Writing for The Daily Telegraph , Peter Hutchison argued that Hawking " feels he is sometimes not properly recognised for his contribution to our understanding of the universe . " In his book The book is dead : long live the book , Sherman Young wrote that most people know Hawking from his appearance on The Simpsons , rather than from anything he has written . 
 = GoldenEye 007 ( 1997 video game ) = 
 GoldenEye 007 is a first @-@ person shooter video game developed by Rare and based on the 1995 James Bond film GoldenEye . It was exclusively released for the Nintendo 64 video game console in August 1997 . The game features a single @-@ player campaign in which players assume the role of British Secret Intelligence Service agent James Bond as he fights to prevent a criminal syndicate from using a satellite weapon against London to cause a global financial meltdown . The game also includes a split @-@ screen multiplayer mode in which two , three , or four players can compete in different types of deathmatch games . 
 GoldenEye 007 was originally conceived as an on @-@ rails shooter inspired by Sega 's Virtua Cop , before being redesigned as a free @-@ roaming shooter . The game was highly acclaimed by the gaming media and has sold over eight million copies worldwide , making it the third @-@ best @-@ selling Nintendo 64 game . GoldenEye 007 is considered an important game in the history of first @-@ person shooters for demonstrating the viability of game consoles as platforms for the genre , and for signalling a transition from the then @-@ standard Doom @-@ like approach to a more realistic style . It pioneered features such as atmospheric single @-@ player missions , stealth elements , and a console multiplayer deathmatch mode . The game is frequently cited as one of the greatest video games of all time . 
 GoldenEye 007 was followed by a spiritual successor , Perfect Dark , also developed by Rare for the Nintendo 64 . A reimagining of the game , also titled GoldenEye 007 , was published by Activision and released for the Wii and Nintendo DS in 2010 , and later re @-@ released as GoldenEye 007 : Reloaded for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 the following year . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 GoldenEye 007 is a first @-@ person shooter that features both single and multiplayer modes . In the single @-@ player mode , the player takes the role of James Bond through a series of free @-@ roaming 3D levels . Each level requires the player to complete a certain set of objectives – such as collecting or destroying specified items , rescuing hostages , or meeting with friendly non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) – and then exit the stage . Some gadgets from the James Bond film series are featured in the game and are often used to complete particular mission objectives ; for example , in one level the electromagnetic watch from Live and Let Die is used to acquire a jail cell key . 
 The arsenal of weapons includes pistols , submachine guns , assault rifles , grenades , and throwing knives , among others . Guns have a finite magazine and must be reloaded after a certain number of shots , but the player may acquire and carry as many weapons as can be found in each mission . The player 's initial weapon in most missions is James Bond 's Walther PPK , called the PP7 in @-@ game . Most of the game 's firearms are modelled on real @-@ life counterparts ( although their names are altered ) , while others are based on fictitious devices featured in the Bond films , such as the Golden Gun and Moonraker laser . The weapons vary in characteristics such as rate of fire , degree of penetration , and type of ammunition used , and inflict different levels of damage depending on which body part they hit . 
 Stealth is a significant element of the gameplay ; frequent gunfire can alert distant guards , and activated alarms can trigger infinitely @-@ respawning enemies . Therefore , to avoid gunfights with numerous opponents , it is advantageous to eliminate soldiers and security cameras before they spot or hear the player . Certain weapons incorporate suppressor or telescopic sight attachments to aid the player in killing enemies discreetly . There are no health @-@ recovery items in the game , although armour vests can be acquired to provide a secondary health bar . 
 Four save files are available to track the player 's progress through the game 's twenty missions , each of which may be played on " Agent " , " Secret Agent " , or " 00 @-@ Agent " difficulty settings . Higher difficulties increase the challenge by altering factors such as the damage enemies can withstand and inflict , the amount of ammunition available , and the number of objectives that must be completed . Once a mission is completed , the player may either continue progressing through the story or choose to replay a previously completed level . Completing certain missions within particular target times enables the player to unlock bonus cheat options which make various changes to the gameplay . Upon fully completing the game on the hardest difficulty setting , an additional " 007 " mode is unlocked that allows the player to customise the challenge of any mission by manually adjusting enemies ' health , reaction times , aiming accuracy , and the damage they inflict . 
 The multiplayer mode allows two , three , or four players to compete against each other in five different types of split screen deathmatch games : Normal , You Only Live Twice , The Living Daylights ( Flag Tag ) , The Man With the Golden Gun , and Licence to Kill . Normal is a basic deathmatch mode in which the main objective is to kill opponents as many times as possible . It can be played as a free @-@ for @-@ all game or in teams . In You Only Live Twice , players only have two lives before they are eliminated from the game , and Licence to Kill is a mode in which players die from a single hit with any weapon . In The Man With the Golden Gun , a single Golden Gun , which is capable of killing opponents with only one shot , is placed in a fixed location on the map ; once the Golden Gun is picked up , the only way to re @-@ acquire it is to kill the player holding it . The player with the Golden Gun is unable to pick up body armour while opponents can . In The Living Daylights , a " flag " is placed in a fixed location on the map , and the player who holds it the longest wins . The flag @-@ carrier cannot use weapons but can still collect them to keep opponents from stocking ammunition . Aspects of each gametype can be customised , including the chosen map , class of weapons , and winning condition . As players progress through the single player mode , new maps and characters are unlocked in the multiplayer mode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 GoldenEye 007 closely follows the plot of the movie , though with some minor alterations . The game starts in Arkhangelsk , in the Soviet Union ( now Russia ) in 1986 , where MI6 has uncovered a secret chemical weapons facility at the <unk> Dam . James Bond and fellow 00 @-@ agent Alec Trevelyan are sent to infiltrate the facility and plant explosive charges . During the mission , Trevelyan is apparently killed by Colonel Arkady Ourumov , but Bond escapes by commandeering an aeroplane . Five years later in 1991 , Bond is sent to investigate a satellite control station in Severnaya , Russia , where programmers Natalya Simonova and Boris Grishenko work . Two years after the Severnaya mission , in 1993 , Bond investigates an unscheduled test firing of a missile in Kyrgyzstan , believed to be a cover for the launch of a satellite known as GoldenEye . This space @-@ based weapon works by firing a concentrated electromagnetic pulse at any Earth target to disable any electrical circuit within range . As Bond leaves the silo , he is ambushed by Ourumov and a squad of Russian troops . Ourumov manages to escape during the encounter . 
 The remainder of the game takes place in 1995 . Bond visits Monte Carlo to investigate the frigate La Fayette , where he rescues several hostages and plants a tracker bug on the Eurocopter Tiger helicopter before it is stolen by the Janus crime syndicate . Bond is then sent a second time to Severnaya , but during the mission he is captured and locked up in the bunker 's cells along with Natalya Simonova , who has been betrayed to Janus . The two escape the complex seconds before it is destroyed , on the orders of Ourumov , by the GoldenEye satellite 's EMP . Bond next travels to Saint Petersburg , where he arranges with ex @-@ KGB agent Valentin Zukovsky to meet the chief of the Janus organisation . This is revealed to be Alec Trevelyan – his execution by Ourumov in the Arkhangelsk facility was faked . Bond and Natalya escape from Trevelyan , but are arrested by the Russian police and taken to the military archives for interrogation . Bond eventually manages to escape the interrogation room , rescue Natalya , and communicate with Defence Minister Dimitri Mishkin , who has verified Bond 's claim of Ourumov 's treachery . Natalya is recaptured by General Ourumov , and Bond gives chase through the streets of St. Petersburg , eventually reaching an arms depot used by Janus . There Bond destroys its weaponry stores and then hitches a ride on Trevelyan 's ex @-@ Soviet missile train , where he kills Ourumov and rescues Natalya . However , Alec Trevelyan and his ally Xenia Onatopp escape to their secret base in Cuba . 
 Natalya accompanies Bond to the Caribbean . Surveying the Cuban jungle aerially , their light aircraft is shot down . <unk> , Bond and Natalya perform a ground search of the area 's heavily guarded jungle terrain , but are ambushed by Xenia , who is quickly killed by Bond . Bond sneaks Natalya into the control centre to disrupt transmissions to the GoldenEye satellite and force it to burn up in the Earth 's atmosphere . He then follows the fleeing Trevelyan through a series of flooded caverns , eventually arriving at the antenna of the control centre 's radio telescope . Trevelyan attempts to re @-@ align it in a final attempt to restore contact with the GoldenEye , but Bond ultimately destroys machinery vital to controlling the antenna and defeats Trevelyan in a gunfight on a platform above the dish . 
 = = Development = = 
 GoldenEye 007 was developed by an inexperienced team ; eight of its ten developers had never previously worked on video games . As programmer David Doak recalls , " Looking back , there are things I 'd be wary of attempting now , but as none of the people working on the code , graphics , and game design had worked on a game before , there was this joyful naïveté . " Due to the success of Donkey Kong Country , GoldenEye 007 was originally suggested as a 2D side @-@ scrolling platformer for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System , but Martin Hollis , the director and producer of the game , proposed " a 3D shooting game " for Nintendo 's in @-@ development " Ultra 64 " console . 
 The intention for the first few months of development was for the game to be an on @-@ rails shooter similar to Sega 's light gun game Virtua Cop ; GoldenEye 's gas plant location was modelled by Karl Hilton with a predetermined path in mind . Although GoldenEye is controlled with a pad rather than a light gun , Hollis credited Virtua Cop as an influence on the developers ' adoption of features such as gun reloading , position @-@ dependent hit reaction animations , penalties for killing innocent characters , and an alternative aiming system that is activated upon pressing the R button of the Nintendo 64 controller . 
 The development team visited the studios of the GoldenEye film to collect photographs and blueprints of the sets used in the movie . Silicon Graphics Onyx workstations and Nintendo 's <unk> development software were used to create the geometry for virtual environments based on this reference material . However , many of the missions were extended or modified to allow the player to participate in sequences which the film 's James Bond did not . Hilton explained , " We tried to stick to [ the reference material ] for authenticity but we weren 't afraid of adding to it to help the game design . It was very organic . " Initially , the designers ' priority was purely on the creation of interesting spaces ; level design and balance considerations such as the placement of start and exit points , characters and objectives did not begin until this process was complete . According to Martin Hollis , " The benefit of this sloppy unplanned approach was that many of the levels in the game have a realistic and non @-@ linear feel . There are rooms with no direct relevance to the level . There are multiple routes across the level . " Hollis also noted that the concept of several varied objectives within each mission was inspired by the multiple tasks in each stage of Super Mario 64 , a game whose 3D collision detection system was also influential for Hollis . 
 Final Nintendo 64 specifications and development workstations were not initially available to Rare : a modified Sega Saturn controller was used for some early playtesting , and the developers had to estimate what the finalised console 's capabilities would be . The final Nintendo 64 hardware could render polygons faster than the SGI Onyx workstations they had been using , but the game 's textures had to be cut down by half . Karl Hilton explained one method of improving the game 's performance : " A lot of GoldenEye is in black and white . RGB colour textures cost a lot more in terms of processing power . You could do double the resolution if you used greyscale , so a lot was done like that . If I needed a bit of colour , I 'd add it in the vertex . " At one time , developers planned to implement the reloading of the weapons by the player unplugging and re @-@ inserting the Rumble Pak on the Nintendo 64 controller , though this idea was discarded at Nintendo 's behest . 
 GoldenEye 007 introduced stealth elements not seen in previous first @-@ person shooter games . Doak explained how this was implemented : " Whenever you fired a gun , it had a radius test and alerted the non @-@ player characters within that radius . If you fired the same gun again within a certain amount of time , it did a larger radius test and I think there was a third even larger radius after that . It meant if you found one guy and shot him in the head and then didn 't fire again , the timer would reset " . Windows throughout the game were programmed so that enemies cannot see through them while the player can . Though decidedly unrealistic , this was an intentional feature made to encourage the player to use windows to covertly spy on enemies . Rather than trying to release the game in tandem with the movie , the Stamper brothers made sure to give the developers as much time as they needed . It was developed through two and a half years , the first year of which was spent developing the engine and producing art assets . The game 's multiplayer mode was added late in the development process ; Martin Hollis described it as " a complete afterthought " . According to David Doak , the majority of the work on the multiplayer mode was done by Steve Ellis , who " sat in a room with all the code written for a single @-@ player game and turned GoldenEye into a multiplayer game . " 
 GoldenEye 007 was released on 25 August 1997 , nearly two years after the film . The game 's cartridge size was 96 Mb ( 12 MB ) . Additionally , every cartridge of the game contains a fully functional ZX Spectrum emulator with ten Rare developed games . This function was originally made as an experimental side project by Rare staff and was deactivated in the final build of the game , but has since been unlocked through fan @-@ developed patches . In addition to the Nintendo 64 game , a racing version was in development for the Virtual Boy , but was ultimately cancelled before release . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Despite an unsuccessful showing at E3 1997 and low expectations among the gaming media , GoldenEye 007 turned out to be both a critical and a commercial success . It received very high critical praise and sold more than eight million units worldwide , making it the third best selling Nintendo 64 game , behind Super Mario 64 and Mario Kart 64 . According to a paper published on the website of the Entertainment Software Association , the game grossed $ 250 million worldwide . Video game journalists have praised GoldenEye 007 for proving that it is possible to create a " fun " first @-@ person shooter experience on a console in both single @-@ player and multiplayer modes ; when the game was released , the first @-@ person shooter was primarily a genre for PC gamers . Journalists noted that the game " opened the genre to a completely new market " and that it was " the first big console [ first @-@ person shooter ] that truly got it right . " Additionally , the game 's use of realistic gameplay , which contrasted with the approaches taken by Doom @-@ clones , and introduction of multiplayer deathmatch on a console are often credited for having revolutionised the genre . 
 Graphically , the game was praised for its varied and detailed environments ; well @-@ animated characters ; realistic effects such as glass transparencies , bullet holes and lingering smoke ; and for generally maintaining a solid frame rate . The zoomable sniper rifle was praised as one of the game 's most impressive and entertaining features , Edge describing it as a " novel twist " and Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot noting its ability to alleviate the game 's distance fog . GoldenEye 007 has subsequently become credited alongside Shiny Entertainment 's MDK for pioneering and popularising the now @-@ standard inclusion of scoped sniper rifles in video games . The game 's audio was also well @-@ received : the music was praised for its inclusion of the " James Bond Theme " and " addictive " tunes based on the GoldenEye film 's score . The sound effects were said to be detailed , although some reviewers criticised the omission of character speech . Some later levels begin in lifts and feature transitions from elevator music to full soundtracks , which Gerstmann cited as examples of the music 's ability to add ambience to the game , and as an illustration of the game 's attention to detail . 
 The gameplay was praised for its depth . IGN 's Doug Perry called GoldenEye 007 an immersive game , which " blends smart strategy gameplay with fast @-@ action <unk> " . Similarly , Greg Sewart of Gaming Age pointed out that players also have " a bit of freedom as to what they want to do in any given situation , and what order the directives are completed in " . Reviewers also enjoyed the wide variety of weapons and the multi @-@ objective @-@ based missions , stating that they make the game stay " fresh by never having you do the same thing twice " . The controls were praised for their precision and were said to be more intuitive than Acclaim 's earlier well @-@ received Nintendo 64 first @-@ person shooter Turok : Dinosaur Hunter . The game 's use of context @-@ sensitive hit locations on the enemies added a realism that was previously unseen in video games , even though the Quake computer mod Team Fortress already featured locational damage such as headshots . Colin of Game Revolution called the gameplay realistic , setting GoldenEye " apart from the pack " , but also criticised the campaign for being badly paced . He noted that GoldenEye 007 " takes it for granted that you have already seen the movie " . He also added that players may get stuck due to the game 's lack of orientation . 
 At the time , the multiplayer mode was considered the best multiplayer game on the system , " edging Mario Kart 64 by a hair " according to IGN . Edge called it addictive and praised the originality of some of the scenarios such as You Only Live Twice . The magazine also stated that it set the standard for multiplayer console combat until it was surpassed by the release of Halo : Combat Evolved in 2001 . Retrospective commentary on GoldenEye 007 in the years following its release included an October 2011 review by Mark Reece from NintendoLife . Reece gave the game a rating of eight out of ten , commenting that although the game 's multiplayer mode stands up well , its graphics , audio and " fiddly " aiming system are dated . He noted that GoldenEye 007 's approach to difficulty settings provides considerable replay value , but is a system rarely used in modern first @-@ person shooters . On the game 's original release , Edge awarded it a score of nine out of ten , but in 2013 , with the benefit of hindsight , the magazine concluded that it should have received its highest score . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 GoldenEye 007 has collected numerous awards , including the BAFTA Interactive Entertainment " Games Award " in 1998 , and four awards from the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences : " Console Action Game of the Year " , " Console Game of the Year " , " Interactive Title of the Year " and " Outstanding Achievement in Software Engineering " . Rare was also recognised for its work on the game and won the BAFTA award for " Best UK Developer " . In 2011 , the game was selected as one of 80 titles from the past 40 years to be placed in the Art of Video Games exhibit in the Smithsonian American Art Museum . With its eight million copies sold , GoldenEye 007 was also one of the most significant titles that helped the Nintendo 64 to remain competitive with rival Sony 's PlayStation , even though it eventually lost much of its market share . 
 GoldenEye 007 is frequently cited as one of the greatest video games of all time . Rowan Kaiser of 1UP.com , who placed the game 53rd on " The 60 Most Influential Games of All Time " , pointed out that the game " paved the way for the later popularity of Halo , Call of Duty , and more " . Similarly , GamePro , placing it ninth in " The 52 Most Important Video Games of All Time " , called it the console killer @-@ app of the 1990s and the best game ever licensed from a film . In 2011 , IGN journalists placed the multiplayer mode at 17th in their list of the " Top 100 Video Game Moments " , and in 2010 Nintendo Power listed GoldenEye 007 as one of the greatest multiplayer experiences in Nintendo history , stating that it is remembered as one of the finest examples of a first @-@ person shooter . 
 In a 2000 poll , readers of Computer and Video Games voted GoldenEye 007 into first place in a list of " the hundred greatest video games " , and it was ranked fifth in a poll the following year . In 2001 , the game ranked 16th in Game Informer 's list of the " Top 100 Games of All Time " . In 2004 , readers of Retro Gamer voted GoldenEye as the 33rd top retro game , with the editors calling it " the game that sold a million <unk> " and " easily the best Bond game to date . " In 2005 , a " Best Games of All @-@ Time " contest at GameFAQs placed GoldenEye 007 at seventh , and in a list made by IGN in 2005 , the game was ranked 29th , while the Reader 's Choice placed it at seventh . Video game review site ScrewAttack rated GoldenEye 007 number one in three separate top ten lists : a 2008 list of the " Top 10 FPS Games Ever " , a 2009 list of the " Top 10 Movie @-@ Based Games " , and a 2010 list of the " Top 10 Local @-@ Multiplayer Console Games " . Edge has featured GoldenEye 007 prominently in three " greatest game " lists : it placed third in a staff @-@ voted poll in 2000 ; 17th in a staff , reader , and gaming industry @-@ voted poll in 2007 ; and it was also included as one of the publication 's top ten shooters in 2003 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 GoldenEye 007 led Rare to begin development of a spiritual successor titled Perfect Dark , also for the Nintendo 64 . Using a modified version of the GoldenEye 007 game engine , Perfect Dark made its debut at E3 1998 , and was released in 2000 to critical acclaim . Although the game features a setting and storyline unrelated to James Bond , it shares many gameplay features with GoldenEye 007 , including a similar control scheme , mission objectives that vary with the difficulty setting , and cheat options unlockable through quick level completions . The game led to the development of the Perfect Dark franchise . 
 A number of the GoldenEye 007 team left Rare soon after development on Perfect Dark commenced , beginning with Martin Hollis in 1998 , who after working on the GameCube at Nintendo of America formed his own company <unk> in 2000 . Other members formed Free Radical Design , and by 2004 , four of the team of nine who originally worked on GoldenEye 007 were employed there . Free Radical Design developed the TimeSplitters series of first @-@ person shooters for the PlayStation 2 , GameCube and Xbox . These games contain several references to GoldenEye 007 , including the design of the health @-@ HUD , the nature of the aiming system , and the dam setting of the opening level of TimeSplitters 2 . 
 In 1999 , the James Bond game licence was acquired by Electronic Arts , which published games based upon the then @-@ recent James Bond films , Tomorrow Never Dies and The World Is Not Enough , as well as entirely original ones , including 007 : Nightfire , 007 : Everything or Nothing and GoldenEye : Rogue Agent . Although some received positive reviews from critics , none of them reached the critical or commercial success of GoldenEye 007 . In 2006 , the licence was acquired by Activision . The company would then publish additional James Bond games , including 007 : Quantum of Solace , James Bond 007 : Blood Stone , and a reimagining of the Nintendo 64 game , also titled GoldenEye 007 . The reimagining features Daniel Craig as the playable character , modern first @-@ person shooter conventions , entirely new level @-@ layouts , and an online component . It was originally released for the Wii and Nintendo DS in 2010 and re @-@ released as GoldenEye 007 : Reloaded for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 the following year . 
 An Xbox Live Arcade port of GoldenEye 007 was in development at Rare for several months , and in 2006 Nintendo of America president Reggie Fils @-@ Aime commented that Nintendo was " exploring all the rights issues " involved in bringing GoldenEye 007 to the Wii Virtual Console . However , due to legal issues involving the numerous licence holders with rights to the game and to the Bond intellectual property , the game has still not been released on either format . In 2010 , an independent development team released GoldenEye : Source , a multiplayer only total conversion mod developed using Valve 's Source engine . 
 = Dual Spires = 
 " Dual Spires " is the 12th episode of the fifth season of the American comedy @-@ drama television series Psych , and the 75th episode overall . The episode was directed by Matt Shakman and written by Bill Callahan and series star James Roday . It originally aired December 1 , 2010 . 
 The episode is a homage to the cult television series Twin Peaks and features seven cast members of the series , including Sherilyn Fenn , Sheryl Lee , Dana Ashbrook , Robyn Lively , Lenny Von Dohlen , Catherine E. Coulson , and Ray Wise . After receiving an e @-@ mail inviting them to a cinnamon festival , Shawn Spencer ( Roday ) and Burton " Gus " Guster ( Dulé Hill ) travel to the quirky small town of Dual Spires . Once there , they are caught up in the mysterious drowning death of teenager Paula Merral . 
 " Dual Spires " received generally positive reviews from critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , it drew 3 @.@ 543 million viewers , with a 2 @.@ 2 / 4 share among all households and a 1 @.@ 3 / 4 share among those aged 18 – 49 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After receiving a flier by email inviting them to a cinnamon festival , private detectives Shawn Spencer ( James Roday ) and Burton " Gus " Guster ( Dulé Hill ) travel to the quirky small town of Dual Spires . Shawn and Gus eat cinnamon pie at the Sawmill Diner , an establishment owned by Robert " Bob " Barker ( Dana Ashbrook ) and his wife Michelle ( Robyn Lively ) and built on a sawmill that burned down in 1958 , killing eight people . Soon , the body of Bob and Michelle 's niece , Paula Merral , is found by a lake . 
 Sheriff Andrew Jackson ( Lenny Von Dohlen ) rules the death an accident , but Shawn receives the Dewey Decimal Classification number of a book , Reincarnation and Rebirth , the title of which parallels the revelation that Paula had supposedly drowned in Santa Barbara , California seven years earlier , though her body was never found . Bob reveals that Michelle 's unstable sister Lucy left Dual Spires , taking with her Paula , whom Michelle and Bob had all but raised . When Paula sent them a letter detailing the drug use and child abuse , they helped Paula fake her death so she could leave Lucy . Detectives Juliet O 'Hara ( Maggie Lawson ) and Carlton Lassiter ( Timothy Omundson ) reopen the case and leave to issue a warrant for Bob 's arrest . 
 Shawn and Gus continue the investigation and , finding an entry in Paula 's diary about meetings with " J " , are led to partially blind photographer Jack Smith ( Ryan McDonald ) . Jack reveals a photograph of Sheriff Jackson 's son Randy ( Scott Lyster ) , taken just before Jack was attacked during a walk with Paula . Randy reveals that after he attacked Jack , Paula confronted him about his ex @-@ girlfriend , who Shawn deduces is librarian Maudette Hornsby ( Sherilyn Fenn ) . However , Hornsby is found hanged at the library , and Sheriff Jackson and Dr. Donna " Doc " Gooden ( Sheryl Lee ) rule that Maudette killed Paula out of jealousy and committed suicide to keep the town from knowing about the affair . Shawn , however , deduces that Maudette was the one that led them to the festival and left clues for them to decode . 
 Suddenly , Shawn and Gus are locked in the library and it is lit on fire , but they are rescued by Father Peter Westley ( Ray Wise ) . Bob , who is revealed to be Paula 's biological father , explains that after World War I , his great @-@ grandfather established the town with two other soldiers , intending to create a secluded utopia . After the sawmill fire in 1958 , the town began to look at all outsiders as a threat . When Doc Gooden and Sheriff Jackson enter and hold him at gunpoint , Shawn deduces that they are the leaders of the other two founding families . Due to Gooden 's infertility and Jackson 's terminal cancer , Randy was the only known direct descendant and therefore the sole future leader . To stop Randy from leaving town with a paranoid Paula , the sheriff and doctor drowned her . After Lassiter and O 'Hara arrive and arrest Gooden and Jackson , the group celebrates at the diner , only to be repulsed by a number of oddities referencing Twin Peaks . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Dual Spires " was the fourth episode directed by Matt Shakman , the sixth to be written by producer Bill Callahan , and sixth to be written by series star James Roday , respectively . It originally aired in the United States on December 1 , 2010 , on USA Network as the 12th episode of Psych 's fifth season and the 75th episode overall . It was an extended episode , at 67 minutes including commercials or 50 without . 
 According to trivia on the " Dual Spires enhanced " video at the Psych website , a Twin Peaks tribute episode had been in the works since season one . Maggie Lawson was the one who suggested the episode 's title , a play on that of the original series . The episode aired 20 years to the day after the 17th episode of Twin Peaks , which answered the question of who killed Laura Palmer , after which , Mike Hale of The New York Times wrote , " there was really no reason to keep watching . " The episode features seven Twin Peaks cast members as guest stars . Sherilyn Fenn , who is best known for portraying Audrey Horne , guest stars as Maudette Hornsby . Sheryl Lee , who played Laura Palmer and Maddy Ferguson , guest stars as Dr. Donna " Doc " Gooden , Dual Spires ' psychiatrist , pediatrician , optometrist , <unk> , podiatrist , dermatologist , orthodontist , forensic scientist , veterinarian , lawyer , and accountant . Dana Ashbrook , who played Bobby Briggs , guest stars as Robert " Bob " Barker . Robyn Lively , who played Lana Budding Milford , guest stars as Michelle Barker . Lenny Von Dohlen , who played Harold Smith , guest stars as Sheriff Andrew Jackson . Catherine E. Coulson , who played the Log Lady , Margaret Lanterman , cameos as a woman carrying wood . Finally , Ray Wise , who played Leland Palmer , reprises his Psych role as Father Peter Westley . Michael Ontkean , who played Sheriff Harry S. Truman , and Mädchen Amick , who played diner waitress Shelly Johnson , were also approached to appear in the episode . Twin Peaks co @-@ creator David Lynch was originally going to guest star in a speaking role as Mayor Douglas Fir , but Lynch was not asked due to Roday 's concern over what Lynch would think of the episode . Other guest stars include Scott Lyster as Randy Jackson and Ryan McDonald as Jack Smith . 
 Additionally , Julee Cruise , who recorded the theme for Twin Peaks , recorded a slower , extended version of the Psych theme song , " I Know You Know " by series creator Steve Franks 's band The Friendly Indians . The imagery that accompanies it is an almost shot @-@ for @-@ shot recreation of the Twin Peaks opening sequence , with a white horse that resembles the one in Sarah Palmer 's vision before the attack on Maddy Ferguson . Later , during a bicycle chase scene , " Baby Did a Bad Bad Thing " by Chris Isaak is heard . Isaak portrayed Special Agent Chester Desmond in Twin Peaks : Fire Walk with Me . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 = = = Allusions to Twin Peaks = = = 
 " Dual Spires " is presented as an homage to Twin Peaks , and CNN writer Katie McLaughlin noted several allusions the episode makes to the series . In the beginning of the episode , there is a chocolate bunny on Shawn 's desk . In Twin Peaks , Special Agent Dale Cooper ( Kyle MacLachlan ) delivered the famous line " Diane , I 'm holding in my hands a small box of chocolate bunnies . " Gus then asks , " Since when is the sound of opening and closing shades so disruptive that it needs to be alleviated ? " The character Nadine Hurley in Twin Peaks attempted to patent her silent drape runner invention . Someone from a website by the name of <unk> sends Shawn and Gus an e @-@ mail that says , " Who killed Paula Merral ? " Twin Peaks famed the catchphrase " Who Killed Laura Palmer ? " The killer also purposely placed clues in his victims ' fingernail beds . The victim 's name itself is an anagram of " Laura Palmer " . 
 Dr. Donna Gooden acts as , among other things , the town 's veterinarian and medical examiner . On Twin Peaks , Laura 's best friend was named Donna , and Donna 's father , Dr. Hayward , was also the town doctor and medical examiner . While drinking a Cherry Coke , Maudette states , " Isn 't cherry the best ? " Sherilyn Fenn , the actress who portrays Maudette , famously tied a cherry stem into a knot with her tongue in Twin Peaks . Later , Ray Wise suddenly has white hair , just as his Twin Peaks character Leland Palmer 's hair turned white overnight in one episode . Dual Spires is famous for its cinnamon pie and apple cider , as Twin Peaks was famous for cherry pie and " damn fine " coffee . The mayor of Dual Spires is named Douglas Fir , and the town of Twin Peaks was filled with Douglas @-@ fir trees . The local paper in Dual Spires is " The Great Northern , " while Twin Peaks had a hotel called the Great Northern . In both series , there are stacks of donuts at the police station . In both Dual Spires and Twin Peaks , a sawmill was the source of the town 's livelihood and burned down in a case of arson . Paula Merral is found wrapped in plastic by the lake , just as in Twin Peaks Laura Palmer 's body was found " dead , wrapped in plastic " on a rocky beach . The Barkers have a framed prom photo of their niece wearing a tiara prominently displayed , and a similar photo of Laura Palmer remains the iconic Twin Peaks image . Leo the cinnamon owl was the festival mascot , whereas the character of Leo Johnson was suspected of Laura Palmer 's murder in Twin Peaks . Owls were a major part of Peaks as well . The pet bird in Dr. Gooden 's waiting room was the same type of bird that bit Laura 's shoulder in Twin Peaks . There is similar camera work and sound effect focus on a ceiling fan whipping around at the top of the stairs at Sheriff Jackson 's house ; this happened often in Twin Peaks . The sheriff 's house also looks similar to the Palmers ' house . Paula secretly dated the sheriff 's son and shared " secret special lover earrings " with him , and in Twin Peaks , Laura and the nephew of one of the townsmen each had half of a golden heart necklace . A local teenage boy wears a jeweled crown . In Peaks , Audrey Horne 's older brother wore a Native American headdress . In both series , the sheriff 's deputy is a Native American who is very in tune with nature . Sheriff Andrew Jackson 's name references the seventh president of the United States , just as the name of the sheriff of Twin Peaks , Harry Truman , references the 33rd . Shawn and Gus find a book written by Earl <unk> ; in Peaks , Windom Earle was a psychopathic ex @-@ FBI agent . 
 The " Dual Spires enhanced " video at the Psych website lists further references to Twin Peaks . Shawn 's name for Gus in this episode is " Lodge <unk> " , a direct reference to the Black and White Lodge . Leo the Cinnamon Owl is a reference to Killer BOB , who possessed Leland Palmer and often took the form of an owl . The sheriff 's deputy is Deputy Frost , named after Twin Peaks co @-@ creator Mark Frost . The doctors of both Dual Spires and Twin Peaks have coconuts in their offices . Both Paula 's and Laura 's diaries described meetings with " J " . Sheriff Jackson tells Bob he needs to be strong for his wife . Dr Hayward says the same thing to Leland Palmer in Twin Peaks . Upon entering the town Gus mentions that the residents are looking at him as if he were the first black man they had ever seen . There are very few black men in Twin Peaks . When they enter the Sawmill Diner Bob Barker says " Top of the morning to you . " In the first season of Twin Peaks , Pete Martell corrected Josie Packard on the saying . Maudette wears an orchid in her hair ; Harold grew orchids in Twin Peaks . In the library Shawn asks if they can " poke around " but he and Gus immediately say " peek " in correction . Thus " peek " , as in Twin Peaks , is spoken twice . A man wearing a hat in the Sawmill Diner gives Shawn and Gus a thumbs up . The older room service attendant did the same thing to Agent Cooper in Twin Peaks . A record player is featured prominently in both the Barker and Palmer homes . The Roadhouse was also a location in Twin Peaks . Both Maudette and Audrey Horne love to dance . Paula 's friend Jack is completely blind in one eye , referencing Twin Peaks ' brothel named " One Eyed Jacks " . In the library Shawn and Gus find a book entitled " Putt Your Way to a Better Future . " After Leland Palmer killed Maddy Ferguson he was seen putting golf balls around in his living room . When Randy is using the table saw it resembles the sawmill scene from the extended opening credits of Twin Peaks . When Maudette is placed in the body bag it is bent in such a way that it resembles a smile , like the smiling bag clue Agent Cooper found . On Maudette 's desk beside her computer is a roll of green tape like the kind used by Leland Palmer to tie up Jacques Renault . In the cabin Bob Barker lights a match and holds it up like Leland Palmer did when describing BOB to Agent Cooper . Bob Barker wears a gold ring on his pinky , something Agent Cooper did in Twin Peaks . In the cabin the walls are red with red drapes as an allusion to the " Red Room " in Agent Cooper 's dream . 
 The " enhanced " video states that there are 724 references to Twin Peaks in the episode 's closing scene . Among them , Jack Smith wears an eye patch and a red suit and dances funny , referencing not only the aforementioned " One Eyes Jacks " brothel and Nadine Hurley , but a dream sequence in Peaks , where a character known as the Man from Another Place wore a similar suit and danced in a bizarre fashion . In the final scene Carlton is seen holding his hand up and stating " that is a damn fine cup of cider " . In the Twin Peaks pilot Agent Cooper holds his hand the same way and states " that is a damn fine cup of coffee . " Additionally , Carlton is later holding a cup of coffee on its side , displaying that the coffee is now solid in a fashion mimicking the same action by Agent Cooper in the final episode . A seven @-@ foot tall man ( John DeSantis ) wearing a bow tie looks much like the giant from Agent Cooper 's dream . Randy is seen at the end barking out the window like Bobby Briggs did to James Hurley in the holding cells . Bob Barker is seen dancing with a picture just as Leland Palmer did in Twin Peaks . The episode 's end credits are accompanied by soap opera @-@ type music and a shot of Paula 's prom picture ; Twin Peaks 's credits did exactly the same thing with Laura 's photo . The music is also very similar to the theme . 
 = = = Other references = = = 
 There are several other references in the episode . Upon seeing an African American for the first time , a child asks Gus if he is Frederick Douglass . When Shawn makes the observation that Dual Spires has " Bob Barker , Doc Gooden , and Randy Jackson , all living in the same inlet town with no cars , cell phones , or internet " , Gus replies that they should pitch the concept to Mark Burnett . Shawn and Gus later ride a tandem bicycle in what Shawn likens to a racially reversed Driving Miss Daisy . Randy reveals that the town gathers every week to watch Everwood . Shawn tells Maudette that they are having a Betty Boop Night at the Roadhouse . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , " Dual Spires " drew 3 @.@ 543 million viewers , with a 2 @.@ 2 / 4 share among all households , meaning that in the United States the episode was tuned into by roughly 2 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households and 4 percent of households watching television . The episode had a 1 @.@ 3 / 4 share among those aged 18 – 49 . 
 The episode received positive reviews from critics familiar with Twin Peaks . Jonah Krakow of IGN gave the episode a score of 9 out of 10 , writing that it was " enjoyable enough on its own merits that I don 't have to apologize for gushing over every single subtle nod to Twin Peaks . " Although CNN 's Katie McLaughlin was initially worried , her fears were quickly alleviated . McLaughlin stated that Psych did a " damn fine " tribute episode , and that she had fun finding all of the Twin Peaks references . Simon Abrams of The A.V. Club gave the episode a rating of C- on a scale of A + to F. Commenting on reports that the episode has been in the works since the series ' first season , Abrams wrote , " [ it ] speaks to how patently unnecessary " Dual Spires " is conceptually but also how potentially endearing it could be , too . " JT Vaughn of Zap2it , however , gave the episode an A + rating , writing , " It was just an absolutely brilliant episode , one which paid a loving homage to a classic television show while also being a damn fine episode in itself . Psych has been in great form since it returned , and long may it continue . " In contrast , Starpulse writer Brittany Frederick , who was unfamiliar with Twin Peaks , enjoyed " Dual Spires " less than other episodes . 
 = Zyklon B = 
 Zyklon B ( German pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; anglicized / <unk> <unk> / or translated Cyclone B ) was the trade name of a cyanide @-@ based pesticide invented in Germany in the early 1920s . It consisted of hydrogen cyanide ( prussic acid ) , a cautionary eye irritant , and one of several adsorbents such as diatomaceous earth . The product is infamous for its use by Nazi Germany during the Holocaust to murder a million people in gas chambers installed at Auschwitz @-@ Birkenau , Majdanek , and other extermination camps . 
 Hydrogen cyanide , a poisonous gas that interferes with cellular respiration , was first used as a pesticide in California in the 1880s . Research at Degesch of Germany led to the development of Zyklon ( later known as Zyklon A ) , a pesticide which released hydrogen cyanide upon exposure to water and heat . It was banned after a similar product was used by Germany as a chemical weapon in World War I. In 1922 , Degesch was purchased by Degussa , where a team of chemists that included Walter Heerdt and Bruno Tesch developed a method of packaging hydrogen cyanide in sealed canisters along with a cautionary eye irritant and adsorbent stabilizers . The new product was also named Zyklon , but it became known as Zyklon B to distinguish it from the earlier version . Uses included delousing clothing and disinfecting ships , warehouses , and trains . 
 In early 1942 , Zyklon B emerged as the preferred killing tool of Nazi Germany for use in extermination camps during the Holocaust . Around a million people were killed using this method , mostly at Auschwitz . Tesch was executed in 1946 for knowingly selling the product to the SS for use on humans . Hydrogen cyanide is now rarely used as a pesticide , but still has industrial applications . Firms in several countries continue to produce Zyklon B under alternative brand names , including Detia @-@ Degesch , the successor to Degesch , who renamed the product to Cyanosil in 1974 . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 Hydrogen cyanide is a poisonous gas that interferes with cellular respiration . Cyanide prevents the cell from producing adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) by binding to one of the proteins involved in the electron transport chain . This protein , cytochrome c oxidase , contains several subunits and has ligands containing iron groups . The cyanide component of Zyklon B can bind at one of these iron groups , heme a3 , forming a more stabilized compound through metal @-@ to @-@ ligand pi bonding . As a result of this new iron @-@ cyanide complex , the electrons that would situate themselves on the heme a3 group can no longer do so . Instead , these electrons destabilize the compound ; thus , the heme group no longer accepts them . Consequently , electron transport is halted , and cells can no longer produce the energy needed to synthesize ATP . In a human weighing 68 kilograms ( 150 lb ) , death occurs within two minutes of inhaling 70 milligrams ( 0 @.@ 0025 oz ) of hydrogen cyanide . 
 = = History = = 
 Hydrogen cyanide , discovered in the late 18th century , was used in the 1880s for the fumigation of citrus trees in California . Its use spread to other countries for the fumigation of silos , goods wagons , ships , and mills . Its light weight and rapid dispersal meant its application had to take place under tents or in enclosed areas . Research by Fritz Haber of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry led to the founding in 1919 of Deutsche Gesellschaft für <unk> <unk> ( Degesch ) , a state @-@ controlled consortium formed to investigate military use of the chemical . Chemists at Degesch added a cautionary eye irritant to a less volatile cyanide compound which reacted with water in the presence of heat to become hydrogen cyanide . The new product was marketed as the pesticide Zyklon ( cyclone ) . As a similar formula had been used as a weapon by the Germans during World War I , Zyklon was soon banned . 
 Deutsche Gold- und Silber @-@ <unk> ( German Gold and Silver Refinery ; Degussa ) became sole owners of Degesch in 1922 . There , beginning in 1922 , Walter Heerdt , Bruno Tesch , and others worked on packaging hydrogen cyanide in sealed canisters along with a cautionary eye irritant and adsorbent stabilizers such as diatomaceous earth . The new product was also labelled as Zyklon , but it became known as Zyklon B to distinguish it from the earlier version . Heerdt was named the inventor of Zyklon B in the Degesch patent application ( number DE <unk> ) dated 20 June 1922 . The German Patent Office awarded the patent on 27 December 1926 . 
 = = Corporate structure and marketing = = 
 In 1930 , Degussa ceded 42 @.@ 5 per cent ownership of Degesch to IG Farben and 15 per cent to Th . Goldschmidt AG , in exchange for the right to market pesticide products of those two companies through Degesch . Degussa retained managerial control . 
 While Degesch owned the rights to the brand name Zyklon and the patent on the packaging system , the chemical formula was owned by Degussa . <unk> GmbH , which was 52 per cent owned by Degussa , owned the rights to a process to extract hydrogen cyanide from waste products of sugar beet processing . This process was performed under license by two companies , Dessauer Werke and <unk> Kolin , who also combined the resulting hydrogen cyanide with stabilizer from IG Farben and a cautionary agent from Schering AG to form the final product , which was packaged using equipment , labels , and canisters provided by Degesch . The finished goods were sent to Degesch , who forwarded the product to two companies that acted as distributors : Heerdt @-@ Linger GmbH ( Heli ) of Frankfurt and Tesch & Stabenow ( Testa ) of Hamburg . Their territory was split along the Elbe river , with Heli handling clients to the west and south , and Testa those to the east . Degesch owned 51 per cent of the shares of Heli , and until 1942 owned 55 per cent of Testa . 
 Prior to World War II Degesch derived most of its Zyklon B profits from overseas sales , particularly in the United States , where it was produced under license by <unk> & <unk> prior to 1931 and by American Cyanamid from 1931 to 1943 . From 1929 , the United States Public Health Service used Zyklon B to disinfect freight trains and clothes of Mexican immigrants entering the United States . Uses in Germany included delousing clothing ( often using a portable sealed chamber invented by Degesch in the 1930s ) and disinfecting ships , warehouses , and trains . By 1943 , sales of Zyklon B accounted for 65 per cent of Degesch 's sales revenue and 70 per cent of its gross profits . 
 = = Use in the Holocaust = = 
 In early 1942 , Zyklon B emerged as the preferred killing tool of Nazi Germany for use in extermination camps during the Holocaust . The chemical claimed the lives of roughly one million people in gas chambers installed in extermination camps at Auschwitz @-@ Birkenau , Majdanek , and elsewhere . Most of the victims were Jews , and by far the majority killed using this method died at Auschwitz . Zyklon B was supplied to concentration camps at Mauthausen , Dachau , and Buchenwald by the distributor Heli , and to Auschwitz and Majdanek by Testa . Camps also occasionally bought Zyklon B directly from the manufacturers . Of the 729 metric tons of Zyklon B sold in Germany in 1942 – 44 , 56 metric tons ( about 8 per cent of domestic sales ) were sold to concentration camps . Auschwitz received 23 @.@ 8 tons , of which 6 tons were used for fumigation . The remainder was used in the gas chambers or lost to spoilage ( the product had a shelf life of only three months ) . Testa conducted <unk> for the Wehrmacht and supplied them with Zyklon B. They also offered courses to the SS in the safe handling and use of the material for fumigation purposes . In April 1941 , the German agriculture and interior ministries designated the SS as an authorized <unk> of the chemical , and thus they were able to use it without any further training or governmental oversight . 
 Rudolf Höss , commandant of Auschwitz , said that the use of Zyklon @-@ B to kill prisoners came about on the initiative of one of his subordinates , SS @-@ Hauptsturmführer ( captain ) Karl Fritzsch , who used the substance to kill some Russian POWs in late August 1941 in the basement of Block 11 in the main camp . The experiment was repeated on more Russian POWs , with Höss watching , in September . Block 11 proved unsuitable for mass killings , as the basement was difficult to air out afterwards and the crematorium ( Crematorium I , which operated until July 1942 ) was some distance away . The site of the killings was moved to Crematorium I , where more than 700 victims could be killed at once . By the middle of 1942 , the operation was moved to Auschwitz II – Birkenau , a nearby satellite camp which had been under construction since October 1941 . 
 The first gas chamber at Auschwitz II – Birkenau was the " red house " ( called Bunker 1 by SS staff ) , a brick cottage converted to a gassing facility by tearing out the inside and bricking up the windows . It was operational by March 1942 . A second brick cottage , the " white house " or Bunker 2 , was converted some weeks later . According to Höss , Bunker 1 held 800 victims and Bunker 2 held 1 @,@ 200 victims . These structures were in use for mass killings until early 1943 . At that point , the Nazis decided to greatly increase the gassing capacity of Birkenau . Crematorium II , originally designed as a mortuary , with morgues in the basement and ground @-@ level incinerators , was converted into a killing factory by installing gas @-@ tight doors , vents for the Zyklon B to be dropped into the chamber , and ventilation equipment to remove the gas afterwards . Crematorium III was built using the same design . Crematoria IV and V , designed from the start as gassing centers , were also constructed that spring . By June 1943 , all four crematoria were operational . Most of the victims were killed using these four structures . 
 The Nazis began shipping large numbers of Jews from all over Europe to Auschwitz in the middle of 1942 . Those who were not selected for work crews were immediately gassed . The group selected to die , about three @-@ quarters of the total , included almost all children , women with small children , all the elderly , and all those who appeared on brief and superficial inspection by an SS doctor not to be completely fit . The victims were told they were to undergo delousing and a shower . They were stripped of their belongings and herded into the gas chamber . 
 The Zyklon B was delivered by ambulance to the crematoria by a special SS bureau known as the Hygienic Institute . The actual delivery of the gas to the victims was always handled by the SS , on the order of the supervising SS doctor . After the doors were shut , SS men dumped in the Zyklon B pellets through vents in the roof or holes in the side of the chamber . The victims were dead within 20 minutes . Johann Kremer , an SS doctor who oversaw gassings , testified that the " shouting and screaming of the victims could be heard through the opening and it was clear that they fought for their lives " . 
 Sonderkommandos ( special work crews forced to work at the gas chambers ) wearing gas masks then dragged the bodies from the chamber . The victims ' glasses , artificial limbs , jewelry , and hair were removed , and any dental work was extracted so the gold could be melted down . If the gas chamber was crowded , which they typically were , the corpses were found half @-@ squatting , their skin discolored pink with red and green spots , with some found foaming at their mouths , or bleeding from their ears . The corpses were burned in the nearby incinerators , and the ashes were buried , thrown in the river , or used as fertilizer . With the Soviet Red Army approaching through Poland , the last mass gassing at Auschwitz took place on 30 October 1944 . In November 1944 , Reichsführer @-@ SS Heinrich Himmler , head of the SS , ordered gassing operations to cease across the Reich . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After World War II ended in 1945 , Bruno Tesch and Karl Weinbacher of Tesch & Stabenow were tried in a British military court and executed for knowingly providing Zyklon B to the SS for use on humans . Gerhard Peters , who served as principal operating officer of Degesch and Heli and also held posts in the Nazi government , served two years eight months in prison as an accessory before being released due to amendments to the penal code . 
 Use of hydrogen cyanide as a pesticide or cleaner has been banned or restricted in some countries . Most hydrogen cyanide is used in industrial processes , made by companies in Germany , Japan , the Netherlands and the US . Degesch resumed production of Zyklon B after the war . The product was sold as Cyanosil in Germany and Zyklon in other countries . It was still produced as of 2000 . Degussa sold Degesch to Detia @-@ Freyberg GmbH in 1986 . The company is now called Detia @-@ Degesch . A fumigation product similar to Zyklon B is also in production by <unk> <unk> <unk> of the Czech Republic , under the trade name Uragan D2 . Uragan means " hurricane " or " cyclone " in Czech . 
 Subsequent use of the word " Zyklon " in trade names has prompted angry reactions in English @-@ speaking countries . The name " Zyklon " on portable roller coasters made since 1965 by <unk> provoked protests among Jewish groups in the U.S. in 1993 , 1999 , and 2011 . In 2002 , British sportswear and football equipment supplier Umbro issued an apology and stopped using the name " Zyklon " , which had appeared since 1999 on the box for one of its trainers , after receiving complaints from the Simon Wiesenthal Center and the Beth Shalom Holocaust Centre . Also in 2002 , Siemens withdrew its application for an American trademark of the word " Zyklon " , which their subsidiary <unk> Bosch und Siemens <unk> had proposed to use for a new line of home appliances in the United States . ( The firm was already using the name in Germany for one of their vacuum cleaners . ) Protests were lodged by the Simon Wiesenthal Center after the trademark application was reported to BBC News Online by one of their readers . French company IPC 's product names used " Cyclone " for <unk> and suffix " B " for biodegradable : " Cyclone B " was renamed " Cyclone Cap Vert " ( " green cap " ) in 2013 after protests from Jewish groups . A rabbi said the name was " horrible ignorance at best , and a Guinness record in evil and cynicism if the company did know the history of the name of its product . " 
 Holocaust deniers claim that Zyklon B gas was not used in the gas chambers , relying for evidence on the research of Fred A. Leuchter , who found low levels of Prussian blue in samples of the gas chamber walls and ceilings . Leuchter attributed its presence to general delousing of the buildings . Leuchter 's negative control , a sample of gasket material taken from a different camp building , had no cyanide residue . In 1999 , James Roth , the chemist who had analyzed Leuchter 's samples , stated that the test was flawed because the material that was sent for testing included large chunks , and the chemical would only be within 10 microns of the surface . The surface that had been exposed to the chemical was not identified , and the large size of the specimens meant that any chemical present was diluted by an undeterminable amount . In 1994 , the Institute for Forensic Research in Kraków re @-@ examined Leuchter 's claim , stating that formation of Prussian blue by exposure of bricks to cyanide is not a highly probable reaction . Using <unk> techniques , they tested 22 samples from the gas chambers and delousing chambers ( as positive controls ) and living quarters ( as negative controls ) . They found cyanide residue in both the delousing chambers and the gas chambers but none in the living quarters . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = Washington State Route 140 = 
 State Route 140 ( SR 140 ) was a state highway located in Clark and Skamania counties in southwestern Washington . The highway began and ended at SR 14 in Washougal and Prindle , respectively , and followed the Washougal River and Canyon Creek . The roadway first appeared as Canyon Creek Road in a 1911 map and was designated Secondary State Highway 8B ( SSH 8B ) in 1937 . SSH 8B was a spur route of Primary State Highway 8 ( PSH 8 ) , which became SR 12 in the 1964 highway renumbering . SR 120 replaced SSH 8B in the same renumbering and SR 12 was renumbered in 1967 to SR 14 after U.S. Route 12 was extended into Washington . SR 120 was also renumbered to SR 140 , which was decommissioned in 1992 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 140 ( SR 140 ) originated as 15th Street at an intersection with SR 14 in Washougal , located about 1 @.@ 47 miles ( 2 @.@ 37 km ) east of the eastern terminus of SR 500 on the shoreline of the Columbia River . 15th Street traveled north through Downtown , crossing the Vancouver – White Salmon rail route of the BNSF Railway and intersecting the former alignment of SR 14 , E Street , before turning northeastward onto 17th Street . The highway crossed the Washougal River out of Washougal in a large forest and became the Washougal River Road . The roadway paralleled the river northeast and later east into the forests and mountains of Skamania County until the river turned north . SR 140 , renamed Canyon Creek Road , turned southeast and encountered a series of sharp turns until terminating at SR 14 in Prindle . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 140 began as Canyon Creek Road and first appeared on a map in 1911 . The first numbered highway on the road was Secondary State Highway 8B ( SSH 8B ) , established in 1937 . The roadway traveled along the Washougal River and Canyon Creek between Primary State Highway 8 ( PSH 8 ) , co @-@ signed as U.S. Route 830 ( US 830 ) , between Washougal and Prindle . SSH 8B remained unchanged until the 1964 highway renumbering , when the route was renumbered as State Route 120 and PSH 8 became State Route 12 . After US 12 was extended west across Washington in 1967 , SR 12 became SR 14 and SR 120 became SR 140 . In 1968 , US 830 was deleted and SR 14 was realigned south onto a newer alignment . In 1992 , SR 140 was removed from the state highway system . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Battle of El Herri = 
 The Battle of El Herri ( also known as <unk> ) was fought between France and the Berber Zaian Confederation on 13 November 1914 . It took place at the small settlement of El Herri , near Khénifra in the French protectorate in Morocco . The battle was part of the Zaian War , in which the confederation of tribes sought to oppose continued French expansion into the interior of Morocco . Having captured the strategic town of Khénifra earlier in the year , the French , under General Hubert Lyautey , entered negotiations with Mouha ou Hammou Zayani , who led the Zaian . Lyautey thought that peace could be achieved and ordered Lieutenant @-@ Colonel René Laverdure , who commanded the garrison in Khénifra , to not launch any offensives . 
 Laverdure became frustrated with the lack of action and , on 13 November , led almost his entire garrison in an attack on the Zaian encampment at El Herri . The attack initially went well , with his artillery and cavalry clearing the tribesmen from the camp , looting the Zaian tents and capturing two of Hammou 's wives . However , the French encountered a significant Zaian force during its withdrawal to Khénifra . This force engaged the French with harassing fire , forcing them to move only under the cover of their artillery . Laverdure then ordered his wounded back to Khénifra with a guard of a company of infantry , which were joined by large numbers of other troops who broke ranks to join the column . Whilst making a river crossing , Laverdure 's rear guard and artillery were overrun and annihilated . Laverdure 's remaining troops then formed square and fought a desperate last stand against several thousand tribesmen before they were also overrun and killed . 
 The French losses were significant , some 623 men ( including Laverdure ) were killed and 176 wounded . The Zaian lost around 182 men killed . The column of wounded reached Khénifra just ahead of pursuing Zaian forces and the town came under siege . Lyautey was dismayed at Laverdure 's actions and was briefly of the opinion that he had cost him the war . However , a relief force reached Khénifra within a few days and the situation stabilised . The Zaian War lasted until 1921 when negotiations secured the submission of much of the confederation to French rule and a military offensive pushed the remainder into the High Atlas mountains . 
 = = Background = = 
 France 's protectorate of Morocco was established after French intervention in the Agadir Crisis of 1911 . Resident General Louis @-@ Hubert Lyautey served as the head of government and one of his main aims was to secure the " Taza corridor " in the Middle Atlas mountains linking Tunis to the Moroccan Atlantic coast . He was opposed by the Berber tribes in the area , amongst them the Zaian confederation led by Mouha ou Hammou Zayani . Hammou had opposed the French intervention since 1877 and led between 4 @,@ 000 and 4 @,@ 200 tents ( the tribal unit of measurement ) of people . 
 French attempts to persuade Hammou to submit had failed and in May 1914 Lyautey authorised General Paul Prosper Henrys to take command of all French troops in the area and launch an attack on Taza and Khénifra , vital parts of the corridor . Despite some fierce engagements with the Zaian in the Khénifra area , Henrys secured the two towns by the middle of June and inflicted substantial losses on the tribes . As part of the defence of the area , Henrys established three Groupes Mobile , mobile columns of troops who could react quickly to threats . A Groupe Mobile was established at Khénifra under Lieutenant @-@ Colonel René Laverdure , another to the west under Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Henri Claudel and a third to the east under Colonel Noël Garnier @-@ Duplessix . July saw increasing attacks on Laverdure 's command and the outbreak of the First World War which significantly reduced the number of French forces based in Morocco . Lyautey was determined to hold Khénifra to use as a bridgehead for further expansion of French territory and referred to it as a bastion against the " hostile Berber masses " upon which the " maintenance of [ his ] occupation " depended . 
 Successfully repulsing additional attacks on Khénifra , Henrys thought he had the upper hand , having proven that the reduced French forces could resist the tribesmen . The Zaian were now contained within a triangle formed by the Oum er Rbia , the <unk> river and the Atlas mountains and were already in dispute with neighbouring tribes over the best wintering land . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Laverdure 's attack = = = 
 Laverdure had been in Khénifra for five months when Hammou set up camp at El Herri , a small village 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) away , for the winter . Hammou had been promised peace talks and had just lost control over five tribes who began negotiations for submission to French rule . Henrys believed that Zaian resistance was near its end and that the war would soon be over . Lyautey wished to keep the situation calm and twice refused Laverdure permission to attack the camp at El Herri , for fear that it would affect the peace talks and that Laverdure had insufficient forces available for the assault . He was instead ordered to keep to the French bank of the Oum er Rbia and had permission only to send troops out for convoy protection , wood gathering and road building . 
 However Laverdure decided to disobey his orders to remain in Khénifra and marched on El Herri with almost the entire garrison . He was said to be frustrated with the lack of action on the front and may have been persuaded by a Makhzen soldier eager to avenge a personal affront he had received from Hammou . Laverdure 's column consisted of six infantry companies of Algerian and Senegalese Tirailleurs , a party of irregular <unk> , two batteries of 65mm and 75mm ( the famous Soixante @-@ Quinze ) cannon and a squadron of <unk> cavalry : numbering 43 officers and 1 @,@ 187 men in total . This amounted to less than half the troops he had had in September when he was first denied permission to launch an attack . Laverdure marched at 2 @.@ 30 am on the morning of 13 November 1914 without informing his superiors , only leaving behind a note saying he was going to " annihilate " Hammou 's camp . 
 Laverdure 's column reached El Herri at dawn and found the encampment of 100 tents . Most of the Zaian men were out of camp at the time , leaving behind the non @-@ combatants , and Laverdure achieved complete surprise . The first that many of the Zaian knew of the attack was when his artillery shells began exploding amongst the tents . This was followed up by a cavalry charge which cleared the camp but was halted by a group of tribesmen who had rallied on a hilltop to the south and inflicted " numerous losses " on the horsemen . Laverdure had to send in his infantry to remove these Zaians , before looting the encampment . Hammou escaped in time but two of his wives were captured before the French headed back to Khénifra at around 8 @.@ 30 am , leaving the looting to tribesmen of the Aït Ichkern , formerly Hammou 's allies who assumed he was now beaten . 
 = = = Zaian counterattack = = = 
 The return to Khénifra was initially hampered by attacks by small groups of tribesmen who were successfully beaten , but not before they discovered the relatively small number of troops in the French column . Word was passed to others in the area and soon a force , estimated at 5 @,@ 000 strong by the French , was assembled . These men consisted of almost the entire Zaian tribe and elements of the <unk> , Aït Harkat , Aït <unk> and Aït Ichkern ( the latter , seeing the French falling back , had changed allegiance once more ) . Zaian tactics were to harass the flanks and rear of the column and to occupy any high ground available for sniping attacks . The French found they could not move in safety without heavy covering fire from the artillery , which was reduced in effectiveness by the dispersal of the Zaian tribesmen and their use of cover . Hammou 's nephew , Moha ou Akka , led a force of several thousand tribesmen around the French to cut off their route to Khénifra . 
 At this point Laverdure ordered one company of his Senegalese infantry to leave the column with a convoy of wounded soldiers which he sent back to Khénifra . However many of his other troops , seeing the Senegalese leaving , broke ranks and followed in panic . Laverdure attempted to continue his withdrawal but , just having crossed the <unk> river , his rearguard was surrounded and attacked repeatedly from all sides , being quickly overrun . The gun batteries soon suffered the same fate , their crews also being killed . The Zaian assembled on the ridges surrounding the remaining French troops , who had formed a defensive square , before launching a final attack with " several thousand " men . This attack lasted just a few minutes and , after a desperate struggle , the square was broken and the remainder of the column was wiped out . The Zaian chased down and killed any of the survivors who attempted to hide in the scrub . 
 The wounded and their escort struggled into Khénifra at about noon , narrowly outpacing the Zaian who had stopped to loot the bodies of the French dead . These men , numbering 171 men and five officers wounded and 426 men and five officers able bodied , were the only French survivors of the battle . A total of 623 Frenchmen had died , along with around 182 of the Zaian . French losses amounted to 218 Algerian or Tunisian Tirailleurs , 210 French soldiers and 33 French officers , 125 Senegalese Tirailleurs and 37 Moroccan <unk> killed . The French officers suffered the highest casualty rate of any group with 90 % of them being killed or wounded ( including Laverdure who died in the final attack ) ; four of the five unwounded officers belonged to the cavalry . Around 65 % of the entire force had been killed or wounded and the French were forced to abandon 4 machine guns , 630 small arms , 62 horses , 56 mules , all of their artillery and camping equipment and much of their personal belongings on the battlefield . Hammou took much of this with him when he escaped to the mountains of the Middle Atlas . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The disaster left Captain Pierre Kroll as the senior officer of the remnants of the Khénifra garrison , some three companies of tirailleurs ( one of which was an ad hoc unit made up from the partially equipped and shaken survivors of the battle ) . Having secured the defences he immediately telegraphed Lyautey and Henrys to inform them of events , the first they had heard of Laverdure 's foray . Lyautey was briefly of the opinion that the event would cause the loss of the whole of Morocco . The next morning Zaian horsemen appeared on the hilltops to the south and east of the city . Khénifra soon came under constant siege from the tribes . 
 Henrys left Fez for Meknes from which he telegraphed Lyautey promising to " strike hard and fast " so that the " Laverdure disaster " did not threaten the French position in Morocco . He said that " everyone , everywhere must be aware of the fact that our forces are numerous , that strong columns are already on their way to Khenifra , and that the repression will be swift " . Henrys dispatched Garnier @-@ Duplessix 's Groupe Mobile to Khénifra from El <unk> and ordered Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Joseph Dérigoin to form another Groupe at Ito for mobile support . Garnier @-@ Duplessix was forced to fight his way through groups of Zaian tribesmen and did not reach the town until 16 November . Henrys joined Dérigoin and entered the town himself two days later , encountering no resistance on the way . Another part of the Khénifra relief force was the 6th battalion of the 2nd French Foreign Legion who marched from <unk> and saw action at El Hammam and along the Oum er Rbia . By the end of the month the French garrison had swelled to 7 @,@ 000 troops , an all @-@ time high . Henrys , Garnier @-@ Duplessix and Kroll were all promoted shortly after the battle in recognition of their actions to prevent the loss of Khénifra . 
 As a show of force Henrys led excursions from Khénifra to El Herri on 19 and 20 November . He observed many campfires and some groups of tribesmen but on the whole the Zaian , who had moved their main camps away from the area , kept their distance . Henrys observed the field of battle and ordered the burial of the French dead , finding many stripped of their clothing and some mutilated or decapitated by post @-@ mortem dagger wounds . Laverdure 's body and those of six of his officers were missing , having been removed by Hammou for use as trophies but were later exchanged for Hammou 's captured wives . The Zaian leader displayed these trophies and captured weapons to nearby tribes to encourage them to support him , a tactic that proved particularly successful with the tribes to the north . Although French forces subsequently fought several successful actions against the Zaian and recovered the captured weapons , El Herri showed that they could be beaten . The battle , along with the siding of the Ottoman Empire with the Central Powers in the First World War and slow French progress on the Western Front , led to increasing numbers of recruits for Hammou . 
 The Zaian war continued for many years after El Herri with Henrys changing tactics from negotiation and bribery to " submit or starve " . Subsequent victories in the Middle Atlas restored the French image of superiority in force and led to increasing submissions and the withdrawal of the Zaian deeper into the mountains . By 1917 the French had managed to establish a military road straight through the Middle Atlas , limiting the free movement of the Zaian . The end of the war came through political rather than military means with Hammou 's sons submitting , on his advice , to the French in June 1920 . Their submission persuaded 3 @,@ 000 tents of Zaian to follow and within six weeks just 2 @,@ 500 tents remained opposed to French rule . Hammou was killed in Spring 1921 by a Berber war party led by Hassan and soon after a combined French and Berber attack on Bekrit defeated the last remaining Zaian force , ending the seven @-@ year @-@ long war . After the war , French expansion in the area continued and they brought almost the entire Middle Atlas under their control by June 1922 . 
 = = Reasons for French defeat = = 
 Though they held him in high regard , Lyautey and Henrys blamed Laverdure for the defeat , with the latter describing the Lieutenant @-@ Colonel 's march from Khénifra as a " poorly prepared and poorly executed " " act of indiscipline " . Laverdure was thought to have underestimated the ability of the Berbers to operate offensively in mountainous terrain against his column . His motive for the " inexcusable imprudence " of disobeying orders is thought to have been for personal glory and to bring the war to an early conclusion . One of the survivors of the battle , Jean Pichon , said that Laverdure was " haunted by the obsessive temptation " of defeating Hammou . Lyautey stated , in a letter to Minister of War Alexandre Millerand , that Laverdure , had he not died on the field , would have deserved " the most severe punishment " at the hands of a military tribunal . 
 It is thought that Laverdure 's actions may have been influenced by a school of thought , advocated by General Charles Mangin , that bold movements would intimidate the North African tribes into submission . This school of thought was critical of Lyautey 's campaign of negotiation backed up by the threat of military power , arguing that it cost too many casualties and that a bolder commander should be appointed instead . Mangin 's opinions had many advocates among the French officers of the colonial forces in Morocco , keen to end the war quickly and transfer to the Western Front , were praised by newspapers , books and journal articles in France and had the support of part of the Chamber of Deputies . Lyautey believed that he had to constantly battle against this school of thought and could not hope to defeat the men who followed it as they were " self @-@ satisfied with its infallibility and convinced of the pitiful inferiority of those who do not submit to it blindly " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The battle was a shock to the French who had not expected the tribes to get the better of a well armed column . Lyautey himself said that " in our entire colonial history there has never been a case of the destruction of such an important force , of the loss of [ almost ] all its officers ... , of the disappearance of so much materiel and booty of war " . The battle has been described variously as the worst ever defeat of French forces in Morocco , the worst in North Africa and one of the worst in the French colonies . The heavy losses suffered at El Herri overshadowed the planning of French military policy for Morocco during the First World War . 
 Today the battle is celebrated by the Moroccan press as a historic event in Moroccan history , alongside other instances of resistance against French and Spanish occupation . An obelisk was erected near to the battlefield in 1991 and was unveiled by two Moroccan ministers , Moulay Ahmad Alawi and Muhammad El @-@ Ansar , listing the names of the 182 Moroccan dead . Hammou is recorded on the obelisk as being a " proud champion " of " national resistance " . The monument 's Arabic text contains some mistakes , recording the French dead at 700 in number ( Henrys recorded 623 ) and giving the year of the battle as 1912 . 
 = Robert White ( Virginia physician ) = 
 Robert White ( 1688 – 1752 ) was an early American physician , military officer , pioneer , and planter in the Colony of Virginia . 
 White was born in Scotland , the son of John White , a physician practicing in Paisley , Renfrewshire . He studied medicine at the University of Edinburgh , and later served as a surgeon with the rank of captain in the Royal Navy of the Kingdom of Great Britain . He relocated to the Thirteen Colonies between 1720 and 1730 , first to Delaware , then Pennsylvania , and finally as a " pioneer settler " in present @-@ day Frederick County , Virginia between 1732 and 1735 . White was one of two physicians practicing in Frederick County , and conducted his practice from his residence near Great North Mountain . White was part of a larger wave of Scottish physicians who settled in Virginia prior to the American Revolutionary War . 
 White was the progenitor of the White political family of Virginia and West Virginia . He was the father of Alexander White ( 1738 – 1804 ) , United States House Representative , and the grandfather of Virginia judge Robert White ( 1759 – 1831 ) and United States House Representative Francis White ( 1761 – 1826 ) . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Robert White was born in Scotland in 1688 . He was the son of John White , a physician practicing in Paisley , Renfrewshire who died in 1742 . White 's lineage was of both Scottish and English origins , descending from Covenanters , a Scottish Presbyterian movement during the 17th century . He studied medicine at the University of Edinburgh in Edinburgh , Scotland , and graduated with a Doctor of Medicine degree from the institution . 
 = = Royal Navy service = = 
 Following the completion of his education , White served as a surgeon with the rank of captain in the Royal Navy of the Kingdom of Great Britain . While it is not known for certain why White resigned his commission , White family tradition held that he left the Royal Navy after he engaged in a duel with another officer . 
 = = Arrival in America = = 
 White was the first member of his family to travel to and reside in America . Between 1720 and 1730 , White arrived in the British Colonies where he visited his uncle William Hoge ( an ancestor of United States House of Representatives member John Blair Hoge ) residing in Delaware Colony . White fell in love with Hoge 's eldest daughter Margaret and he married her in Delaware Colony . White 's marriage to Margaret was likely the cause of his resignation from the Royal Navy . He and Margaret , along with her father William Hoge , relocated near York , Pennsylvania where White erected a residence he named " White Hall " after his family 's ancestral home in Scotland . 
 = = Settlement in Virginia = = 
 From York , White relocated between 1732 and 1735 as a " pioneer settler " to a stream along Great North Mountain near Winchester in Orange County , Virginia ( later included as part of Frederick County following its 1738 creation ) , where he established a plantation . During this move to Virginia , White was accompanied by his elderly father @-@ in @-@ law William Hoge , who settled three miles south of Winchester on Opequon Creek . White was one of the earlier pioneer settlers of Frederick County . White and Hoge , along with other families , established the Opequon Meeting House , the oldest Presbyterian congregation formed west of the Blue Ridge Mountains . 
 White " staked out " his farm between 1732 and 1735 consisting of 375 acres ( 152 ha ) along Hogue Creek , south of the present @-@ day unincorporated community of Hayfield , Virginia along U.S. Route 50 . White 's land tract was surveyed by John Mauzy on April 22 , 1751 , and he was issued a formal land grant from Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron on November 15 , 1754 . Mauzy 's survey stated that White had been residing on the land tract since at least 1751 . White established his permanent residence on this land grant , which became the ancestral home of the White family of Virginia and West Virginia . 
 White was one of two physicians practicing in Frederick County along with Daniel Hart ( died about 1748 ) . White practiced from his residence near Great North Mountain , and one of his more notable patients was Colonel James Wood , founder of Winchester , Virginia . White 's son Alexander married Wood 's daughter , Elizabeth Wood . White was part a larger wave of Scottish physicians who settled in Virginia prior to the American Revolutionary War . White 's alma mater , the University of Edinburgh , was a leading center of medical education and research , and the school trained more physicians than were needed in Scotland . Unlike White , the majority of Scottish physicians practiced in the main centers of population in the colonial port cities . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 White died in 1752 at the age of 64 and was interred in the eastern corner of the Old Opequon Cemetery at the Opequon Presbyterian Church in Kernstown , 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) south of Winchester . By 1855 , a tree was located at White 's burial site in the eastern corner of the cemetery , and the same tree remained at his burial site in 1891 . White was survived by his three sons , Robert , Alexander , and John , and his wife . His son , Dr. Robert White , Jr . , inherited the White family farm following White 's death . 
 = = Marriage and children = = 
 White married Margaret Hoge , the eldest daughter of his uncle William Hoge and his wife , Barbara Hume . White and his wife , Margaret , had at least eight children together : 
 = Wonderbra = 
 The Wonderbra is a type of push @-@ up underwire brassiere that gained worldwide prominence in the 1990s . Although the Wonderbra name was first trademarked in the U.S. in 1955 , the brand was developed in Canada . Moses ( Moe ) Nadler , founder and majority owner of the Canadian Lady Corset Company , licensed the trademark for the Canadian market in 1939 . By the 1960s the Canadian Lady brand had become known in Canada as " Wonderbra , the company . " In 1961 the company introduced the Model 1300 plunge push @-@ up bra . This bra became one of the best @-@ selling Canadian styles and is virtually identical to today 's Wonderbra . 
 In 1968 , Canadian Lady changed its name to Canadian Lady @-@ Canadelle Inc . , was sold to Consolidated Foods ( now Sara Lee Corporation ) , and later became Canadelle Inc . During the 1970s Wonderbra was repositioned as the company 's fashionable and sexy brand , and became the Canadian market leader . 
 In 1991 , the push @-@ up Wonderbra became a sensation in the UK , although it had been sold there since 1964 under license by the Gossard division of Courtaulds Textiles . Sara Lee Corporation did not renew Gossard 's license and redesigned the push @-@ up style for the reintroduction of the Wonderbra to the U.S. market in 1994 . 
 Since 1994 , the Wonderbra has expanded from the single push @-@ up design into a full @-@ range lingerie fashion label in most of the world . In most countries , the brand emphasizes sex @-@ appeal . In its native Canada , however , the brand promotes the functional qualities of its products — a departure from the strategy that made Wonderbra the top @-@ seller in the 1970s . 
 = = Original " Wonder @-@ Bra " design = = 
 Before the Second World War broke out , elastic materials were rationed and unavailable for clothing . Israel Pilot designed an improved cup with a diagonal slash , shoulder strap attachment . This innovation on existing bra design provided more comfort and freedom of movement for the wearer . He also coined the name " Wonder @-@ Bra " in 1935 . 
 Israel Pilot 's patent US <unk> , granted in 1941 , allowed for greater shoulder strap elasticity by cutting the fabric so that the weave has the greatest stretch ( cutting on the " bias " ) . The photographs show the original patent sketches and close @-@ ups of a bra made in the U.S. by D 'Amour . The model is wearing a rare 1950s version of this original Wonder @-@ Bra design . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1939 , Moe Nadler founded the Canadian Lady Corset Company . He created a small sewing shop in the heart of Montreal to make a well fitting , good quality bra in the mid @-@ priced range ( from $ 1 @.@ 00 to $ 1 @.@ 50 retail ) . As part of this effort , he traveled to New York City and met with Israel Pilot and licensed the Wonder @-@ Bra trademark and diagonal slash patent . In Canada , the trademark lost the hyphen , and became " <unk> , " and " Wonderbra " at the U.S. reintroduction . 
 During the wartime years , Canadian apparel manufacturers were subject to quotas on materials . <unk> were unavailable , affecting the comfort and design of women 's underwear . The diagonal slash offered a better fitting brassiere without <unk> , and became a competitive advantage . 
 From 1939 - 1955 , Canadian Lady marketed several lines of intimate apparel including girdles , panties , slips , swimsuits , and brassieres under the Wonderbra brand . The Company also created sub @-@ brands to target different socioeconomic and lifestyle segments of the consumer market . In contrast , the U.S. market for Wonder @-@ Bra stagnated while the brand was owned by Israel Pilot 's companies . In 1952 , Canadian Lady launched Petal Burst with anticipation of tough negotiations with D 'Amour — Israel Pilot 's U.S. company — around the expiration of the patent in 1955 . This new line also adapted to a new fashion trend towards a pointed bust , inspired by Christian Dior 's " New Look " . The Petal Burst by Wonderbra line was successful and delivered 50 % of bra sales by 1957 . 
 The post @-@ patent negotiations were led by Moe Nadler . D 'Amour no longer had leverage with a patent , but still demanded that Canadian Lady stop using the designs , and return the pattern templates . Moe Nadler ignored this demand and instead successfully acquired the Canadian , European , and Asian rights to the Wonderbra trademarks . This allowed the company to move forward into the 1960s with the brand intact . By the mid @-@ 1960s Canadian Lady was exporting and licensing the Wonderbra line to Western Europe , Australia , South Africa , Israel and the West Indies . In the 1970s , Canadelle acquired the remaining worldwide rights to the trademark , and licensed <unk> ( a Canadian pantyhose manufacturer acquired by Sara Lee in the 1980s ) to use the Wonderbra brand on hosiery in Canada . 
 = = = Development of the push @-@ up bra = = = 
 In the late 1950s Moe Nadler started traveling to Europe to find new styles to bring to the Canadian market . In 1960 , Wonderbra introduced a lacy , half push @-@ up bra described in Europe as <unk> ( meaning " pigeon @-@ breasted " in French ) . In 1961 Nadler directed Louise Poirier to develop a deeply plunged , laced push @-@ up design , numbered the 1300 . Canadian Lady licensed these models , among others , to Gossard in 1964 . It was this Wonderbra Model 1300 design that became first a UK success in the early 1990s , a European sensation in 1993 , and then the " One and Only Wonderbra " that was finally launched in the U.S. in 1994 . 
 = = = Canadian product , 1964 to 1980 = = = 
 In the late 1950s and early 1960s , the majority of women were still wearing highly structured undergarments . <unk> were considered the ladylike norm and represented close to 40 % of industry sales by volume . The 1960s also brought to Canadian Lady the challenges of feminism , fashions and the sexual revolution . The feminist movement — cultured by thought leaders like Betty Friedan and Germaine Greer — questioned the mores that defined women 's roles and appearance . Changes in fashion trends , such as pantyhose and the rise of the miniskirt , rendered the girdle unattractive and obsolete to a generation of women . While the intimate apparel industry fretted about bra @-@ burning as a precursor to the decline of all foundation garment sales , women reserved their animosity for their girdles . The Canadian sales data for foundation undergarments , from 1960 to 1971 , vividly demonstrates the shift in tastes . 
 It was against this backdrop that the Canadian Lady Corset Company had to act . In 1964 , Moe Nadler died and his son , Larry Nadler inherited control of the company . Larry Nadler was a Harvard @-@ trained MBA and brought modern marketing strategies to the industry . He commissioned market research that identified women 's feelings about intimate apparel . Women did not hate their bras . Rather , they saw bras as a means to feel and look beautiful , to be fashionable and sexy , and to attract men . While women sometimes went bra @-@ less , they were making a fashion choice and not a political statement . Canadian Lady 's management knew that girdles were out , but bras would remain an essential part of women 's wardrobes . So during the 1960s , while competitors were cutting back on their bra marketing and diversifying into other products , Canadian Lady aggressively pursued bra market share . 
 Later , Larry Nadler identified an age based bifurcation in the market . Younger women ( aged 15 to 20 ) regarded their bras as an enhancement to their sexuality but were not interested in a heavily structured garment . Nadler learned that women wanted " less bra , " not " no bra . " In 1974 , they introduced a new line of brassieres for teens called Dici ( by Wonderbra ) , and invented new hot fabric molding technologies to shape the cup . These bras were seamless and simply designed with less support than the typical bra of the period . The company designed special packaging in the shape of a die ( with holes ) . 
 = = = Brand development = = = 
 In 1966 , Canadian Lady made several important changes to their advertising strategy . They introduced television advertising and changed the emphasis from the product to the brand . Ads attempted to build consumer awareness of the single brand name : Wonderbra . Market research showed that women did not want girdles advertised on television — girdles were seen as armor against sex , while bras provided a means of attraction . 
 Instead of being hidden " <unk> " , <unk> became more visible icons of female sex @-@ appeal . The company also used pricing to promote Wonderbra as a luxury product with the highest price of any mass @-@ merchandised brand . This strategy also provided greater profits in a very competitive industry . The goal was to have women see their <unk> as a cosmetic — a beauty enhancer — rather than a functional garment . Playtex , the leading brand at the time , promoted the ease of care and durability of their girdles and brassieres . 
 Beginning in 1967 , the advertising focused exclusively on Wonderbra brand brassieres . In 1968 , Nadler hired Goodis Advertising to develop the new campaign . The Wonderbra ads were based on fashion and emotional appeal . In various ads , the man would appear as fashion photographer ( in a fashion shoot ) or fashion buyer ( at a fashion show ) . The storyline suggested an attraction or budding romance between the man and the women . The voice @-@ over and jingle featured a man 's voice and the commercial showed an actual woman 's torso naked except for a bra . All other television ads before this era showed brassieres on a manikin or a dressmaker 's dummy to promote the functional features of the product . Every Wonderbra advertisement contained versions of the musical theme , " We care about the shape you 're in . Wonderful , wonderful , Wonderbra " . The 1979 television campaign included a commercial directed by Richard Avedon which won a Silver award for television advertisements shown in Canada . 
 The Dici by Wonderbra television advertisements started in 1974 . The brand was positioned to young women as a more natural alternative to the heavily @-@ structured bras worn by their mothers . The animated ads featured the iconic die @-@ shaped packaging . A bra exited the box like a bird , then metamorphosed into a seagull and flew away . The tagline reinforced a spirit of freedom and nature : " Let it be Dici . Dici or nothing . " 
 = = = Popularity in Canada = = = 
 From 1972 to 1977 , the company doubled its wholesale revenue from $ 12 @.@ 6 million to $ 24 @.@ 9 million . By 1979 Canadelle dominated with 30 % of the Canadian market and $ 27 million in sales . Playtex ( later acquired by Sara Lee ) was second . By 1980 , Wonderbra 's sales were over $ 30 million wholesale ( $ 76 million in 2006 dollars ) in a country with only 10 @.@ 3 million women and girls older than 13 . 
 = = Worldwide reintroduction , 1991 to 1994 = = 
 Around 1991 , Gossard was selling the Wonderbra lines under licenses that were to expire in January 1994 . At the time , the plunge style was a good seller in the UK market . Gossard planned to renew their license and had an option to do so under the existing agreement . Instead of simply renewing the agreement , Gossard executives decided to negotiate better terms with Sara Lee . 
 Soon after the negotiations started , something unexpected happened . In 1992 , the plunge style became a hit with British women and sales took off . Between 1991 and 1993 , UK sales of that Wonderbra style quadrupled to $ 28 million , accounting for 12 @.@ 5 % of the $ 225 million UK branded bra market . Several factors might have contributed to this boom including " an article in British Vogue on the return of the padded bra , a Vivienne Westwood @-@ inspired fad for corsetry and that Gaultier driven yearning for underwear as outerwear " . With this surge in sales , Sara Lee decided not to renew the license with Gossard . 
 In 1994 in the UK , the ( Sara Lee ) Wonderbra achieved a high profile for its racy Hello Boys campaign . The most famous campaign poster presented model Eva Herzigová in a Wonderbra gazing down at her breasts with the caption " Hello Boys " , ambiguously addressing either male admirers or her breasts . Urban myth attributed a number of car accidents to ( male ) drivers being distracted by the advertisements . The influential poster was featured in an exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London and it was voted in at number 10 in a " Poster of the Century " contest . 
 The Playtex Division of Sara Lee was given the responsibility of introducing " The Wonderbra " style to the United States . Although the model was already being manufactured in Montreal by Canadelle , Playtex executives decided to take a year to redesign the bra for the U.S. market . They scheduled a late 1994 national launch for the bra . During this period , Gossard introduced to Americans their <unk> , with a design similar to the push @-@ up Wonderbra model . Other competitors quickly followed while Playtex retooled the design . Victoria 's Secret launched television advertisements to maintain visibility for the Miracle Bra which the company launched in 1993 . 
 The U.S. Wonderbra rollout included events with Eva Herzigová in New York 's Times Square . The advertisements were toned down in comparison to the earlier UK campaign . The U.S. print and billboard advertising showed models wearing only the Wonderbra . Underneath read slogans such as " who cares if it 's a bad hair day " and " look me in the eyes and tell me that you love me . " The $ 25 Million campaign worked in conjunction to the ongoing media interest in the bra . Although Playtex promoted the authenticity of their " One and Only Wonderbra " , the rapid introduction of competitive products meant that the overall U.S. market benefited from a 43 % increase in push @-@ up bra sales by the end of 1994 . 
 Following the 1994 relaunch , the U.S. Wonderbra has expanded from the single push @-@ up bra design to a broader lingerie line . The brand remains popular around the world as a product , and a part of the cultural lexicon . 
 = = Recent developments = = 
 In 2006 , Sara Lee sold its intimate apparel brands . The Wonderbra trademark is the property of Canadelle Limited Partnership of Canada , which is a wholly owned subsidiary of HanesBrands Inc . HanesBrands Inc. owns the license to sell and distribute apparel products under the Wonderbra trademark in all countries except the member states of the European Union , several other European nations and South Africa ; in these other markets , an affiliate of Sun Capital Partners owns the license under the Dim Branded Apparel group which is headquartered in Paris . 
 On January 3 , 2007 , the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ( CBC @-@ TV ) broadcast the results of their internet poll , in which Canadian respondents ranked the Wonderbra 5th out of the top 50 " Greatest Canadian Inventions " ( after Insulin , the light bulb and the telephone , but ahead of the pacemaker ) . 
 In a March 2008 survey of 3 @,@ 000 UK women , the Wonderbra was reported as the greatest fashion innovation in history . According to one magazine article , survey respondents were nearly unanimous in giving push @-@ up bras the number one position . 
 In 2009 , <unk> Canada celebrated the 70th anniversary of the brand 's Canadian introduction . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 During the 1994 reintroduction , it was thought that an international group of women models as spokespersons - they were called " spokesmodels " – would enhance marketing . The brand continues to use this tactic . 
 US Campaigns 
 " One and Only Wonderbra " ( May 9 , 1994 – ) Eva Herzigova , Czech 
 ( 1995 – ) Madison Michele , US 
 ( 1997 – ) Sarah O 'Hare , Australian 
 " Three Degrees of Wonder " ( 2000 – ) Magdalena <unk> , Polish 
 ( 2003 – ) Nadja <unk> , German 
 Wonderbra 10th Anniversary ( 2004 – ) Maja <unk> , Serbian 
 UK Campaigns 
 " Hello Boys " ( 1994 – ) Eva Herzigova , Czech 
 " Necklines – come on down ! " ( 2002 – 2006 ) Inna Zobova , Russian 
 " Who says a woman can 't get pleasure from something soft ? " Sophie Anderton , British 
 ( 1998 – 2000 ) Adriana <unk> , 
 ( 2008 – present ) Dita Von Teese , American 
 South America Campaigns 
 " Necklines – come on down ! " ( 2002 – 2006 ) Inna Zobova , Russian 
 Europe Campaigns 
 " Hello Boys " ( 1994 – ) Eva Herzigova , Czech 
 ( 1996 ) Patrizia <unk> , Italy 
 ( 1998 – 2000 ) Adriana <unk> , 
 " Necklines – come on down ! " ( 2002 – 2006 ) Inna Zobova , Russian 
 = 20 euro note = 
 The twenty euro note ( € 20 ) is the third @-@ lowest value euro banknote and has been used since the introduction of the euro ( in its cash form ) in 2002 . The note is used in the 23 countries which have it as their sole currency ( with 22 legally adopting it ) ; with a population of about 332 million . 
 It is the third @-@ smallest note , measuring 133 x 72 mm with a blue colour scheme . The twenty euro banknotes depict bridges and arches / doorways in Gothic architecture ( between the 13th and 14th century CE ) . 
 The twenty euro note contains several complex security features such as watermarks , invisible ink , holograms and microprinting that document its authenticity . In October 2011 , there were approximately 2 @,@ 755 @,@ 346 @,@ 800 twenty euro banknotes in circulation around the eurozone . 
 The full design of the Europa series 20 euro banknote was revealed on 24 February 2015 and launched on 25 November 2015 . 
 = = History = = 
 The euro was founded on 1 January 1999 , when it became the currency of over 300 million people in Europe . For the first three years of its existence it was an invisible currency , only used in accountancy . Euro cash was not introduced until 1 January 2002 , when it replaced the national banknotes and coins of the countries in eurozone 12 , such as the Belgian franc and the Greek drachma . 
 Slovenia joined the Eurozone in 2007 , Cyprus and Malta in 2008 , Slovakia in 2009 , Estonia in 2011 and Latvia joined on 1 January 2014 . 
 = = = The changeover period = = = 
 The changeover period during which the former currencies ' notes and coins were exchanged for those of the euro lasted about two months , going from 1 January 2002 until 28 February 2002 . The official date on which the national currencies ceased to be legal tender varied from member state to member state . The earliest date was in Germany , where the mark officially ceased to be legal tender on 31 December 2001 , though the exchange period lasted for two months more . Even after the old currencies ceased to be legal tender , they continued to be accepted by national central banks for periods ranging from ten years to forever . 
 = = = Changes = = = 
 Notes printed before November 2003 bear the signature of the first president of the European Central Bank , Wim Duisenberg , who was replaced on 1 November 2003 by Jean @-@ Claude Trichet , whose signature appears on issues from November 2003 to March 2012 . Notes issued after March 2012 bear the signature of the third president of the European Central Bank , incumbent Mario Draghi . 
 Until now there has been only one complete series of euro notes ; however a new series , similar to the current one , is being released . The European Central Bank will , in due time , announce when banknotes from the first series lose legal tender status . 
 As of June 2012 , current issues do not reflect the expansion of the European Union to 27 member states as Cyprus is not depicted on current notes as the map does not extend far enough east and Malta is also missing as it does not meet the current series ' minimum size for depiction . Since the European Central Bank plans to redesign the notes every seven or eight years after each issue , a second series of banknotes is already in preparation . New production and anti @-@ counterfeiting techniques will be employed on the new notes , but the design will be of the same theme and colours identical of the current series ; bridges and arches . However , they would still be recognisable as a new series . 
 = = Design = = 
 The twenty euro note is the third smallest euro note at 133 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 2 in ) × 72 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) with a blue colour scheme . All bank notes depict bridges and arches / doorways in a different historical European style ; the twenty euro note shows the gothic era ( between the 13th and 14th century CE ) . Although Robert Kalina 's original designs were intended to show real monuments , for political reasons the bridge and art are merely hypothetical examples of the architectural era . 
 Like all euro notes , it contains the denomination , the EU flag , the signature of the president of the ECB and the initials of said bank in different EU languages , a depiction of EU territories overseas , the stars from the EU flag and thirteen security features as listed below . 
 The ECB released a game on 5 February 2015 to discover some of the new security features embedded in the new € 20 note . The most significant new anti @-@ counterfeit measure is a transparent window , containing a hologram which shows a portrait of Europa and the number 20 . The Europa series design of the 20 euro note was officially revealed on 24 February 2015 . 
 = = = Security features ( First Series ) = = = 
 As a lower value note , the security features of the twenty euro note are not as high as the other denominations , however , it is protected by : 
 A hologram , tilt the note and one should see the hologram image change between the value and a window or doorway , but in the background , one should see rainbow @-@ coloured concentric circles of micro @-@ letters moving from the centre to the edges of the patch . 
 A EURion constellation , special printing processes give the euro notes their unique feel . 
 A glossy stripe , tilt the note and a glossy stripe showing the value numeral and the euro symbol will appear . 
 Watermarks , it appears when the banknote is against the light . 
 Raised printing , special methods of printing makes the ink feel raised or thicker in the main image , the lettering and the value numerals on the front of the banknotes . To feel the raised print , run your finger over it or scratch it gently with your fingernail . 
 Ultraviolet ink , Under ultraviolet light , the paper itself should not glow , fibres embedded in the paper should appear , and should be coloured red , blue and green , the European Union flag looks green and has orange stars , the ECB President signature turns green , the large stars and small circles on the front glow and the European map , a bridge and the value numeral on the back appear in yellow . 
 Microprinting , On numerous areas of the banknotes you can see microprinting , for example , inside the " EYPΩ " ( EURO in Greek characters ) on the front . You will need a magnifying glass to see it . The tiny text is sharp , and not blurred . 
 A security thread , The security thread is embedded in the banknote paper . Hold the banknote against the light - the thread will appear as a dark stripe . The word " EURO " and the value can be seen in tiny letters on the stripe . 
 Perforations , Hold the banknote against the light . You should see perforations in the hologram which will form the € symbol . You should also see small numbers showing the value . 
 A matted surface , the note paper is made out of pure cotton , which feels crisp and firm , but not limp or waxy . 
 Barcodes , 
 A serial number . 
 = = = Security Features ( Europa Series ) = = = 
 Watermark : When the note is held under a normal light source , a portrait of Europa and an electrotype denomination appear on either side . 
 Portrait Window : When the note is held against the light , the window in the hologram becomes transparent and reveals a portrait of Europa , which is visible on both sides of the note . 
 Portrait Hologram : When the note is tilted , the hologram - the silver @-@ coloured stripe on the right of the note - reveals a portrait of Europa as well as the " € " symbol , the main image and the value of the banknote . 
 Emerald Number : When the note is tilted , the number " 20 " on the bottom left corner of the note displays an effect of the light that moves up and down . The number " 20 " also changes colour from emerald green to deep blue . 
 Security Thread : When the note is held to the light , the security thread appears as a dark line . The " € " symbol and the value of the note can be seen in tiny white lettering in the stripe . 
 Microprinting : Some areas of the banknote feature a series of tiny letters . The microprinting can be read with a magnifying glass . The letters are sharp , not blurred . 
 = = Circulation = = 
 As of May 2013 , there are approximately 2 @,@ 845 @,@ 461 @,@ 000 € 20 banknotes in circulation around the Eurozone . That is approximately € 56 @,@ 909 @,@ 220 @,@ 700 worth of € 20 banknotes ( as of May 2013 ) . The European Central Bank is closely monitoring the circulation and stock of the euro coins and banknotes . It is a task of the Eurosystem to ensure an efficient and smooth supply of euro notes and to maintain their integrity throughout the eurozone . 
 = = Legal information = = 
 Legally , both the European Central Bank and the central banks of the eurozone countries have the right to issue the seven different euro banknotes . In practice , only the national central banks of the zone physically issue and withdraw euro banknotes . The European Central Bank does not have a cash office and is not involved in any cash operations . 
 = = Tracking = = 
 There are several communities of people at European level , most of which is EuroBillTracker , that , as a hobby , it keeps track of the euro banknotes that pass through their hands , to keep track and know where they travel or have travelled . The aim is to record as many notes as possible to know details about its spread , like from where and to where they travel in general , follow it up , like where a ticket has been seen in particular , and generate statistics and rankings , for example , in which countries there are more tickets . EuroBillTracker has registered over 155 million notes as of May 2016 , worth more than € 2 @.@ 897 billion . 
 = <unk> = 
 A megamaser is a type of astrophysical maser , which is a naturally occurring source of stimulated spectral line emission . <unk> are distinguished from astrophysical masers by their large isotropic luminosity . <unk> have typical luminosities of 103 solar luminosities ( L ☉ ) , which is 100 million times brighter than masers in the Milky Way , hence the prefix mega . Likewise , the term <unk> is used to describe masers outside the Milky Way that have luminosities of order L ☉ , or thousands of times stronger than the average maser in the Milky Way , <unk> is used to describe masers billions of times stronger than the average maser in the Milky Way , and extragalactic maser encompasses all masers found outside the Milky Way . Most known extragalactic masers are megamasers , and the majority of megamasers are hydroxyl ( OH ) megamasers , meaning the spectral line being amplified is one due to a transition in the hydroxyl molecule . There are known megamasers for three other molecules : water ( H2O ) , formaldehyde ( <unk> ) , and <unk> ( CH ) . 
 Water megamasers were the first type of megamaser discovered . The first water megamaser was found in 1979 in NGC <unk> , a galaxy in the nearby Centaurus A / M83 Group . The first hydroxyl megamaser was found in 1982 in Arp 220 , which is the nearest ultraluminous infrared galaxy to the Milky Way . All subsequent OH megamasers that have been discovered are also in luminous infrared galaxies , and there are a small number of OH <unk> hosted in galaxies with lower infrared luminosities . Most luminous infrared galaxies have recently merged or interacted with another galaxy , and are undergoing a burst of star formation . Many of the characteristics of the emission in hydroxyl megamasers are distinct from that of hydroxyl masers within the Milky Way , including the amplification of background radiation and the ratio of hydroxyl lines at different frequencies . The population inversion in hydroxyl molecules is produced by far infrared radiation that results from absorption and re @-@ emission of light from forming stars by surrounding interstellar dust . Zeeman splitting of hydroxyl megamaser lines may be used to measure magnetic fields in the masing regions , and this application represents the first detection of Zeeman splitting in a galaxy other than the Milky Way . 
 Water megamasers and <unk> are found primarily associated with active galactic nuclei , while galactic and weaker extragalactic water masers are found in star forming regions . Despite different environments , the circumstances that produce extragalactic water masers do not seem to be very different from those that produce galactic water masers . Observations of water megamasers have been used to make accurate measurements of distances to galaxies in order to provide constraints on the Hubble constant . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Masers = = = 
 The word maser derives from the acronym <unk> , which stands for " Microwave Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation " . The maser is a predecessor to lasers , which operate at optical wavelengths , and is named by the replacement of " microwave " with " light " . Given a system of atoms or molecules , each with different energy states , an atom or molecule may absorb a photon and move to a higher energy level , or the photon may stimulate emission of another photon of the same energy and cause a transition to a lower energy level . Producing a maser requires population inversion , which is when a system has more members in a higher energy level relative to a lower energy level . In such a situation , more photons will be produced by stimulated emission than will be absorbed . Such a system is not in thermal equilibrium , and as such requires special conditions to occur . Specifically , it must have some energy source that can pump the atoms or molecules to the excited state . Once population inversion occurs , a photon with a photon energy corresponding to the energy difference between two states can then produce stimulated emission of another photon of the same energy . The atom or molecule will drop to the lower energy level , and there will be two photons of the same energy , where before there was only one . The repetition of this process is what leads to amplification , and since all of the photons are the same energy , the light produced is monochromatic . 
 = = = Astrophysical masers = = = 
 Masers and lasers built on Earth and masers that occur in space both require population inversion in order to operate , but the conditions under which population inversion occurs are very different in the two cases . Masers in laboratories have systems with high densities , which limits the transitions that may be used for masing , and requires using a resonant cavity in order to bounce light back and forth many times . Astrophysical masers are at low densities , and naturally have very long path lengths . At low densities , being out of thermal equilibrium is more easily achieved because thermal equilibrium is maintained by collisions , meaning population inversion can occur . Long path lengths provide photons traveling through the medium many opportunities to stimulate emission , and produce amplification of a background source of radiation . These factors accumulate to " make interstellar space a natural environment for maser operation . " Astrophysical masers may be pumped either radiatively or <unk> . In radiative pumping , infrared photons with higher energies than the maser transition photons preferentially excite atoms and molecules to the upper state in the maser in order to produce population inversion . In collisional pumping , this population inversion is instead produced by collisions that excite molecules to energy levels above that of the upper maser level , and then the molecule decays to the upper maser level by emitting photons . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1965 , twelve years after the first maser was built in a laboratory , a hydroxyl ( OH ) maser was discovered in the plane of the Milky Way . Masers of other molecules were discovered in the Milky Way in the following years , including water ( H2O ) , silicon monoxide ( SiO ) , and methanol ( CH3OH ) . The typical isotropic luminosity for these galactic masers is 10 − 6 – 10 − 3 L ☉ . The first evidence for extragalactic masing was detection of the hydroxyl molecule in NGC 253 in 1973 , and was roughly ten times more luminous than galactic masers . 
 In 1982 , the first megamaser was discovered in the ultraluminous infrared galaxy Arp 220 . The luminosity of the source , assuming it emits isotropically , is roughly 103 L ☉ . This luminosity is roughly one hundred million times stronger than the typical maser found in the Milky Way , and so the maser source in Arp 220 was called a megamaser . At this time , extragalactic water ( H2O ) masers were already known . In 1984 , water maser emission was discovered in NGC 4258 and NGC 1068 that was of comparable strength to the hydroxyl maser in Arp 220 , and are as such considered water megamasers . 
 Over the next decade , megamasers were also discovered for formaldehyde ( <unk> ) and <unk> ( CH ) . Galactic formaldehyde masers are relatively rare , and more formaldehyde megamasers are known than are galactic formaldehyde masers . <unk> masers , on the other hand , are quite common in the Milky Way . Both types of megamaser were found in galaxies in which hydroxyl had been detected . <unk> is seen in galaxies with hydroxyl absorption , while formaldehyde is found in galaxies with hydroxyl absorption as well as those with hydroxyl megamaser emission . 
 As of 2007 , 109 hydroxyl megamaser sources were known , up to a redshift of <formula> . Over 100 extragalactic water masers are known , and of these , 65 are bright enough to be considered megamasers . 
 = = General requirements = = 
 Regardless of the masing molecule , there are a few requirements that must be met for a strong maser source to exist . One requirement is a radio continuum background source to provide the radiation amplified by the maser , as all maser transitions take place at radio wavelengths . The masing molecule must have a pumping mechanism to create the population inversion , and sufficient density and path length for significant amplification to take place . These combine to constrain when and where megamaser emission for a given molecule will take place . The specific conditions for each molecule known to produce megamasers are different , as exemplified by the fact that there is no known galaxy that hosts both of the two most common megamaser species , hydroxyl and water . As such , the different molecules with known megamasers will be addressed individually . 
 = = Hydroxyl megamasers = = 
 Arp 220 hosts the first megamaser discovered , is the nearest ultraluminous infrared galaxy , and has been studied in great detail at many wavelengths . For this reason , it is the prototype of hydroxyl megamaser host galaxies , and is often used as a guide for interpreting other hydroxyl megamasers and their hosts . 
 = = = Hosts and environment = = = 
 Hydroxyl megamasers are found in the nuclear region of a class of galaxies called luminous infrared galaxies ( LIRGs ) , with far infrared luminosities in excess of one hundred billion solar luminosities , or LFIR > 1011 L ☉ , and ultra @-@ luminous infrared galaxies ( ULIRGs ) , with LFIR > 1012 L ☉ are favored . These infrared luminosities are very large , but in many cases LIRGs are not particularly luminous in visible light . For instance , the ratio of infrared luminosity to luminosity in blue light is roughly 80 for Arp 220 , the first source in which a megamaser was observed . 
 The majority of the LIRGs show evidence of interaction with other galaxies or having recently experienced a galaxy merger , and the same holds true for the LIRGs that host hydroxyl megamasers . <unk> hosts are rich in molecular gas compared to spiral galaxies , with molecular hydrogen masses in excess of one billion solar masses , or H2 > 109 M ☉ . Mergers help funnel molecular gas to the nuclear region of the LIRG , producing high molecular densities and stimulating high star formation rates characteristic of LIRGs . The starlight in turn heats dust , which re @-@ radiates in the far infrared and produces the high LFIR observed in hydroxyl megamaser hosts . The dust temperatures derived from far infrared fluxes are warm relative to spirals , ranging from 40 – 90 K. 
 The far infrared luminosity and dust temperature of a LIRG both affect the likelihood of hosting an hydroxyl megamaser , through correlations between the dust temperature and far infrared luminosity , so it is unclear from observations alone what the role of each is in producing hydroxyl megamasers . LIRGs with warmer dust are more likely to host hydroxyl megamasers , as are ULIRGs , with LFIR > 1012 L ☉ . At least one out of three ULIRGs hosts an hydroxyl megamaser , as compared with roughly one out of six LIRGs . Early observations of hydroxyl megamasers indicated a correlation between the isotropic hydroxyl luminosity and far infrared luminosity , with LOH <formula> <unk> . As more hydroxyl megamasers were discovered , and care was taken to account for the <unk> bias , this observed relationship was found to be flatter , with LOH <formula> <unk> <formula> 0 @.@ 1 . 
 Early spectral classification of the nuclei of the LIRGs that host hydroxyl megamasers indicated that the properties of LIRGs that host hydroxyl megamasers cannot be distinguished from the overall population of LIRGs . Roughly one third of megamaser hosts are classified as starburst galaxies , one quarter are classified as Seyfert 2 galaxies , and the remainder are classified as low @-@ ionization nuclear emission @-@ line regions , or <unk> . The optical properties of hydroxyl megamaser hosts and non @-@ hosts are not significantly different . Recent infrared observations using the Spitzer Space Telescope are , however , able to distinguish hydroxyl megamaser hosts galaxies from non @-@ masing LIRGs , as 10 – 25 % of hydroxyl megamaser hosts show evidence for an active galactic nucleus , compared to 50 – 95 % for non @-@ masing LIRGs . 
 The LIRGs that host hydroxyl megamasers may be distinguished from the general population of LIRGs by their molecular gas content . The majority of molecular gas is molecular hydrogen , and typical hydroxyl megamaser hosts have molecular gas densities greater than 1000 cm − 3 . These densities are among the highest mean densities of molecular gas among LIRGs . The LIRGs that host hydroxyl megamasers also have high fractions of dense gas relative to typical LIRGs . The dense gas fraction is measured by the ratio of the luminosity produced by hydrogen cyanide ( HCN ) relative to the luminosity of carbon monoxide ( CO ) . 
 = = = Line characteristics = = = 
 The emission of hydroxyl megamasers occurs predominantly in the so @-@ called " main lines " at 1665 and 1667 MHz . The hydroxyl molecule also has two " satellite lines " that emit at 1612 and 1720 MHz , but few hydroxyl megamasers have had satellite lines detected . Emission in all known hydroxyl megamasers is stronger in the 1667 MHz line ; typical ratios of the flux in the 1667 MHz line to the 1665 MHz line , called the hyperfine ratio , range from a minimum of 2 to greater than 20 . For hydroxyl emitting in thermodynamic equilibrium , this ratio will range from 1 @.@ 8 to 1 , depending upon the optical depth , so line ratios greater than 2 are indicative of a population out of thermal equilibrium . This may be compared with galactic hydroxyl masers in star @-@ forming regions , where the 1665 MHz line is typically strongest , and hydroxyl masers around evolved stars , in which the 1612 MHz line is often strongest , and of the main lines , 1667 MHz emission is frequently stronger than 1612 MHz . The total width of emission at a given frequency is typically many hundreds of kilometers per second , and individual features that make up the total emission profile have widths ranging from tens to hundreds of kilometers per second . These may also be compared with galactic hydroxyl masers , which typically have linewidths of order a kilometer per second or narrower , and are spread over a velocity of a few to tens of kilometers per second . 
 The radiation amplified by hydroxyl masers is the radio continuum of its host . This continuum is primarily composed of synchrotron radiation produced by Type II supernovae . Amplification of this background is low , with amplification factors , or gains , ranging from a few percent to a few hundred percent , and sources with larger hyperfine ratios typically exhibiting larger gains . Sources with higher gains typically have narrower emission lines . This is expected if the pre @-@ gain linewidths are all roughly the same , as line centers are amplified more than the wings , leading to line narrowing . 
 A few hydroxyl megamasers , including Arp 220 , have been observed with very long baseline interferometry ( VLBI ) , which allows sources to be studied at higher angular resolution . VLBI observations indicate that hydroxyl megamaser emission is composed of two components , one diffuse and one compact . The diffuse component displays gains of less than a factor of one and linewidths of order hundreds of kilometers per second . These characteristics are similar to those seen with single dish observations of hydroxyl megamasers that are unable to resolve individual masing components . The compact components have high gains , ranging from tens to hundreds , high ratios of flux at 1667 MHz to flux at 1665 MHz , and linewidths are of order a few kilometers per second . These general features have been explained by a narrow <unk> ring of material from which the diffuse emission arises , and individual masing clouds with sizes of order one parsec that give rise to the compact emission . The hydroxyl masers observed in the Milky Way more closely resemble the compact hydroxyl megamaser components . There are , however , some regions of extended galactic maser emission from other molecules that resemble the diffuse component of hydroxyl megamasers . 
 = = = Pumping mechanism = = = 
 The observed relationship between the luminosity of the hydroxyl line and the far infrared suggests that hydroxyl megamasers are radiatively pumped . Initial VLBI measurements of nearby hydroxyl megamasers seemed to present a problem with this model for compact emission components of hydroxyl megamasers , as they required a very high fraction of infrared photons to be absorbed by hydroxyl and lead to a maser photon being emitted , making collisional excitation a more plausible pumping mechanism . However , a model of maser emission with a clumpy masing medium appear to be able to reproduce the observed properties of compact and diffuse hydroxyl emission . A recent detailed treatment finds that photons with a wavelength of 53 micrometres are the primary pump for main line maser emission , and applies to all hydroxyl masers . In order to provide enough photons at this wavelength , the interstellar dust that reprocesses stellar radiation to infrared wavelengths must have a temperature of at least 45 Kelvin . Recent observations with the Spitzer Space Telescope confirm this basic picture , but there are still some discrepancies between details of the model and observations of hydroxyl megamaser host galaxies such as the required dust opacity for megamaser emission . 
 = = = Applications = = = 
