 = = = Renovation and destruction = = = 
 Renovation 
 The first known reconstruction of the temple was recorded in a grant made by Kotte Kingdom King <unk> Bahu VI ( 1412 / 1415 - 1467 ) . The grant was made in Grantha script in Sanskrit . In his thirty @-@ eighth regnal year ( 1450 or 1453 ) he summoned the chief priest of the temple , <unk> <unk> ( r ) , and reaffirmed the lands that had belonged to the Siva temple . The villages mentioned as belonging to the temple are <unk> ( ya ) , <unk> and <unk> . Revenue accrued from this land grant was exempt from tax . The grant was inscribed on a granite slab and installed as part of the renovated temple . The conquest of Jaffna kingdom by Sapumal Kumaraya , a military leader sent by the Kotte king in 1450 , was celebrated in the Kokila Sandesaya ( " Message carried by Kokila bird " ) written in the 15th century by the principal monk of the <unk> Tilaka <unk> in <unk> . The book contains a contemporary description of the country traversed by the road taken by the <unk> bird , from <unk> , <unk> <unk> ( referred to as Devi Nuwara - " City of Gods " ) in the south to Nallur ( " Beautiful City " ) in the North of Sri Lanka . It mentions the Munneswaram temple . The second set of grants to be recorded were by another Kotte King , Parakramabahu IX ( 1509 – 1528 ) , who donated extensive lands to the temple and recorded the deed in a copper plate inscription . 
 Destruction 
 The Portuguese , after their arrival in Sri Lanka in 1505 , began a campaign of forced conversion and destruction of many Buddhist and Hindu temples around the island . They destroyed the Munneswaram temple completely in 1578 CE with the exception of the basement , and used the core of the building as a Roman Catholic chapel . Jesuits recorded that they used iron bars to destroy the presiding deity . According to a 1640 Portuguese records , they were able to convert 500 people from the village of Munneswaram as Roman Catholics . However , the locals and temple administrators were able to hide many of the idols of the temple complex before the destruction . 
 Reconstruction 
 Following the destruction , the Munneswaram Pattuva area came under the control of the expanding Kingdom of <unk> , led by its king Rajasinghe I ( 1581 – 1593 ) , who continuously harassed the Portuguese during his reign . Rajasinghe I rebuilt the temple again , but due to continuous conflict most of the area around the temple was depopulated , and proper cultivation of lands abandoned . Irrigation tanks , which provided water for cultivation , fell into disuse . The Portuguese again destroyed the temple in the early 17th century , but the temple was rebuilt by the local people . It was nominally in usage when Kirti Sri <unk> ( 1747 – 1782 ) of the Kandyan Kingdom had the superstructure rebuilt in the 1750s . The <unk> or Kotha on top was made of silver , a work of art displaying affinity to South India 's Dravidian architecture . The <unk> ( consecration ) ceremonies were performed in the year 1753 , and for the performance of daily and special rites of the temple , Kirti Sri Rajasinghe made a grant of lands to the priests , recorded through a copper plate in 1753 . 
 = = Myths = = 
 Most of the myths associated with the temple are not dated and vary with the different religious and ethnic groups as well . One set of myths deals with the creation of the temple , and the other deals with various reconstruction efforts . For the Hindu Tamils , the Munneswaram temple is primarily a Siva temple . According to a Tamil legend , the temple is situated at a place where king Rama of Ayodhya ( in India ) , the hero of the epic Ramayana , prayed to Siva after his war with the demon @-@ king Ravana of Lanka ( identified with Sri Lanka ) . For Sinhala Buddhists who hail from outside of Pattuva , Munneswaram is primarily a goddess temple , currently associated with Kali , and also a popular place of sorcery . Sinhalese myths say that Munneswaram is the place where the deity Kali landed from India . The legend further postulates that another Sinhalese female deity , Pattini , prevented Kali from devouring human beings and made her settle down in Munneswaram . 
 Another myth current amongst Tamils says that the temple was renovated by a legendary Chola king , <unk> . According to that myth , the king , who was afflicted with an incurable skin disease , was cured after taking a bath in the ruined temple ’ s holy pond . Following the miracle , the king went on to renovate the temple and created a community of temple caretakers to maintain the temple . The equivalent myth amongst the Sinhalese people indicates that the diseased king was Rajasinghe or <unk> and the king prayed to the presiding goddess who cured him of his affliction . There were at least two kings called Rajasinghe in Sri Lanka , and both of them were involved in the actual renovations of the temple , and at least seven kings named <unk> , thereby making it difficult to identify the right king . 
 = = Modern temple = = 
 It has been recorded that in 1830 the temple festival attracted thousands of people from the surrounding Pattuva , but by the 1870s the temple was abandoned again . One of the reasons was the depopulation of the Pattuva , due to various causes , and the conversion of paddy land into plantations from subsistence farming . By 1816 , Munneswaram village had hardly 64 people , and the entire Munneswaram Pattuva had 1008 people in 63 villages . 
 The temple properties were no longer cultivated , and tanks were not maintained . Thus the population was surviving on slash and burn agriculture . British colonial policies favored the conversion of these lands into lucrative coconut plantations quickly covering all suitable Pattuva lands . Establishments of large @-@ scale plantations also led to population increase due to migration and settlement of plantation workers from the interior of the country . This led to a demographic change , and the local Pattuva people became disassociated from the temple and its administration . 
 A few villagers from Munneswaram village filed a case in the Chilaw district courts to prevent the land grab of temple properties by outsiders . The case resulted in the British colonial government accepting temple properties as belonging to a newly created temple trust . The trust came under the control of one Cumaraswamy <unk> from Colombo . His family maintains the hereditary priestly position of the Siva temple , and controls all temple properties . A Tamil family from Munneswaram village controls the priestly position of the Kali temple . The Siva temple was renovated in 1875 by the personal efforts of Cumaraswamy <unk> . Improvements were effected again in 1919 and 1963 through public support from Tamil Hindus from Colombo and Jaffna . The temple has become very popular amongst the Sinhalese and they make up over 78 % of the pilgrims to both the Siva and Kali temples . 
 = = Temple layout = = 
 The presiding deity Siva is installed in the form of Lingam in the sanctum sanctorum . The Siva temple ’ s architectural details conform to what is written down in the Hindu scriptures known as <unk> . The Siva temple faces east and has three pathways around it . A sacred pond is situated in front of the Siva temple and a fig tree stands by the side of it . The main sanctum and the structure above the sanctum are one of the largest in Sri Lanka . 
 The Siva temple is surrounded by various other temples and shrines . To the southeast of the Siva Temple is a shrine dedicated to Ganesha . A temple dedicated to Ayyanayake , a Sinhalese Buddhist deity , is situated in the northeast corner of the third pathway of the Siva temple . The popular temple dedicated to Kali stands in the northern part of the pathway . In the southwest of the outer courtyard is another temple dedicated to Ganesha . Within the Siva temple there are shrines dedicated to the Navagraha ( nine planets ) , the sixty three Saivite <unk> saints , various aspects of Siva , Ganesha and Amman . 
 = = Center of Kali cult = = 
 According to anthropologists Richard Gombrich and Gananath Obeyesekere , the cult of Kali reached Sri Lanka via South India . Although Kali shrines may have been part of Tamil Hindu temples prior to 12th century CE , the Sinhalese Buddhist population came to revere Kali as a village demon at least by the 12th century CE . The first known Hindu temple with a shrine to Kali to become popular with the Sinhalese Buddhists is Munneswaram . A myth that has Kali landing at the town of Chilaw , and residing in Munneswaram , has made the temple a popular place of visit for cursing and sorcery purposes . In the early 1970s , the majority of the Sinhalese visitors were there for sorcery purposes , but by the 1990s more than half have been visiting the temple for general veneration purposes , demonstrating the transformation of the deity from a malevolent demigod to a mother goddess . The veneration of Kali has completely overtaken the previously popular veneration of Pattini . Since the 1960s a number of Sinhalese Buddhist shrines dedicated to Kali have sprung up all over the island , especially in urban areas . These are managed by Sinhalese priests who are trance specialists and act as intermediaries between the deity and the devotee while being possessed by the deity . The popular veneration of previously Hindu deities such as Kali and Kataragama deviyo ( the latter identified with the Hindu Skanda ) have fundamentally altered the rational nature of Theravada Buddhism towards the Bhakti ( “ Personal veneration of deity ” ) aspect of Hinduism . Following protests by Buddhist monks and animal rights activist , the government banned the age old custom of animal sacrifices at the Kali temple in 2011 . 
 = = Festivals = = 
 The Munneswaram temple is well known for its celebration of Navaratri and Sivarathri functions . Navaratri lasts for nine days and is dedicated to various aspects of the presiding goddess , whereas Sivarathri is dedicated to Siva . Both these functions primarily attract Hindus to the temple . The annual Munneswaram festival is an important part of the temple calendar and it attracts Hindus , Buddhists , Catholics and even Muslims . Until the 1830s the festival lasted up to 18 days but since the 1960s it lasts for 28 days in the months of August and September . The festival begins with the hoisting of the temple flag . This is followed by 13 days of internal temple processions conducted in the outer pathways of the Siva temple . On each day of the festival , the images of Ganesha , Skanda , and the presiding consort goddess are paraded around the temple . Local Pattuva village deity temples also have festivals that coincide with the annual festival . Villagers belonging to Maradankulama and <unk> sponsor a day each of the 28 @-@ day festival . 
 Devotees visit the temple to attend the daily pujas and make their offerings . Booths are erected outside for the sale of food , drink , brassware , pottery , cloth and holy images . On the penultimate day of the festival there is a procession , when the image of the goddess is placed upon a huge wooden chariot and pulled around the temple by devotees . On the final day of the festival , two large chariots are drawn by the devotees to the <unk> oya , a local river for the <unk> ( " holy bath " ) ceremony when the images are dipped into the river . At the same time thousands of devotees also jump into the river . After the holy bath , the procession goes back to the temple along a route through Chilaw , accompanied by traditional <unk> and Thavil musicians . The procession then passes the Ayyanayake and Kali temples prior to entering the main temple . 
 = Iskandar of Johor = 
 Baginda <unk> <unk> Sultan Iskandar Al @-@ Haj Ibni <unk> Sultan Sir Ismail Al @-@ Khalidi ( 8 April 1932 – 22 January 2010 ) was the 24th Sultan of Johor and the 4th Sultan of modern Johor . He succeeded his father , Sultan Ismail , upon the former 's death on 10 May 1981 , and was the eighth Yang di @-@ Pertuan Agong ( Malay for Supreme King or High King ) of Malaysia , from 26 April 1984 to 25 April 1989 . Sultan Iskandar reign lasted for almost 29 years until his death in January 2010 , upon which he was succeeded by his oldest son , Sultan Ibrahim Ismail . 
 As was the case with his grandfather , Sultan Ibrahim , Sultan Iskandar 's independent mindset resulted in strained relations with the Malaysian federal government on numerous occasions . This was more so during his days as the Yang di @-@ Pertuan Agong , whereby a number of notable public incidents involved Sultan Iskandar . Nevertheless , Sultan Iskandar was reputed to show great concern to his subjects , and was held in high esteem by many of his subjects – particularly the Malays and Orang Aslis . 
 Sultan Iskandar is reputed to have been a staunch disciplinarian , with willingness to occasionally voice personal opinions on governmental issues . On the personal side , subjects who have personally approached the Sultan in his later years described him as a person with a warm and generous personality . However , past critics had also argued that Sultan Iskandar was a person with a turbulent temper . These claims were made by citing records of past notorious incidents , which include an experience of being disinherited from being the Tunku Mahkota of Johor ( or Crown Prince in English ) by his father , in 1961 , as well as a series of alleged criminal acts occurring between the 1970s and the 1990s which were published in the press and provoked widespread moral outrage within the Malaysian public . 
 During his younger days as a prince , Malay royalty Iskandar was commonly known by his first name , " Mahmud " or his full name " Mahmud Iskandar " . He largely discontinued the use of his first name after he became Sultan in 1981 , although some people still refer to him by his full name on an occasional basis . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sultan Iskandar ( known as Mahmud Iskandar until 1981 ) was the third son of Sultan Ismail ibni Sultan Ibrahim by Sultanah Ungku Tun Aminah <unk> Ungku Paduka Bena Sri Maharaja Utama Ahmad , and was born on 8 April 1932 in Istana <unk> , Johor Bahru . ( He had two older brothers , both of whom died in infancy . ) Mahmud received his primary and secondary education in Ngee Heng Primary School and the English College Johore Bahru ( now Maktab Sultan Abu Bakar ) in Johor Bahru . In 1952 , he was sent to Australia for tertiary education at the Trinity Grammar School . After graduating in 1953 , Mahmud travelled to the Isle of Wight in the United Kingdom , where he enrolled into the Upper Chine School for three years . Upon completing his studies , Mahmud returned to Malaysia in 1956 and briefly served as a cadet officer in the Johor Civil Service , taking charge of affairs in District Affairs , Land and Treasury departments until his appointment as the Mahkota of Johor in May 1959 . 
 In 1956 , Mahmud married Josephine Trevorrow , from Cornwall , United Kingdom , with whom he had four children , including the crown prince , Ibrahim Ismail . The marriage ended with divorce in 1962 . He remarried in 1961 – shortly before his divorce to Trevorrow , to Tengku <unk> , who came from the Kelantan royal family . Tengku <unk> had six children with the Sultan . Analysts such as Kate Wharton have observed that any literal references to Trevorrow 's association with Sultan Iskandar was carefully omitted in all official biographies . 
 Mahmud was appointed the Mahkota of Johor from 1959 to 1961 , and Raja Muda from 1966 to 1981 , by Sultan Ismail . On 29 April 1981 , he was re @-@ appointed as the Mahkota shortly before his father 's death . 
 = = Sultan of Johor = = 
 On 10 May 1981 , Mahmud was appointed as the Regent of Johor following the death of his father , and was sworn in as Sultan a day later , shortly before his father was buried . In turn , his younger brother , Tunku Abdul Rahman ( Mahkota of Johor ) ( not to be confused with Abdul Rahman , Malaysia 's first Prime Minister ) , formerly the Mahkota of Johor for twenty years under Sultan Ismail , was appointed the Bendahara of Johor , a post which he held until his death in 1989 . In the same year on 12 December , Sultan Iskandar was appointed as the Chancellor of Universiti Teknologi Malaysia . Unlike the other preceding Sultan of <unk> who had their own coronation ceremony , he did not have one . 
 Under the council of rulers , the elective monarchy system of Malaysia , Sultan Iskandar was elected on 9 February 1984 as the Yang Di @-@ Pertuan Agong , shortly before his predecessor 's term expired on 26 April 1984 . He succeeded the Sultan of Pahang as the Yang @-@ Di Pertuan Agong on 26 April . A royal investiture was held shortly after that , in which he donned the traditional suit of the Agong , whereby he was officially installed . Sultan Iskandar served in the capacity as the Yang @-@ Di Pertuan Agong until 1989 , whereby the Sultan of Perak succeeded him . As the Yang di @-@ Pertuan Agong , Sultan Iskandar was automatically designated under constitutional provisions as the Supreme Commander of the Malaysian Armed Forces , holding the rank of the Marshal of the Royal Malaysian Air Force , Admiral of the Fleet of the Royal Malaysian Navy and Field Marshal of the Army . 
 On 8 April 2006 , the Sultan appointed his grandson Ismail Ibrahim — the son of the Mahkota — as the Raja Muda during an <unk> in conjunction on his birthday . The rank of Raja Muda denotes that Ismail is third in position in terms of the order of succession to the Johor royal throne . 
 = = = State affairs = = = 
 Sultan Iskandar held annual open house events either at Istana Bukit Serene , his official residence , or at Istana Besar . On these days , the Sultan and his eldest son , the Mahkota , held special sessions whereby Johoreans came up to pay their respects to him . The Sultan also bestowed honorary awards on distinguished Malaysians from his annual birthday honours list on his birthdays . As a matter of convention , the state government gazetted 8 April as a state public holiday to mark his birthday . 
 Shortly before he became Agong in April 1984 , Sultan Iskandar issued a proposal for the Orang Aslis to be referred to as the " Bumiputera Asli " ( literally , Original Sons of the Soil ) . The proposal was made as Sultan Iskandar suggested that the Orang Aslis maintained a distinct identity from the Malays as the majority of them were not Muslims . The proposal was subsequently scrapped , and the government made subsequent attempts to assimilate the Orang Aslis with the mainstream Malay society . After his inauguration as the Yang di @-@ Pertuan Agong , he donated his Agong 's salary to various scholarship boards that were open to Malaysians of all races . 
 Sultan Iskandar issued a decree in 2007 which only allowed residences and properties owned by the Sultan and the Mahkota to be called Istana , while properties belonging to other members of the royal family are to be known as " <unk> " . The terms " Istana " and " <unk> " are translated as " Palace " and " Residences " in English , respectively . The following December , Sultan Iskandar gave his endorsement for the state government to gazette a proposed legislation which bans Muslims in the state from practising Yoga , citing that Hindu elements in the exercise went against Islamic teachings . Applications to seek the Sultan 's consent came from the state religious council , who acted under the instructions of the National Fatwa Council . 
 Sultan Iskandar graced the official landmark opening of the Sultan Iskandar customs , immigration and quarantine complex on 1 December 2008 , in the presence of the Mahkota and several key cabinet ministers . The complex was named in honour of the Sultan , who expressed optimism in its success during his opening speech . 
 = = = Foreign relations = = = 
 Since his ascension to the throne , Sultan Iskandar fostered particularly close <unk> ties with Singapore , by developing a personal rapport with top Singaporean leaders . This practice has also been taken up by his sons , the Tunku Mahkota and Tunku Aris Bendahara . Media reports highlighted the particularly warm reception which leaders of both countries received whenever they visited each other 's domains , particularly in July 1988 , when Sultan Iskandar 's visit to Singapore marked the first official visit by any Yang di @-@ Pertuan Agong since 1957 . Between these years , Sultan Iskandar has been awarded or been given the following awards by Singaporean political leaders : 
 1988 : Then @-@ Singapore Deputy Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong received the Dato ' Paduka Mahkota Johor ( <unk> ) from the Sultan himself 
 2007 : Sultan Iskandar was presented with the Honorary Master Parachutist Wing by then @-@ Singapore Defence Minister Teo Chee Hean 
 2007 : Conferred the Honorary Degree of Doctor of Laws by the National University of Singapore . 
 Relations with Singapore took a dive after the International Court of Justice ruled in Singapore 's favour following a long legal battle over the sovereignty of Pedra Branca . At the inaugural session of the 12th Johor State Assembly in 2008 , the Sultan stated his stand on Malaysia 's sovereignty over Pedra Branca , and vowed to find legal means to retrieve the island 's sovereignty . 
 Sultan Iskandar also fostered a fairly close relationship with the Sultan of Brunei , Hassanal Bolkiah , particularly during his days as the Yang Di @-@ Pertuan Agong . In 2006 , they were again seen together in public , after Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah made a state visit to Johor to express his interest in Iskandar Development Region . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = Succession = = = 
 Prior to his life as the Sultan or Agong , and even during the 1980s and early 1990s , Mahmud 's reputation was more or less marred by a number of alleged controversial incidents which received occasional attention from the media . One of these earliest incidents was the loss of his status as Mahkota in 1961 — a position which his father , Sultan Ismail , appointed to him two years earlier , citing reasons of alleged misbehaviour after confidential reports accusing him of <unk> a policeman reached the Sultan . Iskandar 's younger brother , Abdul Rahman ( Mahkota of Johor ) was appointed as the Mahkota in favour of him . Nevertheless , in 1966 , Iskandar was appointed the Raja Muda — which puts him second in line to the throne . In April 1981 , Mahmud was reinstated as Mahkota shortly before his father 's death the following month and was subsequently installed as the Sultan of Johor , under the orders of his father . 
 However , some eyewitnesses challenged the legitimacy of Mahmud 's reappointment as the Mahkota , by arguing that they witnessed Sultan Ismail already having lapsed into coma at the time of his appointment as the Regent . Records stated that Sultan Ismail lapsed into a coma on 8 May , three days before his death . Relations with the Menteri Besar of Johor , Othman Saat deteriorated when the latter questioned Iskandar 's legitimacy to the throne , which led to an incident which saw the Sultan issuing an order to the Menteri Besar to vacate his office within 24 hours , shortly after Sultan Ismail 's death , citing reasons for the need for that office space for his own . The Menteri Besar heeded his order , though the Sultan did not move in as he had said . Othman Saat subsequently resigned the following year as the Menteri Besar . 
 = = = Allegations of criminal misconduct = = = 
 In 1972 , Mahmud was charged for causing assault with a mace to two men for overtaking his car and was convicted the following year . A year later , reports also surfaced another similar attack upon a young couple , when Iskandar , together with his bodyguard , attacked them with chemicals and a mace after having offended him . Another alleged incident took place at about this time when Mahmud chained up two policemen in a dog kennel for a day after having angered him . 
 Five years later , Mahmud was charged and convicted of manslaughter after shooting and killing a man near his private helicopter whom he took to be a smuggler . In both cases , his father , Sultan Ismail , intervened and granted official pardons to Mahmud . Similarly , his eldest son , Ibrahim Ismail , was convicted in the 1980s of shooting dead a man in a nightclub during a feud , but was quickly pardoned . 
 In 1987 , Sultan Iskandar was accused of causing the death of a golf caddy in Cameron Highlands by assault , following an incident in which the golf caddy laughed when the Sultan missed a hole . Tunku Abdul Rahman , Malaysia 's first Prime Minister , pointed out that the Sultan ( then the Agong ) could not be prosecuted due to the immunity that was accorded to the rulers , yet he condemned Sultan Iskandar 's actions at the same time . In the end the matter was let off without much public attention . The brother of the caddy – who also suffered injuries from the incident , being distressed from what he saw , subsequently ran amok in Kuala Lumpur and had to be quarantined in a mental hospital . 
 = = = Gomez Incident = = = 
 = = = = Assault = = = = 
 In late 1992 , two separate assault cases by the Sultan himself as well as his younger son , Abdul Majid Idris , on hockey coaches culminated in the stripping of immunity of rulers from prosecution . Both cases received considerable headlines in the local and international news which was aptly dubbed as " The Gomez Incident " . The incident was kicked off on 10 July 1992 , when Sultan Iskandar 's second son , the Bendahara – Abdul Majid Idris , lost his temper during a hockey match with the Perak hockey team after Perak won the match by a penalty stroke , and assaulted the Perak goalkeeper , Mohamed Jaafar Mohamed <unk> . The goalkeeper later lodged a police report on 30 July . The incident received public attention , especially when the matter was debated in parliament . The incident resulted in the Malaysian Hockey Federation issuing Majid , ( then second @-@ in line to the throne after his elder brother ) facing a ban of five years from participating in any tournaments following investigations . Majid was later convicted of assault in January 1993 , of which the chief justice sentenced him to a year in prison , on top of a RM 2000 fine . He was released on a bail , and these charges were later dropped on grounds of immunity , which was still applicable at the time when the act was committed . 
 The Sultan responded to the ban by putting pressure on the state authorities to enforce isolation of the Johor hockey teams from all national tournaments . In November 1992 , Douglas Gomez , a coach for the Maktab Sultan Abu Bakar field hockey team , expressed his displeasure of being called to withdraw from a semi @-@ final national hockey match by the Director of the Johor Education Department . The incident attracted the attention of the Sultan , who personally summoned Gomez to his palace , Istana Bukit Serene , where he was promptly reprimanded and assaulted by the Sultan . Following Gomez 's meeting with the Sultan , Gomez sought treatment to his face and stomach . Subsequently , he lodged a police report against the Sultan for assault . Gomez elaborated that the Sultan bodyguards , members of the Johor Military Force personnel , were merely onlookers , and that the Sultan was solely responsible for the injuries . 
 = = = = Public responses and follow ups = = = = 
 The assault resulted in a public outcry over the event which pressured all levels of the government right up to the top ranks of the federal government to investigate into the matter . In the closing months of 1992 , and also the opening months of 1993 , dozens of articles mentioning misdeeds by the royal families of several states – but in particular Sultan Iskandar himself were published . A good deal of these alleged misdeeds that were mentioned included the charging of exorbitant fines – way above the prescribed legal limits – upon offenders who had obstructed the Sultan 's car , amongst others . Sultan Iskandar , nevertheless bore the brunt of the backlash by the numerous references centred towards alleged acts of criminal wrongdoings even though many of the listed acts were committed by other members of the royal family . 
 The vociferous spate of criticisms roused by the press prompted Members of Parliament of the Dewan Rakyat to convene a special session on 10 December 1992 . All 96 parliamentarians present on that day passed a unanimous resolution which called for action to curb the powers of the rulers if necessary . During the special meeting , parliamentarians disclosed past criminal records of Sultan Iskandar and his two sons , all of whom had been involved in a total of at least 23 cases of assault and manslaughter , five of which were cases committed by the Sultan after 1981 , two cases by the Mahkota and three cases by the Bendahara . 
 A bill was passed by both the Dewan Rakyat and Dewan Negara on 19 and 20 January 1993 respectively . The bill , which proposed to remove legal immunity was approved by six out of nine sultans — but saw stiff opposition from three , two of which included the Ismail Petra , the Sultan of Kelantan and the Sultan Iskandar himself . Sultan Iskandar took up the initiative to obtain more royal support to stall the implementation of the proposed bill . The bill , which proposed to strip rulers and members of the royal families of legal immunity , would make them prosecutable by the law in any cases of proven criminal wrongdoings . 
 Sultan Iskandar organised a rally which was to be held outside the palace with the aim of garnering public support to stall the bill 's implementation . However , this was cancelled after intense pressure from the government . A report made during the rally quoted Sultan Iskandar calling upon all local civil servants to boycott state and federal functions in a show of support for his motion . Meanwhile , the federal government continued to pressure the rulers into assenting to the bills , which they did after several revisions of the bill were made by the government . Following which , the proposed bill was enshrined into the Federal Constitution in March 1993 . 
 The bill allowed rulers who violated the laws to be prosecuted , while the Sedition Act of 1948 was also amended to allow public criticism of the rulers . A special court was created – presided by the Lord President of the Federal Court – to empower and prosecute members of the rulers and immediate members of the royal household . 
 = = = = Aftermath = = = = 
 Sultan Iskandar and his family members were not prosecuted for their past violations of the law on grounds that the royal immunity was still applicable when the incidences occurred . Nevertheless , shortly after the incident , Sultan Iskandar was prompted to take steps to rehabilitate his public image , which was more or less tarnished by the incident . In a public speech shortly after the episode , the Sultan was noted to have toned down somewhat on his hardline image and appeared to be somewhat more humble , appealing to Johoreans to maintain their loyalty to him . 
 The Gomez incident also led to a review and proposal by the Federal Government in August 1993 to disband the Johor Military Force ( <unk> ) . However , the bill to disband the <unk> was subsequently repealed by parliament . 
 = = = Political = = = 
 = = = = Days as the Yang di @-@ Pertuan Agong of Malaysia ( 1980s ) = = = = 
 Shortly before his election as the Yang @-@ Di Pertuan Agong in 1983 , a spate of reports alleging Sultan Iskandar 's intention to launch a coup d 'état by launching a state of emergency to overthrow the government circulated within political circles , which reached Mahathir himself . The Sultan was reportedly having fostered close relations with several key military personnel , including the Army chief himself . The government subsequently took action to curb constitutional loopholes within the constitution and took to task of reducing the power of royal veto in passing legislation , culminating to a constitutional crisis in late 1983 . Nevertheless , during his inaugural speech as the Agong in 1984 , about a month after the constitutional amendments were passed in parliament , Sultan Iskandar voiced public support for the revised constitution and pledged to act in accordance to the Prime Minister 's advise . 
 A diplomatic scandal between the United Kingdom and Malaysia broke out in 1984 , when several British newspapers published pieces on Sultan Iskandar 's coronation , citing the headlines such as " Killer becomes King " and " King a Killer " , which enraged the Malaysian government , who demanded an apology from the British government . The British government refused to apologise on behalf of the newspapers , hence triggering tensions between the two countries . Two months later , in June 1984 , Sultan Iskandar in his capacity as the Agong , surprised the Malaysian public when he publicly called upon the then @-@ Deputy Prime Minister , Musa Hitam , to make a public apology in front of the entire congregation present at the National Mosque . Sultan Iskandar , on his part , was angry over remarks which Musa made during the course of the 1983 constitutional crisis that he deemed to be disrespectful . Musa abided to the Agong 's demand and boldly came forward to make the apology , which was greeted by a thunderous applause from the entire congregation . The event , which was broadcast live throughout the nation on Malaysian Radio ( although the television stations abruptly terminated its broadcast halfway ) , was seen by many observers as an act of confrontation by the Agong to put Musa in his place . 
 In 1988 , also serving in his capacity as the Yang @-@ Di Pertuan Agong , the Lord President of the Federal Court Tun Salleh Abas was sacked by the Agong in what led to the 1988 Malaysian constitutional crisis . However , observers suggested a remarkably warm relationship between then @-@ Prime Minister Dr. Mahathir Mohamad with the Agong , both of whom shared common resentment against the chief justice , Salleh Abas . In 1973 , Iskandar was convicted of assault and was sentenced to six months imprisonment , of which Salleh Abas served as the public prosecutor hearing the case . As the public prosecutor , Salleh had appealed to the chief justice , Raja <unk> Shah ( now the Sultan of Perak ) , for handing down a heavier sentence for Iskandar , which naturally earned his wrath . The sacking of the Lord President , was however not without controversy , given the alleged manner in which the Agong and Prime Minister had handled the matter – including an incident which the Agong had refused to forgive the Lord President in spite of Salleh 's willingness to offer his apology to the Agong , which he turned down . 
 = = = = Later years ( 2000 onwards ) = = = = 
 Sultan Iskandar 's public call to support Abdullah Badawi 's administration in October 2006 created a minor stir among Mahathir 's supporters , when he remarked that " Mahathir should act like a pensioner " . The call came at a time when Mahathir 's spate of criticisms against Abdullah 's were at its most vociferous period . The Sultan was the first state ruler to publicly defend the policy of the government during the period of Mahathir 's criticisms against the Abdullah administration . Earlier sources however , noted Sultan Iskandar 's concerns with the deepening rift between Mahathir and Abdullah and had asked to be photographed together with the two leaders during the United Malays National Organisations ( UMNO ) 60th anniversary celebrations in Johor Bahru . 
 A month later , in November 2006 , another small stir erupted during the launching ceremony of the Iskandar Development Region , when Sultan Iskandar voiced his opinion that the Causeway , which connects Johor and Singapore , should be removed to allow ships to pass through and promoting development of the state . He also remarked that the people should be wary of all foreigners as they were " vultures " and also urged the people not to hold them in high regard , citing his displeasure that his ancestors were " deceived " by dirty tactics employed by colonialists to build the Causeway . 
 At the inaugural 12th Johor State Assembly Seating in April 2008 , a minor controversy erupted when one opposition member of parliament ( MP ) , Gwee Tong Hiang , flouted dress regulations by appearing in a lounge suit and tie instead of the usual official attire and songkok . This resulted in him being dismissed from the assembly chamber shortly before the Sultan 's arrival . Gwee , a Democratic Action Party ( DAP ) MP , reportedly argued that there was no stated order to wear the official attire and songkok and stated his desire to wear a western suit , promptly drew flak from other MPs and the Menteri Besar , Abdul Ghani Othman who had earlier on met to agree to don in the official attire and songkok prior to the assembly , whereby Gwee was absent . The Sultan , apparently angry at Gwee , sharply criticised him two days later and publicly called upon Gwee to seek an audience with him . 
 = = = Lifestyle = = = 
 During his days as the Agong , Sultan Iskandar was often seen in public carrying a pistol in his waistband , which drew considerable concern and discomfort from the Malaysian public due to his past record of criminal offences . He was also reputed to have led a flamboyant lifestyle , which also drew similar scepticism . He was also known to be a motorbike enthusiast ; documentaries on national patriotism would feature Sultan Iskandar , the then @-@ Agong , riding out on a police motorbike and his flamboyant appearance during a few public ceremonies . These documentaries drew criticisms from the Malaysian public , who felt that the television clips of Sultan Iskandar were inappropriate for its theme and national image . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 As a youth , Mahmud qualified as a pilot , having trained in handling light and medium aircraft and helicopters . He was also apt in handling motorcycles , reportedly possessing the skills to strip a motorcycle down to its component parts and then reassembling it . 
 The Sultan is also well known for his passion in many types of open @-@ air sports , especially golf . In his later years , he spent much of his free time at the Royal Johor Country Club . In addition , he also played tennis and squash on a regular basis . Within private circles , Sultan Iskandar was fondly known as " Moody " , a testimony to his first name " Mahmud . " His son , Abdul Majid , inherited his interest in amateur golf and once served as the President of the Malaysian Golf Association . 
 He is involved in the 1988 Malaysian Constitution crisis which the then prime minister Mahathir Mohammad used his killing of an innocent caddy with a golf club as a leverage to hijack the Malaysian judiciary system by sacking the then Lord of President of the Federal Court of Malaysia ( Now known as Chief Justice of Malaysia ) , Tun Haji Mohamed Salleh bin Abas in an effort to claim his political success . 
 In addition , he kept a large collection of pets , particularly peacocks , at his Istana Bukit Serene compound , where he lived with the Sultanah . In his youth , Iskandar resided at Istana Bukit Coombe , located at the top of Coombe Hill . It was built upon Dutch architectural designs , and was later renamed Istana Bukit Iskandar . The palace was later demolished in 1987 , six years after Sultan Iskandar succeeded his late father as Sultan . 
 = = = Health = = = 
 After undergoing a coronary bypass operation in the United States in 2000 , close aides reported that Sultan Iskandar slowed down somewhat in his pace of life and took to playing golf only on an occasional basis . About with bronchitis in January 2008 saw the Sultan being briefly admitted and treated in a local hospital . 
 = = Death = = 
 Sultan Iskandar died on 22 January 2010 at 7 : 15 p.m at the Puteri Specialist Hospital , Johor <unk> after being admitted earlier in the day following an illness at aged 77 . His death was only officially announced at 11 : 20 p.m by Menteri Besar of Johor Datuk Abdul Ghani Othman announced that flags be lowered to half mast Johor start 6 : 00 am to 6 : 00 pm . He deceased was brought to the Istana Besar , Johor Bahru for laying in state and is buried in the <unk> Royal Mausoleum the next day at 2 : 00 p.m. Before that , the public was allowed to pay their last respects to Sultan Iskandar from early morning . 
 Among the royal family were present and other dignitaries were present to give their last respects is the Yang Di @-@ Pertuan Agong Tuanku Mizan Zainal Abidin and Raja Permaisuri Agong Tuanku Nur <unk> , the Sultan of Brunei Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah , the Raja of Perlis Tuanku Syed Sirajuddin , the Sultan of Pahang Sultan Ahmad Shah , the Sultan of Kedah Sultan Abdul Halim Mu <unk> Shah , the Sultan of Perak Sultan <unk> Shah , the Sultan of Selangor Sultan <unk> Idris Shah , the Yang <unk> Besar of Negeri Sembilan Tuanku <unk> , the Regent of Perlis Tuanku Syed <unk> Putra <unk> , the Tengku Mahkota of Pahang Tengku Abdullah , and the Tengku Mahkota of Kelantan Tengku Muhammad Faris Petra . Prime Minister Dato ' Seri Najib Tun Razak , cut short his visit to India to attend his funeral . Also present were Singapore Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong and Senior Minister Goh Chok Tong . 
 His son the Tunku Mahkota of Johor Tunku Ibrahim Ismail was proclaimed as the next Sultan of Johor also on 23 January . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Several projects and institutions were named after the Sultan , including : 
 = = = Educational institutions = = = 
 Institute Sultan Iskandar of Urban Habitat and Highrise , Universiti Teknologi Malaysia 
 SMK Tengku Mahmud Iskandar , Sungai Mati , Muar 
 SMK Mahmood Iskandar , Parit Saidi , Batu Pahat 
 SK Tengku Mahmood Iskandar 1 and 2 , Pontian 
 Sekolah Menengah Sains Sultan Iskandar , Mersing , Johor 
 = = = Buildings = = = 
 Bangunan Sultan Iskandar , or the Sultan Iskandar Complex in English , a customs , immigration and quarantine complex opened in December 2008 
 Bangunan Sultan Iskandar , Kota Tinggi district office of the Malaysian Public Works Department 
 Bangunan Sultan Iskandar , Federal government headquarters for Youth and Sports in Sarawak , located in Kuching , Sarawak . 
 Dewan Sultan Iskandar , Universiti Teknologi Malaysia 
 Planetarium Sultan Iskandar the first planetarium in Malaysia . The planetarium is located in Kuching Civic Centre , Kuching , Sarawak . It was named in honour of the Sultan , then the eighth Yang di @-@ Pertuan Agong . 
 Sultan Iskandar Broadcasting Complex , headquarters of Johor FM at Jalan <unk> <unk> 
 Pusat Islam Iskandar Johor , the Johor Islamic Centre in Johor Bahru 
 Masjid Iskandar , a mosque at Kem Iskandar , a Commando military camp in Mersing . 
 Sultan Iskandar Mosque , a mosque at Mersing and Bandar Dato ' Onn 
 Kota Iskandar Mosque , a state mosque in Kota Iskandar , Iskandar Puteri . 
 Sultan Iskandar Power Station , Pasir Gudang 
 Sultan Iskandar Reservoir , a water reservoir east of Johor Bahru . 
 = = = Roads = = = 
 Lebuhraya Sultan Iskandar , a stretch of the Iskandar Coastal Highway from Danga Bay to Iskandar Puteri . 
 Lebuhraya Sultan Iskandar ( formerly Lebuhraya <unk> ) , part of the Kuala Lumpur Middle Ring Road 1 in Kuala Lumpur . 
 Jalan Sultan Iskandar , a major road in Bintulu , Sarawak . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 Iskandar Johor Open , an Asian Tour golf tournament funded by the Johor state government 
 Iskandar Malaysia , formerly <unk> Pembangunan Iskandar or Iskandar Development Region ( IDR ) in English 
 Kota Iskandar ( formerly Johor State New Administrative Centre ( <unk> ) ) is an administrative centre for the state government of Johor located at Iskandar Puteri 
 Kem Iskandar , a Commando military camp in Mersing 
 Iskandar Puteri , a planned city which was formerly known as <unk> 
 Taman Iskandar , a housing estate near Pasir Pelangi , Johor Bahru 
 Sultan Iskandar Deep Sea Park , a deep sea park in Pulau <unk> , Mersing . 
 One of his grandsons ( the son of his second son , Abdul Majid ) , Mahmood Iskandar , was named after him . Some of his children and grandchildren are also similarly named after his forebears , notably his older son , Ibrahim , who was named after the Sultan 's grandfather , Sultan Ibrahim . Sultan Iskandar also followed his grandfather 's and father 's footsteps of using the royal monogram " S.I. " . The monogram 's letters represent the initials of their title and names respectively . 
 = = Honours = = 
 He was awarded : 
 = = = Johor Honours = = = 
 Second Class ( DK II , 8 @.@ 5 @.@ 1959 ) , First Class ( <unk> , 28 @.@ 10 @.@ 1959 ) and Grand Master of the Royal Family Order of Johor 
 First Class ( <unk> , 28 @.@ 10 @.@ 1967 ) and Grand Master of the Order of the Crown of Johor 
 Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Loyalty of Sultan Ismail ( 1960 , <unk> ) 
 Sultan Ibrahim Coronation Medal ( PSI 1st class ) 
 Star of Sultan Ismail ( BSI 1st class ) 
 Sultan Ismail Coron Medal ( 1960 ) 
 = = = National and <unk> Honours = = = 
 Malaysia ( as Yang di @-@ Pertuan Agong ) : 
 Recipient of Order of the Royal House of Malaysia 
 Grand Master ( 1984 @-@ 1989 ) of the Order of the Crown of the Realm 
 Grand Master ( 1984 @-@ 1989 ) of the Order of the Defender of the Realm 
 Grand Master ( 1984 @-@ 1989 ) of the Order of Loyalty to the Crown of Malaysia 
 Grand Master ( 1984 @-@ 1989 ) of the Order of Merit of Malaysia 
 Grand Master ( 1984 @-@ 1989 ) of the Order of the Royal Household of Malaysia 
 Recipient of Order of the Crown of the Realm ( <unk> , 1987 ) 
 Sabah : Grand Commander of the Order of Kinabalu ( <unk> ) 
 Kelantan : Royal Family Order of Kelantan ( DK , 1984 ) 
 Perak : Royal Family Order of Perak ( DK , 1983 ) 
 Terengganu : Member of the first class of the Family Order of Terengganu ( DK , 1982 ) 
 = = = Foreign Honours = = = 
 Brunei : Family Order of Brunei ( Darjah <unk> Laila Utama , DK , 1972 ) 
 Thailand : Knight of the Order of the <unk> 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 Sultan Iskandar is a fourth generation descendant of Sultan Abu Bakar , who in turn was the son of Temenggong Daeng Ibrahim , the Temenggong of Johor . In turn , some of Daeng Ibrahim 's patrilineal ancestors were also <unk> of Johor serving under their respective Sultans . It is from this ancestral heritage to which the dynastical name of his lineage is known — Temenggong dynasty . The preceding Sultan prior to Sultan Abu Bakar , Ali and his predecessors who ruled Johor from the 17th to 19th centuries , were descended from Abdul Jalil , a Bendahara . Abdul Jalil became Sultan in 1699 after the death of Sultan Mahmud Shah and adopted the title Sultan Abdul Jalil Shah IV . In this pattern , the names of the dynasties which the ruling houses of Johor were known . The Temenggong dynasty is also related to the Bendahara dynasty by bloodline ; genealogical records show that Sultan Abdul Jalil IV is also a direct patrilineal ancestor of Sultan Iskandar . 
 = Tantallon Castle = 
 Tantallon Castle is a semi @-@ ruined mid @-@ 14th @-@ century fortress , located 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) east of North Berwick , in East Lothian , Scotland . It sits atop a promontory opposite the Bass Rock , looking out onto the Firth of Forth . The last medieval curtain wall castle to be constructed in Scotland , Tantallon comprises a single wall blocking off the headland , with the other three sides naturally protected by sea cliffs . 
 Tantallon was built in the mid 14th century by William Douglas , 1st Earl of Douglas . It was passed to his illegitimate son , George Douglas , later created Earl of Angus , and despite several sieges , it remained the property of his descendants for much of its history . It was besieged by King James IV in 1491 , and again by his successor James V in 1528 , when extensive damage was done . Tantallon saw action in the First Bishops ' War in 1639 , and again during Oliver Cromwell 's invasion of Scotland in 1651 , when it was once more severely damaged . It was sold by the Marquis of Douglas in 1699 to Hew Dalrymple , Lord North Berwick and the ruin is today in the care of Historic Scotland . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Tantallon is of a singular construction within Scotland , the defences comprising only a single large wall securing a coastal promontory . The south @-@ east , north @-@ east , and north @-@ west approaches are naturally defended by steep sea cliffs , and were only ever protected by relatively small defensive walls . To the south @-@ west , a massive curtain wall blocks off the end of the promontory , which forms the inner courtyard . The curtain wall is built of the local red sandstone , and has a tower at either end and a heavily fortified gatehouse in the centre , all of which provided residential accommodation . A north range of buildings , containing a hall , completed the main part of the castle , enclosing a courtyard around 70 by 44 metres ( 230 by 144 ft ) . In total , the buildings of the castle provided around 1 @,@ 100 square metres ( 12 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of accommodation . 
 In its form , Tantallon follows on from the 12th @-@ century castles of Bothwell and Kildrummy , as a castle of enceinte , or curtain wall castle . It was the last of this type to be built in Scotland , as the smaller tower house was becoming increasingly popular . For example , Threave Castle , built at around the same time by Earl William 's cousin Archibald the Grim , is a much more modest tower . There are also similarities between Tantallon and " courtyard " castles , such as Doune , which also dates from the late 14th century , and is entered via a passage beneath a strong keep tower . 
 = = = Curtain wall = = = 
 The curtain wall is over 15 metres ( 49 ft ) high , 3 @.@ 6 metres ( 12 ft ) thick , and around 90 metres ( 300 ft ) long . There are several small chambers within the walls , and stairs with arched ceilings accessing the parapet walk . This parapet walk , beneath the 16th @-@ century crenels of the curtain wall , connects the three towers . 
 The northwest tower , known as the Douglas Tower , was circular in plan and 12 metres ( 39 ft ) across , although the west side has collapsed . Seven storeys high , this tower would have formed the lord 's " donjon " , or keep , containing his private accommodation , and connecting to the hall in the north range . The lowest storey was a pit prison and the timber @-@ floored chambers above were square , with vaulted garderobes or privies . 
 The East Tower is of D @-@ plan , with the curved face outwards , and is 9 metres ( 30 ft ) across . Originally consisting of five storeys , the bottom three were reduced to two after the 1528 siege , by the insertion of stone vaults . Large gun ports were also added in the basement at this time . The third floor of the tower was designed to have access to a parapet on the south @-@ east wall , although this wall was never built . 
 The central gatehouse tower is square , 13 metres ( 43 ft ) across , and up to 24 metres ( 79 ft ) high . It contained four storeys of chambers , some with canopied fireplaces , although the internal walls and floors are now missing . The main entrance ran through a passage below , protected by a drawbridge , three pairs of doors , a portcullis , and machicolations ; holes in the ceiling enabling the defenders to drop missiles on to intruders below . There are two bartizans , or corner turrets , facing in toward the courtyard , where a 16th @-@ century spiral stair gives access to the head of the curtain wall . The entrance was originally via a pointed arched gateway , flanked by round towers . A defensive barbican , or outer gate , was added in the early 14th century , and was destroyed in the 1528 siege , although fragments can still be seen . After the siege , the facade of the gatehouse was rebuilt , with more gun ports at ground level , and the gateway corridor was narrowed . The rebuilding covered up the remains of the earlier round towers , narrowed the main gate , and gave the tower rounded corners for additional strength . 
 = = = Inner court = = = 
 The north range of buildings , around 10 by 40 metres ( 33 by 131 ft ) , is connected to the Douglas Tower . The western section dates from the 14th century , and comprises the remains of the great hall , used by the lord , over the former <unk> , or low , hall , used by the labourers , and later divided to form cellars . The marks of the hall 's pitched roof can be seen on the inside wall of the Douglas Tower . The 16th @-@ century eastern section contained a bakehouse and further private chambers , and has partially collapsed into the sea . Only a small section of the other walls remains to the east , and contains a postern gate , giving access to the sea through a cleft in the cliffs below . The well is 32 metres ( 105 ft ) deep , and was re @-@ excavated in the 19th century . 
 = = = Outer court = = = 
 Alongside the curtain wall is a deep , rock @-@ cut ditch , with a larger second ditch around 100 metres ( 330 ft ) away , defining the outer court of the castle . Within the outer ditch are two mounds , which Charles McKean suggests may conceal 16th @-@ century caponiers , defensive positions allowing covering fire along the trench . McKean notes that Sir James Hamilton of Finnart , the King 's Master of Works , and a noted military engineer who built Scotland 's only known caponiers at Craignethan and Blackness , was present with the King during the 1528 siege , and worked at Tantallon afterwards . A stone @-@ fronted mound formerly ran along the outside of the ditch , although only a 30 @-@ metre ( 98 ft ) section of the outer wall survives , at the south end , terminating in a two @-@ storey round tower . This tower , with several gun ports , was built prior to the siege of 1528 , and may have been inspired by the new artillery defences at nearby Dunbar Castle . A 17th @-@ century " lectern " type doocot , or pigeon house , is the only building within the outer court . Beyond the outer ditch is a 17th @-@ century ravelin , a triangular earthen artillery defence , and the remains of a third , smaller , ditch . 
 = = History = = 
 A map of the area , dated to before 1300 , shows a castellated site with the name of " <unk> " , possibly a corruption of the Brythonic din <unk> or " high @-@ fronted fortress " . The barony of North Berwick , including Tantallon , was in the possession of the Earls of Fife at this time . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 In 1346 , William Douglas ( c . 1327 – 1384 ) , nephew of Robert the Bruce 's companion Sir James Douglas , had returned to Scotland , from France , to claim his inheritance as chief of the name of Douglas . By murdering his godfather , Sir William Douglas of Liddesdale , William became the undisputed head of the House of Douglas . He was created Earl of Douglas in 1358 . 
 It is not clear how Douglas came to possess Tantallon , but in correspondence of 1374 , he refers to " our castle of <unk> " . Douglas may have been made castellan of Tantallon , as a tenant of Isabella , Countess of Fife , and it appears that he built the present castle either shortly before , or shortly after , his elevation to the peerage , to reflect his new @-@ found status . It was intended as a status symbol , although it followed the medieval curtain wall type , which at the time was becoming outmoded and superseded by the tower house . The Douglases continued to hold the lands of Tantallon as tenants of Robert Stewart , Earl of Fife ( c.1340 @-@ 1420 ) , from 1371 until 1372 , when he resigned the title in favour of his son Murdoch . Tantallon was the home of William Douglas ' sister @-@ in @-@ law and mistress , Margaret Stewart , Countess of Angus , the mother of his illegitimate son George Douglas ( 1380 – 1403 ) . In 1377 , the Earl made his close friend , Alan de <unk> of The Bass , Constable of Tantallon Castle , an office he held until at least 1389 . In 1388 , when the 2nd Earl of Douglas died , the Earl of Fife claimed the lands of Tantallon , and confirmed the Countess ' right to live there . Several attempts were made to dislodge the Countess , but the agreement was formalised by parliament in April 1389 , and George Douglas was recognised as Earl of Angus , as his mother 's heir . 
 = = = The Red Douglases = = = 
 The Barony of North Berwick , surrounding Tantallon , stayed with the Earldom of Fife , but despite the Earl 's claim , the castle passed outright into the Douglas family , and was inherited by George Douglas , illegitimate son of the Earl of Douglas , who also inherited his mother 's Earldom of Angus in 1389 . This was the start of the division in the House of Douglas . Archibald the Grim became head of the main line , known as the " Black Douglases " . George Douglas was the progenitor of the " Red Douglases " . 
 In 1397 , George Douglas married Mary , daughter of King Robert III , allying the Red Douglases with the Royal House of Stewart . From 1425 to 1433 , Isabella , Countess of Lennox , the widow of the executed Duke of Albany , was warded at Tantallon . In 1429 another royal enemy , Alexander , Lord of the Isles , was held at Tantallon until his reconciliation with King James I two years later . The 3rd Earl of Angus ( 1426 – 1446 ) made Tantallon his main residence , and was in rebellion from 1443 until his death . He raided the Black Douglas lands of Abercorn , leading to retaliation , and his forfeiture in 1446 , a few months before his death . In 1452 , King James II granted Tantallon to the 4th Earl , brother of the 3rd Earl , who led the Royal force which defeated the Black Douglases at the Battle of <unk> , in May 1455 . 
 The Red Douglases , in the person of Archibald " Bell @-@ the @-@ Cat " ( 1453 – 1514 ) , the 5th Earl , turned against the Royal house in 1482 . Around 1490 , Angus struck a treasonable deal with Henry VII of England , against James IV of Scotland . On 11 October 1491 , Tantallon Castle was besieged by James IV , with guns sent from Edinburgh and Linlithgow , and crossbows and culverins ( a primitive type of hand gun ) from Leith . However , Angus submitted and the castle did not suffer extensive damage . By 1493 Angus was back in favour as Chancellor of Scotland . 
 = = = The Siege of 1528 = = = 
 In 1514 , Archibald Douglas , 6th Earl of Angus ( 1490 – 1557 ) married James IV 's widow Margaret Tudor , daughter of Henry VII , and Regent of Scotland for her infant son James V. The couple unsuccessfully conspired to take the young King to England , sparking off civil war . The Regency was handed to John Stewart , Duke of Albany , who seized Tantallon in 1515 , although it was returned the following year when Angus made his peace . 
 In 1525 , Angus , with support from Henry VIII of England , staged a virtual coup d 'état , taking custody of the young King , and becoming Chancellor . But , in 1528 , the sixteen @-@ year @-@ old James V escaped , and , joining his mother at Stirling , pronounced Angus attainted , banishing him to " north of the Spey " . Angus instead retreated to Tantallon , and then to England . The castle was seized by the King , but Angus managed to return and refortify his stronghold . On 23 October 1528 , King James laid siege to Tantallon which was defended by Angus 's servant Simon <unk> . Angus himself remained at Billie in the <unk> . James V borrowed the guns from Dunbar Castle which was held by the French garrison of the Duke Albany . According to Pitscottie , the guns supplied by Captain Maurice of Dunbar were <unk> , Mow and her marrow ( partner ) , two great <unk> , two <unk> , two double falcons , four quarter falcons , with powder , gunners and bullets . James left three hostages with Maurice in pledge for the guns . The castle was bombarded with this cannon for 20 days , although the King 's guns could not be brought close enough to the walls to do substantive damage , due to the deep outer ditch . The King lifted the siege and returned to Edinburgh , at which point Angus counterattacked and captured the King 's artillery and his principal gunner David Falconer was killed . In May 1529 , Angus fled to England , leaving the castle to James . Simon <unk> , having received no further supplies or reinforcements from Angus made terms and surrendered the castle . Tantallon was retained as a Royal fortress until James V 's death in 1542 , when Angus returned and recovered it . 
 To repair damage sustained during the siege , the King set about rebuilding and strengthening the castle . First , Sir Thomas Erskine of Brechin , the king 's secretary , was made the keeper and organised strengthening and repair works . Then the castle was given to the king 's eldest illegitimate son James . Soon after , Oliver Sinclair was installed as captain , and the surviving accounts for the period 1537 – 1539 record that George Sempill was the master mason , carrying out the repairs under the direction of John Scrimgeour , the King 's Master of Works . The front of the gatehouse was rebuilt , and the East Tower strengthened . Wide @-@ mouthed gun holes were punched through the landward walls of the tower , and a crenellated parapet was added to the curtain wall . To strengthen the great landward curtain wall several chambers and passages within were filled with masonry , and can be seen today . Pitscottie described this operation : " the king caused masons come and <unk> the <unk> , <unk> war left waste before as <unk> ( passages ) , and through @-@ passages ; and maid all <unk> work , to mak it the more <unk> . " 
 = = = Later 16th century = = = 
 On Angus ' return in 1542 , he was still in contact with Henry VIII , and allowed Sir Ralph Sadler , English ambassador to Scotland , to reside at Tantallon during the attempts to negotiate a marriage between the infant Mary , Queen of Scots , and Edward , Prince of Wales in 1542 – 43 . It has been claimed that when the Earl of Hertford invaded Scotland in 1544 , during the ensuing War of the Rough Wooing , Tantallon was bypassed by the English army , due to the Earl 's English sympathies , though the castle of Oliver Sinclair is listed amongst places burnt by the returning English army in contemporary sources , but it was left unmolested in 1547 . Angus was finally imprisoned at Blackness Castle in 1544 , after which he changed sides to support the Scottish cause . The gunners of Tantallon were rewarded in August 1548 , after firing on English ships during an engagement in the Firth of Forth . 
 Angus died at Tantallon in January 1557 , and the castle was seized by the Queen Regent , Mary of Guise . It was given over to the Laird of Craigmillar , and repairs were carried out the following year . In 1558 , George Drummond of Blair was keeper of Tantallon , with a garrison of seven horsemen and 22 soldiers . James Douglas , 4th Earl of Morton took control in 1565 , on behalf of his nephew , the young 8th Earl of Angus , but the following year , Mary , Queen of Scots , gave the Captaincy to Robert Lauder of the Bass , and his son , Robert Lauder , younger of the Bass The appointment of the <unk> followed the surrender of Sir William Douglas of Lochleven , who was one of those charged with the murder of Queen Mary 's favourite , David Rizzio , in March 1566 . Mary visited Tantallon herself in November 1566 . The Yester Writs record an Andrew Hume as Captain of Tantallon Castle in 1577 . Following the death of the 8th Earl in 1588 , the Earls of Angus lived elsewhere , and had little to do with Tantallon Castle . 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 After a period of peace , Tantallon again saw military action during the Bishops ' Wars in 1639 . The Douglas family had remained Catholic after the Scottish Reformation , incurring the wrath of the Presbyterian Covenanters , who opposed Charles I 's attempts to interfere with the Scottish Church . In 1639 , the Covenanters captured Tantallon while William , newly created Marquess of Douglas , was in Edinburgh . 
 In 1650 , during the Third English Civil War , Oliver Cromwell 's Parliamentarian forces invaded Scotland , taking control of the south of the country after their victory at Dunbar in September . In February 1651 , Cromwell found his lines of communication under attack from a small group of Royalists based at Tantallon . This group , led by Alexander Seton , comprised just 91 men . Despite this , Cromwell 's retaliation was to send 2 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 000 troops under General Monck , together with much of the artillery he had in Scotland , and lay siege to Tantallon . Seton was ennobled by Charles II , as Viscount of Kingston , on 14 February , during the siege . After twelve days of bombardment with cannon a breach was made in the Douglas Tower . The defenders were compelled to surrender , but only after quarter had been granted to them in recognition of their bravery . After the siege Tantallon was left in ruins : it was never repaired or inhabited afterwards . The siege of Tantallon was also interesting in that the Commonwealth land forces were supported by the Commonwealth Navy . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 James Douglas , 2nd Marquess of Douglas , the 12th Earl of Angus , was forced , due to gambling debts accrued by himself and his father , to consolidate his estates . The ruins of Tantallon were sold , in 1699 , to Sir Hew Dalrymple , the President of the Court of Session , who also owned the Barony of North Berwick , the Bass , Fidra and other properties in the area . Dalrymple allowed the castle to decay further , and to be quarried to a certain extent for stone . Sir Walter Scott described the castle at length in his 1808 epic poem Marmion . Some restoration was carried out by the <unk> in the late 19th century , and in 1924 , the castle was handed over to the UK Government 's Office of Works by Dalrymple 's descendant , Sir Hew Hamilton @-@ Dalrymple , Bt . It is now in the care of Historic Scotland , and is a category A listed building and a Scheduled Ancient Monument . 
 = Freddie Mercury = 
 Freddie Mercury ( born Farrokh Bulsara ; 5 September 1946 – 24 November 1991 ) was a British singer , songwriter and record producer , known as the lead vocalist and co @-@ principal songwriter of the rock band Queen . He also became known for his flamboyant stage persona and four @-@ octave vocal range . Mercury wrote and composed numerous hits for Queen ( " Bohemian Rhapsody , " " Killer Queen , " " Somebody to Love , " " Don 't Stop Me Now , " " Crazy Little Thing Called Love , " and " We Are the Champions . " ) ; occasionally served as a producer and guest musician ( piano or vocals ) for other artists ; and concurrently led a solo career while performing with Queen . 
 Mercury was born of Parsi descent in the Sultanate of Zanzibar and grew up there and in India until his mid @-@ teens , before moving with his family to Middlesex , England — ultimately forming the band Queen in 1970 with Brian May and Roger Taylor . Mercury died in 1991 at age 45 due to complications from AIDS , having acknowledged the day before his death that he 'd contracted the disease . 
 In 1992 Mercury was posthumously awarded the Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to British Music , with a tribute concert held at Wembley Stadium , London . As a member of Queen , he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2001 , the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 2003 , the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2004 , and the band received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2002 . In 2002 , he was placed at number 58 in the BBC 's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons . Consistently voted one of the greatest singers in the history of popular music , Mercury was voted best male singer of all time in a 2005 poll organised by Blender and MTV2 ; was ranked at 18 on the 2008 Rolling Stone list of the 100 greatest singers ever ; was elected in 2009 as the best rock singer of all time by Classic Rock ; — and was described by AllMusic as " one of rock 's greatest all @-@ time entertainers , " with " one of the greatest voices in all of music . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mercury ( born Farrokh Bulsara ; Gujarati : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ‌ ) was born in the British protectorate of Sultanate of Zanzibar , East Africa ( now part of Tanzania ) . His parents , <unk> ( 1908 – 2003 ) and Jer Bulsara ( 1922 – ) , were Parsis from the Gujarat region of the then province of Bombay Presidency in British India . The family surname is derived from the town of <unk> ( now known as Valsad ) in southern Gujarat . As Parsis , Mercury and his family practised the Zoroastrian religion . The Bulsara family had moved to Zanzibar so that his father could continue his job as a cashier at the British Colonial Office . He had a younger sister , <unk> . 
 Mercury spent most of his childhood in India and began taking piano lessons at the age of seven . In 1954 , at the age of eight , Mercury was sent to study at St. Peter 's School , a British @-@ style boarding school for boys , in Panchgani near Bombay ( now Mumbai ) . One of his formative musical influences at the time was Bollywood singer Lata Mangeshkar . At the age of 12 , he formed a school band , The <unk> , and covered rock and roll artists such as Cliff Richard and Little Richard . A friend from the time recalls that he had " an uncanny ability to listen to the radio and replay what he heard on piano . " It was also at St. Peter 's where he began to call himself " Freddie " , and in February 1963 he moved back to Zanzibar where he joined his parents at their flat . 
 At the age of 17 , Mercury and his family fled from Zanzibar for safety reasons due to the 1964 Zanzibar Revolution , in which thousands of Arabs and Indians were killed . The family moved into a small house in Feltham , Middlesex , England . Mercury enrolled at Isleworth Polytechnic ( now West Thames College ) in West London where he studied art . He ultimately earned a diploma in Art and Graphic Design at Ealing Art College ( now the Ealing campus of University of West London ) , later using these skills to design the Queen heraldic arms . A British citizen at birth , Mercury remained so for the rest of his life . 
 Following graduation , Mercury joined a series of bands and sold second @-@ hand clothes in the Kensington Market in London with girlfriend Mary Austin . He also held a job at Heathrow Airport . Friends from the time remember him as a quiet and shy young man who showed a great deal of interest in music . In 1969 he joined the Liverpool @-@ based band Ibex , later renamed Wreckage . He lived briefly in a flat above the Liverpool pub , The Dovedale Towers . When this band failed to take off , he joined a second band called Sour Milk Sea . However , by early 1970 this group had broken up as well . 
 In April 1970 Mercury joined guitarist Brian May and drummer Roger Taylor who had previously been in a band called Smile . Despite reservations of the other members and Trident Studios , the band 's initial management , Mercury chose the name " Queen " for the new band . He later said , " It ’ s very regal obviously , and it sounds splendid . It ’ s a strong name , very universal and immediate . I was certainly aware of the gay connotations , but that was just one facet of it . " At about the same time , he changed his surname , Bulsara , to Mercury . Mercury designed Queen 's logo , called the Queen crest , shortly before the release of the band 's first album . The logo combines the zodiac signs of all four members : two lions for Leo ( Deacon and Taylor ) , a crab for Cancer ( May ) , and two fairies for Virgo ( Mercury ) . The lions embrace a stylised letter Q , the crab rests atop the letter with flames rising directly above it , and the fairies are each sheltering below a lion . There is also a crown inside the Q and the whole logo is over @-@ shadowed by an enormous phoenix . The whole symbol bears a passing resemblance to the Royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom , particularly with the lion supporters . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Singer = = = 
 Although Mercury 's speaking voice naturally fell in the baritone range , he delivered most songs in the tenor range . His vocal range extended from bass low F ( F2 ) to soprano high F ( F6 ) . He could belt up to tenor high F ( F5 ) . Biographer David Bret described his voice as " escalating within a few bars from a deep , throaty rock @-@ growl to tender , vibrant tenor , then on to a high @-@ pitched , perfect coloratura , pure and crystalline in the upper reaches . " Spanish soprano Montserrat Caballé , with whom Mercury recorded an album , expressed her opinion that " the difference between Freddie and almost all the other rock stars was that he was selling the voice . " She adds , 
 His technique was astonishing . No problem of tempo , he sang with an incisive sense of rhythm , his vocal placement was very good and he was able to glide effortlessly from a register to another . He also had a great musicality . His phrasing was subtle , delicate and sweet or energetic and slamming . He was able to find the right colouring or expressive nuance for each word . 
 A research team undertook a study in 2016 to understand the appeal behind Mercury 's voice . Led by Professor Christian Herbst , the team noted Mercury 's notably faster vibrato and use of <unk> , particularly in comparison to opera singers . The research team studied vocal samples from 23 commercially available Queen recordings , his solo work , and a series of interviews of the late artist . They also used an endoscopic video camera to study a rock singer brought in to imitate Mercury ’ s singing voice . 
 = = = Songwriter = = = 
 Mercury wrote 10 of the 17 songs on Queen 's Greatest Hits album : " Bohemian Rhapsody , " " Seven Seas of <unk> , " " Killer Queen , " " Somebody to Love , " " Good Old @-@ Fashioned Lover Boy , " " We Are the Champions , " " Bicycle Race , " " Don 't Stop Me Now , " " Crazy Little Thing Called Love " and " Play the Game " . 
 The most notable aspect of his songwriting involved the wide range of genres that he used , which included , among other styles , rockabilly , progressive rock , heavy metal , gospel and disco . As he explained in a 1986 interview , " I hate doing the same thing again and again and again . I like to see what 's happening now in music , film and theatre and incorporate all of those things . " Compared to many popular songwriters , Mercury also tended to write musically complex material . For example , " Bohemian Rhapsody " is acyclic in structure and comprises dozens of chords . He also wrote six songs from Queen II which deal with multiple key changes and complex material . " Crazy Little Thing Called Love , " on the other hand , contains only a few chords . Despite the fact that Mercury often wrote very intricate harmonies , he also claimed that he could barely read music . He wrote most of his songs on the piano and used a wide variety of different key signatures . 
 = = = Live performer = = = 
 Mercury was noted for his live performances , which were often delivered to stadium audiences around the world . He displayed a highly theatrical style that often evoked a great deal of participation from the crowd . A writer for The Spectator described him as " a performer out to tease , shock and ultimately charm his audience with various extravagant versions of himself . " David Bowie , who performed at the Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert and recorded the song " Under Pressure " with Queen , praised Mercury 's performance style , saying : " Of all the more theatrical rock performers , Freddie took it further than the rest ... he took it over the edge . And of course , I always admired a man who wears tights . I only saw him in concert once and as they say , he was definitely a man who could hold an audience in the palm of his hand . " Queen guitarist Brian May wrote that Mercury could make " the last person at the back of the furthest stand in a stadium feel that he was connected . " 
 One of Mercury 's most notable performances with Queen took place at Live Aid in 1985 , during which the entire stadium audience of 72 @,@ 000 people clapped , sang and swayed in unison . Queen 's performance at the event has since been voted by a group of music executives as the greatest live performance in the history of rock music . The results were aired on a television program called " The World 's Greatest Gigs " . Mercury 's powerful , sustained note during the a cappella section came to be known as " The Note Heard Round the World " . In reviewing Live Aid in 2005 , one critic wrote , " Those who compile lists of Great Rock <unk> and award the top spots to Mick Jagger , Robert Plant , etc all are guilty of a terrible oversight . Freddie , as evidenced by his Dionysian Live Aid performance , was easily the most godlike of them all . " 
 Over the course of his career , Mercury performed an estimated 700 concerts in countries around the world with Queen . A notable aspect of Queen concerts was the large scale involved . He once explained , " We 're the Cecil B. DeMille of rock and roll , always wanting to do things bigger and better . " The band was the first ever to play in South American stadiums , breaking worldwide records for concert attendance in the Morumbi Stadium in São Paulo in 1981 . In 1986 , Queen also played behind the Iron Curtain when they performed to a crowd of 80 @,@ 000 in Budapest , in what was one of the biggest rock concerts ever held in Eastern Europe . Mercury 's final live performance with Queen took place on 9 August 1986 at Knebworth Park in England and drew an attendance estimated as high as 160 @,@ 000 . With the British national anthem " God Save the Queen " playing at the end of the concert , Mercury 's final act on stage saw him draped in a robe , holding a golden crown aloft , bidding farewell to the crowd . 
 = = = Instrumentalist = = = 
 As a young boy in India , Mercury received formal piano training up to the age of nine . Later on , while living in London , he learned guitar . Much of the music he liked was guitar @-@ oriented : his favourite artists at the time were The Who , The Beatles , Jimi Hendrix , David Bowie , and Led Zeppelin . He was often self @-@ deprecating about his own skills on both instruments and from the early 1980s onward began extensively using guest keyboardists for both Queen and his solo career . Most notably , he enlisted Fred Mandel ( a Canadian musician who also worked for Pink Floyd , Elton John and Supertramp ) for his first solo project , and from 1985 onward collaborated with Mike Moran ( in the studio ) and Spike Edney ( in concert ) . 
 Mercury played the piano in many of Queen 's most popular songs , including " Killer Queen , " " Bohemian Rhapsody , " " Good Old Fashioned Lover Boy , " " We Are the Champions , " " Somebody To Love " and " Don 't Stop Me Now . " He used concert grand pianos and , occasionally , other keyboard instruments such as the harpsichord . From 1980 onward , he also made frequent use of synthesisers in the studio . Queen guitarist Brian May claims that Mercury was unimpressed with his own abilities at the piano and used the instrument less over time because he wanted to walk around onstage and entertain the audience . Although he wrote many lines for the guitar , Mercury possessed only rudimentary skills on the instrument . Songs like " Ogre Battle " and " Crazy Little Thing Called Love " were composed on the guitar ; the latter featured Mercury playing acoustic guitar both onstage and in the studio . 
 = = = Solo career = = = 
 In addition to his work with Queen , Mercury put out two solo albums and several singles . Although his solo work was not as commercially successful as most Queen albums , the two off @-@ Queen albums and several of the singles debuted in the top 10 of the UK Music Charts . His first solo effort involved his contribution to the Richard " <unk> " Wolf mix of Love Kills on the 1984 album ( the song also used as the end title theme for National Lampoon 's Loaded Weapon 1 ) and new soundtrack to the 1927 Fritz Lang film Metropolis . The song , produced by Giorgio Moroder , debuted at the number 10 position in the UK charts . 
 Mercury 's two full albums outside the band were Mr. Bad Guy ( 1985 ) and Barcelona ( 1988 ) . Mr. Bad Guy debuted in the top ten of the UK Album Charts . In 1993 , a remix of " Living on My Own , " a single from the album , posthumously reached number one on the UK Singles Charts . The song also garnered Mercury a posthumous Ivor Novello Award from the British Academy of Songwriters , Composers and Authors . Allmusic critic Eduardo Rivadavia describes Mr. Bad Guy as " outstanding from start to finish " and expressed his view that Mercury " did a commendable job of stretching into uncharted territory . " In particular , the album is heavily synthesiser @-@ driven in a way that is not characteristic of previous Queen albums . 
 His second album , Barcelona , recorded with Spanish soprano Montserrat Caballé , combines elements of popular music and opera . Many critics were uncertain what to make of the album ; one referred to it as " the most bizarre CD of the year . " The album was a commercial success , and the album 's title track debuted at No. 8 in the UK and was also a hit in Spain . The title track received massive air play as the official anthem of the 1992 Summer Olympics ( held in Barcelona one year after Mercury 's death ) . Caballé sang it live at the opening of the Olympics with Mercury 's part played on a screen , and again prior to the start of the 1999 UEFA Champions League Final between Manchester United and Bayern Munich in Barcelona . 
 In addition to the two solo albums , Mercury released several singles , including his own version of the hit " The Great Pretender " by The Platters , which debuted at No. 5 in the UK in 1987 . In September 2006 a compilation album featuring Mercury 's solo work was released in the UK in honour of what would have been his 60th birthday . The album debuted in the UK top 10 . 
 In 1981 – 1983 Mercury recorded several tracks with Michael Jackson , including a demo of " State of Shock , " " Victory " and " There Must Be More to Life Than This " . None of these collaborations were officially released , although bootleg recordings exist . Jackson went on to record the single " State of Shock " with Mick Jagger for The Jacksons ' album Victory . Mercury included the solo version of " There Must Be More To Life Than This " on his Mr. Bad Guy album . In November 2011 , Brian May announced that a series of duets that Mercury recorded with Jackson were to be released in 2012 . He later updated the release date to autumn of 2013 and then to 2014 . 
 In addition to working with Michael Jackson , Mercury and Roger Taylor sang on the title track for Billy Squier 's 1982 studio release , Emotions in Motion and later contributed to two tracks on Squier 's 1986 release , Enough Is Enough , providing vocals on " Love is the Hero " and musical arrangements on " Lady With a Tenor Sax " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 In the early 1970s , Mercury had a long @-@ term relationship with Mary Austin , whom he met through guitarist Brian May . He lived with Austin for several years in West Kensington , London . By the mid @-@ 1970s , the singer had begun an affair with a male American record executive at Elektra Records and , in December 1976 , Mercury told Austin of his sexuality , which ended their romantic relationship . Mercury moved out of the flat they shared , into 12 Stafford Terrace in Kensington and bought Austin a place of her own nearby . They remained close friends through the years , with Mercury often referring to her as his only true friend . In a 1985 interview , Mercury said of Austin , " All my lovers asked me why they couldn 't replace Mary [ Austin ] , but it 's simply impossible . The only friend I 've got is Mary and I don 't want anybody else . To me , she was my common @-@ law wife . To me , it was a marriage . We believe in each other , that 's enough for me . " He also wrote several songs about Austin , the most notable of which is " Love of My Life . " Mercury 's final home , Garden Lodge , 1 Logan Place , a twenty @-@ eight room Georgian mansion in Kensington set in a quarter @-@ acre manicured garden surrounded by a high brick wall , had been picked out by Austin . In his will , Mercury left his London home to Austin , rather than his partner Jim Hutton , saying to her , " You would have been my wife and it would have been yours anyway . " Mercury was also the godfather of Austin 's oldest son , Richard . 
 During the early- to mid @-@ 1980s , he was romantically involved with Barbara Valentin , an Austrian actress , who is featured in the video for " It 's a Hard Life " . By 1985 , he began another long @-@ term relationship with hairdresser Jim Hutton ( 1949 – 2010 ) . Hutton , who was tested HIV @-@ positive in 1990 , lived with Mercury for the last six years of his life , nursed him during his illness and was present at his bedside when he died . Hutton said Mercury died wearing the wedding band that Hutton had given him . 
 = = = Friendship with Kenny Everett = = = 
 Radio DJ Kenny Everett first met Mercury in 1974 when he invited the singer onto his breakfast show on Capital London . As two of Britain 's most flamboyant , outrageous and best @-@ loved entertainers , they shared much in common and instantly became close friends . Everett would play a major role in Queen 's early success when , in 1975 , armed with an advance copy of the single " Bohemian Rhapsody " , Mercury went to see Everett . While privately Everett doubted any station would play the song due to its length at over 6 minutes , he said nothing to Mercury and placed the song on the turntable , and , after hearing it , enthused : " forget it , it 's going to be number one for centuries " . While Capital Radio hadn 't officially accepted the song , the anarchic Everett would talk incessantly about a record he had but couldn 't play , before the song " accidentally " started playing , with Everett stating : " Oops , my finger must 've slipped . " Capital 's switchboard was jammed with callers wanting to know when the song was going to be released – on one occasion Everett aired the song 36 times in one day . 
 During the 1970s , their friendship became closer , with Everett becoming advisor and mentor to Mercury , and Mercury as Everett 's confidante , helping him to accept his sexuality . Throughout the early- to mid @-@ 1980s , they continued to explore their homosexuality , as well as experimenting in drugs , and although they were never lovers , they did experience London night life on a regular basis together . By 1985 , they had fallen out over a disagreement on their using and sharing of drugs , and their friendship was further strained when Everett was outed by his biographer Audrey Lee " Lady Lee " Middleton , with Mercury taking Lee 's side . With both suffering from failing health , Mercury and Everett started talking again in 1989 , and they were able to reconcile their differences . 
 = = = Sexual orientation = = = 
 While some commentators claimed Mercury hid his sexual orientation from the public , others claimed he was " openly gay . " In December 1974 , when asked directly , " So how about being bent ? " by the New Musical Express , Mercury replied , " You 're a crafty cow . Let 's put it this way : there were times when I was young and green . It 's a thing schoolboys go through . I 've had my share of schoolboy pranks . I 'm not going to elaborate further . " Homosexual acts between adult males over the age of 21 were decriminalised in the United Kingdom in 1967 , only seven years earlier . In the 1980s , he would often distance himself from his partner , Jim Hutton , during public events . In October 1986 , The Sun claimed Mercury had " confessed to a string of one @-@ night gay sex affairs . " 
 During his career , Mercury 's flamboyant stage performances sometimes led journalists to allude to his sexuality . Dave Dickson , reviewing Queen 's performance at Wembley Arena in 1984 for Kerrang ! , noted Mercury 's " camp " addresses to the audience and even described him as a " posing , pouting , posturing tart . " In 1992 , John Marshall of Gay Times expressed the following opinion : " [ Mercury ] was a ' scene @-@ queen , ' not afraid to publicly express his gayness , but unwilling to analyse or justify his ' lifestyle ' ... It was as if Freddie Mercury was saying to the world , ' I am what I am . So what ? ' And that in itself for some was a statement . " In an article for AfterElton , Robert Urban stated : " Mercury did not ally himself to ' political <unk> , ' or to LGBT causes . " 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Although he cultivated a flamboyant stage personality , Mercury was shy and retiring when not performing , particularly around people he did not know well , and granted very few interviews . Mercury once said of himself : " When I 'm performing I 'm an extrovert , yet inside I 'm a completely different man . " While on stage , Mercury basked in the love from his audience ; Kurt Cobain 's suicide note mentions how he both admired and envied the way Mercury " seemed to love , relish in the love and adoration from the crowd . " 
 In 1987 Mercury celebrated his 41st birthday at the Pikes Hotel , Ibiza , several months after discovering that he had contracted HIV . Mercury sought much comfort at the retreat and was a close friend of the owner , Anthony Pike , who described Mercury as " the most beautiful person I 've ever met in my life . So entertaining and generous . " According to biographer Lesley @-@ Ann Jones , Mercury " felt very much at home there . He played some tennis , lounged by the pool , and ventured out to the odd gay club or bar at night . " The party , held on 5 September 1987 , has been described as " the most incredible example of excess the Mediterranean island had ever seen , " and was attended by some 700 people . A cake in the shape of Gaudi 's Sagrada Família was provided for the party , although the original cake collapsed and was replaced with a 2 @-@ metre @-@ long sponge with the notes from Mercury 's song " Barcelona " . The bill , which included 232 broken glasses , was presented to Queen 's manager , Jim Beach . 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 In October 1986 the British press reported that Mercury had his blood tested for HIV / AIDS at a Harley Street clinic . A reporter for The Sun , Hugh Whittow , questioned Mercury about the story at Heathrow Airport as he was returning from a trip to Japan . Mercury denied he had a sexually transmitted disease . According to his partner Jim Hutton , Mercury was diagnosed with AIDS shortly after Easter of 1987 . Around that time , Mercury claimed in an interview to have tested negative for HIV . Despite the denials , the British press pursued the rampant rumours over the next few years , fuelled by Mercury 's increasingly gaunt appearance , Queen 's absence from touring and reports from former lovers to various tabloid journals – by 1990 the rumours about Mercury 's health were rife . At the 1990 Brit Awards held at the Dominion Theatre , London , on 18 February , a visibly frail Mercury made his final public appearance on stage when he joined the rest of Queen to collect the Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music . Towards the end of his life , he was routinely stalked by photographers , while The Sun featured a series of articles claiming that he was ill ; notably in an article from November 1990 that featured an image of a haggard @-@ looking Mercury on the front page accompanied by the headline , " It 's official – Freddie is seriously ill . " 
 However , Mercury and his inner circle of colleagues and friends , whom he felt he could trust , continually denied the stories , even after one front page article published on 29 April 1991 , showed Mercury appearing very haggard in what was by then a rare public appearance . It has been suggested that he could have made a contribution to AIDS awareness by speaking earlier about his situation and his fight against the disease . Mercury kept his condition private to protect those closest to him , with Brian May confirming in a 1993 interview he had informed the band of his illness much earlier . Filmed in May 1991 , the music video for " These Are the Days of Our Lives " features a very thin Mercury , in what are his final scenes in front of the camera . The rest of the band were ready to record when Mercury felt able to come in to the studio , for an hour or two at a time . May says of Mercury : “ He just kept saying . ' Write me more . Write me stuff . I want to just sing this and do it and when I am gone you can finish it off . ’ He had no fear , really . ” Justin Shirley @-@ Smith , the assistant engineer for those last sessions , states : “ This is hard to explain to people , but it wasn ’ t sad , it was very happy . He [ Freddie ] was one of the funniest people I ever encountered . I was laughing most of the time , with him . Freddie was saying [ of his illness ] ' I ’ m not going to think about it , I ’ m going to do <unk> 
 After the conclusion of his work with Queen in June 1991 Mercury retired to his home in Kensington , west London . His former partner , Mary Austin , had been a particular comfort in his final years , and in the last few weeks of his life made regular visits to his home to look after him . Near the end of his life Mercury was starting to lose his sight , and he deteriorated to the point where he could not get out of bed . Due to his worsening condition , Mercury decided to hasten his death by refusing to take his medication and continued taking only pain killers . 
 On 22 November 1991 , Mercury called Queen 's manager Jim Beach over to his Kensington home to discuss a public statement . The next day the following announcement was made to the international press on behalf of Mercury : 
 Following the enormous conjecture in the press over the last two weeks , I wish to confirm that I have been tested HIV positive and have AIDS . I felt it correct to keep this information private to date to protect the privacy of those around me . However , the time has come now for my friends and fans around the world to know the truth and I hope that everyone will join with me , my doctors and all those worldwide in the fight against this terrible disease . My privacy has always been very special to me and I am famous for my lack of interviews . Please understand this policy will continue . 
 On the evening of 24 November 1991 , a little over 24 hours after issuing that statement , Mercury died at the age of 45 at his home in Kensington . The official cause of death was bronchial pneumonia resulting from AIDS . Mercury 's close friend , Dave Clark of The Dave Clark Five , had taken over the bedside vigil when he died . Austin phoned Mercury 's parents and sister to break the news of his death , which reached newspaper and television crews by the early hours of 25 November . 
 On 27 November , Mercury 's funeral service was conducted by a Zoroastrian priest . In attendance at Mercury 's service were his family and 35 of his close friends , including the remaining members of Queen and Elton John . His coffin was carried into the chapel to the sounds of " Take My Hand , Precious Lord " / " You 've Got a Friend " by Aretha Franklin . Mercury was cremated at Kensal Green Cemetery , west London . In accordance with Mercury 's wishes , Mary Austin took possession of his ashes and buried them in an undisclosed location . The whereabouts of his ashes are believed to be known only to Austin , who has stated that she will never reveal where she buried them . 
 In his will , Mercury left the vast majority of his wealth , including his home and recording royalties , to Mary Austin and the remainder to his parents and sister . He left £ 500 @,@ 000 to his chef , Joe Fanelli ; £ 500 @,@ 000 to his personal assistant , Peter Freestone ; £ 100 @,@ 000 to his driver , Terry Giddings ; and £ 500 @,@ 000 to Jim Hutton . Austin continues to live at Mercury 's former home , Garden Lodge , Kensington , with her family . The outer walls of Garden Lodge in 1 Logan Place became a shrine to Mercury following his death , with mourners paying tribute by covering the walls in graffiti messages . Three years after his death , Time Out magazine reported , " Since Freddie 's death , the wall outside the house has become London 's biggest rock ' n ' roll shrine . " Today fans continue to visit to pay their respects with messages in letters appearing on the walls . Hutton was involved in a 2000 biography of Mercury , Freddie Mercury , the Untold Story , and also gave an interview for The Times in November 2006 for what would have been Mercury 's 60th birthday . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Continued popularity = = = 
 The extent to which Mercury 's death may have enhanced Queen 's popularity is not clear . In the US , where Queen 's popularity had lagged in the 1980s , sales of Queen albums went up dramatically in 1992 , the year following his death . In 1992 , one American critic noted , " What cynics call the ' dead star ' factor had come into play — Queen is in the middle of a major resurgence . " The movie Wayne 's World , which featured " Bohemian Rhapsody , " also came out in 1992 . According to the Recording Industry Association of America , Queen had sold 34 @.@ 5 million albums in the US by 2004 , about half of which had been sold since Mercury 's death in 1991 . 
 Estimates of Queen 's total worldwide record sales to date have been set as high as 300 million . In the UK , Queen has now spent more collective weeks on the UK Album Charts than any other musical act ( including The Beatles ) , and Queen 's Greatest Hits is the highest selling album of all time in the UK . Two of Mercury 's songs , " We Are the Champions " and " Bohemian Rhapsody , " have also each been voted as the greatest song of all time in major polls by Sony Ericsson and Guinness World Records , respectively . Both songs have been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame ; " Bohemian Rhapsody " in 2004 and " We Are the Champions " in 2009 . In October 2007 the video for " Bohemian Rhapsody " was voted the greatest of all time by readers of Q magazine . 
 = = = Posthumous Queen album = = = 
 In November 1995 , Queen released Made in Heaven , an album featuring Freddie Mercury 's previously unreleased final recordings from 1991 — as well as outtakes from previous years and reworked versions of solo works by the surviving members . The album cover features the Freddie Mercury statue that overlooks Lake Geneva in Montreux , Switzerland , where he had written and recorded his last songs at Mountain Studios . The sleeve of the album contains the words , " Dedicated to the immortal spirit of Freddie Mercury . " 
 Featuring tracks such as " Too Much Love Will Kill You " and " Heaven for Everyone " , the album also contains the song " Mother Love " , the last vocal recording Mercury made prior to his death , which he completed using a drum machine , over which May , Taylor and Deacon later added the instrumental track . After completing the penultimate verse , Mercury had told the band he " wasn 't feeling that great " and stated , " I will finish it when I come back , next time " , however he never made it back into the studio , so May later recorded the final verse of the song . 
 = = = Tributes = = = 
 A statue in Montreux , Switzerland , by sculptor Irena <unk> , was erected as a tribute to Mercury . It stands almost 10 feet ( 3 metres ) high overlooking Lake Geneva and was unveiled on 25 November 1996 by Mercury 's father and Montserrat Caballé , with bandmates Brian May and Roger Taylor also in attendance . Beginning in 2003 fans from around the world have gathered in Switzerland annually to pay tribute to the singer as part of the " Freddie Mercury Montreux Memorial Day " on the first weekend of September . The <unk> And Esh Colliery Band played at the Freddie Mercury statue on 1 June 2010 . 
 In 1997 the three remaining members of Queen released " No @-@ One but You ( Only the Good Die Young ) , " a song dedicated to Mercury and all those that die too soon . In 1999 a Royal Mail stamp with an image of Mercury on stage was issued in his honour as part of the UK postal service 's Millennium Stamp series . 
 In 2009 a plaque was unveiled in Feltham , where Mercury and his family moved upon arriving in England in 1964 . The star in memory of Mercury 's achievements was unveiled on Feltham High Street by his mother Jer Bulsara and Queen bandmate Brian May . A tribute to Queen was on display at the Fremont Street Experience in downtown Las Vegas throughout 2009 on its video canopy . In December 2009 a large model of Mercury wearing tartan was put on display in Edinburgh as publicity for the run of We Will Rock You at the Playhouse Theatre . 
 A statue of Mercury stood over the entrance to the Dominion Theatre in London 's West End from May 2002 to May 2014 for Queen and Ben Elton 's musical We Will Rock You . 
 For Mercury 's 65th birthday Google dedicated their Google Doodle to him . It included an animation set to the Mercury penned song , " Don 't Stop Me Now . " 
 Referring to " the late , great Freddie Mercury " in their 2012 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction speech , Guns N ' Roses quoted Mercury 's lyrics from his song " We Are the Champions " ; " I ’ ve taken my bows , my curtain calls , you ’ ve brought me fame and fortune and everything that goes with it , and I thank you all . " 
 Tribute was paid to Queen and Mercury at the closing ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London . The band 's performance of " We Will Rock You " with solo artist Jessie J was opened with a remastered video of Mercury 's " call and response " routine from 1986 's Wembley Stadium performance , with the 2012 crowd at the Olympic Stadium responding appropriately . 
 The frog genus <unk> , discovered in 2013 in Kerala , India , was named as a tribute because Mercury 's " vibrant music inspires the authors " . In addition , the site of the discovery is very near to where Mercury spent most of his childhood . A new species of the genus <unk> ( Odonata : Zygoptera ) from Brazil was named <unk> <unk> in his honour , with the etymology : " I name this species after Freddie Mercury , artistic name of Farrokh Bulsara ( 1946 – 1991 ) , superb and gifted musician and songwriter whose wonderful voice and talent still entertain millions of people around the world . " 
 = = = Importance in AIDS history = = = 
 As the first major rock star to die of AIDS , Mercury 's death represented a very important event in the history of the disease . In April 1992 the remaining members of Queen founded The Mercury Phoenix Trust and organised The Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert for AIDS Awareness , to celebrate the life and legacy of Mercury and raise money for AIDS research , which took place on 20 April 1992 . The Mercury Phoenix Trust has since raised millions of pounds for various AIDS charities . The tribute concert , which took place at London 's Wembley Stadium for an audience of 72 @,@ 000 , featured a wide variety of guests including Robert Plant ( of Led Zeppelin ) , Roger Daltrey ( of The Who ) , Extreme , Elton John , Metallica , David Bowie , Annie Lennox , Tony Iommi ( of Black Sabbath ) , Guns N ' Roses , Elizabeth Taylor , George Michael , Def Leppard , Seal , Liza Minnelli , and U2 ( via satellite ) . Elizabeth Taylor spoke of Mercury as " an extraordinary rock star who rushed across our cultural landscape like a comet shooting across the sky . " The concert was broadcast live to 76 countries and had an estimated viewing audience of 1 billion people . 
 = = = Appearances in lists of influential individuals = = = 
 Several popularity polls conducted over the past decade indicate that Freddie Mercury 's reputation may , in fact , have been enhanced since his death . For instance , in a 2002 vote to determine who the UK public considers the greatest British people in history , Mercury was ranked 58 in the list of the 100 Greatest Britons , broadcast by the BBC . He was further listed at the 52nd spot in a 2007 Japanese national survey of the 100 most influential heroes . Despite the fact that he had been criticised by gay activists for hiding his HIV status , author Paul Russell included Mercury in his book The Gay 100 : A Ranking of the Most Influential Gay Men and Lesbians , Past and Present . In 2008 Rolling Stone ranked Mercury 18 on its list of the Top 100 Singers Of All Time . Mercury was voted the greatest male singer in MTV 's 22 Greatest Voices in Music . In 2011 a Rolling Stone readers ' pick placed Mercury in second place of the magazine 's Best Lead Singers of All Time . 
 = = = Portrayal on stage = = = 
 On 24 November 1997 , a monodrama about Freddie Mercury 's life , titled Mercury : The Afterlife and Times of a Rock God , opened in New York City . It presented Freddie Mercury in the hereafter : examining his life , seeking redemption and searching for his true self . The play was written and directed by Charles Messina and the part of Mercury was played by Khalid Gonçalves ( né Paul Gonçalves ) and then later , Amir Darvish . Billy Squier opened one of the shows with an acoustic performance of a song he had written about Mercury titled " I Have Watched You Fly . " 
 = = = Portrayals in film and television = = = 
 = = = = Proposed film = = = = 
 Brian May announced in a September 2010 BBC interview that Sacha Baron Cohen , previously known for his comedic characters Borat , Ali G and Brüno , had been chosen to play Mercury in a film about his life . TIME commented with approval on his singing ability and resemblance to Mercury . The motion picture is being written by Peter Morgan , who had been nominated for Oscars for his screenplays The Queen and Frost / Nixon . The film , which is being co @-@ produced by Robert De Niro 's TriBeCa Productions , will focus on Queen 's formative years and the period leading up to the celebrated performance at the 1985 Live Aid concert . Filming was planned to begin sometime in 2011 . 
 In April 2011 Brian May confirmed that a lot of work was still being done in preparation for the film . He said that after holding back for a long time due to mixed feelings , the band had approved a team to start filming later in 2011 , and Baron Cohen 's eagerness had been the key to progress . However , in July 2013 , it was reported that Baron Cohen dropped out of the role due to " creative differences " between him and the surviving band members . Later , Queen guitarist Brian May said they split on good terms and gave the reason for the split that they felt Cohen 's presence would be " distracting . " 
 In December 2013 it was announced that Ben Whishaw , best known for playing Q in the James Bond film Skyfall , had been chosen to replace Cohen in the role of Mercury . It was also announced that British actor and director Dexter Fletcher would direct the film ; however , Fletcher subsequently withdrew from the project in March 2014 . Prior to Fletcher 's withdrawal , production on the film had been due to begin in the summer of 2014 ; any delays would cause further problems , with Whishaw already committed to begin work on the next James Bond film towards the end of the year . 
 = = = = Other portrayals = = = = 
 Mercury appeared as a supporting character in the BBC television drama Best Possible Taste : The Kenny Everett Story , first broadcast in October 2012 . He was portrayed by actor James Floyd . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Mr. Bad Guy ( 1985 ) 
 Barcelona ( with Montserrat Caballé ) ( 1988 ) 
 = The Pandorica Opens = 
 " The Pandorica Opens " is the twelfth episode in the fifth series of British science fiction television programme Doctor Who , first broadcast on 19 June 2010 on BBC One . It is the first in a two @-@ part finale which was continued the next week with " The Big Bang " . The episode was written by head writer and executive producer Steven Moffat and directed by Toby Haynes . 
 In the episode , the mysterious character River Song ( Alex Kingston ) summons alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) and his companion Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) to Roman Britain in 102 AD , where underneath Stonehenge lies a fabled prison called the Pandorica that legend tells holds the most fearsome being in the whole universe . However , it is discovered that the Doctor has been put in a trap by an alliance of his greatest enemies to save the universe from cracks in time that were caused by the Doctor 's space @-@ time vessel the TARDIS . Amy 's fiancé Rory ( Arthur Darvill ) , who had previously been erased from existence from one of the cracks in the universe , makes a return , though he is revealed to be an Auton duplicate outfitted with his consciousness . 
 Moffat wanted the episode to be " big " and " mad " . Filming was done at the real Stonehenge and at a replica in early February 2010 . The " <unk> " set was the largest built on Upper Boat Studios and Haynes helped get the actors into the mood by playing music from the Indiana Jones franchise . The alliance of enemies was the first time such an assembly had been seen in the show , and the production team made sure they used the most iconic monsters that they had in good condition . " The Pandorica Opens " was seen by 7 @.@ 57 million viewers in the UK and received an Appreciation Index of 88 , the highest of the series at the time . The episode was well @-@ received by critics and the two @-@ part story won the 2011 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation ( Short Form ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The Doctor and Amy Pond , following a message from River Song , arrive in Roman Britain on Earth in 102 AD , where they find River posing as Cleopatra . River shows the Doctor a Vincent van Gogh painting titled The Pandorica Opens , which depicts the TARDIS exploding . River had recovered the painting in the 52nd century and travelled to the time @-@ space coordinates on the painting using a time agent 's vortex manipulator . The Doctor realises the " Pandorica " , a fabled prison for the universe 's deadliest being , must be stored in a memorable location near the coordinates : Stonehenge . 
 At Stonehenge , the Doctor , Amy , and River find a passage to an underground area . Inside , they find the Pandorica , a giant metal box outfitted with every type of lock imaginable . While examining the Pandorica , Amy confronts the Doctor about an engagement ring she had previously found in the pocket of his jacket and feels a strong emotional attachment to ; he says that it belonged to a " friend " , and that nothing is ever truly forgotten . The Pandorica is transmitting a signal amplified by Stonehenge 's rocks across the universe , and River warns the Doctor that the signal is drawing " everything that ever hated [ him ] " to Earth that night . The Doctor is aided by a volunteer group of Roman legionaries ; the centurion in charge of them is revealed to be Amy 's fiancé Rory . Neither Rory nor the Doctor can explain Rory 's presence , as he was consumed by a crack in the universe during the events of " Cold Blood " and erased from existence . When Amy comes around after being knocked out by a damaged Cyberman , she does not remember Rory , which upsets him greatly . The Doctor assures Rory that Amy will remember in time , and hands him the engagement ring . 
 The Doctor 's enemies begin to orbit overhead , and the Doctor buys himself additional time with a threatening speech . He urges River to bring the TARDIS to Stonehenge while he , Amy , Rory , and the legionaries prepare . When River tries to use the TARDIS , an outside force takes control of it and pilots it to Amy 's house in the present day . After River leaves the TARDIS , the scanner screen cracks in the same shape as the cracks in the universe and a menacing voice says : " Silence will fall . " River discovers landing patterns in Amy 's garden and sees that someone has broken into the house . She finds in Amy 's room a story book about Pandora 's box and a children 's book about Roman Britain . River communicates this to the Doctor , warning him that the Pandorica must be a trap , created out of Amy 's memories . River identifies her current space @-@ time coordinates — 26 June 2010 , the date the Doctor identified as the onset of the time energy explosion that caused the cracks in the universe ( " Flesh and Stone " ) . The Doctor warns her to leave immediately , but she finds herself again trapped in the TARDIS as the central control console begins to go critical . 
 Back at Stonehenge , the Doctor discovers that the volunteer legionaries , including Rory , are Autons , and he is quickly captured as his other orbiting foes materialise around him . Above ground , as Rory fights to retain his human identity , Amy suddenly remembers him , but as his Auton identity emerges he unwillingly shoots her in the stomach and she dies . The Doctor struggles against his captors , who reveal that they have formed an alliance to imprison him in the Pandorica . Knowing the TARDIS exploding would cause the cracks destroying reality , they believe only the Doctor can operate the TARDIS , and thus removing him will prevent the explosion and save the universe . As the Doctor is sealed into the Pandorica , explosions surround the Earth in space before everything fades to black and silence . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 In the first episode of the series , " The Eleventh Hour " , Prisoner Zero tells the Doctor , " The universe is cracked . The Pandorica will open . Silence will fall " . The Pandorica was also mentioned by River in " Flesh and Stone " as the next time she would meet him , and the Doctor dismissed the Pandorica as a fairy tale . In River 's timeline this takes place before " The Time of Angels " / " Flesh and Stone " . The painting of the TARDIS explosion passes through several characters from previous episodes : the painting is created by Vincent Van Gogh ( Tony Curran ) after his meeting with the Doctor ( " Vincent and the Doctor " ) . The painting is found in 1941 by Winston Churchill ( Ian McNeice ) and Professor Bracewell ( Bill Paterson ) from " Victory of the Daleks " , and River steals the painting from Liz 10 ( Sophie Okonedo ) , who previously appeared in " The Beast Below " . The recurring phrase " silence will fall " came to a head in the next series with the introduction of the alien species and organisation of the Silence . The message on Planet One , " ΘΣ Φ <unk> , " starts with " Theta Sigma ( ΘΣ ) , " which was The Doctor 's " nickname " in his academy days . 
 = = Production = = 
 The read @-@ through for " The Pandorica Opens " took place on 13 January 2010 in the Upper Boat Studios . It began later than planned as cold weather delayed the arrival of some of the cast and crew . The episode was filmed in the sixth production block along with " The Big Bang " . Half of the scene with Liz 10 ( Sophie Okonedo ) was filmed in advance on 22 October 2009 along with scenes of " The Beast Below " at an orangery at Margam Country Park , Port Talbot . The other half , featuring Alex Kingston as River Song , was filmed 5 February 2010 . 
 Showrunner and episode writer Steven Moffat wanted the episode to be " big " and say that " we are turning it up to a level , we are really going mad with it " . Atmospheric lighting was added by director of photography Stephan Pehrsson , who wanted to give it a movie feel . Moffat chose Stonehenge as the primary location for the episode because the monument was large and important enough to be suitable for the fall of someone as powerful as the Doctor . Filming was done at the real Stonehenge in Wiltshire on the night of 2 February 2010 . The cast and crew had to abide by regulations ; they were not allowed to touch the stones , bring heavy equipment in , and the lighting had to be done from the floor . They could only afford to shoot during one night and spent the only hour of daylight in the morning shooting a three @-@ minute dialogue sequence . This proved to be a challenge , as it typically took an hour and a half to film similar scenes . The rest of the scenes set at Stonehenge were filmed with a lightweight replica set up in Margam Country Park called " <unk> " over four nights . Director Toby Haynes thought that they had " established " Stonehenge at the real site and now could get away with seeing less of it . The Doctor 's speech to the alien spaceships was filmed 3 February , while Rory shooting Amy was shot on 4 February . The weather conditions were very cold with wind and rain which caused difficulties as it was hard to communicate over the wind . Haynes wanted the Doctor 's speech to be his " big , pop @-@ star moment " and to look as if he was addressing a large site such as Wembley Stadium . 
 The " <unk> " set was the largest built in the Upper Boat Studios . Haynes wanted the chamber to look " dark " and " physical " , and the art department added cobwebs and stones . As the chamber was supposed to be underground and thus there was no natural light to light the actors ' faces , Haynes decided to utilise gas @-@ fed flaming torches as the source of light ; Gillan was initially nervous about working with the torches and struggled with them . The script referred to it as similar to a temple found in Indiana Jones , and Haynes actually played music from Raiders of the Lost Ark composed by John Williams to help the actors slow down as they explored the set . Haynes believed this would emphasise the awe in the scene as well as the " ghostly " and " haunted " feeling of the chamber . Gillan stated that she found the music very useful . 
 For the scene in which the Doctor , Amy , and River are riding on horses , the close @-@ ups of the characters riding were filmed by having the actors sit on a saddle mounted on the back of a truck and act like they were riding horses . Gillan called this the " strangest thing " she had ever done , and was sure she " looked ridiculous " . They were filmed performing this as the truck drove to achieve the effect of the passing country . Wide shots were taken of stunt doubles of the three actors riding real horses . This scene was filmed on 1 February 2010 . 
 At the episode 's conclusion an alliance of many of the Doctor 's enemies appear : the Daleks , Cybermen , Sontarans , Judoon , Autons , Sycorax , <unk> , Silurians , and <unk> . The Alliance was made up of the " very best " costumes and props they still had in good condition and of the most iconic monsters . So many enemies standing side @-@ by @-@ side had never been seen in the show before . The episode also features Amy battling a Cyberman ; Gillan stated she " really wanted " to work with the iconic monster . As the Cyberman had been guarding the Pandorica for a long time , Haynes wanted to make it look " rusted , creaky , and old " and compared its behavior to Frankenstein . The Cyberman was originally played by an amputee with one arm , but the production team was dissatisfied with the camera angle and decided to reshoot the scene from a different angle , but a different actor who had both arms did the part as the amputee was unavailable . A simple solution was devised to cover his arm with a green sleeve made of the same material as a greenscreen , and the final sequence is a combination of both shots . The Cyberman is killed by Rory , who is unaware he is an Auton ; this was meant to signify that there was something different about Rory , as he would have normally panicked in that situation . At the end of the episode Rory is overcome by the Nestene Consciousness 's control and shoots Amy , which reflected Moffat 's belief that all good love stories end in tragedy . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Pandorica Opens " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One and simulcast on BBC HD on 19 June 2010 . For the first time in the series , the episode was not followed by a short trailer for the next episode , the finale . Initial overnight ratings showed that 5 @.@ 38 million viewers had watched the episode on BBC One , while a further 497 @,@ 000 watched on BBC HD , combining for a total of 5 @.@ 88 million . Final consolidated figures showed a total of 7 @.@ 57 million viewers , with 6 @.@ 94 on BBC One and 635 @,@ 000 on BBC HD . The episode was given an " excellent " Appreciation Index of 88 , the highest for the series at time of broadcast , though this was subsequently bested the next week by the conclusion . 
 " The Pandorica Opens " was released in Region 2 on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on 6 September 2010 with " Vincent and the Doctor " , " The Lodger " and " The Big Bang " . It was then re @-@ released as part of the Complete Fifth Series boxset on 8 November 2011 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " The Pandorica Opens " received positive reviews . Dan Martin of The Guardian praised the cinematic scope and cliffhanger , calling it " the most audacious of showstoppers " . He thought that so much happened in the episode that Rory 's return felt like " a minor plot point " , though he considered that was because the audience knew it was going to happen . Gavin Fuller , writing for The Daily Telegraph , praising it for bringing an " epic , cinematic tale to stick in the memory " that the series had " arguably lacked " , though he thought the assembly of the Alliance was " rather <unk> on Moffat 's part " . He also praised Smith for " hit [ ting ] the right note " and the revelations at the end for being " genuinely shocking " . Like Martin , he said that Rory 's return was " unsurprising " , though " well @-@ handled " and with some touching moments between him and Amy . 
 Patrick Mulkern of Radio Times called it " perhaps the most epic , salivating Doctor Who ever " and praised the four leads and Moffat for " packing in surprises and slotting together the season puzzle with a dazzling plot , urgent pace and terrific dialogue " . IGN 's Matt Wales rated the episode 9 out of 10 , saying it " managed to pack in an absurd number of standout moments " and was " beautifully delivered , if not quite as satisfying as other two @-@ part openers thanks to its wilful evasiveness " . However , he thought that the slow @-@ motion ending " dipped a little too violently into melodrama " , though it was " hard to fault that bravado downbeat cliffhanger " . 
 SFX magazine 's Richard Edwards awarded the episode five out of five stars , praising the " delicious twist " , " great character stuff " , and " touching scenes " between Amy and Rory . He thought that the Alliance was " unlikely " but it worked because the series arc had been " cleverly constructed " . Sam McPherson of Zap2it gave it an A + , praising it for being an improvement upon the finales of previous series . He also thought the use of the Alliance was well done , as it portrayed them as being more misguided than evil . The A.V. Club 's Keith Phipps gave the episode an A- , though expressed concern whether the conclusion would be able to satisfy the set @-@ up . 
 " The Pandorica Opens " , along with its conclusion , was awarded the 2011 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation ( Short Form ) . This was the fifth time Doctor Who has won the award , and the fourth time a Steven Moffat episode has won . The Mill , Doctor Who 's computer @-@ generated effects team , won a Royal Television Society Craft and Design Award for their work on the episode . 
 = Rati = 
 Rati ( Sanskrit : <unk> , Rati ) is the Hindu goddess of love , carnal desire , lust , passion and sexual pleasure . Usually described as the daughter of Prajapati Daksha , Rati is the female counterpart , the chief consort and the assistant of Kama ( Kamadeva ) , the god of love . A constant companion of Kama , she is often depicted with him in legend and temple sculpture . She also enjoys worship along with Kama . Rati is often associated with the arousal and delight of sexual activity , and many sex techniques and positions derive their Sanskrit names from hers . 
 The Hindu scriptures stress Rati 's beauty and sensuality . They depict her as a maiden who has the power to enchant the god of love . When the god Shiva burnt her husband to ashes , it was Rati , whose beseeching or penance , leads to the promise of Kama 's resurrection . Often , this resurrection occurs when Kama is reborn as Pradyumna , the son of Krishna . Rati – under the name of Mayavati – plays a critical role in the upbringing of Pradyumna , who is separated from his parents at birth . She acts as his nanny , as well as his lover , and tells him the way to return to his parents by slaying the demon @-@ king , who is destined to die at his hands . Later , Kama @-@ Pradyumna accepts Rati @-@ Mayavati as his wife . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name of the goddess Rati comes from the Sanskrit root ram , meaning " enjoy " or " delight in . " Although the verb root generally refers to any sort of enjoyment , it usually carries connotations of physical and sensual enjoyment . Etymologically , the word rati refers to anything that can be enjoyed ; but , it is almost always used to refer to sexual love . 
 = = Birth and marriage = = 
 The Kalika Purana narrates the following tale about Rati 's birth . After the creation of the 10 Prajapatis , Brahma – the creator @-@ god – creates Kama ( Kamadeva ) , the god of love , from his mind . Kama is ordered to spread love in the world by shooting his flower @-@ arrows and Prajapati Daksha is requested to present a wife to Kama . Kama first uses his arrows against Brahma and the Prajapatis , who are all incestuously attracted to Brahma 's daughter Sandhya ( " Twilight @-@ dawn / dusk " ) . Shiva , who was passing by , watches them and laughs . Embarrassed , Brahma and the Prajapatis tremble and perspire . From the sweat of Daksha rises a beautiful woman named Rati , who Daksha presents to Kama as his wife . At the same time , the agitated Brahma curses Kama to be burnt to ashes by Shiva in the future . However on Kama 's pleading , Brahma assures him that he would be reborn . The Brahma Vaivarta Purana narrates that Sandhya committed suicide , after Brahma lusts for her . God Vishnu resurrects her and names her Rati , and marries her to Kama . The Shiva Purana mentions that after her suicide Sandhya is reborn from the sweat of Daksha as Rati . In some texts , the god Shiva is described as the father of Rati . 
 The Harivamsa , an appendix to the epic Mahabharata , mentions that Kama and Rati have two children , Harsha ( " Joy " ) and <unk> ( " Grace " ) . However , the Vishnu Purana mentions that Rati , as Nandi , only has one son – Harsha . The epics Mahabharata as well as the Ramayana , also attest to Rati being the consort of Kama . 
 = = Rebirth as Mayavati : Kama 's death and resurrection = = 
 The demon Tarakasura had created havoc in the universe , and only the son of god Shiva could slay him , but Shiva had turned to ascetic ways after the death of his first wife , Sati . Kama was thus instructed by the gods to make Shiva fall in love again . Kama went to Mount Kailash with Rati and Madhu or <unk> ( " Spring " ) , and shot his love @-@ arrows at Shiva ( in another version of the legend , Kama entered Shiva 's mind ) and invoked desire . Wounded by Kama 's arrows , Shiva becomes attracted to Parvati , the reincarnation of Sati , but agitated , burns Kama by a glance of his third eye . 
 The Bhagavata Purana narrates further that the grief @-@ stricken Rati goes mad by Kama 's death and in the Matsya Purana and the Padma Purana versions , she smears herself with her husband 's ashes . Further in Bhagavata Purana , Rati undergoes severe penance and pleads with Parvati to intercede with Shiva to restore her husband . Parvati reassures her that Kama would be reborn as Pradyumna , the son of Krishna , the Avatar of the god Vishnu on earth , and Rati should wait for him in the demon ( asura ) Sambara 's house . In other versions of the narrative like the Matsya Purana , the Padma Purana , the Shiva Purana , the Linga Purana and the Kathasaritsagara , it is Shiva who blesses Rati with the boon of Kama 's resurrection . In other variants , she curses the gods who sent Kama for this doomed mission and the gods , as a group or Brahma , seeks relief for the grieving Rati from Shiva or the Supreme Goddess , Parvati being one of her many manifestations . In some legends , like the one in the Brahmanda Purana , the Goddess revives Kama immediately , hearing the pleading of the wailing Rati and the gods . The renowned Sanskrit poet Kalidasa dedicates canto IV discussing the plight of Rati in his <unk> , which focuses on the story of the wedding of Shiva and Parvati and the birth of their son Skanda , who kills Tarakasura . Canto IV narrates that Rati witnesses the death of her husband and laments his death , and then tries to immolate herself on a funeral pyre . A heavenly voice stops her on time , stating that after the marriage of Shiva , he will revive her husband . 
 The <unk> <unk> chapter of the Skanda Purana presents a very different version . In this version , after the burning of Kama , Parvati is worried that she could not achieve Shiva in absence of Kama . Parvati is consoled by Rati , who asserts that she will revive Kama and starts severe austerities to achieve her goal . Once , the divine sage Narada asks her " whose she was " . Agitated , Rati insults Narada . The spiteful Narada provokes the demon Sambara to kidnap Rati . Sambara takes her to his house , but is unable to touch her as the goddess decreed that he would be reduced to ashes if he touches her . There , Rati becomes the " kitchen in @-@ charge " and is known as Mayavati ( " mistress of illusion – Maya " ) . 
 The Bhagavata Purana and the Kathasaritsagara continue , that on advice of Shiva , Rati assumes the form of Sambara 's kitchen @-@ maid Mayavati and awaits her husband 's arrival in Sambara 's house . Sambara is foretold that the reborn Kama would be his destroyer . Sambara finds out that Kama was born as Pradyumna , the son of Krishna and his wife Rukmini . He steals the child and throws him in the ocean , where the child is swallowed by a fish . This fish is caught by fishermen and sent to Sambara 's kitchen . When the fish is cut , the child is found by Mayavati , who decides to nurture him . The divine sage Narada reveals to Mayavati that she was Rati and the child was Kama and she was to rear him . As the child grew up , the motherly love of Mayavati changes to the passionate love of a wife . The reborn Kama resents her advances , as he considers her his mother . Mayavati tells him the secret of their previous births as narrated by Narada and that he was not her son , but that of Krishna and Rukmini . Mayavati trains Pradyumna in magic and war and advises him to kill Sambara . Pradyumna defeats Sambara and slays him . He returns to <unk> , Krishna 's capital with Mayavati as his wife , where they are welcomed . 
 The Vishnu Purana and the Harivamsa also have a similar account , though the reincarnation of Rati is called <unk> and described as Sambara 's wife , rather than his maid . Both these scriptures safeguard her chastity saying that Rati donned an illusionary form to enchant Sambara . The Brahma Vaivarta Purana explicitly states that Rati does not sleep with Sambara , but gave him the illusionary form of Mayavati . Rati @-@ Mayavati takes a critical role in all narratives of this story where she seduces – by her Maya – both Sambara and Kama @-@ Pradyumna , her " son " who she convinces to be her lover . All texts at the end stress on her purity , untouched by another man . 
 The Harivamsa describes Aniruddha , the son of Pradyumna , " the son of Rati " . 
 = = Associations and iconography = = 
 The name Rati in Sanskrit means " the pleasure of love , sexual passion or union , amorous enjoyment " , all of which Rati personifies . Rati also indicates the female @-@ seed . The word Rati also gives rise to other love @-@ related Sanskrit words like Kama @-@ rati ( " a man stupefied by desire " ) , rati @-@ <unk> ( " sexual intercourse " ) , rati @-@ <unk> ( " sexual intercourse " ) , rati @-@ bhoga ( " sexual enjoyment " ) , rati @-@ shakti ( " virile power " ) , rati @-@ <unk> ( " skilled in the art of love " ) , and rati @-@ yuddha ( " a sex @-@ battle " ) . The word Rati also appears in title of the Sanskrit erotic work Rati @-@ <unk> ( " secrets of Rati " ) – which is said to contain the sexual secrets of the goddess – as well as in the Sanskrit names of many sex techniques and positions like Rati @-@ pasha ( " the noose of Rati " ) , a sex position in which the woman locks her legs behind her lover 's back . 
 Rati stands for sexual pleasure , carnal desire and sexuality . Rati represents only the pleasure aspect of sexual activity and does not relate to child @-@ birth or motherhood . Professor Catherine Benton of the Lake Forest College ( Department of Religion ) relates her birth from the " desire @-@ ridden " sweat to bodily fluids produced during sexual intercourse , which are considered impure in Hinduism . Benton thus , relates her to pollution too , but her association with Kama – the auspicious god of love – grants her the status of an auspicious goddess . Rati and Kama are often pictured on temple walls as " welcome sculptures " , symbols of good fortune and prosperity . Not only is Rati Kama 's consort , but she is also his assistant and constant companion , who arouses sexual feelings . Kama is usually depicted with Rati along his side . Rati is also included as a minor character in any drama involving Kama . Rati also enjoys worship with Kama in some festival rites dedicated to him . 
 The Shiva Purana mentions that Kama himself was pierced by his love @-@ arrows when he saw his " auspicious wife " , Rati . A detailed description of her body , filled with similes praising her fair complexion , her eyes , her face , her " plump " breasts , her hair , her arms , her legs , her thighs and her glowing skin . The textual descriptions of Rati present her as an enchantress ; voluptuous and seductive . Rati , as well as her husband Kama , ride a parrot as their vahana ( vehicle ) . Rati is often depicted with a sword . 
 In Tantra , the Mahavidya goddess Chhinnamasta is depicted severing her own head and standing on the copulating couple of Kama and Rati , with the latter on top , ( <unk> @-@ rati sex position ) . The woman @-@ on @-@ top position suggests female dominance over male . Chhinnamasta standing on a copulating couple of Kama and Rati is interpreted by some as a symbol of self @-@ control of sexual desire , while others interpret it as the goddess , being an embodiment of sexual energy . Images of Chhinnamasta depicted sitting on Kamadeva @-@ Rati in a non @-@ suppressive fashion are associated with the latter interpretation . The love @-@ deity couple also symbolize <unk> , ritual sexual union . 
 = Kentucky Mountain Saddle Horse = 
 The Kentucky Mountain Saddle Horse is a horse breed from the US state of Kentucky . Developed as an all @-@ around farm and riding horse in eastern Kentucky , they are related to the Tennessee Walking Horse and other gaited breeds . In 1989 the Kentucky Mountain Saddle Horse Association ( KMSHA ) was formed , and in 2002 , the subsidiary Spotted Mountain Horse Association ( SMHA ) was developed to registered Kentucky Mountain Saddle Horses with excessive white markings and pinto patterns . Conformation standards are the same for the two groups of horses , with the main difference being the color requirements . The KMSHA studbook is now closed to horses from unregistered parents , although it cross @-@ registers with several other registries , while the SMHA studbook remains open . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kentucky Mountain Saddle Horses must stand above 11 hands ( 44 inches , 112 cm ) high to be registered . Horses above this height are divided into two categories : Class A horses stand taller than 14 @.@ 2 hands ( 58 inches , 147 cm ) , while Class B horses stand 11 to 14 @.@ 1 hands ( 44 to 57 inches , 112 to 145 cm ) high . Horses registered with the Kentucky Mountain Saddle Horse Association ( KMSHA ) may be found in all solid colors , with white markings allowed on the face , legs and small patches of the belly . Horses with excessive white , including " bald face " or full white faces , white above the knees or hocks , or showing pinto markings ( including tobiano , overo and sabino ) are instead registered with the Spotted Mountain Horse Association ( SMHA ) , a subsidiary of the KMSHA . Solid colored foals of two SMHA @-@ registered parents are usually registered with the SMHA , but solid @-@ colored geldings of SMHA @-@ registered parents may be registered with the KMSHA , though they cannot be dual registered . 
 Kentucky Mountain Saddle Horses are mid @-@ sized horses , with a well @-@ muscled and compact build . The breed has a flat facial profile , a mid @-@ length , well @-@ arched neck , a deep chest and well @-@ sloped shoulders . They are known to be self @-@ sufficient and easy keepers . To be registered , Kentucky Mountain Saddle Horses must demonstrate a " gentle temperament and willing disposition " to registry examiners . 
 The breed exhibits a natural ambling gait , called the single @-@ foot , which replaces the trot seen in a majority of horse breeds . Both gaits are an intermediate speed between a walk and a canter or gallop ; ambling gaits are four @-@ beat gaits , whereas the trot is a two @-@ beat gait . The extra footfalls provide additional smoothness to a rider because the horse always has at least one foot on the ground . This minimizes movement of the horse 's topline and removes the bounce of a two @-@ beat gait , caused by a moment of suspension followed by the jolt of two feet hitting the ground as the horse shifts from one pair of legs to the other . The value of an intermediate speed is that the horse conserves energy . More than thirty horse breeds are " gaited , " able to perform a four @-@ beat ambling gait , and some can also trot . 
 = = = Registration = = = 
 Mares and stallions from non @-@ KMSHA parents may not be registered in the main studbook , unless the parents are registered with the Rocky Mountain Horse Association , Mountain Pleasure Horse Association or Kentucky Naturally Gaited Horse Association . Geldings from unregistered parents may be registered if they otherwise meet breed standards . Mares from unregistered parents may be registered as " Appendix " ; their colts must be gelded , but resultant fillies may be registered as full Kentucky Mountain Saddle Horses . The Spotted Mountain Horse studbook is still open to all unregistered horses who otherwise meet breed standards . 
 = = History = = 
 The Kentucky Mountain Saddle Horse developed in eastern Kentucky , and probably have their ancestry in smooth @-@ gaited horses from the southeastern US and the now @-@ extinct Narragansett Pacer . They are related to the Tennessee Walking Horse and other gaited breeds , but their exact early history is unknown . Kentucky Mountain Saddle Horses have a similar history to the Rocky Mountain Horse , and together are sometimes called " Mountain Pleasure Horses " . The Kentucky Mountain Saddle Horse was developed by farmers looking for a small horse that could perform dual duty as a powerful work horse and comfortable riding horse . They were used for long travel over rough terrain , and were developed to have gentle temperaments so that they could be handled by young members of the farm families . Today , they continue to be used as riding horses , and are regarded as excellent trail mounts in rugged terrain . 
 The KMSHA was founded in 1989 . In 2002 , a subsidiary organization , the SMHA , was formed to register horses who had more white markings than were allowed by the KMSHA . As of 2011 , the KMSHA has over 3 @,@ 200 members and has registered over 24 @,@ 000 horses . The majority of the horses are in Kentucky , but the breed is also seen throughout the US , as well as in Canada and a small population in Europe . The KMSHA and SMHA host a joint championship show each year at the Kentucky Horse Park . 
 = Cooper , Texas = 
 The city of Cooper / <unk> / is the county seat of Delta County , in the U.S. state of Texas . Located between the north and south forks of the Sulphur River , Cooper is the largest settlement within Delta County . As of the U.S. Census of 2010 , Cooper had a population of 1 @,@ 969 . 
 First inhabited by native people , Cooper was founded around 1870 , at the same time that Delta County was established . Cooper grew rapidly and it quickly became the center of local events . The city 's economy relied primarily on agricultural farming and the shipping of local goods . In the mid @-@ 1890s , a railroad line was built through the city , assisting in Cooper 's growth . The city continued to grow through the 1910s , and into the early 1920s . In 1926 , however , the region 's cotton crop failed , devastating the local economy . Many businesses were forced to close , including the railroad , and the city 's population plummeted . Although Cooper began to recover during the mid @-@ 1930s , many people who left did not return , and the city never fully recovered . The local economy continued to rely on the growing of cotton as the main economy into the 1960s , until it began to shift to wheat growing in the early 1970s . The population of Cooper has been on a slow decline since the 1970s . 
 Cooper currently has no sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places . The city 's economy still relies largely on agriculture . Cooper is located on the eastern edge of the Dallas – Fort Worth metroplex ( DFW metroplex ) , a large , 12 @-@ county metropolitan area , one of the most populated in the country . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Before establishment = = = 
 The first inhabitants of the area that is now the site of Cooper were the Caddo Indians , who settled large portions of eastern Texas as early as 800 AD . The Caddo were highly advanced , living in large wooden structures , and were skilled farmers . The first European to visit the area was French explorer François Hervey , who discovered the area around 1750 . However , a few decades later , European disease and attacks from neighboring tribes , as well as attacks from European settlers forced the Caddo out of the area around Cooper . Around 1820 , Delaware , Quapaw , and Seminole tribes settled in the area . In 1836 , the Republic of Texas officially recognized the region around Cooper as part of Red River County . In 1840 , Lamar County was formed , absorbing the Cooper area . However , just six years later , the region was designated as part of the newly formed Hopkins County . 
 After the Civil War , the region around the site of Cooper began to grow and develop . People in nearby Ben Franklin , Texas , grew tired of the poor road conditions that connected the region . In 1868 , people in the area petitioned the state government to create a new county located between the north and south forks of the Sulphur River . On July 29 , 1870 , after two years of debating , the state of Texas granted the request for the new county . Shortly afterwards , the first settlements were built in Cooper and the town was established . The community was named after Leroy Cooper , the chairman of the Texas House Committee on Counties and Boundaries who helped establish the new county . Cooper was selected as the seat for the county , which would be named Delta County due to its triangular shape . 
 = = = Since establishment = = = 
 Cooper grew rapidly after being established , with a post office built in the community in 1871 . Cooper was incorporated into a town in 1881 and held its first government elections . That same year , Cooper constructed the county courthouse . The town became the main market center for Delta County , and by 1885 , Cooper had a population around 300 . The Texas Midland Railroad , which ran through Cooper , was chartered in 1892 . The railroad helped promote the rapid growth of the town . By 1896 , Cooper 's population had passed 1 @,@ 000 people , and contained two churches , a school , and 21 businesses , including a bank and a hotel . The town also had two weekly newspapers . Cooper continued to grow into the early 1900s , especially in the area of agriculture . From the early 1890s to around 1910 , farms boomed both in number and in value , with the number of cash crops nearly tripling . The region produced over 70 @,@ 000 chickens and almost 7 @,@ 000 pigs yearly . 
 Cooper continued to grow into the 1920s . The bank had been rebuilt in 1909 , and the region 's crops continued to prosper . Cooper reported its largest population , 2 @,@ 563 , in 1925 . Delta County was hit by the Great Depression early , though . In late 1926 , the community 's cotton crop failed , forcing many residents to withdraw their savings . The bank was forced to close in 1927 , and by the time it reopened a few months later , the region 's economy had plummeted . Several families moved away from Cooper during the early 1930s , and in 1933 , the bank was forced to close again . The Midland Texas Railroad failed , hurting Cooper 's economy further . The New Deal program offered some relief to Cooper , and in 1940 , the Works Progress Administration ( WPA ) demolished the former courthouse in Cooper and replaced it with a new one at a cost of $ 110 @,@ 450 ( equivalent to $ 1 @,@ 865 @,@ 600 respectively in 2016 ) . However , even with the stability of the economy , Cooper 's population remained low until the 1950s , when it returned to about 2 @,@ 350 people . The population declined again in the 1980s , and has continued to slowly decline . Cooper had roughly 60 businesses in the 1970s and 1980s , and in 1986 , work on Cooper Lake had begun . Filling of the lake began in September 1991 , and by the next year , the lake was open for recreation . At that time , Cooper reported having 70 businesses , and a population around 2 @,@ 200 . By 2000 , the population had dropped by about 50 people . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Cooper is the county seat of Delta County , as well as its most populated city . According to statistics from the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 1 @.@ 5 square miles ( 3 @.@ 9 km2 ) , of which 1 @.@ 4 square miles ( 3 @.@ 6 km2 ) ( 99 @.@ 31 % ) is land . About 0 @.@ 1 square miles ( 0 @.@ 26 km2 ) ( 0 @.@ 69 % ) is covered by water . 
 Cooper is located at an elevation of 482 feet ( 147 m ) , a few miles north of Cooper Lake , between the north and south forks of the Sulphur River . It is located about 76 miles ( 122 km ) northeast of Dallas and 94 miles ( 151 km ) west of Texarkana . Texas State Highway 24 bypasses Cooper to the north ; however , Texas State Highway 24 Business splits off and passes through the center of the city . Texas State Highway 154 begins at the western edge of Cooper and passes through the center of the city , intersecting Farm to Market Road 1528 near the county courthouse . Farm to Market Road 64 enters the very western portion of Cooper before terminating at State Highway 24 . Nearby highways include Farm to Market Road 1880 and Farm to Market Road 1529 . 
 Cooper , as well as most of Delta County , is located in the Texas Blackland Prairies region , a flat , tall @-@ grass prairie ecosystem which covers a large portion of north @-@ central Texas . The region 's elevation rarely differs from around 400 feet ( 120 m ) to 500 feet ( 150 m ) . The area 's geology consists mainly of deep clay , or clay mixed with a dark @-@ colored loam . However , the county is also known to have high @-@ quality topsoil , ideal for crop growing . 
 Under the Köppen climate classification , Cooper is in zone Cfa with warm , wet summers and a humid subtropical climate . The average temperature in Cooper in January is 43 ° F ( 6 ° C ) , and in July it is 92 ° F ( 33 ° C ) . Its highest recorded temperature was 115 ° F ( 46 ° C ) in 1969 , and the lowest recorded temperature was − 4 ° F ( − 20 ° C ) in 1989 . The average wettest month is October . The average coolest month is January , while the average hottest month is August . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of the Census of 2010 , the population of Cooper was 1 @,@ 969 people . Five hundred families were residing in 771 households spread across 897 housing units across the city . The total showed an increase of 56 @.@ 6 % from 2000 . As of 2010 , the racial makeup of the town was 77 @.@ 2 % White , 14 @.@ 8 % African American , 1 @.@ 2 % Native American , 1 @.@ 1 % Asian , and 2 @.@ 8 % from other races . Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 6 @.@ 1 % of the population . 
 As of 2010 , of the 771 households , 27 @.@ 9 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 64 @.@ 9 % were married couples living together , 19 @.@ 1 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 35 @.@ 1 % were not families . Of all households , 31 @.@ 5 % were made up of individuals and 15 @.@ 5 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 46 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 09 . The age distribution was 25 @.@ 9 % under 18 , 9 @.@ 3 % from 18 to 24 , 20 @.@ 5 % from 25 to 44 , 24 @.@ 6 % from 45 to 64 , and 19 @.@ 7 % who were 65 or older . The median age was 40 @.@ 2 years . The median income for a household in the town was $ 27 @,@ 531 , and the median income for a family was $ 29 @,@ 853 . In 2000 , employed males had a median income of $ 25 @,@ 592 versus $ 17 @,@ 500 for employed females . Also in 2000 , the per capita income for the city was $ 13 @,@ 815 . 
 On the 2010 Census , residents self @-@ identified with a variety of ethnic ancestries ; the major categories reflect the settlers of the early to mid @-@ 19th century . People of American descent make up 21 % of the population of the city , followed by Irish at 15 @.@ 2 % , English at 7 @.@ 2 % , German at 4 @.@ 3 % , Russian at 2 @.@ 5 % , French at 2 @.@ 4 % , Scottish at 1 @.@ 5 % , French − Canadian at 0 @.@ 7 % , Dutch at 0 @.@ 5 % , Norwegian at 0 @.@ 5 % , Slavic at 0 @.@ 5 % , Palestinian at 0 @.@ 4 % , Austrian at 0 @.@ 3 % , Welsh at 0 @.@ 3 % , Polish at 0 @.@ 2 % , and Italian rounding out at 0 @.@ 2 % . 818 persons were of " other ancestries " . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Cooper 's economy relied heavily on agricultural farming from its founding until the 1950s , especially on the growing of cash crops . In 1880 , cotton , corn , sorghum and other crops were grown on over 100 @,@ 000 acres ( 40 @,@ 000 ha ) of farmland . The county also produced large quantities of livestock , with almost 3 @,@ 000 cows and 10 @,@ 000 hogs grazing on land near Cooper . The logging industry began to grow in the region , and several mills were constructed , producing furniture and lumber . In 1886 , the Santa Fe Railway built a line through the county , and the shipping of crops and lumber became a major business in Cooper . During the early 1890s , the livestock industry in Delta County struggled , with the number of hogs being raised dropping to half of what it had been the previous decade . However , the agricultural business boomed , with the number of farms in the area around Cooper increasing to 1 @,@ 188 , and the value of the farms doubled to $ 1 @,@ 400 ( equivalent to $ 2 @,@ 908 @,@ 900 respectively in 2016 ) each . The production of cotton tripled , and the poultry industry began to boom . Within the city limits , Cooper housed a hotel , a shoemaker , a grocery store , a wagon maker , feed stores , general stores , drug stores , and several cotton and oat gins . Delta County contained 18 manufacturing establishments , but they only employed 33 people . The average income for someone working in the region was $ 208 ( equivalent to $ 2 @,@ 908 @,@ 926 respectively in 2016 ) . 
 At the turn of the century , the cotton industry was booming . The crop made up 69 % of the agricultural business in the region . Livestock production was booming , as was poultry production , especially chicken . In addition , the shipping of agricultural goods and livestock was the other main business in Cooper . The First National Bank was rebuilt in 1909 and became an important factor in Cooper 's economy . In the 1910s , potatoes become an important part of the economy due to the sudden drop in the livestock business . In 1926 , the cotton crop failed and Cooper 's economy plummeted . Many of Cooper 's inhabitants became deep in debt as the price of crops plummeted . The lumber businesses had exhausted the regions resources , forcing most of them to go out of business . Many people moved away to find new work . The local economy stabilized in the mid @-@ 1930s , and cotton , potato , and corn production began to rise . The growing of oats , however , had ended . In addition , the railroad going through Cooper had failed a few years before , so the shipping industry in Cooper was struggling . Cotton and alfalfa carried Cooper 's economy through the 1950s and 1960s , until the shift to the growing of wheat in the 1970s . Cooper reported 60 businesses in the 1970s , more than half of which were dairies . During the 1980s and 1990s , Cooper 's economy shifted to the manufacturing and shipping of local goods , and in 1991 , Cooper had 70 businesses . 
 Currently , Cooper 's economy features several unique industries . According to the 2010 Census , the industries in the town ( by percentage of employed civilian population 16 years and over ) were educational , health and social services at 34 @.@ 6 % , manufacturing at 18 @.@ 7 % , arts , entertainment , recreation , accommodation and food services with 13 @.@ 6 % , construction at 10 @.@ 2 % , transportation , warehousing , and utilities at 5 @.@ 1 % , professional , scientific , management , administrative , and waste management services at 4 @.@ 9 % , public administration with 4 @.@ 3 % , retail trade at 3 @.@ 9 % , finance , insurance , real estate , and rental and leasing with 2 @.@ 0 % , other services ( except public administration ) with 1 @.@ 6 % , and agriculture , forestry , fishing and hunting , and mining at 1 @.@ 0 % . 
 Of the people in the labor force over the age of 16 , 679 people ( 49 @.@ 3 % of the population ) were in the civilian work force , while 697 people ( 50 @.@ 7 % of the population ) were not in the labor force at all . At the time of the Census , seventy people ( 5 @.@ 1 % ) were unemployed , with none in the armed forces . Of the 609 employed residents over the age 16 , private @-@ sector wage and salary workers accounted for 475 of them ( 78 @.@ 0 % ) . One @-@ hundred @-@ nine people ( 17 @.@ 9 % ) were classified as federal government workers , with the self @-@ employed making up 4 @.@ 1 % of the population . No one was classified as an unpaid worker . 
 The median household income for the city of Cooper was $ 27 @,@ 531 , with 137 persons ( 19 @.@ 7 % ) in that class of income . One @-@ hundred @-@ twenty @-@ five people ( 18 @.@ 0 % ) identified themselves as retired . 
 = = Culture and media = = 
 Since its founding , Cooper has served as the center of attractions for Delta County . The city became host to several small schools and churches . In 1955 , the construction of Cooper Lake was authorized . In 1986 , major work on the lake began , and the lake was finished in 1991 . The lake is now the most popular tourist attraction in the area . Boating , swimming , and fishing are available at Cooper Lake . The main fish stocked in the lake are catfish , largemouth bass , and crappie . Along the north shore of the lake is the Doctor 's Creek Unit of Cooper Lake State Park . The park contains several picnic areas , campgrounds and a large swimming area on Cooper Lake . The park also contains several hiking and equestrian trails . On the eastern edge of the lake near the Cooper Lake Dam is the Wildlife Observation Deck , a large birdwatching platform . Along the west and northwest shores of the lake is the Cooper Wildlife Management Area . The park was constructed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers , and protects four unique habitat types . These are wetland , Blackland Prairie , Upland Post Oak , and <unk> Hardwood . The park contains several hiking trails , as well as birdwatching stations and wildlife viewing areas . The park allows fishing and hunting to visitors if they have a proper license . 
 Cooper is also host to the annual <unk> . The event , held every October , serves as a social gathering for the region . The two @-@ day event begins with an open @-@ air concert in Historic Cooper Square . Other events include a 5K run / walk and smashing a car . The festival includes numerous street vendors and a children 's area . Patterson Memorial County Library is also located in Cooper , as well as a 15 @-@ acre ( 6 @.@ 1 ha ) municipal park , and numerous recreational and community centers , including the historic McKinney Home , the house of Dr. John and May McKinney , which was built in 1912 and later restored by their decedent author Susan Albright Hyde . 
 The first newspaper published in Cooper was the Delta Courier in 1873 . The newspaper , published by Bob Michiel , ran weekly until the mid @-@ 1890s . Around the time the publishing of the Delta Courier ended , the People 's Cause newspaper began running weekly . This eventually stopped running ; however , The Cooper Review began running weekly in 1982 . The Cooper Review , run by Jim and Sally Butler , is still published . 
 = = Government = = 
 Since its incorporation in 1870 , Cooper has served as the seat for Delta County . Because of this , Cooper houses the county courthouse , county offices , sheriff , and county library . Cooper has a Mayor – council government . The city council is made up of five members who are elected at large . The current council members are mayor pro @-@ tem David Philips , E.J. Cates , JoAnn <unk> , W. D. Wilkins , and Carl Reel . The city 's current mayor is Scotty Stegall . 
 The first election in Delta County occurred on October 6 , 1870 , to establish control in the newly formed county . Cooper held its first election in 1881 , establishing an aldermanic government . Around that time , the first county courthouse was built in Cooper . Delta County , in addition to Cooper , voted for the Democratic Party in every presidential election from its incorporation in 1870 until 1968 . However , the Populist Party won numerous local and county government positions during the 1890s and the early 1900s . In the 1970s , politics in Delta County shifted , and most of the county began voting for the Republican Party . 
 Delta County 's government consists of a county judge and four county commissioners , representing four county precincts . The current Delta County judge is Herbert <unk> , and the four commissioners are B. V. Templeton , David Moody , Wayne Poole , and Mark Brantley . The current county sheriff is Gerald W. Teague . In addition , Cooper is served by two Texas judicial districts . Judge Scott McDowell serves as judge of the 62nd Texas Judicial District , a position he has held since 2000 . However , McDowell has announced that he will not be seeking another term . Cooper is also part of Texas ' 8th Judicial District , which is served by Judge Robert Newsom . Newsom has served as 8th district judge since his election in 1997 , but has also announced that he will not be seeking another term . 
 Cooper is represented by Larry Phillips ( Republican ) in the Texas State Legislature 's 62nd District . Senator Bob Hall ( Republican ) represents Cooper in the Texas State Senate 's 2nd District . The town is represented in the United States House of Representatives by John Ratcliffe ( Republican ) , and by John Cornyn ( Republican ) and Ted Cruz ( Republican ) in the United States Senate . 
 = = Education = = 
 Delta County has historically been advanced in education . Around the time that Cooper and the county were founded , there were already nine churches in the county . By 1880 , that number had increased to nearly 30 . There were a combined 998 students attending those schools , which operated 4 ½ months a year . In 1889 , East Texas Normal College was founded in Cooper . The school did very well while located in Cooper , but the college moved to Commerce after the campus was destroyed in a fire in 1894 . The school was later renamed East Texas State University , then Texas A & M University – Commerce . In 1896 , Cooper reported to have one successful school located within the city proper . 
 Schools were important during the 1940s , as they became the local activity centers . In the early 1940s , there were 34 common schools and six independent school districts within Delta County . These schools employed 134 people and had a combined total of 4 @,@ 000 students enrolled . Cooper , along with Pecan Gap and <unk> , offered a four @-@ year high school program . Late in the 1940s , with the help of state taxes on transportation , the schools and districts began to consolidate . In 1966 , Cooper had two elementary schools , a junior high school , and a high school . 
 The Cooper Independent School District ( Cooper ISD ) currently operates the schools that serve Cooper . Cooper ISD covers the majority of Delta County , except for the community of Lake Creek , which is located within the jurisdiction of <unk> ISD , and the communities of Pecan Gap and Ben Franklin , which are located within <unk> ISD . There are currently only three schools under the jurisdiction of Cooper ISD , all three of with are located within Cooper proper . The schools are Cooper Elementary School , Cooper Junior High School , and Cooper High School . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 Texas State Highway 154 ( TX 154 ) intersects the city , passing through the central portion of Cooper . The highway begins at its terminus in the western portion of Cooper . The roadway travels eastward through central Cooper , before bending southeast and exiting the city . TX 154 travels within the Cooper proper for approximately 1 @.@ 94 miles ( 3 @.@ 12 km ) . TX 154 was first constructed through Cooper on September 26 , 1935 . State Highway 24 bypasses Cooper as a four @-@ lane divided highway . Only 0 @.@ 48 miles ( 0 @.@ 77 km ) of the highway pass through Cooper , traveling through the western edge of the city limits . TX 24 was originally designated through Cooper on September 26 , 1939 . However , TX 24 was rerouted around Cooper , and on January 14 , 1991 , the 1 @.@ 94 miles ( 3 @.@ 12 km ) long portion of highway was redesignated as Texas State Highway 24 Business . 
 Farm to Market Road 64 ( FM 64 ) enters the western portion of Cooper , traveling for a short distance before terminating at TX 154 . The highway , which was constructed on June 23 , 1942 , spends approximately 0 @.@ 41 miles ( 0 @.@ 66 km ) within the city . FM 1528 , known locally as 1st Street , travels through the center of Cooper . Beginning at an intersection with TX 154 , the highway travels southward through the city for about 0 @.@ 6 miles ( 0 @.@ 97 km ) , before exiting and turning westward . The road was constructed on September 28 , 1949 . Nearby highways include FM 1880 , which travels from the edge of the city to a part of the Cooper Lake Wildlife Management Area , FM 128 , which ends at an intersection with TX 24 a short distance north of Cooper , and FM 1529 , which northward a short distance east of the city . 
 In 1886 , the Santa Fe Railroad was constructed to the north of Cooper , through Ben Franklin and Pecan Gap . Nearly a decade later , in 1895 , the Texas Midland Railroad was constructed through Cooper , helping the city 's economy to boom . The railroad flourished until 1928 , when it was sold to the Southern Pacific Corporation due to the region 's struggling economy . The line was closed in 1934 , and was abandoned in 1975 . Currently , the only railroad to pass near Cooper is the Blacklands Railroad . Commerce Municipal Airport is currently the closest airfield to Cooper , located approximately 13 miles ( 21 km ) away . 
 = = Religion = = 
 The first religious establishment in the region was erected by pioneers from Tennessee in 1847 . By 1860 , two Methodist Episcopal churches had been built nearby . In 1880 , seven churches , which were predominantly Methodist , had been established in Delta County . In 1889 , seven Baptist churches that had been established in the region held a meeting as the Delta County Baptist Association . During the early 1980s , there were 17 churches in Delta County , two of which were located in Cooper . In 1931 , there were 13 Baptist churches located in and around Cooper . During the mid @-@ 1960s , there were 32 churches in the region , representing seven Christian communions . However , by 1982 , five of those churches had closed . 
 Currently , there are 18 churches located within the city limits of Cooper . These include congregations of the United Methodist Church and the Seventh @-@ day Adventist Church , as well as those of Baptist , Catholic , Pentecostal , Methodist Episcopal , and other denominations of Christianity . Six of the churches are of Baptist denomination , and three are Methodist , as well as several which are of other Christianity . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Don Hornsby - Former comedian and novelty pianist 
 Alice Lon – Former singer and dancer on The Lawrence Welk Show 
 Ron Morris – Former professional football player in the National Football League ( NFL ) 
 = New Super Mario Bros. = 
 New Super Mario Bros. ( New <unk> , Nyū Sūpā Mario Burazāzu ) is a side @-@ scrolling platform video game developed and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo DS handheld game console . The game was released in North America and Japan in May 2006 , and in Australia and Europe in June 2006 . It was the first original side @-@ scrolling platform game starring Mario since Super Mario Land 2 : 6 Golden Coins in 1992 , and the first game to be a part of the main Super Mario series since Super Mario Sunshine in 2002 . 
 The game 's plot is similar to those of other side @-@ scrolling Mario games . New Super Mario Bros. follows Mario as he fights his way through Bowser 's henchmen to rescue Princess Peach . Mario has access to several power @-@ ups that help him complete his quest , including the Super Mushroom , the Fire Flower , and the Starman , each giving him unique abilities . While traveling through eight worlds with a total of 80 levels , Mario must defeat Bowser Jr. and Bowser before finally saving Princess Peach . 
 Reviews of the game were very favorable . Praise focused on improvements made to the Mario franchise , while criticism targeted the game 's simplicity , and similarity to previous games . New Super Mario Bros. received several honors , including Game of the Month awards from Game Informer and Electronic Gaming Monthly , and Editors ' Choice Awards from IGN and GameSpot . In Japan , the game broke the record for the best @-@ selling debut for a Nintendo DS game . Overall , the game has sold 30 @.@ 80 million copies worldwide and is the best @-@ selling game for the DS , and one of the best @-@ selling video games of all time . 
 Its follow @-@ up , New Super Mario Bros. Wii , is playable with four players simultaneously , and was released in 2009 for the Wii . A direct sequel , New Super Mario Bros. 2 , was released for the Nintendo 3DS in 2012 , and New Super Mario Bros. U was released as a launch game with the Wii U on November 18 , 2012 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 While New Super Mario Bros. is seen in 2D , some of the characters and objects are 3D polygonal renderings on 2D backgrounds , resulting in a 2.5D effect that visually simulates 3D computer graphics . The player can play as either Mario , or his brother , Luigi . Similar to previous Mario games , Mario ( or Luigi ) can collect coins , stomp on enemies , and break / open blocks . Moves from 3D games featuring Mario reappear in New Super Mario Bros. , including the ground pound , triple jump , and wall jump . Enemies from previous games , such as Petey Piranha , are also reintroduced . 
 A total of 80 levels are available over eight worlds ; these worlds are shown in the Nintendo DS 's bottom touchscreen while viewing the world map . The map of the currently selected world appears in the top screen , which is used to navigate between the world 's courses . Certain worlds require specific means of access , such as completing a boss level while using the Mini Mushroom . The goal of each course is to reach a black flag at the end of the course . At the end of each world , a boss must be defeated before proceeding to the next world . 
 Hidden throughout each of the levels are three Star Coins . By collecting these Star Coins , Mario is able to purchase access to Toad Houses to gain items or lives . Mario can also use these Star Coins to unlock special backgrounds and paths on the world map . 
 There are six power @-@ ups available in New Super Mario Bros. ; the game allows the player to store an extra power @-@ up when he is already using one , a feature carried over from Super Mario World . Three power @-@ ups from Super Mario Bros. return : the Super Mushroom makes a small @-@ sized Mario grow into his regular size , the Fire Flower lets Mario throw fireballs , and the Starman makes Mario invincible temporarily . The Starman also gives him a boost of speed and more jump height , a first for the game . Three more power @-@ ups are introduced in New Super Mario Bros. : 
 the blue Koopa Shell lets Mario withdraw into a shell to protect himself , run and then withdraw into the shell to attack enemies , and swim faster . 
 the Mega Mushroom grows Mario to an incredible size for a short time ( the amount of damage inflicted as Mega @-@ Mario corresponds to extra lives received after returning to normal size ) . The Mega Mushroom provides complete invincibility , and is capable of destroying many enemies ( excluding boss enemies ) with one hit . It even grants Mario the power to kick down the flagpole at the end of any given level . 
 the Mini @-@ Mushroom shrinks Mario into a diminutive size to enter small spaces , including small pipes . It also makes him jump higher and land more slowly , allowing him to reach higher or further places 
 The game 's multiplayer mode pits two players against each other as they play as Mario and Luigi in one of five stages , trying to be the first to obtain a preset number of " Big Stars " . Both players can attack each other in attempts to steal the other player 's stars . Jumping on the opponent 's character will make him lose one star , while performing a ground pound will make him lose three . Also , losing a life will cause that player to lose a star . 
 In addition , some minigames previously available in Super Mario 64 DS have returned and now offer multiplayer options for added replay value . The minigames are divided into the categories Action , Puzzle , Table and Variety . New Super Mario Bros. contains eighteen minigames for single players and ten minigames for multiple players . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the beginning of the game , Princess Peach and Mario ( or Luigi ) are walking together when lightning suddenly strikes Peach 's castle nearby . As Mario runs to help , Bowser Jr. appears and kidnaps her . Realizing what has happened , Mario quickly rushes back and gives chase . Mario ventures through eight worlds pursuing Bowser Jr. and trying to rescue the kidnapped princess . Mario catches up to them and confronts Bowser Jr. occasionally , but is unable to save a princess from the young Koopa 's clutches . At the end of the first world , Bowser Jr. retreats to a castle , where his father , Bowser , awaits Mario on a bridge over a pit filled with lava . In a scene highly reminiscent of the original Super Mario Bros. , Mario activates a button behind Bowser to defeat him , and the bridge underneath Bowser collapses , causing him to fall into the lava which burns his flesh , leaving a skeleton . 
 Despite Bowser 's demise in the first level , this does not stop Bowser Jr. from running through the remaining worlds with Peach in tow , forcing Mario to chase after him before reaching Bowser 's castle in world 8 . There , Bowser Jr. revives his father 's skeleton , creating Dry Bowser , but Mario once again defeats Bowser by dropping him into a deep pit . In the final battle , Bowser Jr. flees once more across a lava chasm to a larger castle , where he throws his father 's bones into a cauldron and revives Bowser in a more powerful form . They attack Mario in tandem , but Mario drops the pair into the pit below . In the game 's final sequence , Mario rescues Peach , who kisses him on the cheek . Over the end credits , Bowser Jr. is seen dragging his unconscious father across the floor . He looks at the screen , and growls , breaking the fourth wall . 
 = = Development = = 
 More than twenty years after Super Mario Bros. was released , Nintendo announced on February 21 , 2006 that New Super Mario Bros. would launch for the Nintendo DS on May 7 , 2006 . The game 's new power @-@ ups were also introduced at the same time , including the Blue Koopa Shell and the Mega Mushroom . Nintendo further mentioned that the game would be played in 2D but use 3D models to create a 2.5D look and feel . The May 7 release was later delayed towards May 21 , but the game 's release date was eventually pushed back slightly to May 15 ; Nintendo also planned to release it around the same time that the Nintendo DS Lite launched , on June 11 , 2006 . 
 New Super Mario Bros. is the first 2D platform game to star Mario since Super Mario Land 2 : 6 Golden Coins in 1992 . First revealed at the 2004 E3 convention , New Super Mario Bros. was available for play at E3 in 2005 . The game 's designers were given much more freedom with designs in New Super Mario Bros. compared to previous 2D Mario games . Characters , enemies , and objects could now be created with much more detailed animations , without requiring that they be designed by hand . To provide visual cues , the developers made the game 's camera more dynamic ; it zooms in and out of action depending on the situation to provide focus where necessary . 
 Physics play an important role in New Super Mario Bros. ' s improved game mechanics . Without the rigid restrictions of tile @-@ based sprites and backgrounds , the designers were free to explore new gameplay mechanics ; when Mario lands on top of a tree , it teeters over and eventually falls if he is stationary for too long . Mario can also swing on ropes and walk on wires that bend and stretch under his weight . 
 Early in the game 's development , the developers planned not to use voice acting to stay true to the spirit of the original Super Mario Bros. However , voice acting was eventually embraced by the developers , who decided that it would serve the game in a positive manner . Although voice acting was used in earlier 2D Mario remakes , New Super Mario Bros. is the first original 2D Mario game to use voice acting . Charles Martinet returned to voice Mario and Luigi , along with Nicole Mills as Princess Peach , Scott Burns as Bowser , and Dolores Rogers as Bowser Jr . New Super Mario Bros. features original music composed by Asuka Ohta and Hajime Wakai , under the direction of the original Super Mario Bros. composer , Koji Kondo , who also created the " <unk> BGM " , the main theme for regular levels . The game 's music dictates gameplay ; enemies jump and dance in time to the music . Predicting enemy movements , players can time their jumps with enemy movements to reach otherwise inaccessible areas . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 New Super Mario Bros. was released by Nintendo in North America on May 15 , 2006 , in Japan on May 25 , 2006 , in Australia on June 8 , 2006 , and in Europe on June 30 , 2006 . Nintendo did not specify why it chose to delay the game 's release in its home market of Japan by ten days , but GameSpot noted that " it stands to reason that the company simply wants a few more days to build inventory . " It was given generally favorable reviews , receiving an aggregated score of 89 on Metacritic and 89 @.@ 07 % on GameRankings . Praise focused on improvements made to the Mario franchise , while criticism targeted the game 's simplicity . In Japan , over 480 @,@ 000 units of New Super Mario Bros. were sold on the day it was released and 900 @,@ 000 copies in the first four days . At the time , it was the best @-@ selling debut for a Nintendo DS game in Japan , but it has since been surpassed by Pokémon Diamond and Pearl . It is Japan 's 26th best @-@ selling game in 2008 . In the United States , 500 @,@ 000 copies of New Super Mario Bros. were sold in the first 35 days , and one million copies were sold twelve weeks after its release . It was the 12th best @-@ selling game and the second best @-@ selling Nintendo DS game of December 2008 in the United States . Worldwide , five million copies were sold as of April 2008 , and over eighteen million as of March 2009 . As of March 31 , 2016 , the game 's worldwide sales have reached 30 @.@ 80 million , making it the best @-@ selling game for the DS and one of the best @-@ selling video games of all time . 
 = = = Critics = = = 
 The game has received critical acclaim , with several noting that New Super Mario Bros. was one of the best games available for the Nintendo DS . GameZone believed that it was the " hot game " to purchase for any DS owner , noting its " huge exploration potential " and reinvention of the platform game genre . Tom Bramwell of Eurogamer stated , " I 've done this sort of thing before hundreds of times across thousands of days in what feels like a dozen Mario games . I still love it . " Believing that experienced players would require very little time to complete the game , GameSpot nevertheless considered New Super Mario Bros. a " completely awesome " game that was an " absolutely necessary " video game to own . GamesRadar considered the game a bargain , noting that it included " a completely solid solo game , a simple @-@ but @-@ exciting two @-@ player , and then a collection of super @-@ quick stylus games " . 
 Several reviewers drew comparisons between New Super Mario Bros. and their favorite Mario games . Although some found that other Mario games were better , most reviewers were still pleased with the overall experience of the game . Some fans however , criticized the game for its low difficulty compared to other Mario games . Craig Harris of IGN was enthused with New Super Mario Bros. , stating that it was his new favorite platform game , beating out his previous favorite , Super Mario World 2 : Yoshi 's Island . Even though Super Mario World and Super Mario Bros. 3 were considered the best 2D Mario games by GamePro 's Mr. Marbles , he decided to add New Super Mario Bros. as his third favorite Mario game , which he admitted had much more replay value than the other two . Despite including new features such as a versus mode , the game made Game Revolution <unk> ask the question , " Can Mario ever truly be new again ? " It also disappointed Greg Sewart of X @-@ Play , who found that the game did not live up to the standards set by its predecessors , but still considered the game the best side @-@ scrolling video game available for the Nintendo DS . Finally , the game got a 96 % from The Official Nintendo Magazine , and thus , earned a ' Gold Award ' . 
 The game 's graphics and audio received praise in a number of reviews . The Computer and Video Games magazine was entertained by the " finely crafted slice of [ ... ] Mario " , along with the extra minigames offered . They believed that the audio was very good for a Nintendo DS game , predicting that " it 'd still scare the pants of [ sic ] the hard @-@ of @-@ hearing . " Despite being a 2D game , GameSpy still found that the 2D and 3D elements blended together perfectly in New Super Mario Bros. The game 's overall experience pleased 1UP.com , which applauded Nintendo 's ability to once again create an enjoyable , solid , and challenging portable experience . However , they were disappointed in the lack of imagination for this remake . Also reviewers quoted that the minigames were disappointing and recycled Super Mario 64 DS mini games , but praised the replay value in them . 
 = = = Awards , nominations , and rankings = = = 
 New Super Mario Bros. received numerous awards and accolades . It was given Game of the Month awards from Game Informer and Electronic Gaming Monthly , and it received Editors ' Choice Awards from IGN and GameSpot . The game was voted Best Handheld Game at the 2006 Spike Video Game Awards and Best Nintendo DS Game by GameSpot , and it won Best Platformer awards from X @-@ Play and Nintendo Power . The game was awarded Choice Video Game at the 2006 Teen Choice Awards , Nintendo Game of the Year at the 2006 Golden Joystick Award , and placed 30th in Official Nintendo Magazine 's 100 greatest Nintendo games of all time . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 New Super Mario Bros. introduces Dry Bowser , who has gone on to appear in other games in the series . He has appeared as a character separate from Bowser in games like Mario Kart Wii and Mario Tennis Open , and has appeared as the boss of the Special World castles in Super Mario 3D Land . He was also featured as a downloadable content character in Mario Kart 8 's second DLC Pack . 
 Some references to New Super Mario Bros. were made in Super Smash Bros. Brawl ; a remixed version of the " Main Theme " of the game plays in the Delfino Plaza stage , and some stickers based on artwork can be collected . The Mega Mushroom reappeared in Mario Kart Wii , New Super Mario Bros. 2 , and Super Mario 3D World , and is also remixed in Mario Tennis : Ultra Smash . 
 A follow @-@ up game , New Super Mario Bros. Wii , was released in late 2009 for the Wii , allowing up to four players simultaneously . The direct sequel , New Super Mario Bros. 2 , was announced on April 21 , 2012 and was released for Nintendo 3DS in August 2012 . New Super Mario Bros. U was released on the Wii U in November 2012 and is an indirect follow @-@ up to New Super Mario Bros. Wii . 
 The original New Super Mario Bros. was also released on the Wii U Virtual Console on April 2 , 2015 in Japan and May 14 , 2015 in North America . 
 = Kvitel = 
 This article refers to the prayer note ; for the card game see <unk> . 
 Kvitel ( Yiddish : <unk> , " little note " ; plural <unk> , Kvitelach ) refers to a practice developed by Hasidic Judaism in which a Hasid ( a follower of Hasidic Judaism ) writes a note with a <unk> prayer and gives it to a Rebbe ( Hasidic Jewish leader ) in order to receive the latter 's blessing . This prayer may be a general request for health , livelihood , or success , or a specific request such as recovery from illness , the ability to bear children , a wedding match , etc . 
 The writing , giving and reading of a kvitel is treated very seriously by Hasid and Rebbe alike , and is executed according to specific protocols . Because of their inherent sanctity , kvitelach may not be thrown away after use ; they are either burned or buried . 
 The practice of giving kvitelach continues today in all the Hasidic courts . Kvitelach are also placed on the graves of Rebbes and <unk> ( plural of " tzadik , " or Jewish holy man ) with the hope that the soul of the deceased will intercede for the petitioner in Heaven . 
 It is a centuries @-@ old custom for Jews to place kvitelach containing personal prayers to God between the stones of the Western Wall in Jerusalem . This practice has been also adopted by Christian pilgrims and foreign dignitaries as well . More than a million prayer notes are placed in the Western Wall each year . 
 = = Origin = = 
 It is unclear when the practice of writing and giving kvitelach began . This practice is not mentioned in the writings of the early <unk> , nor in the works of the school of Isaac Luria ( 1534 – 1572 ) , the father of modern Kabbalah . The first time it is mentioned is during the time of the Baal Shem Tov ( 1698 – 1762 ) , founder of Hasidism . 
 Some scholars have suggested that the practice is based on Biblical commentator Nahmanides 's ( 1194 – 1270 ) interpretation of the scriptural verse " And all those that were numbered of the children of Israel by their fathers ' houses , from twenty years old and upward , all that were able to go forth to war in Israel " ( Numbers 1 : 45 ) . In his commentary on the Torah ( the Five Books of Moses ) , Nahmanides contends that Moses asked each Jew to come before him to be counted . This personal appearance of the Jew before Moses , the tzadik ( Jewish holy man ) , foreshadowed the ceremony of the giving of a kvitel by the Hasid to his Rebbe . 
 Once the practice of giving kvitelach was established in Hasidic courts , it was treated very seriously . There were cases where Hasidic Jews hired a non @-@ Jew to ride or travel to the Rebbe on Shabbat ( the Jewish Sabbath ) to deliver a kvitel for a Jew who was ill , a clear violation of the Shabbat laws . Rabbi Sholom Mordechai <unk> ( 1835 – 1911 ) once responded to a questioner who asked whether a Jew could send a telegram on behalf of a sick person on Shabbat : " In my hometown of <unk> , there was a desperately sick person . When the Belzer Rebbe ( the Rebbe of the Belz Hasidic dynasty , Rabbi Sholom Rokeach ) was in Brod for Shabbat , the local rabbi allowed the Jews to have a gentile write the name of the sick person and his mother 's name and send this kvitel to Brod . " This action was vehemently protested by Rabbi Shlomo Kluger as well as by the Belzer Rebbe , and the rabbi was removed from his post . 
 = = Procedure = = 
 = = = Writing the kvitel = = = 
 In Hasidic courts , the kvitel is inscribed with the names of the petitioner and his family members , along with their specific requests . The form of the name is the person 's full Hebrew name and his mother 's Hebrew name ( e.g. Shmuel ben Chana , " Shmuel the son of Chana " ) , even if the Rebbe already knows who he is . It is customary to write the kvitel on a blank , unlined piece of paper . 
 Customs differ as to who writes the kvitel . In some courts , the Rebbe 's attendant writes the kvitel on behalf of the petitioner ; in others , a specific person is paid to write the kvitelach . Alternately , the petitioner himself writes the kvitel . 
 Various customs arose around the writing of a kvitel . It is considered a bad omen if a kvitel falls on the ground , or if sand is placed on it . ( Sand was commonly used as a drying agent for ink on paper . ) Care is taken to write the kvitel without any mistakes , as Hasidic Jews believe that kvitelach contain deep secrets . 
 = = = Giving the kvitel = = = 
 The kvitel is either sent to the Rebbe by messenger or mail , or given personally by the Hasid during his private audience with the Rebbe . The kvitel is usually given together with a sum of money known as a <unk> ( redemption ) , which is used by the Rebbe for the upkeep of his court or for distribution to charity . Some Rebbes requested from the Hasid a sum of money equal to twice the numerical value of the Hebrew word Chai ( life ) , which equals 18 . Others took an amount of money equal to the numerical value of the letters of the Hebrew names of the Hasid or his wife . 
 Women are also welcome to visit a Rebbe and present their kvitelach to him . However , the Rebbe does not look at the woman directly while giving his blessing . 
 The giving of the first kvitel cements the status of a newly appointed Hasidic Rebbe . In Belz tradition , the first kvitel to a new Rebbe is proffered by a follower of the Ropshitz Hasidic dynasty . Thus , when Rabbi Yissachar Dov Rokeach assumed the mantle of leadership in 1894 after the death of his father , Rabbi Yehoshua Rokeach , he was given his first kvitel by Rabbi Yissachar Dov of <unk> , a follower of the Ropshitz dynasty . Thirty @-@ three years later , following the funeral of Rabbi Yissachar Dov Rokeach , Rokeach 's son and successor , Rabbi Aharon Rokeach , received his first kvitelach from Rabbi Yissachar Dov of <unk> and two other followers of the Ropshitz dynasty . 
 The followers of the Ger Hasidic dynasty have in their possession the Kotzer Kvitel , a long note written by an elderly Hasid who had attended the courts of Rabbi Yehudah Aryeh Leib Alter ( the <unk> Emes ) , Rabbi <unk> Henoch of Alexander , Rabbi Yitzchak Meir Alter ( the <unk> Harim ) and Rabbi Menachem Mendel of <unk> . This Hasid presented the kvitel , containing his memories of these former Rebbes of the Ger dynasty , to Rabbi Avraham Mordechai Alter ( the <unk> Emes ) upon the latter 's appointment as Rebbe of the Ger dynasty . 
 = = = Reading the kvitel = = = 
 If the kvitel is delivered by mail or messenger , the Rebbe 's attendant reads it to the Rebbe . If the Hasid is present , the Rebbe reads the kvitel during their audience . Afterwards , the Rebbe blesses the petitioner . 
 Rebbes traditionally devote their utmost attention to reading kvitelach . It was said of the <unk> Rebbe , Rabbi <unk> Friedman , that when he read a kvitel , he put his whole being into the piece of paper before bestowing his blessing . The <unk> Rebbe , Rabbi Yoel Teitelbaum , was known to scrutinize each kvitel and point out errors in the writing of names of people he had never met . 
 Stories are told about Rebbes who were able to read into a kvitel the situations of those who were named in it . Once a bride @-@ to @-@ be and her mother visited the <unk> Rebbe , Rabbi <unk> Friedman , for a blessing . The Rebbe 's attendant wrote the kvitel hastily , noting next to the mother 's name that she was about to marry . The Rebbe glanced at the kvitel and said , " She is already married . " 
 When Rabbi Aharon Rokeach , the Belzer Rebbe , was hiding from the Nazis in the Kraków Ghetto in 1942 , he accepted a kvitel from one of the men who was assigned to protect him . As the names of the man 's children were read aloud , the Rebbe continually stopped the reader when he reached a certain child 's name and asked him to begin reading the kvitel again . This happened several times . Later the man learned that this son had died suddenly during the war , but the rest of his family survived . 
 It was said of " great Rebbes " that in their presence , petitioners would be struck with awe and would accidentally hand over a blank piece of paper instead of the kvitel . The Rebbe would read the blank page and understand exactly what the person wanted . 
 In the court of <unk> , it was known that if the Rebbe asked for a cigarette to smoke in the middle of reading a kvitel , it was a sign that the petitioner 's request had been accepted . Rabbi Eliezer <unk> Friedman , a follower of the fourth <unk> Rebbe , Rabbi Chaim Meir Hager , witnessed this in 1965 when he delivered a kvitel to the Rebbe on behalf of a Melbourne Jew stricken with cancer and the Rebbe asked for a cigarette while reading the kvitel . The man recovered completely . However , in 1972 , immediately after the death of the Rebbe , the Melbourne Jew fell ill with the same disease and succumbed to it . 
 = = At a grave = = 
 It is a common practice for Hasidic Jews to place kvitelach on the gravesite of a Rebbe or tzadik with the belief that the soul of the deceased will pray for them in Heaven . The visitor usually sits beside the grave to write his kvitel and meditate on his request , and then tears the kvitel and throws it on top of the grave . Many graves of Jewish holy men are constructed with special apertures for the insertion of kvitelach . 
 = = At the Western Wall = = 
 The kvitelach placed in the Western Wall differ from the kvitelach given in Hasidic courts , as they contain prayers , requests or messages written directly to God . These prayer notes are folded and wedged into the cracks and crevices of the Wall . The rationale for this practice has been traced to the <unk> teaching that the Divine Presence has never moved from the Western Wall , and the Kabbalistic teaching that all prayers ascend to Heaven through the Temple Mount , which the Western Wall abuts . More than a million prayer notes are placed in the Western Wall each year . 
 The practice of placing prayer notes in the Western Wall has also been adopted by Christian pilgrims and people of other faiths . Foreign dignitaries who have publicly placed a kvitel in the Western Wall include Pope John Paul II in 2000 , U.S. Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton in 2005 , Pope Benedict XVI in 2008 , U.S. presidential candidate Barack Obama in 2008 , and U.S. presidential candidate Mitt Romney and his wife Ann in 2012 . Pope Francis inserted a handwritten Spanish language text of the Lord 's Prayer in the Wall during his visit in 2014 . 
 Based on the 11th century French rabbi Rabbeinu Gershom 's ban against reading another person 's mail , Jewish law forbids the reading of notes that have been inserted in the Western Wall . 
 = = Disposal of kvitelach = = 
 Kvitelach may not be thrown away ; there is a difference of opinion as to whether they should be burned or buried . According to Rabbi Shmuel Rabinovitch , Rabbi of the Western Wall and author of <unk> HaKotel , a book of laws regarding the Western Wall , burning is a " pure " way to deal with the notes , but burying them is more honorable . Twice a year , Rabbi Rabinovitch and his assistants collect the hundreds of thousands of kvitelach left in the Wall and bury them in the Jewish cemetery on the Mount of Olives . 
 Kvitelach left at gravesites are traditionally burned . The gravesite of the sixth and seventh <unk> Rebbes , Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak <unk> and Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson , includes a fax machine which receives over 700 faxes a day , and a computer which receives 400 emails daily . These kvitelach are all printed and then taken to the graves , where they are torn into shreds and placed atop the graves . When the pile grows too high , the shredded notes are burned . 
 = = Electronic kvitelach = = 
 In today 's electronic age , many online services offer petitioners the chance to send their kvitel to the Western Wall via email , fax , text messaging and Internet ; the kvitel is then printed out and inserted in the cracks of the Wall . The " Send a Kvitel Service " of <unk> receives kvitelach via Internet and then dispatches them to the gravesites of <unk> in North America with people who travel to these gravesites . The <unk> Rebbe himself accepts kvitelach and <unk> via Internet . 
 Sending kvitelach to the grave of a Rebbe or tzadik has also become a fund @-@ raising tool . <unk> <unk> Rachel ( <unk> Rachel Foundation ) encourages donors to send messages and prayers which will be read out at Rachel 's Tomb . Similarly , the Breslov Research Institute website offers donors the opportunity to send a " digital kvitel " to be read by the grave of Rebbe Nachman of Breslov in Uman , Ukraine . 
 = Sweetums ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " Sweetums " is the 15th episode of the second season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 21st overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on February 4 , 2010 . In the episode , the Parks and Recreation Department hosts a public forum to discuss a sponsorship agreement with local candy manufacturer , Sweetums . Leslie and Ann warn the public of the dangers of supposedly nutritious snack bars called " <unk> " , which are filled with simple sugars , notably high fructose corn syrup . 
 The episode was written by Alan Yang and directed by Dean Holland . " Sweetums " addressed several issues including the politics of corporate sponsorship , the use of propaganda and free gifts to manipulate public opinion , and the dangers of corn syrup @-@ related products , which are regularly available in vending machines at public places , such as schools , parks or municipal buildings . 
 The episode featured a guest performance by Justin Theroux as Leslie 's boyfriend , Justin Anderson . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Sweetums " was seen by 4 @.@ 87 million households , and drew the season 's highest rating among viewers aged between 18 and 49 . The episode received positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Pawnee Parks and Recreation Department considers a potential sponsorship deal with Sweetums , a local candy manufacturer hoping to market " nutritious " snack bars to park visitors . Ron ( Nick Offerman ) supports the deal as he advocates governmental privatization and emphasizes consumer choice over public safety . Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) initially supports the deal as well , until Ann ( Rashida Jones ) informs her they are filled with unhealthy corn syrup . Leslie arranges a public forum for Pawnee park visitors so they can make an informed choice about Sweetums products . Ron is unhappy with the arrangement , and gets angry with Leslie worrying about how much he is drinking during a recent outing , feeling she is stifling his personal freedoms . During the forum , Sweetums representatives screen propaganda films , highlighting consumer satisfaction , while Leslie responds by screening a 30 @-@ year @-@ old Sweetums film which discusses how corn syrup and other snack bar ingredients make cattle unhealthy . At the end of Leslie 's screening , Sweetums brings in its commercial 's primary actor , the company 's CEO Nick Newport Jr . ( Gary Weeks ) and his son and daughter , Denver and Dakota . Denver instructs the forum audience members to look under their seats for candy . The forum audience exclaims with excitement and ultimately votes in favor of the sponsorship deal . Ron taunts Leslie by eating two unhealthful servings of steak ( " turf and turf " ) , but she remains genuinely concerned for his health . Ron later apologizes to Leslie for having " been a horse 's ass " . 
 For the B @-@ plot , Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) attempts to move out of his home after his divorce from Wendy ( Jama Williamson ) . Tom again hesitates to reveal his feelings for his ex @-@ wife , whom he married to protect from deportation . Mark ( Paul Schneider ) reluctantly helps Tom through the process as he is a truck owner and could not think of a " valid excuse " . Donna ( Retta ) , April ( Aubrey Plaza ) , Jerry ( Jim O 'Heir ) and Andy ( Chris Pratt ) join to assist Tom move his many boxes to his new home , while Tom himself works very little . At the end of the episode , Tom learns that his new home has a gas leak and that he is unable to move into his new home until Monday . Tom asks the department members to take the boxes into their own homes , but they ultimately bring his possessions and leave them in the Parks and Recreation Department office . Throughout the move , April continues to develop romantic feelings for Andy , who remains oblivious to her affections . When April 's boyfriend Derek ( Blake Lee ) and his gay boyfriend Ben ( Josh Duvendeck ) arrive at Wendy 's house , they mock Andy , which prompts April to refer to their behavior as " really gay for a gay couple . " In their final appearance in the episode , Andy asks April to watch him roller @-@ blade after work , but April declines his offer , implying that the comments of her boyfriend and his boyfriend may have confounded her feelings towards Andy . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Sweetums " was written by Alan Yang and directed by Dean Holland . The episode addresses the supposed dangers of corn syrup @-@ related products , which are regularly available in vending machines at public places , such as schools , parks or municipal buildings . The issue has been the subject of several town meetings like those featured in the episode , and companies use propaganda videos similar to that used by Sweetums in the episode . " Sweetums " featured one of a string of slated guest appearances by Justin Theroux as Justin Anderson , a love interest for Leslie , although Theroux only appeared in the cold open scene of " Sweetums " . In one scene , Ron builds a wooden harp to prove to Leslie what he is capable of doing while drinking alcohol . This element of Ron 's character was inspired by actor Nick Offerman , who in addition to comedy runs an independent carpentry business called Offerman Woodshop . Michael Schur , co @-@ creator of Parks and Recreation , said he planned to incorporate it into Ron 's character soon after learning about Offerman 's carpentry skills . A Sweetums stand is visible during a scene in the future Parks and Recreation episode " Park Safety " , a reference to the outcome of the " Sweetums " episode . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 During one scene , Leslie visits the library and is treated in a hostile manner by the librarian . This is a reference to the previous second season episode , " Ron and Tammy " , which established a long @-@ standing feud between the Pawnee parks and recreation department and the town 's library system . Ron commented that all government should be privatized and parks should be run by Chuck E. Cheese 's , a chain of family entertainment centers . This is a reference to the Parks and Recreation pilot episode , in which Ron said all government should be privatized and follow the Chuck E. Cheese business model . Tom creates what he describes as a moving robot that plays music called " DJ Roomba " by attaching an iPod music player to a Roomba , an autonomous robotic vacuum cleaner . 
 After Jerry accidentally steps on DJ Roomba , Tom and April arrange for the " ghost " of DJ Roomba to follow Jerry around the Pawnee town hall playing an infinite loop of music by the hip hop band The Black Eyed Peas . After expressing excitement that he got DJ Roomba to play music by Dave Matthews Band , Andy sings the line , " Little baby " from the band 's song , " So Much to Say " . During one scene , Andy is impressed with Tom 's Canadian DVD version of the 1999 thriller , Deep Blue Sea . Tom says the disc includes 22 extra minutes and a commentary track in which actor LL Cool J , who appears in the film , raps all his dialogue . Leslie tells Ron she had already written a eulogy for him and it starts , " Oh captain , my captain ! Ron Swanson : a swan song " , a reference to the Walt Whitman poem " O Captain ! My Captain ! " . While Tom is trying on various articles of party clothes , Leslie comments that he looks like Encyclopedia Brown , a young detective from a series of Donald J. Sobol children 's novels . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American NBC broadcast on February 4 , 2010 , " Sweetums " was seen by 4 @.@ 87 million households , according to Nielsen Media Research . It marked a 15 percent increase over the previous week 's episode , " Leslie 's House " . " Sweetums " drew a 2 @.@ 3 rating / 6 share among viewers between 18 and 49 , which was the highest rating of its kind for a second season episode at the time , although the season premiere episode " Pawnee Zoo " drew a slightly larger viewership of about 5 million households . During its original broadcast , " Sweetums " ranked third in its 8 : 30 p.m. , behind Bones on Fox , which drew 12 @.@ 64 million household viewers , and Survivor on CBS , which drew 8 @.@ 39 million households . 
 " Sweetums " received generally positive reviews . Matt Fowler of IGN called it a " fantastic episode " , and called the world of Parks and Recreation rich , lively and " a beautiful mosaic " . Fowler praised individual comedic moments , like the DJ Roomba jokes and portrayal of the easily fooled Pawnee citizens , as well as the development of storylines like that of Tom and Wendy , and Andy and April . Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club praised the episode for revealing more about the mythology of the town of Pawnee , such as the strong influence Sweetums holds over the residents , and the ongoing feud between the parks department and the library . He also praised the character development of characters like Tom and April , adding , " It 's amazing to me how in such a short time , Parks & Rec has taken the most one @-@ note characters and made them truly three @-@ dimensional . " 
 The Star @-@ Ledger television columnist Alan Sepinwall declared " Sweetums " one of the episodes he would suggest to newcomers seeking to become familiar with Parks and Recreation . Sepinwall enjoyed the main story with Leslie and Ron , which he said " returned to a <unk> for the series : the civil servants having to deal with the insane questions and complaints from their constituents " . He also felt Tom 's subplot was impressive because it made him feel sympathy for Tom due to his problems with Wendy , despite the fact that Tom was being so inconsiderate to his friends . Sandra Gonzalez of Entertainment Weekly particularly praised Aziz Ansari and Ron Swanson , as well as the moving subplot , which she said spotlighted the show 's impressive supporting cast . Gonzalez felt the main plot " fell a little flat " , but was helped by the conflict between Leslie and Ron . Steve Kandell of New York magazine praised the episode , and said the script keeps the characters grounded without making them into caricatures . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " Sweetums " , along with the other 23 second season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode . 
 = Typhoon Tingting = 
 Typhoon Tingting was a destructive tropical cyclone that produced record @-@ breaking rains in Guam . The eighth named storm of the 2004 Pacific typhoon season , Tingting originated from a tropical depression over the open waters of the western Pacific Ocean . The storm gradually intensified as it traveled northwest , becoming a typhoon on June 28 and reaching its peak the following day while passing through the Mariana Islands . After maintaining typhoon intensity for three days , a combination of dry air and cooler sea surface temperatures caused the storm to weaken as it traveled northward . On July 1 , the storm passed by the Bonin Islands , off the coast of Japan , before moving out to sea . By July 4 , <unk> had transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . The remnants were last reported by the Japan Meteorological Agency , the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for the western Pacific basin , near the international date line on July 13 . 
 While passing through the Mariana Islands , Typhoon Tingting produced torrential rains which triggered flooding and numerous landslides . In Guam , 554 @.@ 99 mm ( 21 @.@ 85 in ) of rain fell in 24 hours , breaking the daily and monthly rainfall records for June . Winds gusted up to 212 km / h ( 132 mph ) , causing significant structural damage , amounting to $ 6 million in losses . One fatality occurred as a result of flooding and nine others resulted from rough seas . In the Mariana Islands , 71 homes were destroyed and hundreds were damaged ; losses totaled $ 11 @.@ 2 million . In Japan , two people were killed by rough seas . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On June 24 , 2004 , an area of low pressure associated with developing convection formed about 1 @,@ 110 km ( 690 mi ) to the east @-@ southeast of Guam . Early the next day , as the system began to intensify , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) began monitoring the low pressure as a tropical depression . With low wind shear and favorable diffluence , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert for the storm at 0000 UTC , classifying it as Tropical Depression 11W twelve hours later . The depression traveled towards the northwest along the edge of a mid @-@ latitude ridge . Outer bands began developing around the system , although the ridge to its north restricted outflow . About 24 hours after the JMA designated the depression , the agency upgraded it to a tropical storm and named it Tingting , which was contributed by Hong Kong and is a fairly common pet name for young girls . At 0600 UTC on June 26 , the JTWC also classified Tingting as a tropical storm . 
 As Tingting tracked northwestward , it continued to develop outflow in all directions . The storm slowly intensified as it traveled towards the Mariana Islands , strengthening into a severe tropical storm early on June 27 . Later that day , a ragged eye began to form . The ridge influencing the track of Tingting moved eastward , causing the storm to begin a gradual turn towards the north At 0000 UTC on June 28 , the JTWC upgraded the storm to a minimal typhoon , the equivalent of a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , and the JMA followed about six hours later . Several hours later , Tingting passed through the central Mariana Islands , tracking near the small island of <unk> , while continuing to intensify . At 0900 UTC , the typhoon reached its peak intensity with winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) according to both agencies and a minimum pressure of 955 hPa ( mbar ) . With low wind shear , further strengthening was anticipated as it neared the Bonin Islands . However , the typhoon began to weaken due to increasing dry air and decreasing sea surface temperatures . On June 30 , Tingting passed within 95 km ( 60 mi ) east of Iwo Jima . Later that day , the storm 's eye dissipated as convection around the center of circulation weakened . 
 On July 1 , the JTWC downgraded Tingting to a tropical storm . At 1200 UTC the following day , the JMA downgraded the storm to a severe tropical storm as winds decreased below 120 km / h ( 75 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) . Convection associated with the storm began to diminish as Tingting began to undergo an extratropical transition . Although the storm maintained its intensity as a severe tropical storm , it was moving into increasingly unfavorable conditions and weakening was anticipated . As Tingting tracked towards the northeast into the mid @-@ latitude westerlies , it completed its extratropical transition on July 4 . After becoming an extratropical cyclone , Tingting accelerated towards the north before abruptly stalling near the Kamchatka Peninsula . On July 6 , the extratropical remnants of Tingting were absorbed by a developing area of low pressure located to the south of the former typhoon . However , the JMA continued to monitor Tingting as a separate system as it executed a counter @-@ clockwise loop though July 10 before heading towards the international date line . The storm was last reported on July 13 to the west Aleutian Islands . 
 = = = Differences among warning centers = = = 
 The Japan Meteorological Agency uses 10 @-@ minute sustained winds for its tropical cyclone tracking information , while the Joint Typhoon Warning Center uses 1 @-@ minute sustained winds . JMA 's peak intensity for Tingting was 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) 10 @-@ minute sustained , or 160 km / h ( 105 mph ) 1 @-@ minute sustained . The JTWC 's peak intensity for Tingting was also 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) 1 @-@ minute sustained , or 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) 10 @-@ minute sustained . The Hong Kong Observatory also assessed Tingting to have winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) 10 @-@ minute sustained , or 160 km / h ( 105 mph ) 1 @-@ minute sustained . However , Dr. Karl Hoarau of Cergy @-@ Pontoise University near Paris , France proposed that Tingting was stronger than officially reported . He estimated that the storm reached peak 1 @-@ minute sustained winds between 160 km / h ( 105 mph ) and 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) on June 28 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Throughout its track , Tingting was responsible for 12 fatalities , 10 in the Mariana Islands and two in Japan ; it also left $ 23 @.@ 7 million in damage behind , $ 17 @.@ 2 million in the Mariana Islands and $ 6 @.@ 5 million in Japan . 
 = = = Mariana Islands = = = 
 An estimated 300 people in Guam evacuated to emergency shelters in advance of Typhoon Tingting . Several schools throughout Guam were being used as shelters . A tropical storm warning and a flash flood warning , which were issued several hours before the typhoon warning , were kept in place for Guam until June 29 . A small craft advisory was also issued for rest of the Mariana Islands . A typhoon warning was declared for most of the islands on June 27 . The United States Air Force Base in the Mariana Islands was placed under Tropical Cyclone Condition of Readiness Four , the lowest level of readiness , as Tingting approached . 
 As Typhoon Tingting approached the Mariana Islands , three Chinese women drowned in rough seas produced by the storm in Saipan . On June 28 , Tingting produced strong winds throughout the region . Sustained winds on Guam reached 82 km / h ( 51 mph ) with gusts to 106 km / h ( 66 mph ) ; a pressure of 994 @.@ 6 hPa ( mbar ) was also recorded on the island . Although located closer to the center of Tingting , Rota reported lower winds than Guam ; the highest sustained wind reached 70 km / h ( 44 mph ) with gusts of 93 km / h ( 58 mph ) . Due to the lack of sufficient observations on Tinian , the highest sustained winds recorded were suspected to be lower than what they really were . Winds of 56 km / h ( 35 mph ) were recorded several times with gusts to 84 km / h ( 52 mph ) . Sustained winds on Saipan were recorded up to 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) with gusts to 124 km / h ( 77 mph ) ; a pressure of 984 @.@ 9 hPa ( mbar ) was also recorded . The highest winds during Typhoon Tingting throughout the Mariana Islands were measured on Pagan Island where 106 km / h ( 66 mph ) sustained winds were recorded along with a gust of 212 km / h ( 132 mph ) . 
 Although Tingting passed about 400 km ( 250 mi ) to the northeast of Guam , torrential rains from a monsoonal feeder band produced record @-@ breaking rainfall . In the span of 24 hours , 554 @.@ 99 mm ( 21 @.@ 85 in ) of rain fell on Guam , shattering both the record for highest single day rainfall and the monthly rainfall for June at 80 @.@ 26 mm ( 3 @.@ 16 in ) and 371 @.@ 09 mm ( 14 @.@ 61 in ) respectively . Most of the northern areas of the island received more than 510 mm ( 20 in ) of rain but the southern areas of Guam reported much lower totals . At Anderson Air Force Base , a total of 287 @.@ 78 mm ( 11 @.@ 33 in ) of rain was recorded over a 30 @-@ hour span . Rota recorded much less rainfall than Guam , having 145 @.@ 28 mm ( 5 @.@ 72 in ) during 24 hours and a storm total of 221 @.@ 99 mm ( 8 @.@ 75 in ) . No rainfall was recorded on both Tinian and Pagan Island due to the lack of observations . On Saipan , a total of 197 @.@ 61 mm ( 7 @.@ 78 in ) was measured . 
 The record @-@ breaking rainfall in Guam produced severe flooding and numerous landslides throughout the island . A total of 57 homes were destroyed and another 624 were damaged . Crop damages on the island amounted to $ 500 @,@ 000 with most of the farmers reporting total crop losses . One person died after being swept away along a flooded road . Total property damages totaled to $ 6 million . Most of the damage on Rota resulted from flooding and high seas . The port on the island suffered $ 1 million in damages and crop losses amounted to $ 500 @,@ 000 . The same day that Tingting made its closest approach to Guam , a 19 @-@ year @-@ old was swept off a reef and drowned in rough seas produced by the typhoon . On Tinian and Saipan , unlike Guam and Rota , most of the damage was a result of the winds . A total of 4 homes were destroyed and 24 others sustained major damage on Tinian while another 4 were destroyed , 81 sustained major damage , and another 101 were affected on Saipan . Schools on the two islands sustained a combined $ 92 @,@ 737 in damages . At Saipan 's port , an oil tanker sank , spilling thousands of gallons of oil into the water . 
 Throughout the Saipan , 50 power lines , 20 transformers , and 6 power poles were damaged or destroyed , leaving 25 percent of the islands ' residents without power and $ 300 @,@ 000 in damages . An estimated 90 percent of the banana trees were knocked down , contributing to the $ 518 @,@ 000 in crop losses . Property losses on the two islands was estimated at $ 1 @.@ 6 million . On the islands of Alamagan , Pagan , and Agrihan all private homes , a total of six , were destroyed , the food stores and crops were lost , and the water supply was contaminated . The main public facility , which was used as a storm shelter on Alamagan , sustained heavy damage . Damages from the three islands amounted to $ 500 @,@ 000 . The following day , five people went out kayaking however , the rough seas overturned the kayaks and all five drowned . Numerous water rescues on jet skis had to be made as residents became stranded in their cars after driving into flooded roads . Damages throughout the islands amounted to $ 11 @.@ 2 million . 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 Between June 30 and July 1 , Tingting brushed the Bonin Islands with heavy rainfall and high winds . The storm dropped 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) of precipitation on Chichi @-@ jima , of which 77 mm ( 3 in ) fell in 24 hours . Chichi @-@ jima experienced the strongest winds associated with the cyclone in the Bonin Islands ; sustained winds reached 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) and gusts peaked at 146 km / h ( 91 mph ) . At 1500 UTC , a pressure of 959 @.@ 4 hectopascals ( 28 @.@ 33 inHg ) was recorded on the island . The high winds produced by the storm caused power outages throughout the islands , with Chichi @-@ jima losing power for nearly two hours . No known property damage resulted from the passage of Tingting . 
 Throughout eastern Japan , large swells produced by Tingting caused moderate coastal damage and killed two people . In Urakawa District , Hokkaidō , the local fishing industry sustained considerable damage , amounting to 20 @.@ 5 million JPY ( $ 240 @,@ 000 USD ) . Moisture from the storm also enhanced rainfall in the Shizuoka Prefecture , resulting in a record daily rainfall of 368 mm ( 14 @.@ 5 in ) in Shizuoka City on June 29 . The rains led to significant flooding and several landslides ; 921 homes were flooded and an estimated 160 @,@ 000 residences were without power at the height of the storm . Damage was estimated to be 540 million JPY ( $ 6 @.@ 3 million USD ) . 
 = = Aftermath and retirement = = 
 On July 9 , the Government of the Mariana Islands requested that President George W. Bush declare a major disaster area for the commonwealth . Governor Juan N. <unk> reported that the islands needed at least $ 2 @.@ 5 million to repair damages from the typhoon . The cost to repair infrastructure and clean up debris on Rota totaled $ 762 @,@ 000 . A helicopter carrying relief supplies was sent to the Pagan and Agrihan , where people had no food . The American Red Cross also provided $ 17 @,@ 000 in assistance . The Government of Guam requested $ 6 million in aid from the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) to repair the damages from Tingting . On July 29 , George Bush approved the request for a disaster declaration and federal aid began to be sent to the Mariana Islands and Guam . Almost a month later , the islands of <unk> , Alamagan , and Pagan were granted public assistance . In mid @-@ August , Typhoon Chaba caused significant damage in the Mariana Islands . A bill was passed following the storm to allow up to 500 people to be hired as temporary workers on Saipan and Tinian . In mid @-@ September , a request was made by the commonwealth for $ 10 million in natural disaster mitigation following the effects of successive typhoons in the region . The funds were to be used for cleanup efforts , aid residents struggling in the wake of the storms and help reduce unemployment . 
 The typhoon 's name originated from Hong Kong ; Tingting is a girls ' given name ( Chinese : <unk> ; Cantonese Yale : <unk> @-@ <unk> ) from the area . It was part of a series of typhoon names that are reduplicated female , like <unk> , Shanshan and Lingling . During the 38th session ( 2005 ) of the <unk> @-@ WMO Typhoon Committee , Hong Kong requested that Tingting be removed from the lists of typhoon names . It would later replace it with <unk> ( a reference to Lion Rock ) . 
 = Sinestro Corps War = 
 " Sinestro Corps War " is an American comic book crossover event published by DC Comics in its Green Lantern and Green Lantern Corps titles . Written by Geoff Johns and Dave Gibbons and drawn by Ivan Reis , Patrick Gleason , and Ethan Van Sciver , the 11 @-@ part saga was originally published between June and December 2007 . In addition to the main storyline , four supplemental " Tales of the Sinestro Corps " one @-@ shot specials and a Blue Beetle tie @-@ in issue were concurrently released . 
 The story centers on the Green Lanterns of Earth — Hal Jordan , Kyle Rayner , John Stewart and Guy Gardner — and the rest of the Green Lantern Corps as they fight an interstellar war against the Sinestro Corps , an army led by the former Green Lantern Sinestro who are armed with yellow power rings and seek a universe ruled through fear . A 1986 Alan Moore " Tales of the Green Lantern Corps " story was the thematic basis of the storyline . Many characters were changed , killed off or re @-@ introduced as a result of the event . 
 Critical and fan reception to " Sinestro Corps War " was highly positive . Many reviewers ranked it among the top comic books of the year and the storyline 's first issue garnered a 2008 Eisner Award nomination for Best Penciller / Inker or Penciller / Inker Team . The storyline was also a financial success , and several issues underwent multiple printings . " Sinestro Corps War " is the second part of a trilogy in the Green Lantern storyline , preceded by the 2005 miniseries Green Lantern : Rebirth . The conclusion of " Sinestro Corps War " sets up the third and final part of the trilogy , Blackest Night , which was published in 2009 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Following his defeat in Green Lantern : Rebirth , the events of Green Lantern : Sinestro Corps Special # 1 see the supervillain Sinestro retreat to the planet Qward in the <unk> Universe . There he amasses an army , the Sinestro Corps , that he selects based upon their ability to " instill great fear " . Each member is armed with a yellow power ring , mirroring the green ones of the Green Lantern Corps . Amongst Sinestro 's allies are Parallax and the resurrected Anti @-@ Monitor . The Sinestro Corps then launch an all @-@ out assault against the Green Lantern Corps and the universe itself . 
 During the assault on Oa , the Sinestro Corps manages to inflict heavy casualties and free Superman @-@ Prime and the Cyborg Superman from their imprisonment . Kyle Rayner is captured and transported to Qward , where Sinestro manages to separate Rayner from the symbiote Ion allowing Parallax to possess him . In Green Lantern ( vol . 4 ) # 21 the heroes Hal Jordan , John Stewart and Guy Gardner attempt to rescue fallen comrade Kyle Rayner , but are themselves entrapped , with Jordan transported to face Sinestro and his allies . A failed bid to rescue Jordan depicted in Green Lantern ( vol . 4 ) # 22 sees surviving members of the Green Lantern Corps forced underground and split into two groups . While one group attempts to free Jordan only to find themselves ambushed , the other successfully rescues Ion . They then re @-@ unite with their ambushed comrades and together they escape from Qward back to the positive matter universe . Hal , John and Guy return to Earth to warn the Justice League of the Anti @-@ Monitor 's return . 
 As the Sinestro Corps spreads out to ambush Green Lanterns across the universe , Green Lantern ( vol . 4 ) # 23 sees the Guardians decide to rewrite their sacred text , the Book of Oa . They remove a section devoted to a prophecy concerning the " Blackest Night " , against the objections of two of their number , Ganthet and Sayd . They then add ten new laws , the first of which authorizes the use of lethal force against the Sinestro Corps , while Ganthet and Sayd are expelled from Oa . As the Green Lanterns gather on Oa in preparation for a Sinestro Corps assault , the Sinestro Corps teleport themselves and their Central Power Battery instead to a new <unk> , their objective revealed to be Earth . Events in Green Lantern Corps ( vol . 2 ) # 16 show Hal informing the Green Lantern Corps of Sinestro 's plans . 
 Green Lantern ( vol . 4 ) # 24 continues the story , with Green Lanterns and Sinestro Corps members battling across Earth . Hal manages to free Kyle from Parallax before the entity is imprisoned in their power batteries by Ganthet and Sayd . After John and Guy arrive , the former Guardians reveal to them the prophecy of the " Blackest Night " , seen in Green Lantern ( vol . 4 ) # 25 . It foretells of five more Corps arising , each based on a different color and emotion . After the five corps are established , a " War of Light " will ensue , in which all the corps are destroyed , leading to the " Blackest Night " . 
 The Guardians arrive on Earth and appoint Sodam Yat to be the new Ion . After a lengthy struggle in New York , the Sinestro Corps are defeated by the overwhelming numbers against them . One of the Guardians sacrifices himself to send Superman @-@ Prime to an alternate universe and another , Scar , suffers a major wound at the hands of the Anti @-@ Monitor , while Hal and Kyle subdue and arrest Sinestro in Coast City . It is learned 440 Green Lanterns perished during the course of the war . 
 As seen in Green Lantern ( vol . 4 ) # 25 , the Guardians decide to bring the second of the new laws into effect . After realizing that the " Blackest Night " prophecy will come to pass , Ganthet and Sayd depart after creating a blue power ring with the intention of creating their own Corps , based on the spreading of Hope to the rest of the universe . The Anti @-@ Monitor , having been blown across the vacuum of space at the battle 's climax , finds itself on a dark planet . Here it is transformed by an unknown force into a Black Power Battery . 
 = = Origins = = 
 " Sinestro Corps War " was based on concepts introduced by Alan Moore and Kevin O 'Neill in the short story " Tygers " , published in Tales of the Green Lantern Corps Annual # 2 ( 1986 ) . Writers Geoff Johns and Dave Gibbons incorporated several ideas from Moore 's stories into " Sinestro Corps War " , including the prophecy of the Blackest Night , Sodam Yat , <unk> the Sentient City and the Children of the White Lobe . <unk> Pon , a minor character only mentioned once in Moore 's " <unk> Doesn 't <unk> " story from 25 years previous , also makes an appearance in Green Lantern # 25 . 
 Work began on " Sinestro Corps War " in September 2006 . The structure was fluid , at one point becoming a few issues with two bookends to just one gigantic issue . The title was originally just " Sinestro Corps " , but during development the creators added the word " War " . Eventually the structure finalized into a one @-@ shot special for release in June , after which the story would alternate between Green Lantern and Green Lantern Corps until November . After the crossover 's initial publishing successes , DC added four Tales of the Sinestro Corps one @-@ shots to the publishing schedule . 
 Johns and Ethan Van Sciver first announced the crossover during the DC " Big Guns " panel at the 2006 Fan Expo Canada , with Johns calling it " the next level of Rebirth " . By January 2007 , Johns , Gibbons and editor Peter Tomasi had planned out most of the storyline . Sterling Gates , whom Johns had met at a convention , was brought in to write a backup story for the Superman @-@ Prime one @-@ shot and co @-@ write Green Lantern / Sinestro Corps Secret Files # 1 . 
 The creators called " Sinestro Corps War " " World War II with the entire universe " . In a September 2007 interview , Johns compared " Sinestro Corps War " to the Star Wars trilogy , with Green Lantern : Rebirth as A New Hope and " Sinestro Corps War " as The Empire Strikes Back . References to other science fiction stories were made by artist Ivan Reis , who inserted characters such as E.T. , ALF and a Predator into large two @-@ page illustrations . The writers also included the sound " EPA " in Green Lantern # 25 as a direct reference to a scene in The Simpsons Movie where Comic Book Guy says it is the sound Green Lantern made when Sinestro threw him in a vat of acid . 
 = = Format = = 
 The main story consisted of 11 parts running through the Green Lantern and Green Lantern Corps books . Expanding upon the overall story are four one @-@ shots labeled Tales of the Sinestro Corps , as well as one tie @-@ in with Blue Beetle # 20 . Part One , the one @-@ shot Green Lantern : Sinestro Corps Special # 1 , was released in June 2007 . Parts Two through Ten were released between August and December , alternating between Green Lantern # 21 – 25 and Green Lantern Corps # 14 – 18 , with an epilogue in Green Lantern # 26 . The content of Green Lantern Corps # 19 was changed to illustrate the battle between Sodam Yat and Superman @-@ Prime in response to the fans ' reaction to the story . Geoff Johns announced in October 2007 that the conclusion Green Lantern # 25 would be delayed two weeks . After the storyline concluded , Green Lantern / Sinestro Corps Secret Files # 1 was released in December . The issue further explored the back story of the opposing groups and listed every member of the Green Lantern Corps and Sinestro Corps . 
 There was much internal discussion at DC about how the storyline would be collected . Eventually DC decided to release two hardcover volumes ( a February 2008 release containing the first five parts of the story and a June 2008 release containing the last six issues ) and a June 2008 hardcover collecting the tie @-@ in issues and backstories . This follows DC Comics ' recent trend of releasing durable hardcover collections initially , followed later by <unk> . 
 = = = Tales of the Sinestro Corps = = = 
 In addition to the main story , DC released four Tales of the Sinestro Corps one @-@ shots in September , October and November 2007 . The issues were late additions to the crossover that DC added after the initial successes of " Sinestro Corps War " . A hardcover collection of the four issues was released in June 2008 . The Tales of the Sinestro Corps one @-@ shots focused on : 
 Parallax , written by Ron Marz and illustrated by Adriana Melo and Marlo <unk> . 
 Cyborg Superman , written by Alan Burnett and illustrated by Patrick Blaine and Jay <unk> . 
 Superman @-@ Prime ( previously solicited as about the Anti @-@ Monitor ) , written by Geoff Johns and illustrated by Pete Woods . The issue also featured the backup story " Fear is a Baby 's Cry " written by Sterling Gates and illustrated by Jerry Ordway . 
 Ion , written by Ron Marz and illustrated by Michael <unk> . 
 = = Story and character changes = = 
 " Sinestro Corps War " introduced the Sinestro Corps in full after allusions to them throughout the post @-@ One Year Later Green Lantern title . Sinestro received a major thematic overhaul as a result of his leadership of his eponymous Corps , with parallels drawn with Adolf Hitler and Nazi Germany . Green Lantern villains Superboy @-@ Prime ( later Superman @-@ Prime ) , Cyborg Superman and the Manhunters became members of the Sinestro Corps . The Anti @-@ Monitor also made his first reappearance since his death at the conclusion of Crisis on Infinite Earths in 1985 as the " Guardian " of the Sinestro Corps and later the power source of the Black Lanterns . Superboy @-@ Prime was renamed Superman @-@ Prime during the event . Ostensibly to illustrate his coming of age in the story , Geoff Johns mentioned the ongoing legal dispute over the Superboy name as another reason for the character 's new name . 
 Some changes were also made to the heroes during the course of the storyline . The role of Ion passed from Kyle Rayner to Sodam Yat , making Yat the " strongest Green Lantern in the universe " as a result according to Johns . The Book of Oa was rewritten by the Guardians to institute 10 new laws for the Green Lantern Corps , the first of which authorized lethal force against the Sinestro Corps . The rebirth of Coast City , the process of which had been seen throughout Geoff Johns ' run on Green Lantern , as " the City Without Fear " was used to symbolically represent Hal Jordan 's journey towards acceptance after his resurrection . The second volume of the story 's collection revealed that the original plan was for both John Stewart and Guy Gardner to be possessed by Parallax , with artwork of them facing off against Hal Jordan . However , in the midst of the story planning , Johns realized this would make Parallax 's possession of Kyle less effective and the segment was dropped and redrawn . 
 Green Lantern # 25 expanded on the " emotional spectrum " concept and introduced five new color @-@ based corps of similar structure to the Green Lanterns and the Sinestro Corps . These corps each draw from different emotions , corresponding with the seven colors of the rainbow ( red for rage , orange for avarice , yellow for fear , green for willpower , blue for hope , indigo for compassion and violet for love ) . Ganthet and Sayd , two Guardians of the Universe who were exiled during the course of the war , were shown as developing the corps that corresponds to the color blue and the emotion hope , while the Anti @-@ Monitor becomes the power source for an eighth color @-@ based corps , the " Black Lanterns " , who represent death and the " absence of human drives and emotions " . The issue also laid the foundations for the 2009 event Blackest Night , something the creators had been working towards since early 2007 . 
 = = Critical and financial reception = = 
 Altogether , " Sinestro Corps War " turned Green Lantern into one of DC Comics ' most profitable titles . Green Lantern : Sinestro Corps Special # 1 , first released June 2007 , sold out in a single day . DC later reprinted the issue four times , each time with new variant covers by Van Sciver . By August , the issue had sold over 89 @,@ 000 copies , 36 % of which was the result of an unusually high number of <unk> . The first four parts of the storyline , Green Lantern # 21 and 22 , and Green Lantern Corps # 14 and 15 , were released in July and August and also sold out . The issues went to a second printing , with Green Lantern Corps # 14 going to a third printing . Green Lantern # 23 and Tales of the Sinestro Corps : Parallax # 1 later went on to second printings as well . Blue Beetle # 20 saw much higher sales than usual for the title as a result of its tie @-@ in to " Sinestro Corps War " , with sales 75 % higher than in the previous month . 
 Critical reception to " Sinestro Corps War " was highly positive . IGN.com called the story a " smash hit " and Newsarama referred to it as both an " action @-@ packed DC adventure " and " DC 's blockbuster event of the year " . Comic Book Resources released an editorial in mid @-@ October 2007 entitled " Sinestro Corps War is what World War Hulk <unk> be " , citing the former 's ability to keep up and gain momentum throughout despite being both twice as large and far less publicized than the latter . Comic Book Resources placed " Sinestro Corps War " on its " Best of 2007 " list , and named Geoff Johns one of its " Best Writers of 2007 " . In 2008 , Ethan Van Sciver earned an Eisner Award nomination for his art in Green Lantern : Sinestro Corps Special # 1 . 
 DC Comics Executive Editor Dan DiDio praised the storyline as " the best thing that [ DC Comics ] put out this year . Without a doubt " , and called " Sinestro Corps War " the model for crossovers in 2008 and beyond , including " Final Crisis " . <unk> has also stated that he would like to see a direct @-@ to @-@ video animated " Sinestro Corps War " film similar to Justice League : The New Frontier . Geoff Johns suggested elements of " Sinestro Corps War " will appear in DC Universe Online , on which he is collaborating with artist Jim Lee . 
 = = Collected editions = = 
 The main story was first collected in two volumes , but was later collected in a single volume . Miscellaneous stories were collected in an additional volume : 
 Green Lantern : The Sinestro Corps War ( 336 pages , paperback , September 2011 , ISBN 1 @-@ 4012 @-@ 3301 @-@ 5 ) 
 Green Lantern : The Sinestro Corps War Volume One ( collects Green Lantern vol . 4 # 21 – 23 , Green Lantern Corps vol . 2 # 14 – 15 , and a story from Green Lantern : Sinestro Corps Special # 1 ; 176 pages , hardcover , February 2008 , ISBN 1 @-@ 4012 @-@ 1650 @-@ 1 ; softcover , May 2009 , ISBN 1 @-@ 4012 @-@ 1870 @-@ 9 ) 
 Green Lantern : The Sinestro Corps War Volume Two ( collects Green Lantern vol . 4 # 24 – 25 and Green Lantern Corps vol . 2 # 16 – 19 , 192 pages , hardcover , July 2008 , ISBN 1 @-@ 4012 @-@ 1800 @-@ 8 ; paperback , June 2009 , ISBN 1 @-@ 4012 @-@ 2036 @-@ 3 ) 
 Green Lantern : Tales of the Sinestro Corps ( collects Tales of the Sinestro Corps : Parallax # 1 , Tales of the Sinestro Corps : Cyborg @-@ Superman # 1 , Tales of the Sinestro Corps : Superman @-@ Prime # 1 , Tales of the Sinestro Corps : Ion # 1 , Green Lantern / Sinestro Corps Secret Files # 1 , and stories from Green Lantern : Sinestro Corps Special # 1 and Green Lantern vol . 4 # 18 – 20 ; 200 pages , hardcover , July 2008 , ISBN 1 @-@ 4012 @-@ 1801 @-@ 6 ; paperback , June 2009 , ISBN 1 @-@ 4012 @-@ 2326 @-@ 5 ) 
 = Steve Driehaus = 
 Steven L. " Steve " Driehaus ( born June 24 , 1966 in Cincinnati , Ohio ) is a former U.S. Representative for Ohio 's 1st congressional district , serving from 2009 until 2011 . He is a member of the Democratic Party . He previously served as the Minority Whip in the Ohio House of Representatives . 
 The district includes the western four @-@ fifths of Cincinnati , as well as suburbs north and west of the city in Hamilton and Butler counties . He was formerly a four @-@ term member of the Ohio House of Representatives , representing the 31st District from 2001 to 2009 . His Ohio State House district included western Cincinnati and all of Addyston , Cheviot , Cleves and North Bend , Ohio . 
 = = Early life , education and career = = 
 Driehaus , a 1984 graduate and class president of Elder High School in Cincinnati , studied political science at Miami University while earning a B.A. in 1988 and holds a Master of Public Administration ( MPA ) from Indiana University earned in 1995 . He served as a Peace Corps volunteer in Senegal where he worked with village groups and local schools as a natural resource volunteer to promote sustainable environmental practices from 1988 @-@ 90 . 
 Driehaus then served as Associate Director of the Center for International Education and Development Assistance at Indiana University . While serving in this role , he coordinated the South African Internship Program , which was sponsored by the United States Information Agency that is the largest professional exchange program between the United States and South Africa . He formerly directed and served as consultant to the Community Building Institute , a collaborative effort of Xavier University and United Way & Community Chest that promotes citizen @-@ led , asset @-@ based community development . He is a member of the Price Hill Civic Club and serves on the Board of Seton High School . He was a part @-@ time political science instructor at Xavier University . He began his political career as an aide for Cincinnati City Council Member Todd <unk> and former U.S. Rep. Charlie <unk> in the 1990s . 
 = = Ohio House of Representatives = = 
 Driehaus served four consecutive terms . He served as Minority Whip of the Ohio House of Representatives from the beginning of his third term in January 2005 until he resigned from the position to be replaced by Fred <unk> in December 2007 due to his campaign for the United States House of Representatives . 
 Driehaus took a leadership role on issues such as election law and redistricting reform . He took issue with information privacy in the state . 
 = = U.S. House of Representatives = = 
 = = = Committee assignments = = = 
 Committee on Financial <unk> on Housing and Community Opportunity 
 Subcommittee on International Monetary Policy and Trade 
 Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations 
 Committee on Oversight and Government <unk> on Information Policy , Census , and National Archives 
 Subcommittee on National Security and Foreign Affairs 
 Driehaus has been a highly regarded politician . The Cincinnati Enquirer named him legislative " Rookie of the Year " during his first term . In 2008 , the ARC of Ohio and the Ohio Association of Election Officials named him Democratic Legislator of the Year . He had a reputation as a pro @-@ life fiscal conservative . 
 = = Political campaigns = = 
 = = = Ohio House campaigns = = = 
 In 2000 , Driehaus ran for the Ohio House of Representatives from the 33rd district , which at the time included Delhi Township , Price Hill , Sayler Park and other parts of western Hamilton County . 
 The incumbent , Jerome <unk> , had surrendered his seat due to term limits . In the 2002 redistricting , Driehaus ' district became the 31st district and surrendered many Republican constituents . Driehaus has served the 31st Ohio House of Representatives district , which has included wards 19 – 22 , 25 & 26 of Cincinnati as well as Cheviot , Cleves , North Bend , and Addyston since the 2002 redistricting . This district is fully contained within Ohio 's 1st congressional district . It is also ( along with districts 32 and 33 ) part of Ohio Senate district 9 , which encompasses the south central portion of Hamilton County . 
 Driehaus did not have an opponent in any of his Democratic primaries , and he earned at least 57 % shares of the vote in each of his general elections for state legislature . 
 = = = 2006 elections = = = 
 Driehaus had been the choice of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee ( DCCC ) to run in Ohio 's 1st congressional district for the 2006 United States House of Representatives elections , but he decided to run for re @-@ election in his Ohio House of Representatives seat . He had been elected as the Minority Whip of the Ohio House of Representatives , replacing Dale Miller for the beginning of the 2005 session , in a November 2004 vote after being reelected to his third term . Driehaus survived his own challenge from Scott Gehring with a 2 : 1 victory margin in the 2006 election for his state house seat . 
 Based on the 2000 and 2004 United States Presidential election the district has voted 1 % more Republican than the nation as a whole . The district is regarded as a Democratically shifting maturing suburban district that is expected to vote more city @-@ like as it becomes more dense . The district was one of four Republican Ohio congressional seats that the party had targeted for takeover , but Chabot held off Cincinnati Councilman John Cranley by a 52 % to 48 % margin and the Republicans held on to three of the four seats . 
 = = = 2008 congressional campaign = = = 
 Although Driehaus passed on the 2006 race , he began planning a run for the district in 2008 almost as soon as the 2006 election cycle ended . This was largely because he was barred from running for a fifth term in the state house . Ohio 's 1st district was very high on the target list for the Democrats in both 2006 and 2008 . Seven @-@ term Republican incumbent Steve Chabot , elected in the Republican wave of 1994 , had won the district consistently , but with varying margins . He had won the seat with less than 55 % of the vote in four of his seven previous victories . 
 In previous elections , the 1st congressional district was hotly contested . It narrowly favored Democratic Ohio Governor Ted Strickland and United States Senator Sherrod Brown in 2006 ; and United States President George W. Bush narrowly outpaced Democratic nominee John Kerry by just 1 percentage point in the 2004 United States presidential election . Driehaus was recruited for the race by Democratic party officials , and he received early contributions for this race from Nancy Pelosi , Steny H. Hoyer , James E. Clyburn , and Chris Van <unk> , that were included in his 2007 second quarter financial filings . From the time of the first official announcement on May 3 , 2007 and first financial filing deadline on July 15 , 2007 , the race has been closely watched in the national media , and Time described it as one of the 15 Congressional races to watch in the 2008 election . The DCCC has named the district 's race as one of the thirteen that it is supporting in hopes of ousting a Republican incumbent in the 2008 United States House of Representatives elections . 
 In the midst of the financial crisis of 2007 – 2010 , especially the subprime mortgage crisis , one of the issues in the race has been the candidates stances on foreclosures . The race was considered to be close . As of October 14 , 2008 ( three weeks before election day ) , The Rothenberg Political Report considered the race to be a toss @-@ up . A poll by Survey USA indicated that African @-@ American turnout would probably determine who won the race . 
 Although a marginally Republican district , 27 percent of the district 's voters are African @-@ American — one of the highest percentages for a Republican @-@ held district in the 109th Congress . The district includes nearly all of Cincinnati 's African @-@ American voters . In the November 4 election , Driehaus defeated incumbent Chabot with 52 percent of the vote , largely on the strength of a 16 @,@ 000 @-@ vote margin in Hamilton County . Barack Obama carried the district with 55 percent of the vote . 
 = = = 2010 congressional campaign = = = 
 Driehaus was challenged by Republican nominee and his predecessor , former U.S. Congressman Steve Chabot , as well as Libertarian nominee James Berns , and Green Party nominee Richard Stevenson . As Chabot was ahead in public opinion polls , the DCCC pulled its financial support for TV ads from the Driehaus campaign , indicating to NBC pundit Chuck Todd that they expected Driehaus to be defeated , which he was , 52 % to 45 % . 
 In October 2012 Driehaus filed a criminal complaint against the Susan B. Anthony List claiming the organization violated Ohio law against making false statements in a campaign advertisement . He later asked that the complaint be dropped . Driehaus later sued the List , claiming the group caused his " loss of livelihood " by " defaming " him by saying he supported taxpayer funded abortion due to his vote for the Affordable Care Act . The case was decided in favor of the Susan B. Anthony List ( Defendants ) ( 805 <unk> 412 ( 2011 ) ) . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = = Peace Corps = = 
 In March 2011 , Driehaus was selected for an approximately two and a half years tenure as the Peace Corps ' director of HIV and AIDS education in Swaziland . This follows on his prior African Peace Corps experience as a volunteer . His wife and three children moved along with him . On June 29 , 2011 , he completed his staff training and was sworn in for service . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Driehaus was raised in Green Township by H. Donald and Clare Driehaus , along with his seven siblings . He lives with his wife , Lucienne , and their , in Price Hill , Cincinnati . They are congregants at St. Teresa of Avila parish . His father , Don Driehaus , is a former Hamilton County Democratic Party co @-@ chairman . 
 He was succeeded in the Ohio House of Representatives by his sister Denise . Their father died on September 21 , 2008 , aged 75 . 
 = German Type IXA submarine = 
 The German Type IXA submarine was a sub @-@ class of the German Type IX submarine built for Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine between 1937 and 1938 . These U @-@ boats were designed between 1935 and 1936 and were intended to be fairly large ocean @-@ going submarines . The inspiration for the Type IXA submarine came from the German Type IA submarine , which had a similar diving depth and identical submerged horsepower . 
 Two of the eight Type IXA submarines ( U @-@ 37 and U @-@ 38 ) would become the 6th and 10th most successful U @-@ boats that saw service in World War II , sinking 53 and 35 ships respectively . All of the Type IXA submarines were sunk fairly early in the war except for U @-@ 37 and U @-@ 38 , which were scuttled in May 1945 to prevent them from falling into the hands of the Allies . 
 = = Construction = = 
 All Type IXA submarines were ordered by the Kriegsmarine between 29 July 1936 and 21 November 1936 as part of Plan Z and the overall German plan of re @-@ armament in violation of the Treaty of Versailles . The design of the IXA submarines was derived from the German Type IA submarine . All contracts for the construction of the submarines were awarded to DeSchiMAG AG Weser , Bremen . The first U @-@ boat to be laid down in the Bremen ship yards was U @-@ 37 , whose keel was laid down on 15 March 1937 . The last U @-@ boat to be laid down was U @-@ 44 , whose construction began on 15 September 1937 . By November 1939 , all eight submarines had been fully constructed and commissioned into the Kriegsmarine . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The Type IXA submarines were the first German submarines to have a double hull . This allowed for a greater chance of survival in the event of an attack and gave them better seaworthiness on the surface . The Type IXA submarines had a test depth of 230 metres ( 750 ft ) . The class had two MAN M 9 V 40 / 46 supercharged 9 @-@ cylinder diesel engines that produced 4 @,@ 400 PS ( 4 @,@ 300 shp ; 3 @,@ 200 kW ) as well as two SSW 2 GU 345 / 34 double @-@ acting electric motors that produced 1 @,@ 000 PS ( 986 shp ; 735 kW ) and allowed them to travel at 18 @.@ 2 knots ( 33 @.@ 7 km / h ; 20 @.@ 9 mph ) while surfaced and 7 @.@ 7 knots ( 14 @.@ 3 km / h ; 8 @.@ 9 mph ) submerged . The Type IXA submarines had a range of 10 @,@ 500 nmi ( 19 @,@ 400 km ; 12 @,@ 100 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) while on the surface and up to 78 nmi ( 144 km ; 90 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) while submerged . The fuel capacity was 154 tonnes ( 152 long tons ) . The maximum crew capacity was 56 , though the number on board was usually around 45 – 48 . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Type IXA submarines had six torpedo tubes ( four in the bow and two in the stern ) and carried a total of twenty @-@ two 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 in ) torpedoes . The torpedo warhead was between 617 pounds ( 280 kg ) and 948 pounds ( 430 kg ) . These torpedoes could travel up to 6 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 600 yd ) and as fast as 44 knots ( 81 km / h ) . Twelve torpedoes were stowed internally and ten were in the topside deck containers . In order to get the torpedoes into the forward or bow torpedo room , the torpedoes were lifted over the U @-@ boat by a crane . The crew would then pull the torpedo inside the vessel using a cradle that was set at an angle to allow the torpedo to slide into position inside the torpedo room . To reload a torpedo tube with a torpedo from one of the above @-@ deck canisters , the submarine would have to surface in calm water . Then the torpedo would be pulled out of the compartment with winches and lowered into the forward or bow torpedo room . This process could take several hours for just one torpedo , during which the U @-@ boat was unable to dive , making it an easy target for Allied aircraft . 
 The Type IXA submarines were equipped with a 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 13 in ) L / 45 deck gun on a <unk> mounting forward of the conning tower . Shell storage was 180 rounds . The gun fired a 33 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 15 @.@ 1 kg ) HE round at a muzzle velocity of 780 m / s ( 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ) out to a maximum range of 15 @,@ 175 m ( 16 @,@ 596 yd ) . Against aircraft the weapon 's ceiling was 10 @,@ 000 m ( 11 @,@ 000 yd ) . Training and elevation was manual . The rate of fire was 15 rounds per minute . They were also armed with 2 cm FlaK 30 and 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns . The 2 cm FlaK 30 guns had a range of 4 @,@ 900 metres ( 5 @,@ 400 yd ) firing at up to 280 rounds per minute ; firing against aircraft the ceiling was reduced to 3 @,@ 700 m . The muzzle velocity was 835 m / s ( 2 @,@ 740 ft / s ) and each round weighed 0 @.@ 71 pounds ( 0 @.@ 32 kg ) . The 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / <unk> had a range of 8 @,@ 500 metres ( 9 @,@ 300 yd ) and a firing rate of 30 rounds per minute . Its muzzle velocity was 1 @,@ 000 m / s ( 3 @,@ 300 ft / s ) and the shell 's total weight was 1 @.@ 64 lb ( 0 @.@ 74 kg ) . 
 = = List of Type IXA U @-@ boats = = 
 The Type IXA class had eight U @-@ boats , all of which were built by AG Weser of Bremen . After being commissioned and deployed , the Type IXA submarines were stationed in the German port city of Wilhelmshaven . 
 = = = U @-@ 37 = = = 
 U @-@ 37 was laid down by AG Weser of Bremen on 15 March 1937 . Following just over a year of construction , she was launched from the Bremen shipyards on 14 May 1938 and commissioned into the Kriegsmarine on 4 August 1938 under the command of Kapitänleutnant Heinrich Schuch as a member of the 6th U @-@ boat Flotilla . U @-@ 37 was by far the most successful Type IXA U @-@ boat and the sixth most successful U @-@ boat in World War II , sinking 53 merchant ships for a total of 200 @,@ 124 gross register tons ( GRT ) , along with two warships during eleven war patrols from August 1939 to March 1941 . In spite of these victories , U @-@ 37 was later withdrawn from combat service and was used for training submarine crews until the end of the war . On 8 May 1945 , the crew of U @-@ 37 scuttled the U @-@ boat in Sonderburg Bay off Flensburg to keep her from falling into the hands of the Allies . 
 = = = U @-@ 38 = = = 
 The keel for U @-@ 38 was laid down on 15 April 1937 and after over a year and a half of construction she was commissioned on 24 October 1938 with Oberleutnant zur See Heinrich Liebe in command . Upon commissioning , U @-@ 38 was assigned to the 6th U @-@ boat Flotilla . Like U @-@ 37 , U @-@ 38 conducted eleven patrols . During these patrols she managed to sink or damage over 30 enemy vessels . Like U @-@ 37 , U @-@ 38 ranks as one of the most successful U @-@ boats of World War II , holding 10th place . With World War II drawing to a disastrous close for Germany , U @-@ 38 was scuttled by her own crew west of Wesermünde on 5 May 1945 . 
 = = = U @-@ 39 = = = 
 The keel for U @-@ 39 was laid down on 2 June 1937 . She was commissioned over a year later on 10 December 1938 with Kapitänleutnant Gerhard <unk> in command as a member of the 6th U @-@ boat Flotilla . On 14 September 1939 , just days after she began her first war time patrol , U @-@ 39 was hunted down by the British destroyers HMS Faulknor , HMS Firedrake , and HMS Foxhound and disabled with depth charges after she attempted to sink the British aircraft carrier HMS Ark Royal . All of her crew members survived and were captured by the British . U @-@ 39 was the first German U @-@ boat to be sunk in World War II . 
 = = = U @-@ 40 = = = 
 U @-@ 40 was ordered for construction on 29 July 1936 and her keel was laid down on 1 July 1937 . She was launched from Bremen on 9 November 1938 and commissioned on 11 February 1939 with Kapitänleutnant Werner von Schmidt in command . U @-@ 40 conducted only two war patrols during her career , both while part of the 6th U @-@ boat Flotilla . During her short war @-@ time service , U @-@ 40 sank no ships . She sank on 13 October 1939 after hitting mines in the English Channel while attempting a short cut to a rendezvous with other U boats . 
 = = = U @-@ 41 = = = 
 U @-@ 41 was laid down on 27 November 1937 and was launched on 28 January 1939 . She was commissioned into the Kriegsmarine on 22 April 1939 under the command of Oberleutnant zur See Gustav @-@ Adolf Mugler . U @-@ 41 only undertook three war patrols , two as part of the 6th U @-@ boat Flotilla and one as a member of the 2nd U @-@ boat Flotilla . During her brief career she sank five enemy vessels for a total of 22 @,@ 815 GRT , captured two more ships for a total of 2 @,@ 073 GRT , and damaged one ship of 8 @,@ 096 GRT . On 5 February 1940 , U @-@ 41 was sunk after a depth charge attack by the British destroyer HMS Antelope off the coast of Ireland . All 49 crew members were lost with the ship . 
 = = = U @-@ 42 = = = 
 U @-@ 42 was ordered by the Kriegsmarine on 21 November 1936 . Her keel was laid down on 21 December 1937 by AG Weser of Bremen as yard number 947 . She was launched on 16 February 1939 and commissioned on 15 July 1939 with Kapitänleutnant Rolf Dau in command of the vessel . U @-@ 42 had a very short career , being sunk while still on her first war patrol . During her service with the Kriegsmarine , U @-@ 42 conducted only one training patrol and one war patrol , during which she damaged one enemy vessel of 4 @,@ 803 GRT . Both of U @-@ 42 's patrols were as a member of the 6th U @-@ boat Flotilla . On 13 October 1939 , U @-@ 42 was sunk southwest of Ireland by the British warships HMS Imogen and HMS Ilex . Out of a crew of 46 , twenty survived and 26 went down with the submarine . 
 = = = U @-@ 43 = = = 
 The keel for U @-@ 43 was laid down on 15 August 1938 at the AG Weser yard at Bremen ; she was launched on 23 May 1939 and commissioned on 26 August 1939 under the command of Kapitänleutnant Wilhelm Ambrosius . Between November 1939 and July 1943 the U @-@ boat conducted 14 combat patrols as a member of the 6 . <unk> and later the 2 . <unk> , sinking 21 merchant ships for a total of 117 @,@ 036 GRT , damaging one ship of 10 @,@ 350 GRT and another of 9 @,@ 131 GRT , enough for it to be declared a total loss . U @-@ 43 was sunk on 30 July 1943 southwest of the Azores by a torpedo dropped by a United States Navy aircraft from the escort carrier Santee ; all 55 hands were lost . 
 = = = U @-@ 44 = = = 
 U @-@ 44 was ordered by the Kriegsmarine on 21 November 1936 and was laid down on 15 September 1938 by AG Weser , Bremen as yard number 949 . She was launched on 5 August 1939 and commissioned on 4 November under the command of Kapitänleutnant Ludwig Mathes . During her service in the Kriegsmarine , U @-@ 44 conducted only two war patrols ( one as part of the 6th U @-@ boat Flotilla and another as a member of the 2nd U @-@ boat Flotilla ) and sank a total of eight enemy vessels for a loss of 30 @,@ 885 GRT . On 13 March 1940 , U @-@ 44 struck a mine that was located in Minefield Number 7 off the north coast of the Netherlands . All 47 of U @-@ 44 's crew members went down with the submarine . 
 = Structural history of the Roman military = 
 The structural history of the Roman military concerns the major transformations in the organization and constitution of ancient Rome 's armed forces , " the most effective and long @-@ lived military institution known to history . " From its origins around 800 BC to its final dissolution in AD 476 with the demise of the Western Roman Empire , Rome 's military organization underwent substantial structural change . At the highest level of structure , the forces were split into the Roman army and the Roman navy , although these two branches were less distinct than in many modern national defense forces . Within the top levels of both army and navy , structural changes occurred as a result of both positive military reform and organic structural evolution . These changes can be divided into four distinct phases . 
 Phase I 
 The army was derived from obligatory annual military service levied on the citizenry , as part of their duty to the state . During this period , the Roman army would wage seasonal campaigns against largely local adversaries . 
 Phase II 
 As the extent of the territories falling under Roman control expanded and the size of the forces increased , the soldiery gradually became salaried professionals . As a consequence , military service at the lower ( non @-@ salaried ) levels became progressively longer @-@ term . Roman military units of the period were largely homogeneous and highly regulated . The army consisted of units of citizen infantry known as legions ( Latin : legiones ) as well as non @-@ legionary allied troops known as auxilia . The latter were most commonly called upon to provide light infantry , logistical , or cavalry support . 
 Phase III 
 At the height of the Roman Empire 's power , forces were tasked with manning and securing the borders of the vast provinces which had been brought under Roman control . Serious strategic threats were less common in this period and emphasis was placed on preserving gained territory . The army underwent changes in response to these new needs and became more dependent on fixed garrisons than on march @-@ camps and continuous field operations . 
 Phase IV 
 As Rome began to struggle to keep control over its sprawling territories , military service continued to be salaried and professional for Rome 's regular troops . However , the trend of employing allied or mercenary elements was expanded to such an extent that these troops came to represent a substantial proportion of the armed forces . At the same time , the uniformity of structure found in Rome 's earlier military disappeared . <unk> of the era ranged from lightly armed mounted archers to heavy infantry , in regiments of varying size and quality . This was accompanied by a trend in the late empire of an increasing predominance of cavalry rather than infantry troops , as well as a requirement for more mobile operations . In this period there was more focus ( on all frontiers but the east ) on smaller units of independently @-@ operating troops , engaging less in set @-@ piece battles and more in low @-@ intensity , guerilla actions . 
 = = Tribal forces ( c . 800 BC – c . 578 BC ) = = 
 According to the historians Livy and Dionysius of Halicarnassus , writing at a far later date , the earliest Roman army existed in the 8th century BC . During this period Rome itself was probably little more than a fortified hilltop settlement and its army a relatively small force , whose activities were limited " mainly [ to ] raiding and cattle rustling with the occasional skirmish @-@ like battle " . Historian Theodor Mommsen referred to it as Rome 's <unk> army , named for its presumed subdivision along the boundaries of Rome 's three founding tribes ( Latin : curiae ) , the <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . This army 's exact structure is not known , but it is probable that it loosely resembled a warrior band or group of bodyguards led by a chieftain or king . Mommsen believes that Roman military organization of this period was regimented by the " Laws of [ the apocryphal ] King [ V ] Italus " but these laws , though referred to by Aristotle , have been lost . 
 The army ( Latin : <unk> ) consisted , according to Livy , of exactly 3 @,@ 000 infantry and 300 horsemen , one third from each of Rome 's three founding tribes . Warriors served under six " leaders of division " ( Latin : <unk> ) who in turn served under a general , usually in the person of the reigning King . Mommsen uses philological arguments and references from Livy and others to suggest that the greater mass of foot @-@ soldiers probably consisted of <unk> ( javelin @-@ throwers ) , with a smaller number possibly serving as <unk> ( archers ) . The cavalry was far smaller in number and probably consisted solely of the town 's richest citizens . The army may also have contained the earliest form of chariots , hinted at by references to the <unk> ( " the wheelers " ) . 
 By the beginning of the 7th century BC , the Iron @-@ Age Etruscan civilization ( Latin : <unk> ) was dominant in the region . Like most of the other peoples in the region , the Romans warred against the Etruscans . By the close of the century , the Romans had lost their struggle for independence , and the Etruscans had conquered Rome , establishing a military dictatorship , or kingdom , in the city . 
 = = Etruscan @-@ model hoplites ( 578 BC – c . 315 BC ) = = 
 Although several Roman sources including Livy and Polybius talk extensively about the Roman army of the Roman Kingdom period that followed the Etruscan capture of the city , no contemporary accounts survive . Polybius , for example , was writing some 300 years after the events in question , and Livy some 500 years later . Additionally , what records were kept by the Romans at this time were later destroyed when the city was sacked . The sources for this period cannot therefore be seen as reliable , as they can be for later military history , e.g. from the First Punic War onwards . 
 According to our surviving narratives , the three kings of Rome during the Etruscan occupation were Tarquinius Priscus , Servius Tullius , and Tarquinius Superbus . During this period the army underwent a reformation into a <unk> army based on socio @-@ economic class . This reformation is traditionally attributed to Servius Tullius , the second of the Etruscan kings . Tullius had earlier carried out the first Roman census of all citizens . Livy tells us that Tullius reformed the army by transplanting onto it the structure derived originally for civil life as a result of this census . At all levels , military service was , at this time , considered to be a civic responsibility and a way of advancing one 's status within society . 
 However , Rome 's social classes were qualified rather than created by the census . It is perhaps more accurate to say therefore that the army 's structure was slightly refined during this period rather than radically reformed . Prior to these reforms , the infantry was divided into the <unk> of rich citizens and the infra <unk> of poorer citizens . The latter were excluded from the regular line of battle on the basis that their equipment was of poor quality . During the reforms , this crude division of poorer and richer citizens was further stratified . The army thereafter consisted of a number of troop types based upon the social class of propertied citizens , collectively known as adsidui . From the poorest in the " fifth class " to the richest in the " first class " and the equestrians above them , military service was compulsory for all . However , Roman citizens at this time generally viewed military service as a proper undertaking of duty to the state , in contrast to later views of military service as an unwelcome and unpleasant burden . Whereas there are accounts of Romans in the late empire mutilating their own bodies in order to exempt themselves from military service , there seems to have been no such reluctance to serve in the military of early Rome . This may in part be due to the generally lower intensity of conflict in this era ; to the fact that men were fighting close to and often in protection of their own homes , or due to — as posited by later Roman writers — a greater martial spirit in antiquity . 
 The equestrians , the highest social class of all , served in mounted units known as equites . The first class of the richest citizens served as heavy infantry with swords and long spears ( resembling hoplites ) , and provided the first line of the battle formation . The second class were armed similarly to the first class , but without a breastplate for protection , and with an oblong rather than a round shield . The second class stood immediately behind the first class when the army was drawn up in battle formation . The third and fourth classes were more lightly armed and carried a thrusting @-@ spear and javelins . The third class stood behind the second class in battle formation , normally providing javelin support . The poorest of the propertied men of the city comprised the fifth class . They were generally too poor to afford much equipment at all and were armed as skirmishers with slings and stones . They were deployed in a screen in front of the main army , covering its approach and masking its manoeuvres . 
 Men without property , who were thereby excluded from the qualifying social classes of the adsidui , were exempted from military service on the grounds that they were too poor to provide themselves with any arms whatsoever . However , in the most pressing circumstances , even these proletarii were pressed into service , though their military worth was probably questionable . Troops in all of these classes would fight together on the battlefield , with the exception of the most senior troops , who were expected to guard the city . 
 The army is said to have increased from 3 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 men in the 5th century BC , and then again from 4 @,@ 000 to 6 @,@ 000 men sometime before 400 BC . This later army of 6 @,@ 000 men were then divided into 60 centuries of 100 men each . According to Historian P. <unk> 's hypothesis , when the Roman monarchy was replaced by two <unk> in c . 500 BC , the royal legion was divided into two ( one for each praetor ) , each legion comprising 3 @,@ 000 hoplites . The velites and cavalry were also split equally ( 1 @,@ 200 velites and 300 cavalry each ) , for a total of 4 @,@ 500 men . This remained the normal size of a Republican legion until the end of the Social War ( 88 BC ) . However , Livy states that a legion at the time of Marcus Furius Camillus ( early 4th century BC ) consisted of only 3 @,@ 000 infantry and 300 cavalry . 
 = = Manipular legion ( 315 BC – 107 BC ) = = 
 The army of the early Republic continued to evolve , and although there was a tendency among Romans to attribute such changes to great reformers , it is more likely that changes were the product of slow evolution rather than singular and deliberate policy of reform . The manipular formation was probably copied from Rome 's Samnite enemies to the south , perhaps as a result of Roman defeats in the Second Samnite War . 
 During this period , an army formation of around 5 @,@ 000 men was known as a legion ( Latin : <unk> ) . However , in contrast to later legionary formations of exclusively heavy infantry , the legions of the early and middle Republic consisted of both light and heavy infantry . The term manipular army , an army based on units called maniples ( Latin <unk> singular , <unk> plural , from manus , " the hand " ) , is therefore used to contrast the later legionary army of the Empire that was based around a system of cohort units . The manipular army was based partially upon social class and partially upon age and military experience . It therefore represents a theoretical compromise between the earlier class @-@ based army and the class @-@ free armies of later years . In practice , even slaves were at one time pressed into the army of the Republic out of necessity . Normally a single legion was raised each year , but in 366 BC two legions were raised in a single year for the first time . 
 The manipular army got its name from the manner in which its heavy infantry was deployed . <unk> were units of 120 men each drawn from a single infantry class . The maniples were small enough to permit tactical movement of individual infantry units on the battlefield within the framework of the greater army . The maniples were typically deployed into three discrete lines ( Latin : triplex <unk> ) based on the three heavy infantry types of hastati , principes and triarii . The first type , the hastati , typically formed the first rank in battle formation . They typically wore a mail shirt and brass helmet adorned with three feathers approximately 30 cm ( 12 in ) in height and carried an iron bossed wooden shield , 120 cm ( 4 ft ) tall and a slightly convex oval in shape . Traditionally they were armed with a sword known as a gladius and two throwing spears known as pila : one the heavy <unk> of popular imagination and one a slender javelin . However the exact introduction of the <unk> and the replacement of the spear with the sword as the primary weapon of the Roman Legions is uncertain , and it 's possible that the early manipular legions still fought with the Hastati and Principes wielding the Hasta or Spear . 
 The second type , the principes , typically formed the second rank of soldiers back from the front of a battle line . They were heavy infantry soldiers armed and armoured as per the hastati . The triarii , who typically formed the third rank when the army was arrayed for battle , were the last remnant of hoplite @-@ style troops in the Roman army . They were armed and armoured as per the principes , with the exception that they carried a pike rather than two pila . A 600 @-@ man triarii maniple was divided into two formations each six men across by 10 men deep . A manipular legion typically contained between 1 @,@ 200 @-@ 2400 hastati , 1 @,@ 200 @-@ 2400 principes and 600 @-@ 1200 triarii . The three classes of unit may have retained some slight parallel to social divisions within Roman society , but at least officially the three lines were based upon age and experience rather than social class . Young , unproven men would serve as hastati , older men with some military experience as principes , and veteran troops of advanced age and experience as triarii . 
 The heavy infantry of the maniples were supported by a number of light infantry ( Latin : velites ) and cavalry ( Latin : equites ) troops , typically 300 horsemen per manipular legion . The cavalry was drawn primarily from the richest class of equestrians , but additional cavalry and light infantry were drawn at times from the socii and Latini of the Italian mainland . The equites were still drawn from the wealthier classes in Roman society . There was an additional class of troops ( Latin : accensi , also <unk> and later <unk> ) who followed the army without specific martial roles and were deployed to the rear of the triarii . Their role in accompanying the army was primarily to supply any vacancies that might occur in the maniples , but they also seem to have acted occasionally as orderlies to the officers . 
 The light infantry of 1 @,@ 200 velites consisted of unarmoured skirmishing troops drawn from the youngest and lower social classes . They were armed with a sword and buckler ( 90 cm ( 3 ft ) diameter ) , as well as several light javelins , each with a 90 cm ( 3 ft ) wooden shaft the diameter of a finger , with a c . 25 cm ( 10 in ) narrow metal point . Their numbers were swollen by the addition of allied light infantry and irregular rorarii . 
 The Roman levy of 403 BC was the first to be requested to campaign for longer than a single season , and from this point on such a practice became gradually more common , if still not typical . 
 A small navy had operated at a fairly low level after the Second Samnite War , but it was massively upgraded during this period , expanding from a few primarily <unk> and coastal @-@ based patrol craft to a full maritime unit . After a period of frenetic construction , the navy mushroomed to a size of more than 400 ships on the Carthaginian pattern . Once completed , it could accommodate up to 100 @,@ 000 sailors and embarked troops for battle . The navy thereafter declined in size . This was partially because a pacified Roman Mediterranean called for little naval policing , and partially because the Romans chose to rely during this period on ships provided by Greek cities , whose peoples had greater maritime experience . 
 = = = <unk> of the infantry ( 217 BC – 107 BC ) = = = 
 The extraordinary demands of the Punic Wars , in addition to a shortage of manpower , exposed the tactical weaknesses of the manipular legion , at least in the short term . In 217 BC , Rome was forced to effectively ignore its long @-@ standing principle that its soldiers must be both citizens and property owners when slaves were pressed into naval service ; around 213 BC , the property requirement was reduced from 11 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 asses . Since the Romans are unlikely to have preferred to employ slaves over poor citizens in their armies , it must be assumed that , at this point , the proletarii of the poorest citizens must also have been pressed into service despite their lack of legal qualification . By 123 BC , the financial requirement for military service was slashed again from 4 @,@ 000 asses to just 1 @,@ 500 asses . By this time , therefore , it is clear that many of the property @-@ less former proletarii had been nominally admitted into the adsidui . 
 During the 2nd century BC , Roman territory saw an overall decline in population , partially due to the huge losses incurred during various wars . This was accompanied by severe social stresses and the greater collapse of the middle classes into lower classes of the census and the proletarii . As a result , both the Roman society and its military became increasingly <unk> . The Roman state was forced to arm its soldiers at the expense of the state , since many of the soldiers who made up its lower classes were now impoverished proletarii in all but name , and were too poor to afford their own equipment . 
 The distinction between the heavy infantry types of hastati , principes and triarii began to blur , perhaps because the state was now assuming the responsibility of providing standard @-@ issue equipment to all but the first class of troops , who alone were able to afford their own equipment . By the time of Polybius , the triarii or their successors still represented a distinct heavy infantry type armed with a unique style of cuirass , but the hastati and principes had become indistinguishable . 
 In addition , the shortage of available manpower led to a greater burden being placed upon its allies ( socii ) for the provision of allied troops . Where accepted allies could not provide the required force types , the Romans were not averse during this period to hiring mercenaries to fight alongside the legions . 
