 = = Marian legion ( 107 BC – 27 BC ) = = 
 In a process known as the Marian reforms , Roman consul Gaius Marius carried out a programme of reform of the Roman military . In 107 BC , all citizens , regardless of their wealth or social class , were made eligible for entry into the Roman army . This move formalised and concluded a gradual process that had been growing for centuries , of removing property requirements for military service . The distinction between hastati , principes and triarii , which had already become blurred , was officially removed , and the legionary infantry of popular imagination was created . Legionary infantry formed a homogeneous force of heavy infantry . These legionaries were drawn from citizen stock ; by this time , Roman or Latin citizenship had been regionally expanded over much of ancient Italy and Cisalpine Gaul . Lighter citizen infantry , such as the velites and equites , were replaced by non @-@ citizen auxilia that could consist of foreign mercenaries . Due to the concentration of the citizen legions into a force of heavy infantry Rome 's armies depended on auxiliary cavalry attachments for support . As a tactical necessity , legions were almost always accompanied by an equal or greater number of lighter auxiliary troops , which were drawn from the non @-@ citizens of the Empire 's territories . One known exception of legions being formed from non @-@ citizen provinces during this period was the legion that was raised in the province of Galatia . 
 After Marius , the legions were drawn largely from volunteer citizens rather than citizens conscripted for duty . Volunteers came forward and were accepted not from citizens of the city of Rome itself but from the surrounding countryside and smaller towns falling under Roman control . Whereas some long @-@ term military professionals were classed as veterans , they were outnumbered by civilians with limited military experience who were in active service perhaps only for a few campaigns . The legions of the late Republic remained , unlike the legions of the later Empire , predominantly Roman in origin , although some small number of ex @-@ auxiliary troops were probably incorporated . The army 's higher @-@ level officers and commanders were still drawn exclusively from the Roman aristocracy . 
 Unlike earlier in the Republic , legionaries were no longer fighting on a seasonal basis to protect their land . Instead , they received standard pay , and were employed by the state on a fixed @-@ term basis . As a consequence , military duty began to appeal most to the poorest sections of society , to whom a guaranteed salary was attractive . The army therefore consisted of a far higher proportion of the poor — particularly the rural poor — than it had previously . A destabilising consequence of this development was that the proletariat " acquired a stronger and more elevated position " within the state . This professionalisation of the military was necessary to provide permanent garrisons for newly acquired and distant territories such as Hispania , something not possible under an army of seasonal citizen militia . 
 Historian R. E. Smith notes that there was a need to raise additional legions in an emergency to repel specific strategic threats . He argues that this may have resulted in two types of legion . Long @-@ standing legions deployed overseas were probably professional troops forming a standing army . Quickly @-@ formed new legions , in contrast , consisted of younger men , perhaps with little or no military experience , who hoped for adventure and plunder . However , no distinction in basic pay , discipline or armour is known of between the two types of legion . The practice of veteran troops signing up again voluntarily into newly raised legions must have meant that no one army conformed exactly to one or other of these theoretical archetypes . 
 The legions of the late Republic were , structurally , almost entirely heavy infantry . The legion 's main sub @-@ unit was called a cohort and consisted of approximately 480 infantrymen . The cohort was therefore a much larger unit than the earlier maniple sub @-@ unit , and was divided into six <unk> of 80 men each . Each centuria was separated further into 10 " tent groups " ( Latin : <unk> ) of 8 men each . Legions additionally consisted of a small body , typically 120 men , of Roman legionary cavalry ( Latin : equites legionis ) . The equites were used as scouts and dispatch riders rather than battlefield cavalry . Legions also contained a dedicated group of artillery crew of perhaps 60 men , who would operate devices such as ballistae . 
 Each legion was normally partnered with an approximately equal number of allied ( non @-@ Roman ) <unk> troops . The addition of allied troops to the Roman army was a formalisation of the earlier arrangement of using light troops from the Socii and Latini , who had received Roman citizenship after the Social War . Auxiliary troops could be formed from either auxiliary light cavalry known as alae , auxiliary light infantry known as cohors <unk> , or a flexible mixture of the two known as cohors equitata . Cavalry types included mounted archers ( Latin : <unk> ) , heavy shock cavalry ( Latin : <unk> or clibanarii ) , or lancers ( Latin : <unk> or <unk> ) . Infantry could be armed with bows , slings , throwing spears , long swords , or thrusting spears . Auxiliary units were originally led by their own chiefs , and , in this period , their internal organisation was left to their commanders . 
 However , " the most obvious deficiency " of the Roman army remained its shortage of cavalry , especially heavy cavalry ; even auxiliary troops were predominantly infantry . <unk> argues that auxiliary forces largely consisted of Cretan archers , Balearic slingers and Numidian infantry , all of whom fought on foot . As Rome 's borders expanded and its adversaries changed from largely infantry @-@ based to largely cavalry @-@ based troops , the infantry @-@ based Roman army began to find itself at a tactical disadvantage , particularly in the East . 
 After having declined in size following the subjugation of the Mediterranean , the Roman navy underwent short @-@ term upgrading and revitalisation in the late Republic to meet several new demands . Under Caesar , an invasion fleet was assembled in the English Channel to allow the invasion of Britain ; under Pompey , a large fleet was raised in the Mediterranean Sea to clear the sea of Cilician pirates . During the civil war that followed , as many as a thousand ships were either constructed or pressed into service from Greek cities . 
 = = = Non @-@ citizen recruitment ( 49 BC – 27 BC ) = = = 
 By the time of Julius Caesar in 54 BC , regular legionary units were supplemented by <unk> , a body of scouts , and <unk> , spies who infiltrated enemy camps . Due to the demands of the civil war , the extraordinary measure of recruiting legions from non @-@ citizens was taken by Caesar in Transalpine Gaul ( Latin : Gallia <unk> ) , by Brutus in Macedonia , and by Pompey in Pharsalus . This irregular and extraordinary recruitment was not , however , typical of recruitment during this period , and Roman law still officially required that legions were recruited from Roman citizens only . 
 = = Imperial legions and reformation of the auxilia ( 27 BC – 117 AD ) = = 
 By the turn of the millennium , Emperor Augustus ' primary military concern was to prevent Roman generals from further usurping the imperial throne . The experience of Caesar and , earlier , Marius and Sulla , had demonstrated the willingness of " emergency " ( re @-@ activated previously decommissioned ) legions containing troops keen for plunder to follow their generals against the state . Augustus therefore removed the need for such emergency armies by increasing the size of the standing armies to a size sufficient to provide territorial defence on their own . Perhaps due to similar concerns , the legions and auxiliaries of the army were supplemented under the Emperor Augustus by an elite formation of guards dedicated to the protection of the Emperor . The first such unit was based in Rome and were known as the Praetorian Guard , and a second similar formation were known as the <unk> <unk> . 
 The legions , which had been a mix of life professionals and civilian campaigners , was altered into a standing army of professionals only . The actual structure of the cohort army remained much the same as in the late Republic , although around the 1st century AD the first cohort of each legion was increased in size to a total of 800 soldiers . However , while the structure of the legions remained much the same , their make @-@ up gradually changed . Whereas early Republican legions had been raised by a draft from eligible Roman citizens , imperial legions were recruited solely on a voluntary basis and from a much wider base of manpower . Likewise , whereas Republican legions had been recruited almost exclusively in Italy , early Imperial legions drew most of their recruits from Roman colonies in the provinces from 68 AD onwards . One estimate places the proportion of Italian troops at 65 % under Augustus in c . 1 AD , falling to around 49 % by the end of Nero 's reign . 
 Since the legions were officially open only to Roman citizens , Max Cary and Howard Hayes <unk> argue that at least in some provinces at this time " many provincials must have been recruited who lacked any genuine claim to Roman citizenship but received it unofficially on enlistment , " a practice that was to increase in the 2nd century . This is most likely in those provinces where the pool of Roman citizens was not large enough to fulfill the provincial army 's recruitment needs . One possible example is Britain , where one estimate puts the citizen pool in the 1st century at only 50 @,@ 000 out of a total provincial population of around two million . 
 At the same time as the legions underwent these transformations , the auxilia were reorganized and a number of allied troops were formalised into standing units similar to legions . Rather than being raised re @-@ actively when required , the process of raising auxiliary troops was carried out in advance of conflicts according to annual targets . Whereas the internal organisation of the auxilia had previously been left up to their commanders , in the early empire they were organised into standardised units known as <unk> ( for cavalry alae ) and <unk> ( for infantry <unk> ) . Although never becoming as standardised in their equipment as the legions , and often retaining some national flavour , the size of the units at least was standardised to some degree . Cavalry were formed into either an ala quingenaria of 512 horsemen , or an ala millaria of 1 @,@ 000 horsemen . Likewise , infantry auxilia could be formed into a cohors quingenaria of 500 men or a cohors millaria of 1 @,@ 000 men . Mixed cavalry / infantry auxiliaries were typically formed with a larger proportion of foot than horse troops : the cohors equitata quingenaria consisted of 380 foot and 120 horsemen , and the cohors equitata millaria consisted of 760 foot and 240 horsemen . 
 The vitality of the empire at this point was such that the use of native auxilia in the Roman army did not apparently <unk> the military as some scholars claim was to happen in the late empire . On the contrary , those serving in the auxilia during this period frequently strove to <unk> themselves . They were granted Roman citizenship on retirement , granting them several social advantages , and their sons became eligible for service in the legions . 
 As with the army , many non @-@ Italians were recruited into the Roman Navy , partly because the Romans had never readily taken to the sea . It appears that the navy was considered to be slightly less prestigious than the auxilia but , like the auxilia , troops could gain citizenship on discharge upon retirement . In terms of structure , each ship was staffed by a group of men approximately equivalent to a century , with ten ships forming a naval squadron . 
 = = = Introduction of vexillationes ( 76 AD – 117 AD ) = = = 
 Through the final years of the 1st century AD , the legions remained the backbone of the Roman army , although the auxilia in fact outnumbered them by up to half as much again . Within the legions , the proportion of troops recruited from within Italy fell gradually after 70 AD . By the close of the 1st century , this proportion had fallen to as low as 22 percent , with the remainder drawn from conquered provinces . Since technically only citizens were allowed to enlist in the legions , where recruits did not possess citizenship then , at least in some instances , citizenship " was simply given [ to ] them on enlistment " . During this time , the borders of the Empire had remained relatively fixed to the extent originally reached under the Emperor Trajan . Because of this , the army was increasingly responsible for protecting existing frontiers rather than expanding into foreign territory , the latter of which had characterised the army 's earlier existence . As a result , legions became stationed in largely fixed locations . Although entire legions were occasionally transferred into theatres of war , they remained largely rooted in one or more legionary bases in a province , detaching into smaller bodies of troops ( Latin : vexillationes ) on demand . This policy eventually led to a split of the military 's land @-@ based forces into mobile and fixed troops in the later Empire . In general , the best troops were dispatched as vexillationes , and the remainder left to guard border defences were of lower quality , perhaps those with injuries or near retirement . 
 = = <unk> of the army ( 117 AD – 253 AD ) = = 
 By the time of the emperor Hadrian the proportion of Italians in the legions had fallen to just ten percent and provincial citizens now dominated . This low figure is probably a direct result of the changing needs of military staffing : a system of fixed border defences ( Latin : limes ) were established around the Empire 's periphery under Hadrian , consolidating Trajan 's territorial gains . These called for troops to be stationed permanently in the provinces , a prospect more attractive to locally raised rather than Italian troops . The higher prestige and pay to be found in the Italian dominated Praetorian Guard must also have played a role . The majority of the troops in the legions at the start of the 3rd century AD were from the more Romanised ( though non @-@ Italian ) provinces , especially Illyria . As the century progressed , more and more barbarians ( Latin : barbari ) were permitted to settle inside of , and tasked with aiding in the defence of , Rome 's borders . As a result , greater numbers of barbarous and semi @-@ barbarous peoples were gradually admitted to the army . 
 However , whether this <unk> of the legions was partnered by a drop in the professionalism of the troops is contested . Antonio Santosuosso argues that the strict discipline and high motivation of the days of Marius had lapsed , but Andrew <unk> states that the Illyrian troops were both valiant and warlike , and Tacitus described German recruits as being natural mercenaries ( Latin : <unk> ad arma <unk> ) . It seems that discipline in the legions did slacken , with soldiers granted permission to live with wives outside of military lodgings and permitted to adopt a more lavish and comfortable lifestyle , in contrast to the strict military regimen of earlier years . However , it is by no means certain that this led to any reduction in the effectiveness of the legions , due to the greater ferocity and stature of the barbari recruits . The flavour of the Roman military , however , was now dictated by the increasing number of regional recruits , leading to a partial barbarisation of Rome 's military forces beginning in this period . The barbarisation of the lower ranks was paralleled by a concurrent barbarisation of its command structure , with the Roman senators who had traditionally provided its commanders becoming entirely excluded from the army . By 235 AD the Emperor himself , the figurehead of the entire military , was a man born outside of Italy to non @-@ Italian parents . 
 The gradual inclusion of greater numbers of non @-@ citizen troops into the military was taken a further step by the creation under Hadrian of a new type of force in addition to the legions and auxilia , known as numeri . Formed in bodies of around 300 irregular troops , the numeri were drawn from subjugate provinces and peoples of client @-@ states or even from beyond the borders of the empire . They were both less regimented and less Romanised than auxiliary troops , with a " pronounced national character , " including native dress and native war cries . The introduction of the numeri was a response to the need for cheap troops , who were nevertheless fierce and provided a force balance of light infantry and cavalry . They were therefore largely less well armed and less well trained than auxilia or legions , although more prestigious elite irregular native troops were also utilised . However , the legions still made up around one half of the Roman army at this point . 
 = = Successive crises ( 238 AD – 359 AD ) = = 
 By the late Empire , enemy forces in both the East and West were " sufficiently mobile and sufficiently strong to pierce [ the Roman ] defensive perimeter on any selected axis of penetration " ; from the 3rd century onwards , both Germanic tribes and Persian armies pierced the frontiers of the Roman Empire . In response , the Roman army underwent a series of changes , more organic and evolutionary than the deliberate military reforms of the Republic and early Empire . A stronger emphasis was placed upon ranged combat ability of all types , such as field artillery , hand @-@ held ballistae , archery and darts . Roman forces also gradually became more mobile , with one cavalryman for every three infantryman , compared to one in forty in the early Empire . Additionally , the Emperor Gallienus took the revolutionary step of forming an entirely cavalry field army , which was kept as a mobile reserve at the city of Milan in northern Italy . It is believed that Gallienus facilitated this concentration of cavalry by stripping the legions of their integral mounted element . A diverse range of cavalry regiments existed , including <unk> or clibanarii , <unk> , and legionary cavalry known as <unk> . Collectively , these regiments were known as equites . Around 275 AD , the proportion of <unk> was also increased . There is some disagreement over exactly when the relative proportion of cavalry increased , whether Gallienus ' reforms occurred contemporaneously with an increased reliance on cavalry , or whether these are two distinct events . <unk> appears to believe that Gallienus ' reforms were contemporaneous with an increase in cavalry numbers . He argues that , by 258 , Gallienus had made cavalry the predominant troop type in the Roman army in place of heavy infantry , which dominated earlier armies . According to Warren Treadgold , however , the proportion of cavalry did not change between the early 3rd and early 4th centuries . 
 Larger groups of barbari began to settle in Rome 's territories around this time , and the troops they were contracted to provide to the Roman army were no longer organised as numeri but rather were the forerunners of the later rented native armies known as federated troops ( Latin : foederati ) . Though they served under Roman officers , the troops of these units were far more <unk> than the numeri , lacked Romanisation of either military structure or personal ideology , and were ineligible for Roman citizenship upon discharge . These native troops were not permitted to fight in native war bands under their own leaders , unlike the later foederati ; instead , these troops were split into small groups attached to other Roman units . They existed therefore as a halfway house between numeri , who were encouraged to be Romanised , and the foederati , who raised officers from their own ranks and were almost entirely self @-@ dependent . 
 = = <unk> and limitanei ( 284 AD – 395 AD ) = = 
 A distinction between frontier guard troops and more mobile reserve forces had emerged with the use of certain troops to permanently man frontiers such as Hadrian 's Wall in Britannia in the 2nd century AD . The competing demands of manned frontiers and strategic reserve forces had led to the division of the military into four types of troops by the early 4th century : 
 The limitanei or <unk> patrolled the border and defended the border fortifications . According to some older theories , the limitanei were " settled and hereditary " militia that were " tied to their posts . " But according to most recent research , the limitanei were originally regular soldiers , including infantry , cavalry , and river flotillas , although they eventually became settled militia . According to <unk> , the <unk> of cavalry , and auxilia of infantry alone by this time , were local provincial reserves that may have evolved from earlier auxiliary units . According to Pat Southern and Karen Dixon , the legiones , auxilia , and <unk> of the border armies were part of the limitanei , but higher @-@ status than the older <unk> and alae in the same armies . 
 The comitatenses , and later the palatini were strategic reserves , usually in the rear . After their division into palatini and comitatenses , the latter were usually associated with the <unk> armies , and the former were usually associated with the regional armies , but both types could be moved between the two . 
 The emperor Constantine I created the scholae to replace the old praetorian guard . The scholae were his personal guard , and were mainly equipped as cavalry . Vogt suggests that the scholae formed two small central reserves ( Latin : scholae ) held to the strategic rear even of the comitatenses , one each in the presence of the emperors of West and East respectively . 
 The permanent field armies of the palatini and comitatenses ultimately derived from the temporary field armies of the earlier <unk> comitatus . 
 Created and expanded from the core troops of the Emperor 's personal bodyguards , the central field armies by 295 AD seem to have been too large to be accounted for as simple bodyguard forces , but were still too small to be able to campaign independently of legionary or <unk> support . 
 Of the four troop types , the limitanei ( border guards ) were once considered to have been of the lowest quality , consisting largely of peasant @-@ soldiers that were both " grossly inferior " to the earlier legions and inferior also to their counterparts in the mobile field armies . However , more recent work establishes that the limitanei were regular soldiers . 
 While the limitanei were supposed to deal with policing actions and low @-@ intensity incursions , the duty of responding to more serious incidents fell upon the provincial troops . The countering of the very largest scale incursions on a strategic scale was the task of the comitatenses and palatini or mobile field troops , possibly accompanied by the emperor 's scholae . Both border and field armies consisted of a mix of infantry and cavalry units although the weight of cavalry was , according to some authorities , greater in the mobile field armies . Overall , approximately one quarter of the army consisted of cavalry troops but their importance is uncertain . Older works such as the Eleventh Edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica ( 1911 ) state that the Roman military of the late Empire was " marked by that predominance of the horseman which characterised the earlier centuries of the Middle Ages , " but many more recent authors believe that the infantry remained predominant . 
 There is some dispute about whether this new military structure was put into place under the Emperor Diocletian or Constantine since both reorganised the Roman Army in the late 3rd and early 4th centuries to some degree . Both Diocletian and even his predecessor of thirty years Gallienus may already have controlled mobile strategic reserves to assist the empire 's border forces ; either Diocletian or Constantine expanded this nascent force into permanent field armies . 
 Recruitment from amongst Roman citizens had become greatly curtailed as a consequence of a declining population , " cripplingly numerous " categories of those exempted from military service and the spread of Christianity with its pacifist message . Together , these factors culminated in " the withdrawal of the urban class from all forms of military activity . " In their place , much of Rome 's military were now recruited from non @-@ Italian peoples living within the empire 's borders . Many of these people were barbarians or semi @-@ barbarians recently settled from lands beyond the empire , including several colonies of Carpi , Bastarnae and Sarmatians . 
 Although units described as legiones existed as late as the 5th century in both the border and field armies , the legionary system was very different from that of the principate and early empire . Since the term legion continued to be used , it is unclear exactly when the structure and role of the legions changed . In the 3rd or 4th century , however , the legions ' role as elite heavy infantry was substantially reduced and may have evaporated entirely . Instead , those " legions " that remained were no longer drawn exclusively ( and perhaps hardly at all ) from Roman citizens . Either Diocletian or Constantine reorganised the legions into smaller infantry units who , according to some sources , were more lightly armoured than their forebears . Their lighter armament may have been either because they " would not consent to wear the same weight of body armour as the legionaries of old " or , as in at least one documented instance , because they were prohibited from wearing heavy armour by their general in order to increase their mobility . 4th @-@ century legions were at times only one sixth the size of early imperial legions , and they were armed with some combination of spears , bows , slings , darts and swords , reflecting a greater contemporary emphasis on ranged fighting . The auxilia and numeri had also largely disappeared . Constantine further increased the proportion of German troops in the regular army ; their cultural impact was so great that even legionaries began wearing German dress . At the start of Diocletian 's reign , the Roman army numbered about 390 @,@ 000 men , but by the end of his reign he successfully increased the number to 581 @,@ 000 men . 
 = = = Adoption of barbarian allies ( 358 AD – 395 AD ) = = = 
 By the late 4th century , the Empire had become chronically deficient in raising sufficient troops from amongst its own population . As an alternative , taxation raised internally was increasingly used to subsidise growing numbers of barbarian recruits . The Romans had , for some time , recruited individual non @-@ Roman soldiers into regular military units . In 358 AD , this practice was accelerated by the <unk> adoption of the entire Salian Franks people into the Empire , providing a ready pool of such recruits . In return for being allowed to settle as foederatii in northern Gallia on the near side of the Rhine , the Franks were expected to defend the Empire 's borders in their territory and provide troops to serve in Roman units . 
 In 376 , a large band of Goths asked Emperor Valens for permission to settle on the southern bank of the Danube River on terms similar to the Franks . The Goths were also accepted into the empire as foederati ; however , they rebelled later that year and defeated the Romans at the Battle of Adrianople . The heavy losses that the Roman military suffered during this defeat ironically forced the Roman Empire to rely still further on such foederati troops to supplement its forces . In 382 , the practice was radically extended when federated troops were signed up en masse as allied contingents of <unk> and foederatii troops separate from existing Roman units . Near @-@ constant civil wars during the period 408 and 433 between various Roman usurpers , emperors and their supposed deputies such as Constantine III , Constantius III , Aetius and Bonifacius resulted in further losses , necessitating the handing over of more taxable land to foederati . 
 The size and composition of these allied forces remains in dispute . Santosuosso argues that foederati regiments consisted mostly of cavalry that were raised both as a temporary levy for a specific campaign need and , in some cases , as a permanent addition to the army . Hugh Elton believes that the importance of foederati has been overstated in traditional accounts by historians such as A.H.M. Jones . Elton argues that the majority of soldiers were probably non @-@ Italian Roman citizens , while Santosuosso believes that the majority of troops were almost certainly non @-@ citizen barbari . 
 = = Collapse in the West and survival in the East ( 395 AD – 476 AD ) = = 
 The non @-@ federated mobile field army , known as the comitatenses , was eventually split into a number of smaller field armies : a central field army under the emperor 's direct control , known as the <unk> <unk> or praesentalis , and several regional field armies . Historians Santosuosso and Vogt agree that the latter gradually degraded into low @-@ quality garrison units similar to the limitanei that they either supplemented or replaced . By the 5th century , a significant portion of Western Rome 's main military strength lay in rented barbarian mercenaries known as foederati . 
 As the 5th century progressed , many of the Empire 's original borders had been either wholly or partially denuded of troops to support the central field army . In 395 , the Western Roman Empire had several regional field armies in Italy , Illyricum , Gallia , Britannia and Africa , and about twelve border armies . By about 430 , two more field armies were established in Hispania and <unk> but the central government had lost control of Britannia as well as much of Gaul , Hispania , and Africa . In the same period , the Eastern Roman Empire had two palatine field armies ( at Constantinople ) , three regional field armies ( in the East , in Thrace , and in Illyricum ) and fifteen frontier armies . 
 As Roman troops were spread increasingly thin over its long border , the Empire 's territory continued to dwindle in size as the population of the empire declined . Barbarian war bands increasingly began to penetrate the Empire 's vulnerable borders , both as settlers and invaders . In 451 , the Romans defeated Attila the Hun , but only with assistance from a confederation of foederatii troops , which included Visigoths , Franks and Alans . As barbarian incursions continued , some advancing as far as the heart of Italy , Rome 's borders began to collapse , with frontier forces swiftly finding themselves cut off deep in the enemy 's rear . 
 Simultaneously , barbarian troops in Rome 's pay came to be " in a condition of almost perpetual turbulence and revolt " from 409 onwards . In 476 these troops finally unseated the last emperor of the Western Roman Empire . The Eastern Roman forces continued to defend the Eastern Roman ( Byzantine ) Empire until its fall in 1453 . 
 The former Oxford University historian Adrian Goldsworthy has argued that the cause of the fall of the Roman Empire in the West should not be blamed on <unk> of the late Roman Army , but on its recurrent civil wars , which led to its ability to repel or defeat invasions from outside its frontiers to be seriously weakened . The East Roman or Byzantine empire on the other hand had fewer civil wars to contend with in the late fourth and early fifth centuries , or in the years from 383 @-@ 432 A.D. 
 = Bedlington Terrier = 
 The Bedlington Terrier is a breed of small dog named after the mining town of Bedlington , Northumberland in North East England . Originally bred to hunt vermin in mines , the Bedlington Terrier has since been used in dog racing , numerous dog sports , as well as in conformation shows and as a companion dog . It is closely related to the Dandie Dinmont Terrier , Whippet and <unk> . 
 It is described as a very versatile yet contradictory dog , being both good with children and " fit to kill any other dog of his weight " . They have powerful swimming skills , comparable to those of water dogs such as the Newfoundland , and are noted for being very quick and having high endurance . Bedlingtons are noted for their similarity in appearance to lambs . The dogs have blue , liver or sandy colouration , all three of which may have tan points . Their fur forms a distinctive top knot on the dog 's head . 
 Originally known as the Rothbury or Rodbury Terrier , the name Bedlington Terrier was not applied to the breed until 1825 , but some dogs have pedigrees that can be traced back as far as 1782 . The first dog shows with a class for Bedlington Terriers was held in 1870 at Bedlington . Bedlington Terriers shown at early shows were frequently dyed to improve the look of their fur . In 1948 , a Bedlington Terrier known as Rock Ridge Night Rocket won best in show at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show . The breed has a high instance of copper toxicosis , but with the exception of eye problems , it is mostly free from health complaints . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Appearance = = = 
 The Bedlington Terrier has been described as resembling a lamb . It has also been compared to a miniature version of the Scottish <unk> . George Shields stated that exceedingly well @-@ bred dogs possess the spirit of a thoroughbred racehorse . 
 The dogs have blue , liver or sandy colouration , all three of which may have tan points . Bedlingtons carry what is known as the greying gene , a dominant trait carried on the G locus . This gene causes puppies born with black or dark brown fur to lighten to grey or liver with age . The fur of the Bedlington creates a shape on the top of the dog 's head known as a topknot . Although most modern breed standards call for the dog 's topknot to be lighter than its body , when the breed was first being formed there was at least one prominent breeder , Mr. Pickett , who believed that the topknot should be darker , not lighter . 
 The dog 's coat has been described as shaggy , hard , and rugged in style and it has also been described as <unk> in texture , giving the breed the nickname of " <unk> @-@ haired terrier " . Its coat is made up of a combination of hard and soft hairs . It is extremely difficult to maintain a " show clip " , even for professionals , and grooming can be quite expensive . Dogs in what is referred to as show clip , or groomed for the show ring , cannot have fur that stands out more than 1 inch ( 2 @.@ 5 centimetres ) from their body , and the coat must have a " crisp " texture . If grooming is not performed regularly , the coat 's condition rapidly deteriorates . For that reason , most Bedlingtons that are kept strictly as pets keep a lower maintenance " pet groom " style . Bedlington Terriers have been referred to as a <unk> hypoallergenic breed . 
 The head of the dog must be rounded in shape with no stop . Their eyes are almond @-@ shaped and small , and the lips are close @-@ fitting and lack <unk> . The back must be arched , and the body should be slightly longer in length than in height . Although 16 @.@ 5 inches ( 42 cm ) is the preferred height for male dogs , a range from 16 to 17 @.@ 5 inches ( 41 to 44 cm ) is allowed ; for females , the preferred height is 15 @.@ 5 inches ( 39 cm ) and the acceptable range is from 15 to 16 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 to 42 cm ) . Both genders must weigh between 17 and 23 pounds ( 7 @.@ 7 and 10 @.@ 4 kg ) . They possess a light , springy gait . 
 = = = Temperament = = = 
 Bedlingtons are sharp and plucky . Their bark has been called hound @-@ like and has been compared to the firing of a machine gun . Fast dogs with high endurance , the Bedlington Terrier is just as quick in water as it is on land , and their swimming speed rivals that of the Newfoundland . Bedlington Terriers " have pace enough to keep up with the ordinary speed of a horse . " Because of the Whippet in their lineage , they have a tendency to bolt . Their versatility has been praised , with some dogs willing to " [ be ] a house @-@ dog , a gun @-@ dog , a rat @-@ dog , a badger @-@ dog , or , if needed , [ to ] bolt a fox ... " 
 They are also known for their intelligence and tenacity when it comes to taking on vermin . Bedlingtons are quite fond of fighting , and are prone to jealousy when around other dogs . One man stated that " this dog was about fit to kill any other dog of his weight " and compared him to the fighting dogs used in dog fighting . They have also been used in pit fighting . 
 However , both the AKC and the <unk> call the breed " mild " and " gentle " and recommends it as being good with children . <unk> says the breed is soft in temperament , companionable , demonstrative , loyal , and a quiet <unk> . Although the breed may chase small animals outside , it is accepting of them inside . Playful and cheerful , the breed can be high @-@ strung and excitable , and is prone to being headstrong . The New Zealand Kennel Club warns against keeping them with dogs that have dominant personalities , " as once challenged they are terrifying fighters , despite their gentle appearance " , but otherwise the breed is good with other dogs . 
 Some breeders , notably George Newcombe , have argued that the working ability and courage of the Bedlington terrier has declined since it began being bred for show . Poodle may have been introduced into the breed to make the coat easier to groom and maintain . George Newcombe of the Working Bedlington Terrier Club said that " the pure [ Bedlington Terrier ] could no longer be considered a serious working breed " and proceeded to cross his dogs with Lakeland Terriers in an attempt to bring back the Bedlington 's working qualities . 
 = = History = = 
 Bred in the village of Bedlington in Northumberland , the Bedlington Terrier has been described as " the favourite companion of the northern miners " . They were originally known as Rodbury Terriers , Rothbury Terriers , or " Rothbury 's Lambs " , because the Lord of Rothbury had taken a particular liking to the dogs . Before this , they were known as " gypsy dogs " , as gypsies and poachers used them to hunt . The first mention of the Bedlington terrier , or as it was then known , the Rothbury or Rodbury Terrier , was in 1825 , most likely in The Life of James Allen , but some dogs ' pedigrees have been traced as far back as 1782 . James ' father , William , was much in demand as an otter hunter , and he kept Bedlington Terriers in order to help him hunt . They were also valued by their owners as rabbit coursing dogs and racing dogs , until the Whippet became more popular as a racing dog and a courser . 
 The Bedlington Terrier name was first given to a dog named Young Piper , which was owned by a man named Joseph Ainsley . Ainsley 's Piper has been called " the best of his race " and " had a reputation for great pluck and courage " . Piper began working with badgers at eight months old , and carried on hunting other animals generally regarded as vermin until he was blind . Piper is also known for saving a child from a pig , keeping the animal at bay until help arrived . Piper died at fifteen . 
 The first shows that had a class for the Bedlington Terrier were held in 1870 at Bedlington . The following year , there was a Bedlington Terrier class at a show held at Crystal Palace , where a red dog named Miner took first prize . Miner also won a show held at Birmingham . The Bedlington Terrier Club was established in 1875 . Many dogs in early shows were clipped and dyed to bring them closer to the breed standard and improve their chances of winning . 
 It is unknown if the judges of the time were aware of this practice , or if they cared . The practice of trimming was eventually accepted by The Kennel Club , under the pretense that the trimming was being done to " <unk> a dog to show his shape and general contour . " 
 Bedlington Terriers are closely related to the Dandie Dinmont Terrier . In fact , the Earl of Antrim once exhibited two terriers from the same litter , and one won shows as a Dandie Dinmont , while the other won shows as a Bedlington . Bedlington Terriers are also related to the Kerry Blue Terrier and the Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier . The shape of its back suggests that it may related to the Whippet and it may also be related to the <unk> . Bedlington Terriers have been crossed with Whippets to produce a Lurcher with " extra guts , pep , [ and ] fire . " 
 In 1948 , Ch . Rock Ridge Night Rocket took best in show at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show and was subsequently featured in LIFE magazine . One of his descendants , Ch . <unk> ' Cable Car , was featured on the cover of Sports Illustrated in the February 8 , 1960 edition . 
 = = Health = = 
 = = = Longevity = = = 
 Median longevity of Bedlington Terriers , based on two recent UK surveys , is about 13 @.@ 5 years , which is longer than for purebred dogs in general and longer than most breeds similar in size . The longest @-@ lived of 48 deceased dogs in a 2004 UK Kennel Club survey was 18 @.@ 4 years . Leading causes of death among Bedlington Terriers in the UK were old age ( 23 % ) , <unk> ( 15 % ) , and hepatic ( 12 @.@ 5 % ) . The leading " hepatic " cause of death was copper toxicosis . Dogs that died of liver diseases usually died at a younger age than dogs dying of most other causes . 
 Bedlington Terrier owners in the UK reported that the most common health issues among living dogs were reproductive , heart murmur , and eye problems such as <unk> , retinal dysplasia , and cataracts . Bedlingtons seem to be more prone to these eye diseases than other breeds . They also have a high incidence of kidney problems . Copper toxicosis occurred among about 5 % of living dogs . Inbreeding is a concern , as some dogs " [ having ] been bred in and in to a damaging extent . " <unk> breeders will conduct DNA testing of all litters and will not allow pups who carry the copper toxicosis gene to be bred , a practice which has significantly reduced the incidence of this disease in the breed . Excepting these problems , Bedlingtons are generally a very healthy breed . 
 = = = Copper toxicosis = = = 
 Copper toxicosis , also known as copper storage disease and copper overload syndrome , is an autosomal recessive disease that is characterized by an accumulation of copper in the liver . It is closely related to Wilson 's disease in humans . Bedlington Terriers are more prone to copper toxicosis than most other dog breeds . West Highland White Terriers , Skye Terriers , and Doberman Pinschers are also prone to copper storage disease . Bedlington Terriers are the only breed of dog in which haemolysis has been reported , but there have been no reports of neurological involvement in any dog breed . Studies have shown that in Bedlingtons , the disease is caused by a defective metallothionein that causes cell lysosomes to become saturated with copper . This causes the cell to store copper in the nucleus . There are three varieties of the disease : the Asymptomatic Form occurs when copper accumulates but there are no clinical symptoms of the disorder ; the <unk> Form which is seen mostly in young dogs , causes death in two to three days , and is thought to be caused by stress ; and the Chronic Form , which is characterized by an extended period of time in which liver disease slowly causes the death of the dog . Bedlingtons also have a tendency to accumulate iron in the liver , but not nearly to the extent that they accumulate copper . 
 = SSX 3 = 
 SSX 3 is a snowboard racing game developed by EA Canada and published by EA Sports Big . The game was initially released on October 20 , 2003 for the GameCube , PlayStation 2 , and Xbox . It was later ported to the Game Boy Advance by Visual Impact on November 11 , 2003 and to the Gizmondo by <unk> Entertainment on August 31 , 2005 as a launch title . It is the third installment in the SSX series . 
 Set on a fictional mountain , the single @-@ player mode follows snowboarders competing in the SSX Championship . Players choose from a variety of characters and take part in various events in different locations , earning points and money by performing tricks , winning races , completing goals and finding collectables . Money can be used to upgrade character attributes , buy new clothes and boards , and unlock music and extras . Multiple players can play against each other in local multiplayer modes , and an online multiplayer mode also allowed players to connect to games and play against each other online on the PlayStation 2 version of the game , but has since been discontinued . 
 Development of SSX 3 initially began in 2001 following the release of the previous title in the series , SSX Tricky . The development team was composed of people from various different employment backgrounds , including an Oscar nominated visual effects designer who worked as one of the game 's art directors . The game includes 30 different types of snow and general visual improvements over the previous game , such as enhanced models and shadows . It was initially confirmed through a trailer in NBA Street Vol . 2 in 2003 . A soundtrack album , SSX 3 the Soundtrack , was released on September 30 , 2003 . 
 SSX 3 was critically acclaimed , with reviewers praising the game 's open world , trick system , presentation and soundtrack . It was the first game in the SSX series to sell 1 million copies . IGN 's Douglass C. Perry called it the best snowboarding game he had ever played , stating that it " expands upon Tricky in every way " . GameSpot 's Greg Kasavin said that it " delivers a rush like few racing games or action sports games have ever achieved " , recommending it not only to veterans , but also for novices of the series . It received the Academy of Interactive Arts and Sciences ' awards for Console Action Sports Game of the Year and Outstanding Achievement in Licensed Soundtrack . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 SSX 3 is a snowboard racing game played from a third person perspective . Players control one of various snowboarders and compete in events set across individual courses in peaks on a mountain . Unlike previous games in the series , which contain unconnected courses , a freeride mode also allows players to freely roam the open world consisting of all the courses in the game ; it is possible for the player to ride from the top of the mountain to the bottom without stopping or reloading each course . New areas are progressively unlocked throughout the game . 
 Players can gain points by performing tricks , such as grabs , grinds , flips and spins . A feature returning from previous games in the SSX series is the " adrenaline meter " , which gains " adrenaline " when the player executes tricks . It can be used to provide a speed boost or , once it becomes full , perform advanced tricks called " übers " that grant more points than regular tricks . Performing übers increases the level of the adrenaline meter , which leads to progressively more advanced " super über " tricks and faster adrenaline boosts . Performing multiple tricks of different kinds creates a combo , doubling the points acquired from tricks . However , repeating the same trick causes the amount of points it earns to drop . Landing tricks poorly or hitting an object in mid air will cause the snowboarder to " wipe out " , falling over . The player has the ability to recover their snowboarder more quickly by tapping a button , or alternatively reset the snowboarder back to the course if they get stuck in an area . Both wiping out and resetting result in a loss of adrenaline and the ability to perform übers until the adrenaline meter is filled again . 
 Players complete " peak goals " — set objectives — to progress through the single @-@ player mode and unlock all three peaks of the mountain . Peak goals are achieved by completing events , earning money or completing " big challenges " and finding collectables , both during freeride mode , which can be accessed outside of events . The player only has to complete one of these goals to progress to the next peak . Completing each peak goal unlocks a trophy for the player . 
 Each course in the game has a designated event that players can compete in . Events fall under two categories : race and freestyle . Coming first in an event provides the player a gold medal , coming second provides the player a silver medal , and coming third provides the player a bronze medal . It is also possible to obtain a platinum medal by beating certain times or getting a high enough score . The race event objective is to get to the end of the course as quickly as possible . Players race against other snowboarder NPCs on the same course . Races contain multiple routes and shortcuts , which can give the player an advantage over opponents . Players can also use melee combat to knock other snowboarders over , slowing them down and providing the player with adrenaline . Race events have three heats , and the player must come third place or above in each heat to progress . Once all race events are completed on a peak , the player 's snowboarder is challenged to a " backcountry race " by their rival snowboarder . Winning unlocks a " peak race " , where the player aims to beat their rival 's best time from the peak to the bottom of the mountain . Both races have only one heat . Completing the races unlocks the next peak . 
 The freestyle events include " slopestyle " , " big air " and " super pipe " . Their objectives are to get as many points as possible . <unk> courses are similar to race courses , as players must ride through a downhill track with multiple paths . However , the goal of slopestyle courses is for the player to gain points by performing tricks . Big air courses are short , with one or two ramps that are designed to allow the player to perform large jumps and multiple tricks in a small amount of time . Super pipe courses contain half @-@ pipes that the player can repeatedly perform tricks on . Freestyle events are structured similarly to race events ; each have three heats , and the player is invited to " backcountry jams " and " peak jams " , where points are scored through performing tricks . Completing the freestyle events unlocks the next peak . 
 Outside of events , players can take part in big challenges . The objectives of the challenges include jumping through hoops and collecting items , among others . Collectable " crystals " items can also be found on every course , and can be collected in any event and in freeride . Obtaining enough crystals and completing enough big challenges on a peak unlocks the next peak . In addition to peak goals , SSX 3 contains smaller challenges called " career highlights " . Similar to big challenges , objectives can vary , and include holding a <unk> for five seconds or doing a certain number of übers in one event . In freeride , players can travel to any courses they have unlocked and can also go to stations ; These areas contain lodges , which allow the player to save their game , edit music playlists , buy attributes to improve their snowboarder , purchase new übers , and buy or equip gear and boards to change the aesthetics of the snowboarder . Money can also be used to buy extras , such as videos , cheat characters and game art . Money can be earned in game by performing tricks , completing big challenges and events , or collecting crystals . Earning enough money on a peak will unlock the next peak . In station areas , the narrator of the game , " DJ <unk> " , talks to you via " EA Radio Big " , a fictional radio station . He gives the player information about events and weather , as well as other miscellaneous information . While the player is on a course , the soundtrack of the game is played through EA Radio Big . Depending on how well the player is performing , the music becomes quieter and louder . The player can change what music is allowed to play at lodges . 
 The PlayStation 2 version of SSX 3 had an online multiplayer mode that allowed two players to race against each other over the internet . The service required an " EA Account " to use . Players could join lobbies , where they could challenge players to races , view player statistics such as the global rank of a player , and chat with players using supported USB headsets and keyboards . Players could send messages and add up to forty " buddies " using " EA Messenger " , an in @-@ game instant messaging service . The online service has since been discontinued . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game was initially confirmed through a trailer in the game NBA Street Vol . 2 in 2003 with the working title SSX 3 , which later became the official title . The game was available to play by journalists before release at the July 2003 Camp EA event and E3 2003 . The Gizmondo version was also available to play by journalists at E3 2005 . 
 SSX 3 was developed by EA Canada and published under the EA Sports Big brand . During the development of SSX and SSX Tricky , there were plans for both games to allow the player to explore a mountain , but this was never implemented , and was instead made the focus for SSX 3 . EA Canada stated that SSX 3 was designed so " just about anyone can pick up and play " . Larry LaPierre , the producer of the game , stated that the developers wanted " to give people the first ever full mountain experience " and allow players to choose what they wanted to do on the mountain . 
 The open ended nature of the game was influenced by Battlefield 1942 and NBA Street Vol . 2 , both EA titles , as the developers of SSX 3 enjoyed features in both games that allow players to choose the way they want to play . Developers were also inspired by their own personal experiences with snowboarding at Island Lake Lodge . EA Canada hired people from various different work backgrounds to develop the game , including the Oscar nominated visual effects designer Henry <unk> , who worked as one of the game 's three art directors . The game contains 30 different types of snow , ranging in consistency and rendered using various shading techniques and more " realistic " lighting effects than the game 's predecessor , SSX Tricky . Improvements to graphics over the previous game in the series also include better models and shadows , as well as more reflections in the in @-@ game snow . SSX 3 is the first game in the SSX series and one of the first games in general to be THX certified . 
 SSX 3 's development began in 2001 , after the release of the previous title in the series , SSX Tricky . It was released on October 20 , 2003 in North America for GameCube , PlayStation 2 , and Xbox ; and in Japan on December 12 , 2003 for GameCube and October 18 , 2003 for PlayStation 2 . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Songs from various other bands can also be heard in the game , including Jane 's Addiction and Red Hot Chili Peppers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 SSX 3 received critical acclaim upon its release . Metacritic calculated an average score of 93 out of 100 for the PlayStation 2 version based on 41 reviews , and 92 out of 100 for the Xbox and GameCube versions , both based on 27 reviews . All scores indicate " universal acclaim " . It is EA Sports Big 's second @-@ highest rated game on Metacritic before the first title in the series , SSX . On aggregate website GameRankings , the game holds 92 % for PS2 and GameCube based on 60 reviews and 38 reviews respectively and 90 % for Xbox based on 41 reviews . Reviewers liked the addition of an open world , the presentation and trick system , while finding issues with the difficulty of the controls and customization options . It won the Academy of Interactive Arts and Sciences ' Console Action Sports Game of the Year and Outstanding Achievement in Licensed Soundtrack awards . Douglass C. Perry of IGN called it the best snowboarding game he had ever played , and GameSpot 's Greg Kasavin stated that it " delivers a rush like few racing games or action sports games have ever achieved " . SSX 3 was the first game in the SSX series to sell 1 million copies . 
 Reviewers particularly praised SSX 3 's technical advancements , with Game Revolution 's Ben Silverman calling the game 's snow effects unrivaled , while also recognising its " consistently high " frame rate . Eurogamer 's Tom Bramwell directed his praise at the game 's draw distances , seamless animation and colourful environments , and GameSpy 's Bryn Williams commended the game 's lighting and particle effects . Reviewers also recognised SSX 3 's open world as innovative , with Williams finding that the loading times allow players to ride across long distances " without having to wait a single second for the environments to load into memory " . Louis Bedigian of GameZone called the PS2 version " extremely fun . The gameplay is as good as snowboarding games come . " Carlos <unk> , also of GameZone , was a bit less positive of the GameCube version , saying , " The lack of fantastical obstacles and other Tricky @-@ exclusive elements is admittedly missed , but the inclusion of so many other excellent improvements makes you quickly forget that this ain 't Tricky . " Tim Surette , also of GameZone , gave the Xbox version a score of 9 @.@ 7 out of 10 , which is a much higher score than the other console versions , and called it " one of the tightest games out there ... there ’ s nothing that stands out as a negative , and everything else is a glaring positive . The abundance of ‘ stuff to do ’ keeps the gameplay fresh and makes 100 % completion a task for the gods . " However , in a slightly less positive review , the reviewer for GamesTM stated that " given the constraints of the sport " , the game does a great job of staying as open as possible . 
 The trick system was also well received ; Bramwell called the new super @-@ über tricks " astonishingly cool " and stated that he was pleased that the game introduced " a much more clear @-@ cut combo system " . Perry said that the addition of board presses " make playing SSX 3 an entirely new game " , adding that performing tricks is " a pleasure on the PS2 and Xbox " , but criticised the GameCube 's controls , citing that " the controller just doesn 't provide enough buttons to do " the game justice . Kasavin also noted that the PS2 pad was " especially well suited for the game " . 
 SSX 3 's sound and voice acting were heavily praised , with Silverman commending the " varied soundtrack and great effects " , stating that they make the game " sound terrific " . Perry noted that SSX 3 is " a legitimate THX endorsed game , ensuring high @-@ quality sound clarity " . Williams thought highly of the voice acting , calling it " clear , simple , and not annoying in the slightest " . He also considered the DJ commentary to be slick and unobtrusive . Kasavin praised the soundtrack , calling it " one of the highlights of the experience " , and gave recognition to the way it layers in with the racing , saying that " it contributes heavily to the intensity and excitement of playing SSX 3 " . 
 Non @-@ video game publications also sang the praises of the game . Noah Robischon of Entertainment Weekly gave the PS2 version an A and said that all of the smooth music , " along with the ' Uber ' and ' Super Uber ' combo tricks , will have you stumbling away from the console at 4 a.m. , your fingers aching and your voice hoarse . " Playboy gave the GameCube , PS2 and Xbox versions a score of 100 % and said , " While other snowboarding games run out of steam mid @-@ shred , the SSX series continues to gain momentum . " 
 The Game Boy Advance version of SSX 3 was more poorly received , gaining a score of 63 out of 100 based on 14 reviews on Metacritic , indicating " Mixed or average reviews " . On GameRankings , it received a score of 57 % based on 12 reviews . The reviewer for Computer and Video Games called the game slow and sluggish , and its controls unresponsive . Craig Harris of IGN said that the graphics engine has difficulty " keeping up with all that the designers throw at it " . In a more positive review , Frank Provo of GameSpot claimed that it " duplicates many of the same features found in the console versions " , stating that the game 's 3D graphics engine is " unrivaled by anything else currently available for the system " . Bedigian of GameZone said that this version was " not even close to the exciting console versions . " 
 = New South Greenland = 
 New South Greenland , sometimes known as Morrell 's Land , was an appearance of land recorded by the American captain Benjamin Morrell of the schooner Wasp in March 1823 , during a sealing and exploration voyage in the Weddell Sea area of Antarctica . Morrell provided precise coordinates and a description of a coastline which he claimed to have sailed along for more than 300 miles ( 480 km ) . Because the Weddell Sea area was so little visited , and hard to navigate due to ice conditions , the alleged land was never properly investigated before its existence was emphatically disproved during Antarctic expeditions in the early 20th century . 
 At the time of Morrell 's voyage , the geography of the then unnamed Weddell Sea and its surrounding coasts was almost entirely unknown , making the claimed sighting initially plausible . However , obvious errors in Morrell 's voyage account , and his general reputation as a fabulist , created scepticism about the existence of this new land . In June 1912 the German explorer Wilhelm Filchner searched for but found no traces of land , after his ship Deutschland became icebound in the Weddell Sea and drifted into the locality of Morrell 's observation . A sounding of the sea bottom revealed more than 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) of water , indicating no land in near proximity . Three years later , trapped in the same waters with his ship Endurance , Ernest Shackleton was able by similar means to confirm the land 's non @-@ existence . 
 Various explanations for Morrell 's error have been suggested , including intentional deception . However , Morrell describes his find briefly and prosaically , evidently seeking no personal credit or glory from the discovery . In his narrative he assigns the honour to his fellow sealing captain , Robert Johnson , for finding and naming the land two years earlier . Morrell may have been honestly mistaken , through miscalculation of his ship 's position or by <unk> detail when writing the account after nine years . Alternatively , he may have made the common error of confusing distant icebergs with land , or been misled by the distorting effects of Antarctic mirage . In 1843 the distinguished British naval explorer James Clark Ross reported possible land in a position close to Morrell 's ; this land , too , would eventually be proven not to exist . 
 = = Voyage of the Wasp , 1822 – 23 = = 
 = = = June 1822 to March 1823 = = = 
 In the early 19th century the geography of Antarctica was almost completely unknown , though occasional sightings of land had been recorded . In 1822 Benjamin Morrell , who had sailed to the South Sandwich Islands the previous year , was appointed commander of the schooner Wasp for a two @-@ year voyage of sealing , trading and exploration in the Antarctic seas and the southern Pacific Ocean . In addition to his sealing duties Morrell had , as he put it , " discretionary powers to prosecute new discoveries . " He proposed to use this discretion to investigate the Antarctic seas " and to ascertain the practicality ... of penetrating to the South Pole . " This would be the first of four extended voyages that would keep Morrell at sea for most of the following eight years , although he would not revisit the Antarctic after the initial voyage . 
 Wasp sailed south from New York on 22 June 1822 . She reached the Falkland Islands late in October , after which Morrell spent 16 days in fruitless searches for the nonexistent Aurora Islands , before heading for South Georgia , where the ship anchored on 20 November . In his account Morrell wrongly records the position of this anchorage , giving a location in open sea about 60 miles ( 97 km ) south @-@ west of the island 's coastline . According to Morrell 's account , Wasp then headed eastwards to hunt for seals , and reached the remote Bouvet Island on 6 December . The polar historian H.R. Mill notes that Morrell 's description of this island 's physical features fails to mention its most singular characteristic — the permanent ice sheet that covers its surface . Morrell then attempted to take the ship southwards but , reaching thick ice at around 60 ° S , turned northeast towards the Kerguelen Islands where he anchored on 31 December . 
 After several days of exploration and evidently profitable sealing , Wasp left the <unk> on 11 January 1823 , sailing south and east to record her furthest eastern position at 64 ° 52'S , 118 ° <unk> on 1 February . From this point , according to his own account , Morrell decided to take advantage of strong easterly winds , and made passage westward back to the Greenwich meridian , 0 ° . His subsequent account of this voyage has been disputed , particularly his assertion that a distance of more than 3 @,@ 500 miles ( 5 @,@ 600 km ) was covered in 23 days . The writer Rupert Gould points out that , according to Morrell 's record , this journey included a stretch of 900 miles ( 1 @,@ 400 km ) in four days , a rate of progress that even Gould , generally sympathetic to Morrell , is inclined to doubt . Morrell quotes various positions during the voyage at southerly latitudes which later proved to be at least 100 miles inside the then undiscovered Antarctic continental mainland . One possible explanation for this discrepancy , offered by the writer W.J. Mills , is that since Morrell 's account was written nine years after the voyage he may not have had access to the ship 's log , and hence " felt constrained to invent details that appeared plausible " , in order to sustain his narrative . 
 On 28 February Wasp reached Candlemas Island in the South Sandwich Islands . After a few days spent in a search for fuel to feed the ship 's stoves , Morrell sailed southwards on 6 March , into the area later known as the Weddell Sea . Finding the sea remarkably free of ice , Morrell advanced to 70 ° 14'S before turning north @-@ westward on 14 March . This retreat , Morrell says , was due to the ship 's lack of fuel ; otherwise , he claims , in these open waters he could have taken the ship to 85 ° , or perhaps to the Pole itself . These words are very similar to those used by the British explorer James Weddell to describe his own experiences in the same area , a month earlier , which has led historians to suspect that Morrell may have plagiarised Weddell 's experiences . 
 = = = Sighting of land = = = 
 From the earliest navigations of the Southern Ocean in the 16th century , lands which subsequently proved to be nonexistent had from time to time been reported . Robert Headland of the Scott Polar Research Institute has suggested various reasons for these false sightings , ranging from " too much rum " to deliberate hoaxes designed to lure rival ships away from good sealing grounds . Some sightings may have been of large ice masses that were carrying rocks and other glacial debris — dirty ice can appear convincingly similar to land . It is also possible that some of these lands existed , but later became submerged after volcanic eruptions . Other sightings may have been of actual land , the position of which was wrongly fixed through observational errors arising from chronometer failure , adverse weather or simple incompetence . 
 At 2 pm on 15 March , as Wasp cruised north @-@ eastwards , Morrell records : " Land was seen from the masthead , bearing west , distance 3 leagues " ( about nine miles , 14 km ) . He did not at the time consider that he had made a new discovery ; he seems to have assumed that he was seeing the east coast of the Antarctic Peninsula , the western coast of which had been explored and given the name " New South Greenland " in 1821 , by Robert Johnson , a former captain of the Wasp . Johnson 's name for this land was never adopted ; in 1831 it was named Graham Land . At the time of Morrell 's voyage the geographical character and dimensions of the peninsula were unknown ; Morrell 's recorded position was in fact far to the east of the peninsula . Morrell 's account reads : " At half past 4 pm we were close on with the body of land to which Captain Johnson had given the name of New South Greenland " . The next few days were spent exploring this supposed coast , which was apparently rich in seal . Some 75 miles ( 120 km ) further south , Morrell thought he could see snow @-@ covered mountains . 
 After three days , Morrell called a halt " because of shortage of water and season far advanced " . Wasp turned north , from a position Morrell calculated as 67 ° 52'S , 48 ° <unk> , and on 19 March , the ship passed what he assumed was the northern cape of the land , at 62 ° <unk> , 47 ° <unk> . " This land abounds with oceanic birds of every description " , wrote Morrell . He also records seeing 3 @,@ 000 sea elephants . At 10 o 'clock Wasp " bade farewell to the cheerless shores of New South Greenland " , and sailed for Tierra del Fuego , then through the Magellan Strait into the Pacific Ocean , reaching Valparaiso , Chile , on 26 July 1823 . 
 = = Searches for Morrell 's land = = 
 In 1838 , the French explorer Jules Dumont d 'Urville sailed over the position of Morrell 's " north cape " , but saw no indication of land . This , together with the obvious errors in Morrell 's voyage account , and his general reputation as a braggart , led most later geographers to doubt his story . This scepticism remained even after Sir James Clark Ross reported an appearance of land in 1843 , not far from Morrell 's alleged observation ; Ross 's sighting was occasionally proffered as support for Morrell 's claim . After Ross there was no further exploration of the Weddell Sea until 1903 , when William Speirs Bruce took Scotia to 74 ° <unk> , but in a sector of the sea which did not bring him close to Morrell 's or Ross 's supposed sightings . Bruce was , however , did not dismiss Morrell 's claims , writing that they should not be rejected until absolutely disproved . 
 The first determined search for New South Greenland came during the Second German Antarctic Expedition , 1911 – 13 , under Wilhelm Filchner . The expedition 's ship , Deutschland , became trapped in heavy sea ice while attempting to establish a shore base at Vahsel Bay . Her subsequent north @-@ westerly drift had , by mid @-@ June 1912 , brought her to a position just 37 miles ( 60 km ) east of Morrell 's recorded sighting . Filchner left the ship on 23 June and , with two companions and sufficient provisions for three weeks , sledged westward across the sea ice in search of Morrell 's land . Daylight was limited to two or three hours a day , and temperatures fell to − 31 ° F ( − 35 ° C ) , making travel difficult . They found no signs of land ; a lead weight dropped through the ice reached a depth of 5 @,@ 248 feet ( 1 @,@ 600 m ) before the line snapped . The depth confirmed that there was no land in the vicinity , and Filchner concluded that Morrell had probably seen a mirage . 
 On 17 August 1915 Sir Ernest Shackleton 's ship Endurance , trapped in the ice like Deutschland three years earlier , drifted to a point 10 miles west of Morrell 's sighting . Here , a depth sounding recorded 1 @,@ 676 fathoms ( 10 @,@ 060 feet , 3 @,@ 065 m ) , leading Shackleton to write : " I decided that Morrell Land must be added to the long list of Antarctic islands and continental coasts that have resolved themselves into icebergs " . On 25 August a further sounding of 1 @,@ 900 fathoms ( 11 @,@ 400 feet , 3 @,@ 500 m ) gave Shackleton additional evidence of the non @-@ existence of New South Greenland . 
 Although Filchner 's and Shackleton 's investigations and observations were accepted as conclusive proof that New South Greenland was a myth , there remained the question of Sir James Ross 's reported appearance of land in a position around 65 ° S , 47 ° W. Ross 's reputation was sufficient for this possibility to be taken seriously , and for his alleged sighting to be recorded on maps and Admiralty charts . In 1922 Frank Wild , leading the Shackleton @-@ Rowett Expedition aboard Quest after Shackleton 's death early in the expedition , investigated the location of Ross 's sighting . Nothing was seen ; prevented by ice conditions from reaching the exact spot , Wild took a sounding at 64 ° 11'S , 46 ° <unk> , which revealed 2 @,@ 331 fathoms ( 13 @,@ 986 ft ; 4 @,@ 263 m ) of water . This showed that no land was near . 
 = = Opinions and theories = = 
 Hugh Robert Mill , writing in 1905 before the non @-@ existence of New South Greenland had been finally established , concluded that because of Morrell 's blunders , and his habit of incorporating the experiences of others into his story , all his claims should be treated as unproven . Nevertheless , he conceded that " a man may be ignorant , boastful and obscure , and yet have done a solid piece of work " . The Canadian geographer Paul Simpson @-@ Housley , although sceptical about much of Morrell 's account , suggests that the speeds claimed for the derided western journey , though fast , were not impossible , and Morrell 's farthest south in the Weddell Sea , queried by Mill , is entirely plausible , given that James Weddell had sailed four degrees further south just a month earlier . 
 The writer Rupert Gould , in a lengthy essay on New South Greenland published in 1929 , queries the assumption that the sighting was simply invented by Morrell , partly on the grounds that very little weight is given to the discovery in Morrell 's 500 @-@ page account . Gould writes : " If Morrell wished to gain an undeserved reputation as an Antarctic explorer , one would think he could have gone a better way about it than to bury his pièces <unk> , after he had forged them , in an undistinguished corner of so bulky a book . " Nor would he have credited it to Captain Johnson two years earlier , rather than to himself . 
 Gould also discusses the possibility that what Morrell sighted was the eastern coast of Graham Land , the so @-@ called " Foyn Coast " , despite its being 14 ° further west from position of the New South Greenland sighting . Gould asserts that the features of the peninsula 's eastern coast corresponds closely with Morrell 's description of <unk> South Greenland . This theory supposes that Morrell miscalculated the ship 's position , perhaps because he lacked the chronometer necessary for proper navigational observation . In his account Morrell writes that he was " destitute of the various nautical and mathematical instruments " , although other parts of his narrative seem to indicate that the occasional dead reckoning calculation was the exception to the norm . A longitudinal error of 14 ° is very large , and the additional distance of about 350 miles ( 560 km ) to the Foyn coast seems too great to have been covered within the ten @-@ day voyage from the South Sandwich Islands , where the ship 's position is recorded accurately . Even so , Gould suggests that a " balance of evidence " shows that what Morrell saw was the Foyn coast . 
 Filchner 's view that the supposed sighting of New South Greenland could be explained by a mirage is echoed by Simpson @-@ Housley . He suggests that Morrell and his crew saw a superior mirage . One form of superior mirage , sometimes described as a Fata Morgana , distorts distant flat coastlines or ice edges both vertically and horizontally , so they can appear to have tall cliffs and other features such as high mountain peaks and valleys . In his expedition account South , Shackleton gives a description of a Fata Morgana observed on 20 August 1915 , coincidentally as his ship Endurance drifted close to the recorded position of New South Greenland : " The distant pack is thrown up into towering barrier @-@ like cliffs , which are reflected in blue lakes and lanes of water at their base . Great white and golden cities of Oriental appearance at close intervals along these cliff @-@ tops indicate distant bergs ... The lines rise and fall , tremble , dissipate , and reappear in an endless transformation scene " . 
 = = Afterwards = = 
 Morrell 's four voyages finally ended on 21 August 1831 , with his return to New York . He then wrote his Narrative of Four Voyages , which was published the following year . He attempted to resume his seafaring career , seeking employment with the London @-@ based shipping firm of Enderby Brothers , but his reputation had preceded him and he was rejected . Charles Enderby stated publicly that " he had heard so much of him that he did not think fit to enter into any engagement with him . " Morrell also sought to join Dumont D 'Urville 's expedition to the Weddell Sea in 1837 , but his services were again declined . He reportedly died in 1839 , and is commemorated by Morrell Island , 59 ° 27'S , 27 ° <unk> , an alternative name for Thule Island in the Southern Thule sub @-@ group of the South Sandwich Islands . Robert Johnson , who coined the name New South Greenland , disappeared with his ship in 1826 , while investigating the Antarctic waters in the vicinity of what would later be known as the Ross Sea . 
 = Cyclone = 
 In meteorology , a cyclone is a large scale air mass that rotates around a strong center of low atmospheric pressure . They are usually characterized by inward spiraling winds that rotate counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere . All large @-@ scale cyclones are centered on low @-@ pressure areas . The largest low @-@ pressure systems are polar vortices and extratropical cyclones of the largest scale ( synoptic scale ) . According to the National Hurricane Center glossary , warm @-@ core cyclones such as tropical cyclones and subtropical cyclones also lie within the synoptic scale . Mesocyclones , tornadoes and dust devils lie within the smaller mesoscale . Upper level cyclones can exist without the presence of a surface low , and can pinch off from the base of the Tropical Upper Tropospheric Trough during the summer months in the Northern Hemisphere . Cyclones have also been seen on extraterrestrial planets , such as Mars and Neptune . Cyclogenesis describes the process of cyclone formation and intensification . Extratropical cyclones begin as waves in large regions of enhanced mid @-@ latitude temperature contrasts called baroclinic zones . These zones contract to form weather fronts as the cyclonic circulation closes and intensifies . Later in their life cycle , extratropical cyclones occlude as the cold air mass undercuts the warmer air and become cold core systems . A cyclone 's track is guided over the course of its 2 to 6 day life cycle by the steering flow of the subtropical jet stream . 
 Weather fronts separate two masses of air of different densities and are associated with the most prominent meteorological phenomena . Air masses separated by a front may differ in temperature or humidity . Strong cold fronts typically feature narrow bands of thunderstorms and severe weather , and may on occasion be preceded by squall lines or dry lines . They form west of the circulation center and generally move from west to east . Warm fronts form east of the cyclone center and are usually preceded by stratiform precipitation and fog . They move poleward ahead of the cyclone path . Occluded fronts form late in the cyclone life cycle near the center of the cyclone and often wrap around the storm center . 
 Tropical cyclogenesis describes the process of development of tropical cyclones . Tropical cyclones form due to latent heat driven by significant thunderstorm activity , and are warm core . Cyclones can transition between extratropical , subtropical , and tropical phases . Mesocyclones form as warm core cyclones over land , and can lead to tornado formation . Waterspouts can also form from mesocyclones , but more often develop from environments of high instability and low vertical wind shear . In the Atlantic and the northeastern Pacific oceans , a tropical cyclone is generally referred to as a hurricane ( from the name of the ancient Central American deity of wind , Huracan ) , in the Indian and south Pacific oceans it is called a cyclone , and in the northwestern Pacific it is called a typhoon . 
 = = Structure = = 
 There are a number of structural characteristics common to all cyclones . A cyclone is a low @-@ pressure area . A cyclone 's center ( often known in a mature tropical cyclone as the eye ) , is the area of lowest atmospheric pressure in the region . Near the center , the pressure gradient force ( from the pressure in the center of the cyclone compared to the pressure outside the cyclone ) and the force from the Coriolis effect must be in an approximate balance , or the cyclone would collapse on itself as a result of the difference in pressure . 
 Because of the Coriolis effect , the wind flow around a large cyclone is counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere . In the Northern Hemisphere , the fastest winds relative to the surface of the Earth therefore occur on the eastern side of a northward @-@ moving cyclone and on the northern side of a westward @-@ moving one ; the opposite occurs in the Southern Hemisphere . In contrast to low pressure systems , the wind flow around high pressure systems are clockwise ( anticyclonic ) in the northern hemisphere , and counterclockwise in the southern hemisphere . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Cyclogenesis is the development or strengthening of cyclonic circulation in the atmosphere . Arctic Climatology and Meteorology . Cyclogenesis is an umbrella term for several different processes , all of which result in the development of some sort of cyclone . It can occur at various scales , from the microscale to the synoptic scale . 
 Extratropical cyclones begin as waves along weather fronts before occluding later in their life cycle as cold @-@ core systems . However , some intense extratropical cyclones can become warm @-@ core systems when a warm seclusion occurs . 
 Tropical cyclones form as a result of significant convective activity , and are warm core . Mesocyclones form as warm core cyclones over land , and can lead to tornado formation . Waterspouts can also form from mesocyclones , but more often develop from environments of high instability and low vertical wind shear . <unk> is the opposite of cyclogenesis , and is the high @-@ pressure system equivalent which deals with the formation of high @-@ pressure areas — <unk> . 
 A surface low can form in a variety of ways . Topography can create a surface low . Mesoscale convective systems can spawn surface lows that are initially warm core . The disturbance can grow into a wave @-@ like formation along the front and the low will be positioned at the crest . Around the low , the flow will become cyclonic . This rotational flow will move polar air will equatorward on the west side of the low , while warm air will move poleward on the east side . A cold front will appear on the west side , while a warm front will form on the east side . Usually the cold front will move at a quicker pace than the warm front and will " catch up " with it due to the slow erosion of higher density air mass located out ahead of the cyclone . In addition , the higher density air mass sweeping in behind the cyclone strengthens the higher pressure , denser cold air mass . The cold front over takes the warm front , and reduces the length of the warm front . At this point an occluded front forms where the warm air mass is pushed upwards into a trough of warm air aloft , which is also known as a trowal . 
 Tropical cyclogenesis is the term that describes the development and strengthening of a tropical cyclone . The mechanisms by which tropical cyclogenesis occurs are distinctly different from those that produce mid @-@ latitude cyclones . Tropical cyclogenesis , the development of a warm @-@ core cyclone , begins with significant convection in a favorable atmospheric environment . There are six main requirements for tropical cyclogenesis : 
 sufficiently warm sea surface temperatures , 
 atmospheric instability , 
 high humidity in the lower to middle levels of the troposphere 
 enough Coriolis force to develop a low @-@ pressure center 
 a preexisting low @-@ level focus or disturbance 
 low vertical wind shear . 
 An average of 86 tropical cyclones of tropical storm intensity form annually worldwide , with 47 reaching hurricane / typhoon strength , and 20 becoming intense tropical cyclones ( at least Category 3 intensity on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale ) . 
 = = Synoptic scale = = 
 The following types of cyclones are identifiable in synoptic charts . 
 = = = Surface @-@ based types = = = 
 There are three main types surface @-@ based cyclones : Extratropical cyclones , Subtropical cyclones and Tropical cyclones 
 = = = = Extratropical cyclone = = = = 
 An extratropical cyclone is a synoptic scale low @-@ pressure weather system that does not have tropical characteristics , as it is connected with fronts and horizontal gradients ( rather than vertical ) in temperature and dew point otherwise known as " baroclinic zones " . 
 " Extratropical " is applied to cyclones outside the tropics , in the middle latitudes . These systems may also be described as " mid @-@ latitude cyclones " due to their area of formation , or " post @-@ tropical cyclones " when a tropical cyclone has moved ( extratropical transition ) beyond the tropics . They are often described as " depressions " or " lows " by weather forecasters and the general public . These are the everyday phenomena which along with anti @-@ cyclones , drive the weather over much of the Earth . 
 Although extratropical cyclones are almost always classified as baroclinic since they form along zones of temperature and dewpoint gradient within the westerlies , they can sometimes become barotropic late in their life cycle when the temperature distribution around the cyclone becomes fairly uniform with radius . An extratropical cyclone can transform into a subtropical storm , and from there into a tropical cyclone , if it dwells over warm waters sufficient to warm its core , and as a result develops central convection . A particularly intense type of extratropical cyclone that strikes during winter is known colloquially as a nor 'easter . 
 = = = = = Polar low = = = = = 
 A polar low is a small @-@ scale , short @-@ lived atmospheric low @-@ pressure system ( depression ) that is found over the ocean areas poleward of the main polar front in both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres . Polar lows are cold @-@ core so they can be considered as a subset of extratropical cyclones . Polar lows were first identified on the meteorological satellite imagery that became available in the 1960s , which revealed many small @-@ scale cloud vortices at high latitudes . The most active polar lows are found over certain ice @-@ free maritime areas in or near the Arctic during the winter , such as the Norwegian Sea , Barents Sea , Labrador Sea and Gulf of Alaska . Polar lows dissipate rapidly when they make landfall . Antarctic systems tend to be weaker than their northern counterparts since the air @-@ sea temperature differences around the continent are generally smaller . However , vigorous polar lows can be found over the Southern Ocean . During winter , when cold @-@ core lows with temperatures in the mid @-@ levels of the troposphere reach − 45 ° C ( − 49 ° F ) move over open waters , deep convection forms which allows polar low development to become possible . The systems usually have a horizontal length scale of less than 1 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 620 mi ) and exist for no more than a couple of days . They are part of the larger class of mesoscale weather systems . Polar lows can be difficult to detect using conventional weather reports and are a hazard to high @-@ latitude operations , such as shipping and gas and oil platforms . Polar lows have been referred to by many other terms , such as polar mesoscale vortex , Arctic hurricane , Arctic low , and cold air depression . Today the term is usually reserved for the more vigorous systems that have near @-@ surface winds of at least 17 m / s . 
 = = = = Subtropical = = = = 
 A subtropical cyclone is a weather system that has some characteristics of a tropical cyclone and some characteristics of an extratropical cyclone . They can form between the equator and the 50th parallel . As early as the 1950s , meteorologists were unclear whether they should be characterized as tropical cyclones or extratropical cyclones , and used terms such as quasi @-@ tropical and semi @-@ tropical to describe the cyclone hybrids . By 1972 , the National Hurricane Center officially recognized this cyclone category . Subtropical cyclones began to receive names off the official tropical cyclone list in the Atlantic Basin in 2002 . They have broad wind patterns with maximum sustained winds located farther from the center than typical tropical cyclones , and exist in areas of weak to moderate temperature gradient . 
 Since they form from extratropical cyclones which have colder temperatures aloft than normally found in the tropics , the sea surface temperatures required is around 23 degrees Celsius for their formation , which is three degrees Celsius ( 5 ° F ) lower than for tropical cyclones . This means that subtropical cyclones are more likely to form outside the traditional bounds of the hurricane season . Although subtropical storms rarely have hurricane @-@ force winds , they may become tropical in nature as their cores warm . 
 = = = = Tropical = = = = 
 A tropical cyclone is a storm system characterized by a low @-@ pressure center and numerous thunderstorms that produce strong winds and flooding rain . A tropical cyclone feeds on heat released when moist air rises , resulting in condensation of water vapour contained in the moist air . They are fueled by a different heat mechanism than other cyclonic windstorms such as nor 'easters , European windstorms , and polar lows , leading to their classification as " warm core " storm systems . 
 The term " tropical " refers to both the geographic origin of these systems , which form almost exclusively in tropical regions of the globe , and their dependence on Maritime Tropical air masses for their formation . The term " cyclone " refers to the storms ' cyclonic nature , with counterclockwise rotation in the Northern Hemisphere and clockwise rotation in the Southern Hemisphere . Depending on their location and strength , tropical cyclones are referred to by other names , such as hurricane , typhoon , tropical storm , cyclonic storm , tropical depression , or simply as a cyclone . 
 While tropical cyclones can produce extremely powerful winds and torrential rain , they are also able to produce high waves and a damaging storm surge . Their winds increase the wave size , and in so doing they draw more heat and moisture into their system , thereby increasing their strength . They develop over large bodies of warm water , and hence lose their strength if they move over land . This is the reason coastal regions can receive significant damage from a tropical cyclone , while inland regions are relatively safe from strong winds . Heavy rains , however , can produce significant flooding inland . Storm surges are rises in sea level caused by the reduced pressure of the core that in effect " sucks " the water upward and from winds that in effect " pile " the water up . Storm surges can produce extensive coastal flooding up to 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) from the coastline . Although their effects on human populations can be devastating , tropical cyclones can also relieve drought conditions . They also carry heat and energy away from the tropics and transport it toward temperate latitudes , which makes them an important part of the global atmospheric circulation mechanism . As a result , tropical cyclones help to maintain equilibrium in the Earth 's troposphere . 
 Many tropical cyclones develop when the atmospheric conditions around a weak disturbance in the atmosphere are favorable . Others form when other types of cyclones acquire tropical characteristics . Tropical systems are then moved by steering winds in the troposphere ; if the conditions remain favorable , the tropical disturbance intensifies , and can even develop an eye . On the other end of the spectrum , if the conditions around the system deteriorate or the tropical cyclone makes landfall , the system will weaken and eventually dissipate . A tropical cyclone can become extratropical as it moves toward higher latitudes if its energy source changes from heat released by condensation to differences in temperature between air masses . A tropical cyclone is usually not considered to become subtropical during its extratropical transition . 
 = = = Upper level types = = = 
 = = = = Polar cyclone = = = = 
 A polar , sub @-@ polar , or Arctic cyclone ( also known as a polar vortex ) is a vast area of low pressure which strengthens in the winter and weakens in the summer . A polar cyclone is a low @-@ pressure weather system , usually spanning 1 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 620 mi ) to 2 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 200 mi ) , in which the air circulates in a counterclockwise direction in the northern hemisphere , and a clockwise direction in the southern hemisphere . The Coriolis acceleration acting on the air masses moving poleward at high altitude , causes a counterclockwise circulation at high altitude . The poleward movement of air originates from the air circulation of the Polar cell . The polar low is not driven by convection as are tropical cyclones , nor the cold and warm air mass interactions as are extratropical cyclones , but is an artifact of the global air movement of the Polar cell . The base of the polar low is in the mid to upper troposphere . In the Northern Hemisphere , the polar cyclone has two centers on average . One center lies near Baffin Island and the other over northeast Siberia . In the southern hemisphere , it tends to be located near the edge of the Ross ice shelf near 160 west longitude . When the polar vortex is strong , its effect can be felt at the surface as a westerly wind ( toward the east ) . When the polar cyclone is weak , significant cold outbreaks occur . 
 = = = = TUTT cell = = = = 
 Under specific circumstances , upper level cold lows can break off from the base of the Tropical Upper Tropospheric Trough ( TUTT ) , which is located mid @-@ ocean in the Northern Hemisphere during the summer months . These upper tropospheric cyclonic vortices , also known as TUTT cells or TUTT lows , usually move slowly from east @-@ northeast to west @-@ southwest , and their bases generally do not extend below 20 @,@ 000 feet in altitude . A weak inverted surface trough within the trade wind is generally found underneath them , and they may also be associated with broad areas of high @-@ level clouds . Downward development results in an increase of cumulus clouds and the appearance of a surface vortex . In rare cases , they become warm @-@ core tropical cyclones . Upper cyclones and the upper troughs which trail tropical cyclones can cause additional outflow channels and aid in their intensification . Developing tropical disturbances can help create or deepen upper troughs or upper lows in their wake due to the outflow jet emanating from the developing tropical disturbance / cyclone . 
 = = Mesoscale = = 
 The following types of cyclones are not identifiable in synoptic charts . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A mesocyclone is a vortex of air , 2 @.@ 0 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) to 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) in diameter ( the mesoscale of meteorology ) , within a convective storm . Air rises and rotates around a vertical axis , usually in the same direction as low @-@ pressure systems in both northern and southern hemisphere . They are most often cyclonic , that is , associated with a localized low @-@ pressure region within a supercell . Such storms can feature strong surface winds and severe hail . Mesocyclones often occur together with updrafts in supercells , where tornadoes may form . About 1700 mesocyclones form annually across the United States , but only half produce tornadoes . 
 = = = Tornado = = = 
 A tornado is a violently rotating column of air that is in contact with both the surface of the earth and a cumulonimbus cloud or , in rare cases , the base of a cumulus cloud . Also referred to as twisters , a <unk> term in America , or cyclones , although the word cyclone is used in meteorology , in a wider sense , to name any closed low @-@ pressure circulation . 
 = = = Dust devil = = = 
 A dust devil is a strong , well @-@ formed , and relatively long @-@ lived whirlwind , ranging from small ( half a metre wide and a few metres tall ) to large ( more than 10 metres wide and more than 1000 metres tall ) . The primary vertical motion is upward . Dust devils are usually harmless , but can on rare occasions grow large enough to pose a threat to both people and property . 
 = = = Waterspout = = = 
 A waterspout is a columnar vortex forming over water that is , in its most common form , a non @-@ supercell tornado over water that is connected to a cumuliform cloud . While it is often weaker than most of its land counterparts , stronger versions spawned by mesocyclones do occur . 
 = = = Steam devil = = = 
 A gentle vortex over calm water or wet land made visible by rising water vapour . 
 = = = Fire whirl = = = 
 A fire whirl – also colloquially known as a fire devil , fire tornado , <unk> , or fire twister – is a whirlwind induced by a fire and often made up of flame or ash . 
 = = Climate change = = 
 Scientists warn that climate change could increase the intensity of typhoons as climate change projections show that the difference in temperature between the ocean – the heat source for cyclones – and the storm tops – the cold parts of cyclones – are likely to increase . Climate change is predicted to increase the frequency of high @-@ intensity storms in selected ocean basins . While the effect changing climate is having on tropical storms remains largely unresolved scientists and president of Vanuatu Baldwin Lonsdale say the devastation caused by Pam , was aggravated by climate change . 
 = = Other planets = = 
 Cyclones are not unique to Earth . Cyclonic storms are common on Jovian planets , such as the Small Dark Spot on Neptune . It is about one third the diameter of the Great Dark Spot and received the nickname " Wizard 's Eye " because it looks like an eye . This appearance is caused by a white cloud in the middle of the Wizard 's Eye . Mars has also exhibited cyclonic storms . Jovian storms like the Great Red Spot are usually mistakenly named as giant hurricanes or cyclonic storms . However , this is inaccurate , as the Great Red Spot is , in fact , the inverse phenomenon , an anticyclone . 
 = Paper Trail = 
 Paper Trail is the sixth studio album by American hip hop recording artist T.I. , released September 30 , 2008 , on Grand Hustle Records and Atlantic Records . He began to write songs for the album as he awaited trial for federal weapons and possession charges . Unlike his past albums , he wrote his lyrics down on paper , which he had not done since his debut album , I 'm Serious ( 2001 ) . 
 The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 , selling 568 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , becoming T.I. ' s highest debut sales to date , and the fourth highest debut of the year . The album was eventually certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on August 27 , 2009 . It received generally favorable reviews from critics , and is T.I. ' s most successful currently . The album spawned eight singles , four of which reached the top five of the Billboard Hot 100 , with two singles peaking at number one . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 On November 13 , 2007 , while awaiting a trial for federal weapons charges , T.I. announced he had been writing songs for a new album to be entitled Paper Trail . He wrote his lyrics down on paper , which he had not done since his debut album , I 'm Serious . The album highlights his " fear , anger and guilt " as he awaited trial . 
 T.I. recorded nearly 100 tracks during the production for Paper Trail , including a collaboration with Fall Out Boy on a track entitled " Out in the Cold " . However the song was left out of the final cut , but T.I. told MTV that he may add some of the cut tracks to his next album . On August 22 , 2008 , the songs " Like I Do " featuring The @-@ Dream , " Let My Beat Pound " , " My Life Your Entertainment " featuring Usher , and " Swagga Like Us " were all leaked online . 
 The album was scheduled to be released in September 2008 , but was subsequently moved up to an August 12 after the release of the promotional and lead single " No Matter What " and high demand of the album . At the time , T.I. said that the first single may have been " Top of the World " , originally featuring B.o.B and Kanye West , explaining that the song was " a reflective song about our humble beginnings and how far we 've come " . The album was pushed back for a release date of September 2 , then September 9 and to its final release date of September 30 , 2008 , in the US . The album was first released on September 29 , 2008 , in continental Europe . 
 = = Singles and promotion = = 
 The first single released from the album was a song titled " No Matter What " . It was posted on <unk> 's website on April 29 , 2008 , as a promotional recording , then released as a single on May 6 , along with a music video , which he premiered on MTV 's FNMTV . The song narrates T.I. rising above his misfortunes , including a prison sentence for weapon charges . 
 On August 19 , 2008 , the album 's lead single " Whatever You Like " , was made available for digital download . The song reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 on September 6 , 2008 and set a new record for biggest one @-@ week jump to the top position , going from number seventy @-@ one to number one , becoming his first number one song on the chart as a lead artist and best opening @-@ week sales by a rap track since Nielsen SoundScan began compiling download data in 2003 . T.I. announced that he was " ecstatic " and " overjoyed " after setting a record for the biggest jump to top of the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 After the success of " Whatever You Like " , iTunes published the release dates for the upcoming singles , " Swing Ya Rag " on August 26 , " What Up , What 's <unk> ' " on September 2 , and " Ready for Whatever " on September 23 , 2008 . Additionally , a song titled " Swagga Like Us " , featuring T.I. , Jay @-@ Z , Lil Wayne and Kanye West - which samples " Paper Planes " by M.I.A. - was then released as a single on September 4 , for Paper Trail and debuted in the Hot 100 at number five . 
 The album 's seventh single , " Live Your Life " featuring Rihanna , broke T.I 's own record for biggest leap to number one , when it jumped from number eighty to number one on the Hot 100 , giving T.I. his second Hot 100 number one as a lead artist , and Rihanna her fifth overall . The song also set a first week digital record , when it sold 334 @,@ 000 digital downloads in its first week of availability , a record that was previously held by Mariah Carey 's " Touch My Body . " 
 The eighth single was confirmed to be " Dead and Gone " featuring Justin Timberlake , by the song 's co @-@ producer Rob Knox . T.I. himself later confirmed the release of the single . The song was charted by Billboard before the announcement of the single . The song reached number two on the Billboard Hot 100 on February 27 , 2009 . Overall , eight songs from the album charted on the Billboard Hot 100 , including " 56 Bars ( Intro ) " , " I 'm <unk> " and " My Life Your Entertainment " , despite not being singles . A music video was released for the song " Slide Show " which highlighted a photo collage that followed T.I. ' s career as a recording artist . The track " Every Chance I Get " was featured on the promotional trailer for Armored starring Columbus Short . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 According to Nielsen SoundScan , Paper Trail sold 357 @,@ 000 copies in the United States in the first three days of its release. and it went to debuted at number 1 on the US Billboard 200 chart , with 568 @,@ 000 copies sold . It is T.I. ' s best debut to date and the fourth highest debut of 2008 . In its second week , the album remained at number 1 with sales of 177 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . In its third week , the album fell to number 2 , selling 131 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . In its fourth week , the album fell to number 3 , selling 93 @,@ 427 copies in the United States . In its fifth week , the album fell to number 7 , selling 76 @,@ 560 copies in the United States . It ultimately spent 55 weeks on the US Billboard 200 . 
 The album has sold over two million copies in the United States and it has been certified two @-@ time platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Paper Trail received positive reviews from most music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 74 , based on 19 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . Several critics praised the production on the album ; Andy Kellman of AllMusic noted that DJ Toomp 's and Danja 's production appearance provided " some much needed punch " , which placed the album above T.I. ' s previous album , T.I. vs. <unk> .. Margeaux Watson of Entertainment Weekly said that the " outstanding production " proved that T.I. " still knows how to have a good time " . Wilson McBee of Slant Magazine called the songs produced by Toomp the " vintage T.I. " , describing the sound as " ecstasies of sweltering synth lines , ground @-@ shaking 808 patterns and breathless verbalizing " . However , McBee felt that the songs that were directly about T.I. ' s prison sentence for weapons charges ( " No Matter What " , " Ready for Whatever " ) were among the weakest on the album , saying that " admitting guilt , making excuses and expressing no regrets falls flat " . Sharing a similar sentiment , Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone called the songs " mostly dispenses with the Tupac @-@ wannabe gangsta @-@ confessor pretensions to deliver catchy , tight , bombastic pop @-@ rap alongside a who 's @-@ who of megastar guests " , saying that T.I. was a " well @-@ oiled hit machine who 's more fun than deep " . 
 Newsday 's Glen Gamboa gave Paper Trail a B rating and commented that " [ T.I. ] is still bouncing between pop @-@ leaning hip @-@ hop anthems [ ... ] and spare , often violent , tales of crime and brutality " . Michael Saba of Paste said that , " Even with the burden of sloppy crossover tracks , Paper Trail has enough standout moments for T.I. ’ s throne to remain secure for now . " Shannon Barbour of About.com said that , " Regardless of the outcome of reality , Paper Trail is a solid combination of rhyme , repentance , swagger and substance . " People magazine gave the album four out of four stars , saying that the album was " a near @-@ perfect hip @-@ hop album for 2008 . " In his consumer guide for MSN Music , critic Robert Christgau called Paper Trail an " expediently excessive piece of rich @-@ get @-@ richer " and gave it an A- rating , indicating " the kind of garden @-@ variety good record that is the great luxury of musical micromarketing and overproduction . Anyone open to its aesthetic will enjoy more than half its tracks " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 " Porn Star " features an additional vocals by Ricco Barrino . 
 " Collect Call " features an additional vocals by <unk> 'l . 
 Sample credits 
 " Live Your Life " – Contains a sample from " <unk> din <unk> " performed by O @-@ Zone . 
 " Whatever You Like " – Contains a sample from " Redemption " performed by Bill Conti . 
 " What Up , What 's <unk> ' " – Contains samples of " Never Give You Up " performed by Harvey Mason . 
 " Swagga Like Us " – Contains a sample from " Paper Planes " performed by M.I.A .. 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Chart procession and succession = = = 
 = Edinburgh Zoo = 
 Edinburgh Zoo , formerly the Scottish National Zoological Park , is an 82 @-@ acre ( 33 ha ) non @-@ profit zoological park in Edinburgh , the capital of Scotland . The land lies on the south facing slopes of Corstorphine Hill , from which it provides extensive views of the city . Built in 1913 , and owned by the Royal Zoological Society of Scotland , it receives over 600 @,@ 000 visitors a year , which makes it Scotland 's second most popular paid @-@ for tourist attraction , after Edinburgh Castle . As well as catering to tourists and locals , the zoo is involved in many scientific pursuits , such as captive breeding of endangered animals , researching into animal behaviour , and active participation in various conservation programs around the world . 
 Edinburgh Zoo was the first zoo in the world to house and to breed penguins . It is also the only zoo in Britain to house koalas and giant pandas . The zoo is a member of the British and Irish Association of Zoos and Aquariums ( <unk> ) , the European Association of Zoos and Aquaria ( EAZA ) , the World Association of Zoos and Aquariums ( <unk> ) , and the Association of Scottish Visitor Attractions . It has also been granted four stars by the Scottish Tourism Board . The zoo gardens boast one of the most diverse tree collections in the Lothians . 
 = = History = = 
 The Royal Zoological Society of Scotland ( RZSS ) was founded as a registered charity in 1909 by an Edinburgh lawyer , Thomas Hailing Gillespie . The Corstorphine Hill site was purchased by the Society with help from the Edinburgh Town Council in early 1913 . Gillespie 's vision of what a zoological park should be was modelled after the ' open design ' of Tierpark Hagenbeck in Hamburg , a zoo which promoted a more spacious and natural environment for the animals , and stood in stark contrast to the steel cages typical of the menageries built during the Victorian era . The Scottish National Zoological Park was opened to the public in 1913 and was incorporated by Royal Charter later that year . In 1948 , following a visit by His Majesty King George VI , the Society was granted the privilege of adding the prefix ' Royal ' to its name . It remains the only zoo with a Royal Charter in the United Kingdom . 
 Edinburgh Zoo 's long association with penguins began in January 1914 , with the arrival of three king penguins from the Christian Salvesen whaling expedition which docked in Leith . The subsequent successful hatching of a king penguin chick in 1919 was the first penguin to be hatched in captivity . These were the first penguins to be seen outside of the South Atlantic anywhere in the world . The now famous daily penguin parade started by accident in 1950 with the escape of several birds . This proved so popular with visitors and the penguins that it is a daily feature of the zoo today . 
 After Tom Gillespie retired , Gilbert D. Fisher was appointed director @-@ secretary of the zoo in 1956 . He held the post till he retired in 1971 . 
 In 1986 , the Society acquired the Highland Wildlife Park at Kingussie , 30 miles ( 48 km ) south of Inverness . The zoo and the park work together in providing the most appropriate captive habitat possible in Scotland . Public visitation trips between both sites are organised frequently by the RZSS . 
 The zoo still retains the original charter , which drives its active breeding programme , and biodiversity , conservation and sustainability initiatives . The RZSS provides multiple ways for the public to help support its mission , including a membership club , animal adoption , donations , legacies and volunteering . 
 = = Animals and exhibits = = 
 = = = Budongo Trail = = = 
 Named after the Budongo Forest in Uganda , the Budongo Trail facility houses a troop of 18 common chimpanzees ; 9 males ( David , Louis , <unk> , Paul , Rene , <unk> , <unk> , Liberius and Velu ) and 9 females ( Cindy , Pearl , Lucy , Eva , Sophie , Lianne , <unk> , <unk> and Edith ) . The main building features viewing galleries , a lecture theatre and interactive games and displays designed to teach visitors about the chimpanzee 's lifestyle and social structure . 
 = = = Living Links = = = 
 Living Links is built around a field station and research centre for the study of primate behaviour . The exhibit features enclosures housing common squirrel monkeys and tufted capuchins . 
 = = = Penguins Rock = = = 
 Edinburgh Zoo is well known for housing penguins in its collection , the first three being king penguins , which arrived in January 1913 . The zoo 's current penguin pool , named " Penguins Rock " , is 65 metres long , 3 @.@ 5 metres deep at its deepest point , contains 1 @.@ 2 million litres of water , and houses colonies of gentoo , king , and rockhopper penguins . 
 = = = Giant pandas = = = 
 In 2011 , Edinburgh Zoo leased two giant pandas , a male named Yáng <unk> ( <unk> , meaning " sunshine " ) and a female named <unk> <unk> ( <unk> , meaning " sweetie " ) , from the <unk> Breeding Centre in China at a cost of $ 1m a year . The zoo spent £ 285 @,@ 000 building an enclosure especially for the pandas , and they will remain at the zoo for a maximum of ten years before being returned to China . Edinburgh Zoo is currently the only zoo in the United Kingdom that houses giant pandas . 
 = = = Brilliant Birds = = = 
 Opened in 2011 , Brilliant Birds is a walk @-@ through aviary housing several species of exotic birds , including Nicobar pigeons , Bali starlings , lilac @-@ breasted rollers , chestnut @-@ backed thrush , and Victoria crowned pigeons . A selection of amphibians , invertebrates and fish are also displayed in the building 's main entrance hall , including axolotl , blue poison dart frogs , mudskippers , figure 8 pufferfish , banded archerfish , blind cave fish , and a colony of leafcutter ants . 
 = = = Koala Territory = = = 
 Koala Territory was first opened in 2005 , and houses three koalas , two males named <unk> and <unk> , and a female named <unk> . <unk> was the offspring of <unk> and <unk> , and was born in 2013 and died in 2016 . Koala Territory is decorated with Aboriginal @-@ inspired artwork , and features a garden of eucalyptus plants . 
 = = = Wallaby Outback = = = 
 Opened in 2015 , the walkthrough became the zoo 's swamp wallabies new home . Visitors can get up close to these marsupials . 
 = = = Animal Antics = = = 
 A daily show in which keepers demonstrate the natural skills of animals to an audience of visitors . Keepers use positive reinforcement training with every animal , which means that the animals that perform in the shows are never forced into doing tricks . Because of this , the animals used in Animal Antics vary between shows . 
 = = = Other mammals = = = 
 Other notable mammal species in the zoo 's collection include oriental small @-@ clawed otters , Asian lions , meerkats , sun bears , Sumatran tigers , giant anteaters , binturong , African wild dogs , Grévy 's zebras , greater one @-@ horned rhinoceros , banteng , red river hogs , North American porcupines , swamp wallabies , striped skunks , pygmy hippopotamus , Scottish wild cats , Malayan tapirs , white @-@ faced saki monkeys , ring @-@ tailed lemurs , cottontop tamarins , geladas , and Barbary macaques . 
 = = = Other birds = = = 
 Other notable bird species in the zoo 's collection include Darwin 's rhea , Chilean flamingos , Egyptian vultures , eastern white pelicans , scarlet ibis , waldrapp ibis , great argus pheasants , ocellated turkeys , red @-@ fronted macaws , rainbow lorikeets , hamerkop , and southern cassowary . 
 = = = Military animals = = = 
 Several of the zoo 's animals have held military rank . 
 Wojtek was a bear adopted in Iran by the Polish II Corps and enlisted into the 22nd Artillery Supply Company to allow him to travel when the troops were posted . He served in the Middle East and during the Battle of Monte Cassino and retired to Edinburgh Zoo when the Polish troops , billeted in Scotland , demobilised . 
 Sir Nils Olav , a king penguin , was the mascot and Colonel @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Norwegian King 's Guard . He was adopted in 1972 when the King 's Guard were in the city for the Edinburgh Military Tattoo , given the rank of <unk> ( lance corporal ) , and promoted each time the corps visited the city . He died in 1987 and his successor , Nils Olav II , inherited his rank . Nils was visited by the Norwegian King 's Guard on 15 August 2008 and awarded a knighthood . The honour was approved by the King of Norway , King Harald V. During the ceremony a crowd of several hundred people joined the 130 guardsmen at the zoo to hear a citation from King Harald the Fifth of Norway read out , which described Nils as a penguin " in every way qualified to receive the honour and dignity of knighthood " . 
 = = Future developments = = 
 The carnivore rock dens , located between the Sumatran tigers and the geladas are to be totally overhauled , with the Amur leopard and jaguar leaving the collection . The Asian lion , Sumatran tiger and Scottish wildcat will remain on @-@ show . A new Sumatran tiger enclosure is being developed in the meadow behind the current enclosure . Red panda are due to rejoin the collection later in the year . 
 = = Research and conservation = = 
 Edinburgh Zoo is the national centre for primate behavioural research . Budongo Trail , a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art chimpanzee enclosure , was opened in May 2008 by The Princess Royal . Budongo Trail is a naturalistic enclosure which can house up to 40 chimps . It includes a large outdoor area and three separate indoor areas for the chimps together with observation areas and a lecture theatre for the public . The RZSS is the principal sponsor in the long term study and conservation of a group of approximately 60 chimpanzees as part of the Budongo Conservation Field Station in Uganda , Africa . Amidst the opening of Budongo Trail , Jane Goodall described it as a " wonderful facility " where primates " are probably better off [ than ] living in the wild in an area like Budongo [ Forest ] , where one in six gets caught in a wire snare , and countries like Congo , where chimpanzees , monkeys and gorillas are shot for food commercially . " 
 In addition to Budongo Trail , the zoo is home to Living Links , a field station and research centre for the study of primates that was developed in a partnership with the University of St Andrews . Living Links houses capuchin monkeys and squirrel monkeys originating from the forests of South America , and offers researchers unique opportunities to study primate behaviour . 
 In July 2006 , a cull of invasive brown rats on the Scottish island of Canna was deemed a provisional success and after two years of observation , during which time no rats were observed , the island was declared officially rat free by the Environment Minister , Mike Russell on 7 June 2008 . The rats had been outcompeting the rare local wood mouse , known as the Canna mouse and also endangering local seabird populations . The National Trust for Scotland which own the island invested £ 500 @,@ 000 employing exterminators from New Zealand to cull the estimated 10 @,@ 000 brown <unk> in co @-@ operation with RZSS , approximately 150 Canna mice were captured and homed at Edinburgh Zoo and the Highland Wildlife Park . 40 mice were returned to the island in late 2006 with the remaining being re @-@ introduced in stages . 
 In May 2008 , a joint application submitted by the Royal Zoological Society of Scotland ( RZSS ) and the Scottish Wildlife Trust ( <unk> ) was approved by the Scottish Government allowing for a trial reintroduction of the European beaver to the Knapdale Forest in Mid @-@ Argyll . If the trial is successful then the European beaver will be the first mammal to be reintroduced to the United Kingdom . Beavers have been extinct in Scotland since the 16th century , when they were hunted for their pelt , meat and medicinal properties ( use of <unk> ) . 
 = = Zoo gardens = = 
 Before being acquired by the society , the Corstorphine hill site was a nursery , once owned by Thomas Blaikie , who planted many of the great French parks such as ‘ La <unk> ’ . On this site two nurserymen raised the famous apple cultivars ‘ John Downie ’ and ‘ James Grieve ’ . Today , the zoo has one of the most diverse tree collections in the Lothians with 120 species . The south @-@ facing aspect allows bananas to be grown outside . Increasingly , horticulture is seen as a discipline in its own right , with the focus on habitat creation within enclosures , food stuffs for the animals , and enrichment for both the animals and the visiting public . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 Organisations that remain critical of Edinburgh Zoo 's work include the Animal Liberation Front , who have voiced their distaste for the quality of the enclosure that formerly housed polar bears . The Born Free Foundation has also stated several times that the zoo fails in its conservation work , as well as opposing the zoo 's plans to house elephants . 
 Edinburgh Zoo received a public backlash on Twitter after the European Endangered Species Programme ( EEP ) recommended that they should cull three red river hog piglets after an unplanned birth . A protest took place under the # <unk> tag on Thursday 3 February 2011 . The Twitter campaign was started by <unk> , with major support from Captive Animals Protection Society . On Friday 4 February 2011 , it was announced that the # <unk> campaign had been successful and the zoo would attempt to re @-@ home the piglets . 
 Following various internal issues and allegations relating to senior staff , the zoo was subject to investigations relating to its charitable status . The Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator ( <unk> ) held an inquiry into the Royal Zoological Society of Scotland , and one director was fired while two others were suspended . The zoo suspended its chief operating officer and acting chief executive Gary Wilson while it investigated allegations made against him . 
 In July 2011 , the zoo 's monkey house had to be closed after a gelada escaped from its enclosure . The animal vaulted an electric fence as it tried to escape whilst visitors looked on . 
 The zoo also came under criticism for plans to charge £ 20 per person for visitors to watch the necropsy of an animal . A <unk> spokesman criticised the idea , largely due to the timing of the event , which was scheduled to take place two months after the zoo announced a £ 2 million loss in profits , making the necropsy seem like a " Money @-@ making drive " . 
 In February 2012 , the zoo was told to conduct a full review of its financial controls following an inquiry into complaints about how the zoo was run in 2011 . The report by the <unk> cleared the zoo of misconduct but found " areas of governance that could be improved " . 
 In May 2012 , several hundred zoo visitors were forced to seek shelter after a family of hogs escaped from keepers and ran amok . Those who had taken refuge in the monkey house later described scenes where zoo workers pursued the animals with various equipment including brushes and dart guns . Though the drama lasted over an hour , the adult hogs were recaptured unharmed . 
 On 22 August 2012 a scarlet ibis escaped from the zoo and went on the loose in the city after a squirrel had chewed a hole in the netting at the top of its cage . Keepers noticed it was missing and later that day it was spotted more than 3 miles away in Dundas Street , near the city centre . The ibis was missing for nearly a week before being recaptured four miles from the zoo . 
 In September 2012 zoo customers were herded indoors when a Heck bull escaped from its enclosure . The 600 kg animal with three feet long horns was loose for over 40 minutes , until zoo workers and vets managed to restrain him by using <unk> darts . 
 = Cancer pain = 
 Pain in cancer may arise from a tumor compressing or infiltrating nearby body parts ; from treatments and diagnostic procedures ; or from skin , nerve and other changes caused by a hormone imbalance or immune response . Most chronic ( long @-@ lasting ) pain is caused by the illness and most acute ( short @-@ term ) pain is caused by treatment or diagnostic procedures . However , radiotherapy and chemotherapy may produce painful conditions that persist long after treatment has ended . 
 The presence of pain depends mainly on the location of the cancer and the stage of the disease . At any given time , about half of all patients with malignant cancer are experiencing pain , and two thirds of those with advanced cancer experience pain of such intensity that it adversely affects their sleep , mood , social relations and activities of daily living . 
 With competent management , cancer pain can be eliminated or well controlled in 80 to 90 percent of cases , but nearly one in two patients in the developed world receives less than optimal care . Worldwide , nearly 80 percent of people with cancer receive little or no pain medication . 
 Guidelines for the use of drugs in the management of cancer pain have been published by the World Health Organization ( WHO ) and others . Healthcare professionals have an ethical obligation to ensure that , whenever possible , the patient or patient 's guardian is well @-@ informed about the risks and benefits associated with their pain management options . Adequate pain management may sometimes slightly shorten a dying patient 's life . 
 = = Pain = = 
 Pain is classed as acute ( short term ) or chronic ( long term ) . Chronic pain may be continuous with occasional sharp rises in intensity ( flares ) , or intermittent : periods of <unk> interspersed with periods of pain . Despite pain being well controlled by long @-@ acting drugs or other treatment , flares may occasionally be felt ; this is called breakthrough pain , and is treated with quick @-@ acting analgesics . 
 The majority of patients with chronic pain notice memory and attention difficulties . Objective psychological testing has found problems with memory , attention , verbal ability , mental flexibility and thinking speed . Pain is also associated with increased depression , anxiety , fear , and anger . Persistent pain reduces function and overall quality of life , and is demoralizing and debilitating for patients and those who care for them . 
 Pain 's intensity is distinct from its unpleasantness . For example , it is possible through <unk> and some drug treatments , or by suggestion ( as in hypnosis and placebo ) , to reduce or eliminate the unpleasantness of pain without affecting its intensity . 
 Sometimes , pain caused in one part of the body feels like it is coming from another part of the body . This is called referred pain . 
 Pain in cancer can be produced by mechanical ( e.g. pinching ) or chemical ( e.g. inflammation ) stimulation of specialized pain @-@ signalling nerve endings found in most parts of the body , or it may be caused by diseased or damaged nerves , in which case it is called neuropathic pain . <unk> pain is often accompanied by other feelings such as pins and needles . 
 The patient 's description is the best measure of pain ; they will usually be asked to estimate intensity on a scale of 0 – 10 ( with 0 being no pain and 10 being the worst pain they have ever felt ) . 
 = = Cause = = 
 About 75 percent of cancer pain is caused by the illness itself ; most of the remainder is caused by diagnostic procedures and treatment . 
 = = = Tumor @-@ related = = = 
 Tumors cause pain by crushing or infiltrating tissue , triggering infection or inflammation , or releasing chemicals that make normally non @-@ painful stimuli painful . 
 Invasion of bone by cancer is the most common source of cancer pain . It is usually felt as tenderness , with constant background pain and instances of spontaneous or movement @-@ related exacerbation , and is frequently described as severe . Rib fractures are common in breast , prostate and other cancers with rib metastases . 
 The vascular ( blood ) system can be impacted by solid tumors . Between 15 and 25 percent of deep vein thrombosis is caused by cancer ( often by a tumor compressing a vein ) , and it may be the first hint that cancer is present . It causes swelling and pain in the legs , especially the calf , and ( rarely ) in the arms . The superior vena cava ( a large vein carrying circulating , de @-@ oxygenated blood into the heart ) may be compressed by a tumor , causing superior vena cava syndrome , which can cause chest wall pain among other symptoms . 
 When tumors compress , invade or inflame parts of the nervous system ( such as the brain , spinal cord , nerves , ganglia or <unk> ) , they can cause pain and other symptoms . Though brain tissue contains no pain sensors , brain tumors can cause pain by pressing on blood vessels or the membrane that encapsulates the brain ( the meninges ) , or indirectly by causing a build @-@ up of fluid ( edema ) that may compress pain @-@ sensitive tissue . 
 Pain from cancer of the organs , such as the stomach or liver ( visceral pain ) , is diffuse and difficult to locate , and is often referred to more distant , usually superficial , sites . Invasion of soft tissue by a tumor can cause pain by inflammatory or mechanical stimulation of pain sensors , or destruction of mobile structures such as ligaments , tendons and skeletal muscles . 
 Pain produced by cancer within the pelvis varies depending on the affected tissue . It may appear at the site of the cancer but it frequently radiates diffusely to the upper thigh , and may refer to the lower back , the external genitalia or perineum . 
 = = = Diagnostic procedures = = = 
 Some diagnostic procedures , such as lumbar puncture ( see post @-@ dural @-@ puncture headache ) , <unk> , paracentesis , and <unk> can be painful . 
 = = = Treatment @-@ related = = = 
 Potentially painful cancer treatments include : 
 immunotherapy which may produce joint or muscle pain ; 
 radiotherapy , which can cause skin reactions , enteritis , fibrosis , myelopathy , bone necrosis , neuropathy or <unk> ; 
 chemotherapy , often associated with chemotherapy induced peripheral neuropathy , <unk> , joint pain , muscle pain , and abdominal pain due to diarrhea or constipation ; 
 hormone therapy , which sometimes causes pain flares ; 
 targeted therapies , such as trastuzumab and rituximab , which can cause muscle , joint or chest pain ; 
 angiogenesis inhibitors like bevacizumab , known to sometimes cause bone pain ; 
 surgery , which may produce post @-@ operative pain , post @-@ amputation pain or pelvic floor myalgia . 
 = = = Infection = = = 
 The chemical changes associated with infection of a tumor or its surrounding tissue can cause rapidly escalating pain , but infection is sometimes overlooked as a possible cause . One study found that infection was the cause of pain in four percent of nearly 300 cancer patients referred for pain relief . Another report described seven patients , whose previously well @-@ controlled pain escalated significantly over several days . Antibiotic treatment produced pain relief in all patients within three days . 
 = = Management = = 
 Cancer pain treatment aims to relieve pain with minimal adverse treatment effects , allowing the patient a good quality of life and level of function and a relatively painless death . Though 80 – 90 percent of cancer pain can be eliminated or well controlled , nearly half of all patients with cancer pain in the developed world and 80 percent of people with cancer worldwide receive less than optimal care . 
 Cancer changes over time , and pain management needs to reflect this . Several different types of treatment may be required as the disease progresses . Pain managers should clearly explain to the patient the cause of the pain and the various treatment possibilities , and should consider , as well as drug therapy , directly modifying the underlying disease , raising the pain threshold , interrupting , destroying or stimulating pain pathways , and suggesting lifestyle modification . The relief of psychological , social and spiritual distress is a key element in effective pain management . 
 A patient whose pain cannot be well controlled should be referred to a palliative care or pain management specialist or clinic . 
 = = = Psychological = = = 
 = = = = Coping strategies = = = = 
 The way a person responds to pain affects the intensity of their pain ( moderately ) , the degree of disability they experience , and the impact of pain on their quality of life . Strategies employed by patients to cope with pain include enlisting the help of others , persisting with tasks despite pain , distraction , rethinking maladaptive ideas , and prayer or ritual . 
 Some people in pain tend to focus on and exaggerate the pain 's threatening meaning , and estimate their own ability to deal with pain as poor . This tendency is termed " catastrophizing . " The few studies so far conducted into catastrophizing in cancer pain have suggested that it is associated with higher levels of pain and psychological distress . Cancer pain patients who accept that pain will persist and nevertheless are able to engage in a meaningful life were less susceptible to catastrophizing and depression in one study . Patients with desired goals , and the motivation and means to achieve those goals , were found in two studies to experience much lower levels of pain , fatigue and depression . 
 Patients who are confident in their understanding of their condition and its treatment , and confident in their ability to ( a ) control their symptoms , ( b ) collaborate successfully with their informal carers and ( c ) communicate effectively with health care providers experience better pain outcomes . Physicians should therefore take steps to encourage and facilitate effective patient communication , and should consider psychosocial intervention . 
 = = = = Psychosocial interventions = = = = 
 Psychosocial interventions affect the amount of pain experienced and the degree to which it interferes with daily life ; and the American Institute of Medicine and the American Pain Society support the inclusion of expert , quality @-@ controlled psychosocial care as part of cancer pain management . Psychosocial interventions include education ( addressing among other things the correct use of analgesic medications and effective communication with clinicians ) , which modestly but reliably reduces the amount of pain experienced by the patient , and coping @-@ skills training ( changing thoughts , emotions , and behaviors through training in skills such as problem solving , relaxation , distraction and cognitive restructuring ) , which reduces psychological distress and improves quality of life in cancer patients . Education may be more helpful to patients with stage I cancer and their carers , and coping @-@ skills training may be more helpful at stages II and III . 
 The patient 's adjustment to cancer depends vitally on the support of their family and other informal carers , but pain can seriously disrupt such interpersonal relationships , so patients and therapists should consider involving family and other informal carers in expert , quality @-@ controlled psychosocial therapeutic interventions . 
 = = = Medications = = = 
 The WHO guidelines recommend prompt oral administration of drugs when pain occurs , starting , if the person is not in severe pain , with non @-@ opioid drugs such as paracetamol , <unk> , non @-@ steroidal anti @-@ inflammatory drugs or COX @-@ 2 inhibitors . Then , if complete pain relief is not achieved or disease progression necessitates more aggressive treatment , mild opioids such as codeine , <unk> , <unk> or tramadol are added to the existing non @-@ opioid regime . If this is or becomes insufficient , mild opioids are replaced by stronger opioids such as morphine , while continuing the non @-@ opioid therapy , escalating opioid dose until the person is painless or the maximum possible relief without intolerable side effects has been achieved . If the initial presentation is severe cancer pain , this stepping process should be skipped and a strong opioid should be started immediately in combination with a non @-@ opioid analgesic . 
 Some authors challenge the validity of the second step ( mild opioids ) and , pointing to their higher toxicity and low efficacy , argue that mild opioids could be replaced by small doses of strong opioids ( with the possible exception of tramadol due to its demonstrated efficacy in cancer pain , its specificity for neuropathic pain , and its low sedative properties and reduced potential for respiratory depression in comparison to conventional opioids ) . 
 More than half of people with advanced cancer and pain will need strong opioids , and these in combination with non @-@ opioid pain medicine can produce acceptable analgesia in 70 – 90 percent of cases . A Cochrane review updated in 2016 concluded that morphine is effective in relieving cancer pain . Side @-@ <unk> of nausea and constipation are rarely severe enough to warrant stopping of treatment . Sedation and cognitive impairment usually occur with the initial dose or a significant increase in dosage of a strong opioid , but improve after a week or two of consistent dosage . Antiemetic and laxative treatment should be commenced concurrently with strong opioids , to counteract the usual nausea and constipation . Nausea normally resolves after two or three weeks of treatment but laxatives will need to be aggressively maintained . 
 Analgesics should not be taken " on demand " but " by the clock " ( every 3 – 6 hours ) , with each dose delivered before the preceding dose has worn off , in doses sufficiently high to ensure continuous pain relief . People taking slow @-@ release morphine should also be provided with immediate @-@ release ( " rescue " ) morphine to use as necessary , for pain spikes ( breakthrough pain ) that are not suppressed by the regular medication . 
 Oral analgesia is the cheapest , and simplest mode of delivery . Other delivery routes such as sublingual , topical , parenteral , rectal or spinal should be considered if the need is urgent , or in case of vomiting , impaired swallow , obstruction of the gastrointestinal tract , poor absorption or coma . Current evidence for the effectiveness of fentanyl <unk> patches in controlling chronic cancer pain is weak but they may reduce complaints of constipation compared with oral morphine . 
 Liver and kidney disease can affect the biological activity of analgesics . When such people are treated with oral opioids they must be monitored for the possible need to reduce dose , extend dosing intervals , or switch to other opioids or other modes of delivery . The benefit of non @-@ steroidal anti @-@ inflammatory drugs should be weighed against their gastrointestinal , cardiovascular , and renal risks . 
 Not all pain yields completely to classic analgesics , and drugs that are not traditionally considered analgesics but which reduce pain in some cases , such as steroids or bisphosphonates , may be employed concurrently with analgesics at any stage . <unk> antidepressants , class I <unk> , or anticonvulsants are the drugs of choice for neuropathic pain . Up to 90 percent of people at death are using such " adjuvants " . Many adjuvants carry a significant risk of serious complications . 
 Anxiety reduction can reduce the unpleasantness of pain but is least effective for moderate and severe pain . Since <unk> such as benzodiazepines and major tranquilizers add to sedation , they should only be used to address anxiety , depression , disturbed sleep or muscle spasm . 
 = = = Interventional = = = 
 If the analgesic and adjuvant regimen recommended above does not adequately relieve pain additional , more intrusive options are available . 
 = = = = Radiation = = = = 
 Radiotherapy is used when drug treatment is failing to control the pain of a growing tumor , such as in bone <unk> ( most commonly ) , penetration of soft tissue , or compression of sensory nerves . Often , low doses are adequate to produce analgesia , thought to be due to reduction in pressure or , possibly , interference with the tumor 's production of pain @-@ promoting chemicals . <unk> that target specific tumors have been used to treat the pain of metastatic illnesses . Relief may occur within a week of treatment and may last from two to four months . 
 = = = = <unk> block = = = = 
 A neurolytic block is the deliberate injury of a nerve by the application of chemicals ( in which case the procedure is called " <unk> " ) or physical agents such as freezing or heating ( " <unk> " ) . These interventions cause degeneration of the nerve 's fibers and temporary interference with the transmission of pain signals . In these procedures , the thin protective layer around the nerve fiber , the basal lamina , is preserved so that , as a damaged fiber regrows , it travels within its basal lamina tube and connects with the correct loose end , and function may be restored . <unk> cutting a nerve severs these basal lamina tubes , and without them to channel the regrowing fibers to their lost connections , a painful neuroma or <unk> pain may develop . This is why the neurolytic is preferred over the surgical block . 
 A brief " rehearsal " block using local anesthetic should be tried before the actual neurolytic block , to determine efficacy and detect side effects . The aim of this treatment is pain elimination , or the reduction of pain to the point where opioids may be effective . Though the neurolytic block lacks long @-@ term outcome studies and evidence @-@ based guidelines for its use , for patients with progressive cancer and otherwise incurable pain , it can play an essential role . 
 = = = = Cutting or destruction of nervous tissue = = = = 
 Surgical cutting or destruction of peripheral or central nervous tissue is now rarely used in the treatment of pain . Procedures include neurectomy , <unk> , dorsal root entry zone lesioning , and <unk> . 
 Cutting through or removal of nerves ( neurectomy ) is used in patients with short life expectancy who are unsuitable for drug therapy due to ineffectiveness or intolerance . Because nerves often carry both sensory and motor fibers , motor impairment is a possible side effect of neurectomy . A common result of this procedure is " <unk> pain " where , 6 – 9 months after surgery , pain returns at greater intensity . 
 <unk> involves cutting nerve fibers that run up the front / side ( <unk> ) quadrant of the spinal cord , carrying heat and pain signals to the brain . Pancoast tumor pain has been effectively treated with dorsal root entry zone lesioning ( destruction of a region of the spinal cord where peripheral pain signals cross to spinal cord fibers ) ; this is major surgery that carries the risk of significant neurological side effects . <unk> involves cutting nerve fibers in the brain . It reduces the unpleasantness of pain ( without affecting its intensity ) , but may have cognitive side effects . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 <unk> is the destruction of the pituitary gland , and has been used successfully on metastatic breast and prostate cancer pain . 
 = = = = Patient @-@ controlled analgesia = = = = 
 <unk> pump 
 An intrathecal pump infuses an opioid such as morphine directly into the fluid @-@ filled space ( the subarachnoid cavity ) between the spinal cord and its protective sheath , providing enhanced analgesia with reduced systemic side effects . This can reduce the level of pain in otherwise intractable cases . An anxiolytic or a <unk> analgesic , and local anesthetics may also be infused along with the opioid . 
 Long @-@ term epidural catheter 
 The outer layer of the sheath surrounding the spinal cord is called the dura mater . Between this and the surrounding vertebrae is the epidural space filled with connective tissue , fat and blood vessels and crossed by the spinal nerve roots . A long @-@ term epidural catheter may be inserted into this space for three to six months , to deliver anesthetics or analgesics . The line carrying the drug may be threaded under the skin to emerge at the front of the patient , a process called " tunneling " , recommended with long @-@ term use to reduce the chance of any infection at the exit site reaching the epidural space . 
 = = = = Spinal cord stimulation = = = = 
 Electrical stimulation of the dorsal columns of the spinal cord can produce analgesia . First , the leads are implanted , guided by the patient 's report and fluoroscopy , and the generator is worn externally for several days to assess efficacy . If pain is reduced by more than half , the therapy is deemed to be suitable . A small pocket is cut into the tissue beneath the skin of the upper buttocks , chest wall or abdomen and the leads are threaded under the skin from the stimulation site to the pocket , where they are attached to the snugly @-@ fitting generator . It seems to be more helpful with neuropathic and ischemic pain than <unk> pain , but current evidence is too weak to recommend its use in the treatment of cancer pain . 
 = = = = Deep brain stimulation = = = = 
 Ongoing electrical stimulation of structures deep within the brain has produced impressive results with some patients but results vary and appropriate patient selection is important . One study of seventeen patients with intractable cancer pain found that thirteen were virtually pain free and only four required opioid analgesics on release from hospital after the intervention . Most ultimately did resort to opioids , usually in the last few weeks of life . 
 = = = Complementary and alternative medicine = = = 
 Due to the poor quality of most studies of complementary and alternative medicine in the treatment of cancer pain , it is not possible to recommend integration of these therapies into the management of cancer pain . There is weak evidence for a modest benefit from hypnosis ; studies of massage therapy produced mixed results and none found pain relief after 4 weeks ; <unk> , and touch therapy results were inconclusive ; acupuncture , the most studied such treatment , has demonstrated no benefit as an adjunct analgesic in cancer pain ; the evidence for music therapy is equivocal ; and some herbal interventions such as PC @-@ <unk> , mistletoe , and saw palmetto are known to be toxic to some cancer patients . The most promising evidence , though still weak , is for mind @-@ body interventions such as biofeedback and relaxation techniques . 
 = = = Barriers to treatment = = = 
 Despite the publication and ready availability of simple and effective evidence @-@ based pain management guidelines by the World Health Organization ( WHO ) and others , many medical care providers have a poor understanding of key aspects of pain management , including assessment , dosing , tolerance , addiction , and side effects , and many do not know that pain can be well controlled in most cases . In Canada , for instance , veterinarians get five times more training in pain than do physicians , and three times more training than nurses . Physicians may also <unk> pain out of fear of being audited by a regulatory body . 
 Systemic institutional problems in the delivery of pain management include lack of resources for adequate training of physicians , time constraints , failure to refer patients for pain management in the clinical setting , inadequate insurance reimbursement for pain management , lack of sufficient stocks of pain medicines in poorer areas , outdated government policies on cancer pain management , and excessively complex or restrictive government and institutional regulations on the prescription , supply , and administration of opioid medications . 
 Patients may not report pain due to costs of treatment , a belief that pain is inevitable , an aversion to treatment side effects , fear of developing addiction or tolerance , fear of distracting the doctor from treating the illness , or fear of masking a symptom that is important for monitoring progress of the illness . Patients may be reluctant to take adequate pain medicine because they are unaware of their prognosis , or may be unwilling to accept their diagnosis . Patient failure to report pain or misguided reluctance to take pain medicine can be overcome by sensitive coaching . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Fifty @-@ three percent of all patients with malignant cancer , 59 percent of patients receiving anticancer treatment , 64 percent of patients with metastatic or advanced @-@ stage disease , and 33 percent of patients after completion of curative treatment experience pain . Evidence for prevalence of pain in newly diagnosed cancer is scarce . One study found pain in 38 percent of newly diagnosed cases , another found 35 percent of new patients had experienced pain in the preceding two weeks , while another reported that pain was an early symptom in 18 – 49 percent of cases . More than one third of patients with cancer pain describe the pain as moderate or severe . 
 Primary tumors in the following locations are associated with a relatively high prevalence of pain : 
 Head and neck ( 67 to 91 percent ) 
 Prostate ( 56 to 94 percent ) 
 Uterus ( 30 to 90 percent ) 
 The genitourinary system ( 58 to 90 percent ) 
 Breast ( 40 to 89 percent ) 
 Pancreas ( 72 to 85 percent ) 
 <unk> ( 56 to 94 percent ) 
 All patients with advanced multiple myeloma or advanced sarcoma are likely to experience pain . 
 = = Legal and ethical considerations = = 
 The International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights obliges signatory nations to make pain treatment available to those within their borders as a duty under the human right to health . A failure to take reasonable measures to relieve the suffering of those in pain may be seen as failure to protect against inhuman and degrading treatment under Article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . The right to adequate palliative care has been affirmed by the US Supreme Court in two cases , <unk> v. Quill and Washington v. Glucksberg , which were decided in 1997 . This right has also been confirmed in statutory law , such as in the California Business and Professional Code 22 , and in other case law precedents in circuit courts and in other reviewing courts in the US . The 1994 Medical Treatment Act of the Australian Capital Territory states that a " patient under the care of a health professional has a right to receive relief from pain and suffering to the maximum extent that is reasonable in the circumstances " . 
 Doctors and nurses have an ethical obligation to ensure that when consent for pain treatment is withheld or given it is , whenever possible , withheld or given by a fully informed patient . Patients or their guardians must be apprised of any serious risks and the common side effects of pain treatments . What appears to be an obviously acceptable risk or harm to a professional may be unacceptable to the patient . For instance , patients who experience pain on movement may be willing to forgo strong opioids in order to enjoy alertness during their painless periods , whereas others would choose around @-@ the @-@ clock sedation so as to remain pain @-@ free . The care provider should not insist on treatment that the patient rejects , and must not provide treatment that the provider believes is more harmful or riskier than the possible benefits can justify . 
 Some patients – particularly those who are terminally ill – may not wish to be involved in making pain management decisions , and may delegate such choices to their treatment providers . The patient 's participation is a right , not an obligation , and although reduced patient involvement may result in less @-@ than @-@ optimal pain management , their choice should be respected . 
 As medical professionals become better informed about the interdependent relationship between physical , emotional , social , and spiritual pain , and the demonstrated benefit to physical pain from alleviation of these other forms of suffering , they may be inclined to question the patient and family about interpersonal relationships . Unless the patient has asked for such psychosocial intervention – or at least freely consented to such questioning – this would be an ethically unjustifiable intrusion into the patient 's personal affairs ( analogous to providing drugs without the patient 's informed consent ) . 
 The obligation of a professional medical care provider to alleviate suffering may occasionally come into conflict with the obligation to prolong life . If a terminally ill patient prefers to be painless , despite a high level of sedation and a risk of shortening their life , they should be provided with their desired pain relief ( despite the cost of sedation and a possibly slightly shorter life ) . Where a patient is unable to be involved in this type of decision , the law and the medical profession in the United Kingdom allow the doctor to assume that the patient would prefer to be painless , and thus the provider may prescribe and administer adequate analgesia , even if the treatment may slightly hasten death . It is taken that the underlying cause of death in this case is the illness and not the necessary pain management . 
 One philosophical justification for this approach is the doctrine of double effect , where to justify an act involving both a good and a bad effect , four conditions are necessary : 
 the act must be good overall ( or at least morally neutral ) 
 the person acting must intend only the good effect , with the bad effect considered an unwanted side effect 
 the bad effect must not be the cause of the good effect 
 the good effect must outweigh the bad effect . 
 = = Cited works = = 
 Fitzgibbon , DR ; Loeser , JD ( 2010 ) . Cancer pain : Assessment , diagnosis and management . Philadelphia . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 089 @-@ 2 . 
 = Material Girl = 
 " Material Girl " is a song by American singer Madonna from her second studio album Like a Virgin ( 1984 ) . It was released on November 30 , 1984 by Sire Records as the second single from the album . It also appears slightly remixed on the 1990 greatest hits compilation , The Immaculate Collection , and in its original form on the 2009 greatest hits compilation , Celebration . The song was written by Peter Brown and Robert Rans , while Nile Rodgers produced the track . Madonna explained that the concept of the song was indicative of her life at that time . She felt that " Material Girl " was provocative in its content and was attracted to it . 
 " Material Girl " consists of synth arrangements with a robotic voice repeating the hook . The lyrics identify with materialism , with Madonna asking for a rich and affluent life , rather than romance and relationships . Contemporary critics have frequently identified " Material Girl " along with " Like a Virgin " as the songs that established Madonna as an icon . " Material Girl " was a commercial success , reaching the top @-@ five in Australia , Belgium , Canada , Ireland , Japan and United Kingdom . It reached the number two position on the Billboard Hot 100 in the United States , becoming her third top @-@ five single there . 
 The music video was a mimicry of Marilyn Monroe 's performance of the song " Diamonds Are a Girl 's Best Friend " from the 1953 film Gentlemen Prefer Blondes . The mimicked scenes are interspersed with scenes of a Hollywood director trying to win the heart of an actress , played by Madonna herself . Discovering that , contrary to her song , the young woman was not impressed by money and expensive gifts , he pretended to be penniless and succeeded in taking her out on a date . She has performed the song in five of her world tours ; most of her performances of the song on tour are <unk> of the song 's music video . 
 " Material Girl " has been covered by a number of artists , including Britney Spears , The Chipettes and Hilary and Haylie Duff . It has appeared in the films Moulin Rouge ! ( 2001 ) and Bridget Jones : The Edge of Reason ( 2004 ) . Madonna has often remarked that she regrets recording " Material Girl " as its title became a nickname for her in the mainstream media . The song has been labeled an empowering influence for women , and was the subject of debates . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Material Girl " was written by Peter Brown and Robert Rans , while Nile Rodgers produced the track . In 1986 , Madonna told Company magazine , that although she did not write or create the song , the lyrical meaning and concept did apply to her situation at that point of time . She elaborated , " I 'm very career @-@ oriented . You are attracted to people who are ambitious that way , too , like in the song ' Material Girl ' . You are attracted to men who have material things because that 's what pays the rents and buys you furs . That 's the security . That lasts longer than emotions . " During a 2009 interview with Rolling Stone , Madonna was asked by interviewer Austin Scaggs , regarding her first feelings , after listening to the demos of " Like a Virgin " and " Material Girl " . Madonna responded by saying , " I liked them both because they were ironic and provocative at the same time but also unlike me . I am not a materialistic person , and I certainly wasn 't a virgin , and , by the way , how can you be like a virgin ? I liked the play on words , I thought they were clever . They 're so geeky , they 're cool . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Material Girl " consists of synth arrangements , with a strong backbeat supporting it . A robotic male voice repeats the hook " Living in a material world " . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Publishing , the song is set in the time signature of common time , with a tempo of 120 beats per minute . It is set in the key of C major , with Madonna 's voice spanning from the tonal nodes of C4 to C5 . The song has a basic chord progression of F – G – Em – Am @-@ F @-@ G @-@ C in the chorus , while the verses are based on the C mixolydian mode , giving a hip , swing @-@ like mood . The bassline in the song with the post @-@ disco origins is reminiscent of The Jacksons ' " Can You Feel It " , which appeared on their 1980 album Triumph . Furthermore , the strophes remind of the refrain from Melissa Manchester 's hit " You Should Hear How She Talks About You " ( 1982 ) . 
 The lyrics explain that what Madonna wants is money , good clothes , the perfect life and men who are able to supply those materialistic things . A cross @-@ reference to the 1960 song " Shop Around " by The Miracles is also present . The lyrics also portray relationships in terms of capitalism as commodities , and romance becomes synonymous to trading stocks and shares . The title was a polysemy like the lyrics . It deduced Madonna as the desired and most respected woman . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Following the song 's release on November 30 , 1984 , as the second single from Like a Virgin , " Material Girl " received mixed reviews from music critics . Author Rikky Rooksby , in his book The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , compared the song with those of Cyndi Lauper because of Madonna 's shrill voice in the song . He added that the song was a " pungent satire on the Reagan / Thatcher young @-@ guns @-@ go @-@ for @-@ it era . Which just goes to show that pop music and irony don 't mix . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic said that " Material Girl " was one of the songs that made Madonna an icon , the other being " Like a Virgin " from the same album , both remaining as a definitive statement . He added that both tunes overshadow the rest of the record , " because they are a perfect match of theme and sound . " Debby Miller from Rolling Stone , felt that the song portrayed Madonna as a more practical girl than previous female singers . Dave Karger from Entertainment Weekly , while reviewing the album in 1995 , felt that the song came off a bit repetitious and immature when compared to the present context . Jim Farber from Entertainment Weekly felt that the song provided then critics a way to criticize Madonna 's work . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine commented that Madonna had " defined a generation with hits like ' Material Girl ' . " Alfred Soto from Stylus Magazine compared the song with " Everything She Wants " by Wham ! . Michael Paoletta from Billboard commented that the song sustained a " fevered dance @-@ rock momentum . " Nancy <unk> from Billboard said that " singer and team conquer once more with their irresistible assembly of new and used pop hooks . " In 2003 , Madonna fans were asked to vote for their Top 20 Madonna singles of all time for a special issue of Q magazine dedicated to Madonna . " Material Girl " was allocated the 15th spot on the list . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 during the week of February 9 , 1985 , at position 43 , when " Like a Virgin " was descending out of the top ten . The single climbed the Hot 100 quickly , jumping 13 spots to number five the week of March 9 , 1985 , and eventually spent two weeks at number two , held off by REO Speedwagon 's " Can 't Fight This Feeling " and Phil Collins ' " One More Night " . The week when the song slipped to position three , her upcoming single " Crazy for You " reached number four , giving Madonna two simultaneous top @-@ five hits . " Material Girl " reached the top of the Hot Dance Club Songs but was less successful on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , failing to enter the top 40 and peaking at number 49 . It was placed at number 58 on the year @-@ end chart for 1985 , with Madonna becoming the top pop artist for the year . In Canada , the song debuted on the RPM Singles Chart at number 76 , on the issue dated February 16 , 1985 . After five weeks , it reached a peak position of four on the chart and was present on the chart for a total of 21 weeks . It was ranked at number 46 on the RPM Year @-@ End chart for 1985 . 
 In Australia , the song reached the top five and peaked at number four . In the United Kingdom , " Material Girl " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 24 on March 2 , 1985 and reached a peak position of number three . It was present for a total of ten weeks on the chart . The song was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry , for shipment of 250 @,@ 000 copies of the song . According to the Official Charts Company , the song has sold 405 @,@ 000 copies there . Across Europe , the song reached the top @-@ ten in Austria , Belgium , Ireland , Netherlands , Spain and the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles , while reaching the top 40 of Germany , Italy and Switzerland . In New Zealand and Japan , the song reached the top @-@ five . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was inspired by Madonna 's admiration of Marilyn Monroe and mimicked the latter 's performance of the song " Diamonds Are a Girl 's Best Friend " from the 1953 film Gentlemen Prefer Blondes . It also featured actor Keith Carradine , who played Madonna 's love interest . The video was the first to showcase Madonna 's acting ability , as it combined the dance routines of " Diamonds Are a Girl 's Best Friend " with the storyline of a man who impresses Madonna with daisies , rather than diamonds . In a 1987 interview with New York Daily News , Madonna said : 
 Well , my favorite scene in all of Monroe 's movies is when she does that dance sequence for ' Diamonds Are a Girl 's Best Friend ' . And when it came time to do the video for the song [ Material Girl ] , I said , I can just redo that whole scene and it will be perfect . [ ... ] Marilyn was made into something not human in a way , and I can relate to that . Her sexuality was something everyone was obsessed with and that I can relate to . And there were certain things about her vulnerability that I 'm curious about and attracted to . 
 The music video was shot January 10 and 11 , 1985 , at Ren @-@ Mar Studios in Hollywood , California , and was directed by Mary Lambert , who worked with Madonna in the videos for " Like a Virgin " and " Borderline " . It was produced by Simon Fields with principal photography by Peter Sinclair , editing by Glenn Morgan and choreography by Kenny Ortega . Actor Robert Wuhl appeared in the video 's opening . Much of the jewelry is sourced from the collection of Connie Parente , a popular Hollywood jewelry collector . The music video was at the same time an exegesis and a critique of the lyrics and Madonna herself . It was on the set of the video that Madonna met her first husband , actor Sean Penn . 
 The video opens with two men watching a rush in the screening rooms of a Hollywood studio . On the screen , an actress played by Madonna sings and dances to " Material Girl " , dressed like Monroe from " Diamonds Are a Girl 's Best Friend " . One of the men , played by Carradine , is a director or a producer and is immensely rich . He falls in love with the actress and wants to express his passion for her . He tells his employee , played by Wuhl : " She 's [ Madonna ] fantastic . She could become a star . " The employee answered : " She could be . She could be great . She could be a major star . " The former then concludes by saying : " She is a star , George . " Madonna is in a pink strapless gown and has her hair in blond locks ala Monroe . The background is a reconstruction of the Monroe video , complete with staircase , chandeliers and a number of tuxedo clad chorus boys . Madonna dances and sings the song , while she is showered with cash , expensive jewellery , furs and is carried by the men over the stairs . At one time , she alludes herself from the men , by dismissing them with her fan . As the producer tries to impress Madonna , he comes to know that she does not like material things , but rather prefers simple romance . He pretends to be penniless , and brings her hand @-@ cut flowers while paying a poor man a large amount to borrow ( or possibly buy ) his dirty truck to take her on a date . His plan seems to work , because the final scene shows him and Madonna kissing in the truck in an intimate position . 
 It was in the video of " Material Girl " that Madonna began to accept and utilize herself being compared to Monroe . However , she established a safe distance from those comparisons and developed inside the same pastiche . Details like the usage of different gloves or different fans in the video brought forth the connections between these women , but Madonna alluded to herself in subtle ways . The fan in Monroe 's hand for the original video was an iconography of the Sudarshana Chakra ( wheel ) held by the Indian idol Vishnu . Scholar Georges @-@ Claude Guilbert , who wrote Madonna as postmodern myth : how one star 's self @-@ construction rewrites sex , said that the fan symbolized fiery desire aroused by Monroe as well as ritual sacrifice , eerily foreshadowing her untimely death in 1962 . Madonna 's fan , which appeared at the end of the video , signified that Madonna – while paying her tribute to Monroe – was signaling that she had no intention of being a victim like her , and that she was on the path of becoming a feminist post @-@ modern myth . Author Nicholas Cook commented that the video promoted Madonna 's identity as the song suggested , with the purpose of shifting " Madonna 's image from that of a disco @-@ bimbo to authentic star . " Lisa A. Lewis , author of Gender , Politics and MTV said that with the video , Madonna achieved the rare distinction of being accepted as a literature medium by the music authors . " Material Girl " was nominated for best female video at the 1985 MTV Video Music Awards but lost to Tina Turner 's " What 's Love Got to Do with It " . The video was ranked at position 54 on VH1 's 100 Greatest Videos . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Material Girl " was performed by Madonna on five of her world tours . She ended The Virgin Tour ( 1985 ) with a self @-@ parodying performance of the song . She wore a white tube top and a tight white skirt and carried a bunch of notes in her left hand . At the end of the performance she asked the audience " Do you really think I 'm a material girl ? ... I 'm not ... Take it [ Throwing fake money ] ... I don 't need money ... I need love . " As she began to strip off more clothes , she was apprehended and marched offstage by an extra posing as her father . In Detroit , Tony Ciccone himself did the honors . The performance was included in the VHS release Madonna Live : The Virgin Tour . 
 In the Who 's That Girl World Tour of 1987 , Madonna performed it as a medley with " Dress You Up " and " Like a Virgin " . She wore an elaborate costume , inspired by Dame Edna Everage . It consisted of a hat strewn with fake fruits , flowers and feathers , jeweled batwing spectacles with heavy , black frames , a ruffled skirt , a bodice covered with objects like watches and dolls and fishnets . Author Carol <unk> stated that the dress was more " ludicrous for Madonna , than humorous . " Two different performances of the song on this tour can be found on the videos : Who 's That Girl : Live in Japan , filmed in Tokyo , Japan , on June 22 , 1987 , and Ciao Italia : Live from Italy , filmed in Turin , Italy , on September 4 , 1987 . 
 For the Blond Ambition World Tour in 1990 , Madonna and her supporting dancers Niki Haris and Donna De Lory were dressed as old women in fluffy dressing gowns with dollar signs and curling pins in their hair . Singing the song with a strong mid @-@ western accent , they got up and revealed a <unk> pink dress underneath their gown , in which they danced around . On some dates Madonna replaced the words " experience has made me rich " with " experience has made me a bitch " . After singing , she produced dollar bills out of her corsage and threw them up in the air for the audience to catch . Two different performances were taped and released on video , Blond Ambition : Japan Tour 90 , taped in Yokohama , Japan , on April 27 , 1990 , and Blond Ambition World Tour Live , taped in Nice , France , on August 5 , 1990 . During the Re @-@ Invention World Tour of 2004 , a general setlist was decided where the show rehearsals would start with " I 'm So Stupid " from American Life , " Dress You Up " and " Material Girl " . But " Dress You Up " and " I 'm So Stupid " were later dropped from the show . Hence " Material Girl " was transferred as the closing song of the military segment of the show , and was re @-@ arranged as an electric guitar version . Madonna wore military themed clothes and sang the song while standing in front of a microphone and playing an electric guitar . The backdrops displayed mathematical equations along with DNA helixes rushing through the screens . Minimal elements of the song were included in the live performance of " Girl Gone Wild " on The MDNA Tour . 
 " Material Girl " was included in the final section of the Rebel Heart Tour ( 2015 – 16 ) . For this section , Madonna worked with designer Jeremy Scott for party inspired costumes . She wanted a " Harlem @-@ flapper @-@ meets @-@ Paris @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Twenties " look , and Scott came up with the final dress adorned with thousands of Swarovski crystals . Following the jazz rendition of 2000 single " Music " , Madonna 's started performing " Material Girl " , in a similar theme like the music video . Towards the end , Madonna changed the choreography , and made her dancers who posed as suitors , to fall down the stairs instead . The performance ended with the singer walking down the catwalk in a bridal veil and carrying a white bouquet , which she eventually throws into the crowd . Utilizing the stage as both stairs as well as video backdrop , the stairs rose up and down during the song . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Cantopop singer Sally Yeh covered the song in Cantonese under the title " Two Hundred Degrees ( <unk> ) " . The children 's show Sesame Street did a loose parody of the song in 1989 with completely different lyrics called " Cereal Girl " . The " music video " was about a monster girl who loves cereal after tasting a bowl of it . The Chipettes performed a cover version on the 1985 Alvin and the Chipmunks episode " Sisters " . In 1998 the song was sampled for the number @-@ two dance hit " If You Buy This Record ( Your Life Will Be Better ) " by The <unk> featuring Maya . Industrial band KMFDM covered the song for the 1999 Virgin Voices : A Tribute To Madonna : Vol 1 tribute album . The same year , Britney Spears performed the song during her ... Baby One More Time Tour , calling Madonna and Janet Jackson her biggest inspirations . <unk> band Exhumed covered the song as part of a limited edition bonus CD for their 2004 album Platters of <unk> . Richard Cheese and Lounge Against the Machine covered the song in lounge music style on his 2004 album I 'd Like a Virgin . 
 Sisters Hilary and Haylie Duff recorded a cover of the song for the film Material Girls ( 2006 ) , in which they both starred . Their cover was to be produced by Lil Jon , with the released version being produced by the Dead Executives . According to Haylie , the song was to be released as a single but there was no time to shoot a music video . Icelandic singer <unk> <unk> performed the song at The Secret Garden Festival and The Big Chill in the summer of 2007 . On her sold out May 16 , 2009 , concert at the National Auditorium of Mexico City , Mexican Latin Pop singer , Yuridia performed a cover version of " Material Girl " . An avant @-@ garde / folk rock cover of the song by Mountain Party was included on the 2007 Madonna tribute compilation Through the Wilderness . The song " <unk> Girl " by the German rapper <unk> samples Madonna 's version in its chorus . 
 " Material Girl " was part of the " Sparkling Diamonds " medley in the 2001 film Moulin Rouge ! . In the 2004 movie Bridget Jones : The Edge of Reason , the song was used for the scene where Bridget gets out of a Thai jail . The 2006 Nintendo DS rhythm @-@ action game Elite Beat Agents contains a cover version of the song for one of the game 's levels . The level follows two <unk> trapped on a deserted island . It also appears in the video game Karaoke Revolution Party and in Nintendo 's Wii Music , a 2008 music video game for the Wii . In 2010 , Elton John performed a cover version of " Material Girl " at the Rainforest Fund Benefit Concert . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After the song 's release , the phrase " material girl " became another nickname for Madonna . She often remarked that " Material Girl " is the song she most regrets recording , as it became a label that has been attached to her for decades . She also said if she had known this , she probably would never have recorded it . After making the video , Madonna said she never wanted to be compared to Monroe , despite posing as the Hollywood icon and recreating many of Marilyn 's signature poses for various photos shoots , most notably a 1991 issue of Vanity Fair . Reflecting on the song , Madonna told author J. Randy Taraborrelli : 
 I can 't completely disdain the song and the video , because they certainly were important to my career . But talk about the media hanging on a phrase and misinterpreting the damn thing as well . I didn 't write that song , you know , and the video was about how the girl rejected diamonds and money . But God forbid irony should be understood . So when I 'm ninety , I 'll still be the Material Girl . I guess it 's not so bad . Lana Turner was the Sweater Girl until the day she died . 
 Academics analyzed the usage of the term material as odd because , according to them , materialistic is the correct word . However , that would have posed problems of versification for Madonna and songwriter Brown . Guilbert commented that " material girl " designated a certain type of liberated women , thus deviating from its original coinage which meant a girl who is tangible and accessible . Cook said that the meaning and impact of " material girl " was no more circumscribed by the video , rather by its song . Its influence was seen later among such diverse groups such as female versus male , gay versus straight , and academic versus teenage . 
 In 1993 , a conference was held at the University of California at Santa Barbara , with the subject as Madonna : Feminist Icon or Material Girl ? . The conference pondered on the duality of Madonna as both of them and deduced that the question of Madonna 's feminism is not easy to decide . Some of the feminists left the conference , citing that they had not been able to make up their minds . As the New Age concept became popular in the U.S. in the late 1990s , Madonna tried to shun the " material girl " tag , and embarked on a spiritual quest of her own . Journals like The Times and The Advocate declared her as " the Ethereal Girl " and " Spiritual Girl " respectively . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = Sheep = 
 The sheep ( Ovis aries ) is a quadrupedal , ruminant mammal typically kept as livestock . Like all ruminants , sheep are members of the order Artiodactyla , the even @-@ toed ungulates . Although the name " sheep " applies to many species in the genus Ovis , in everyday usage it almost always refers to Ovis aries . Numbering a little over one billion , domestic sheep are also the most numerous species of sheep . An adult female sheep is referred to as a ewe ( / <unk> / ) , an intact male as a ram or occasionally a <unk> , a castrated male as a <unk> , and a younger sheep as a lamb . 
 Sheep are most likely descended from the wild mouflon of Europe and Asia . One of the earliest animals to be domesticated for agricultural purposes , sheep are raised for fleece , meat ( lamb , <unk> or mutton ) and milk . A sheep 's wool is the most widely used animal fiber , and is usually harvested by shearing . Ovine meat is called lamb when from younger animals and mutton when from older ones . Sheep continue to be important for wool and meat today , and are also occasionally raised for pelts , as dairy animals , or as model organisms for science . 
 Sheep husbandry is practised throughout the majority of the inhabited world , and has been fundamental to many civilizations . In the modern era , Australia , New Zealand , the southern and central South American nations , and the British Isles are most closely associated with sheep production . 
 <unk> has a large lexicon of unique terms which vary considerably by region and dialect . Use of the word sheep began in Middle English as a derivation of the Old English word <unk> ; it is both the singular and plural name for the animal . A group of sheep is called a flock , herd or mob . Many other specific terms for the various life stages of sheep exist , generally related to lambing , shearing , and age . 
 Being a key animal in the history of farming , sheep have a deeply entrenched place in human culture , and find representation in much modern language and symbology . As livestock , sheep are most often associated with pastoral , Arcadian imagery . Sheep figure in many mythologies — such as the Golden Fleece — and major religions , especially the Abrahamic traditions . In both ancient and modern religious ritual , sheep are used as sacrificial animals . 
 = = Description and evolution = = 
 Domestic sheep are relatively small ruminants , usually with a crimped hair called wool and often with horns forming a lateral spiral . Domestic sheep differ from their wild relatives and ancestors in several respects , having become uniquely neotenic as a result of selective breeding by humans . A few primitive breeds of sheep retain some of the characteristics of their wild cousins , such as short tails . Depending on breed , domestic sheep may have no horns at all ( i.e. polled ) , or horns in both sexes , or in males only . Most horned breeds have a single pair , but a few breeds may have several . 
 Another trait unique to domestic sheep as compared to wild <unk> is their wide variation in color . Wild sheep are largely variations of brown hues , and variation within species is extremely limited . Colors of domestic sheep range from pure white to dark chocolate brown and even spotted or piebald . Selection for easily <unk> white fleeces began early in sheep domestication , and as white wool is a dominant trait it spread quickly . However , colored sheep do appear in many modern breeds , and may even appear as a recessive trait in white flocks . While white wool is desirable for large commercial markets , there is a niche market for colored fleeces , mostly for <unk> . The nature of the fleece varies widely among the breeds , from dense and highly crimped , to long and hairlike . There is variation of wool type and quality even among members of the same flock , so wool classing is a step in the commercial processing of the fibre . 
 Depending on breed , sheep show a range of heights and weights . Their rate of growth and mature weight is a heritable trait that is often selected for in breeding . Ewes typically weigh between 45 and 100 kilograms ( 99 and 220 lb ) , and rams between 45 and 160 kilograms ( 99 and 353 lb ) . When all deciduous teeth have erupted , the sheep has 20 teeth . Mature sheep have 32 teeth . As with other ruminants , the front teeth in the lower jaw bite against a hard , toothless pad in the upper jaw . These are used to pick off vegetation , then the rear teeth grind it before it is swallowed . There are eight lower front teeth in ruminants , but there is some disagreement as to whether these are eight incisors , or six incisors and two incisor @-@ shaped canines . This means that the dental formula for sheep is either 0 @.@ 0 @.@ 3 @.@ 34 @.@ 0 @.@ 3 @.@ 3 or 0 @.@ 0 @.@ 3 @.@ 33 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 3 There is a large diastema between the incisors and the molars . For the first few years of life it is possible to calculate the age of sheep from their front teeth , as a pair of milk teeth is replaced by larger adult teeth each year , the full set of eight adult front teeth being complete at about four years of age . The front teeth are then gradually lost as sheep age , making it harder for them to feed and hindering the health and productivity of the animal . For this reason , domestic sheep on normal pasture begin to slowly decline from four years on , and the average life expectancy of a sheep is 10 to 12 years , though some sheep may live as long as 20 years . 
 Sheep have good hearing , and are sensitive to noise when being handled . Sheep have horizontal slit @-@ shaped pupils , possessing excellent peripheral vision ; with visual fields of approximately 270 ° to 320 ° , sheep can see behind themselves without turning their heads . Many breeds have only short hair on the face , and some have facial wool ( if any ) confined to the poll and or the area of the mandibular angle ; the wide angles of peripheral vision apply to these breeds . A few breeds tend to have considerable wool on the face ; for some individuals of these breeds , peripheral vision may be greatly reduced by " wool blindness " , unless recently shorn about the face . Sheep have poor depth perception ; shadows and dips in the ground may cause sheep to baulk . In general , sheep have a tendency to move out of the dark and into well lit areas , and prefer to move uphill when disturbed . Sheep also have an excellent sense of smell , and , like all species of their genus , have scent glands just in front of the eyes , and <unk> on the feet . The purpose of these glands is uncertain , but those on the face may be used in breeding behaviors . The foot glands might also be related to reproduction , but alternative reasons , such as secretion of a waste product or a scent marker to help lost sheep find their flock , have also been proposed . 
 = = = Sheep compared to goats = = = 
 Sheep and goats are closely related as both are in the subfamily Caprinae . However , they are separate species , so hybrids rarely occur , and are always infertile . A hybrid of a ewe and a buck ( a male goat ) is called a sheep @-@ goat hybrid ( only a single such animal has been confirmed ) , and is not to be confused with the sheep @-@ goat chimera , though both are known as " <unk> " . Visual differences between sheep and goats include the beard of goats and divided upper lip of sheep . Sheep tails also hang down , even when short or docked , while the short tails of goats are held upwards . Sheep breeds are also often naturally polled ( either in both sexes or just in the female ) , while naturally polled goats are rare ( though many are polled artificially ) . Males of the two species differ in that buck goats acquire a unique and strong odor during the rut , whereas rams do not . 
 = = = Breeds = = = 
 The domestic sheep is a multi @-@ purpose animal , and the more than 200 breeds now in existence were created to serve these diverse purposes . Some sources give a count of a thousand or more breeds , but these numbers cannot be verified , according to some sources . However , several hundred breeds of sheep have been identified by the FAO ( Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN ) , with the estimated number varying somewhat from time to time : e.g. 863 breeds as of 1993 , 1314 breeds as of 1995 and 1229 breeds as of 2006 . ( These numbers exclude extinct breeds , which are also tallied by the FAO . ) For purposes of such tallies , the FAO definition of a breed is " either a subspecific group of domestic livestock with definable and identifiable external characteristics that enable it to be separated by visual appraisal from other similarly defined groups within the same species or a group for which geographical and / or cultural separation from phenotypically similar groups has led to acceptance of its separate identity . " Almost all sheep are classified as being best suited to furnishing a certain product : wool , meat , milk , hides , or a combination in a dual @-@ purpose breed . Other features used when classifying sheep include face color ( generally white or black ) , tail length , presence or lack of horns , and the topography for which the breed has been developed . This last point is especially stressed in the UK , where breeds are described as either upland ( hill or mountain ) or lowland breeds . A sheep may also be of a fat @-@ tailed type , which is a dual @-@ purpose sheep common in Africa and Asia with larger deposits of fat within and around its tail . 
 Breeds are often categorized by the type of their wool . Fine wool breeds are those that have wool of great crimp and density , which are preferred for textiles . Most of these were derived from Merino sheep , and the breed continues to dominate the world sheep industry . Downs breeds have wool between the extremes , and are typically fast @-@ growing meat and ram breeds with dark faces . Some major medium wool breeds , such as the Corriedale , are dual @-@ purpose crosses of long and fine @-@ wooled breeds and were created for high @-@ production commercial flocks . Long wool breeds are the largest of sheep , with long wool and a slow rate of growth . Long wool sheep are most valued for crossbreeding to improve the attributes of other sheep types . For example : the American Columbia breed was developed by crossing Lincoln rams ( a long wool breed ) with fine @-@ wooled Rambouillet ewes . 
 Coarse or carpet wool sheep are those with a medium to long length wool of characteristic coarseness . Breeds traditionally used for carpet wool show great variability , but the chief requirement is a wool that will not break down under heavy use ( as would that of the finer breeds ) . As the demand for carpet @-@ quality wool declines , some breeders of this type of sheep are attempting to use a few of these traditional breeds for alternative purposes . Others have always been primarily meat @-@ class sheep . 
 A minor class of sheep are the dairy breeds . Dual @-@ purpose breeds that may primarily be meat or wool sheep are often used secondarily as milking animals , but there are a few breeds that are predominantly used for milking . These sheep do produce a higher quantity of milk and have slightly longer lactation curves . In the quality of their milk , fat and protein content percentages of dairy sheep vary from non @-@ dairy breeds but lactose content does not . 
 A last group of sheep breeds is that of fur or hair sheep , which do not grow wool at all . Hair sheep are similar to the early domesticated sheep kept before woolly breeds were developed , and are raised for meat and pelts . Some modern breeds of hair sheep , such as the <unk> , result from crosses between wool and hair breeds . For meat and hide producers , hair sheep are cheaper to keep , as they do not need shearing . Hair sheep are also more resistant to parasites and hot weather . 
 With the modern rise of corporate agribusiness and the decline of localized family farms , many breeds of sheep are in danger of extinction . The Rare Breeds Survival Trust of the UK lists 22 native breeds as having only 3 @,@ 000 registered animals ( each ) , and The Livestock Conservancy lists 14 as either " critical " or " threatened " . Preferences for breeds with uniform characteristics and fast growth have pushed heritage ( or heirloom ) breeds to the margins of the sheep industry . Those that remain are maintained through the efforts of conservation organizations , breed registries , and individual farmers dedicated to their preservation . 
 = = Diet = = 
 Sheep are exclusively herbivorous mammals . Most breeds prefer to graze on grass and other short roughage , avoiding the taller woody parts of plants that goats readily consume . Both sheep and goats use their lips and tongues to select parts of the plant that are easier to digest or higher in nutrition . Sheep , however , graze well in monoculture pastures where most goats fare poorly . Like all ruminants , sheep have a complex digestive system composed of four chambers , allowing them to break down cellulose from stems , leaves , and seed hulls into simpler carbohydrates . When sheep graze , vegetation is chewed into a mass called a bolus , which is then passed into the rumen , via the reticulum . The rumen is a 19- to 38 @-@ liter ( 5 to 10 gal ) organ in which feed is fermented . The fermenting organisms include bacteria , fungi , and protozoa . ( Other important rumen organisms include some archaea , which produce methane from carbon dioxide . ) The bolus is periodically regurgitated back to the mouth as cud for additional chewing and salivation . Cud chewing is an adaptation allowing ruminants to graze more quickly in the morning , and then fully chew and digest feed later in the day . This is safer than grazing , which requires lowering the head thus leaving the animal vulnerable to predators , while cud chewing does not . 
 Other than forage , the other staple feed for sheep is hay , often during the winter months . The ability to thrive solely on pasture ( even without hay ) varies with breed , but all sheep can survive on this diet . Also included in some sheep 's diets are minerals , either in a trace mix or in licks . 
 = = = Grazing behavior = = = 
 Sheep follow a diurnal pattern of activity , feeding from dawn to dusk , stopping sporadically to rest and chew their cud . Ideal pasture for sheep is not <unk> grass , but an array of grasses , legumes and forbs . Types of land where sheep are raised vary widely , from pastures that are seeded and improved intentionally to rough , native lands . Common plants toxic to sheep are present in most of the world , and include ( but are not limited to ) cherry , some oaks and acorns , tomato , yew , rhubarb , potato , and rhododendron . 
 = = = = Effects on pasture = = = = 
 Sheep are largely grazing herbivores , unlike browsing animals such as goats and deer that prefer taller foliage . With a much narrower face , sheep crop plants very close to the ground and can <unk> a pasture much faster than cattle . For this reason , many shepherds use managed intensive rotational grazing , where a flock is rotated through multiple pastures , giving plants time to recover . Paradoxically , sheep can both cause and solve the spread of invasive plant species . By disturbing the natural state of pasture , sheep and other livestock can pave the way for invasive plants . However , sheep also prefer to eat invasives such as cheatgrass , leafy spurge , kudzu and spotted knapweed over native species such as sagebrush , making grazing sheep effective for conservation grazing . Research conducted in Imperial County , California compared lamb grazing with herbicides for weed control in seedling alfalfa fields . Three trials demonstrated that grazing lambs were just as effective as herbicides in controlling winter weeds . Entomologists also compared grazing lambs to insecticides for insect control in winter alfalfa . In this trial , lambs provided insect control as effectively as insecticides . 
 = = = Rumination = = = 
 During fermentation , the rumen produces gas that must be expelled ; disturbances of the organ , such as sudden changes in a sheep 's diet , can cause the potentially fatal condition of bloat , when gas becomes trapped in the rumen , due to reflex closure of the caudal esophageal sphincter when in contact with foam or liquid . After fermentation in the rumen , feed passes into the reticulum and the omasum ; special feeds such as grains may bypass the rumen altogether . After the first three chambers , food moves into the abomasum for final digestion before processing by the intestines . The abomasum is the only one of the four chambers analogous to the human stomach , and is sometimes called the " true stomach " . 
 = = = Concentrated diets = = = 
 Sheep are one of the few livestock animals raised for meat today that have rarely been raised in an intensive , confined animal feeding operation ( <unk> ) . Although there is a growing movement advocating alternative farming styles , a large percentage of beef cattle , pigs , and poultry are still produced under such conditions . In contrast , only some sheep are regularly given high @-@ concentration grain feed , much less kept in confinement . Especially in industrialized countries , sheep producers may fatten market lambs before slaughter ( called " finishing " ) in feedlots . Many sheep breeders flush ewes and rams with a daily ration of grain during breeding to increase fertility . Ewes may be flushed during pregnancy to increase birth weights , as 70 % of a lamb 's growth occurs in the last five to six weeks of gestation . However , overfeeding of ewe hoggets ( i.e. adolescent ewes ) in early pregnancy can result in restricted placental development , restricting growth of fetal lambs in late pregnancy . Otherwise , only lactating ewes and especially old or infirm sheep are commonly provided with grain . Feed provided to sheep must be specially formulated , as most cattle , poultry , pig , and even some goat feeds contain levels of copper that are lethal to sheep . The same danger applies to mineral supplements such as salt licks . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 = = = Flock behavior = = = 
 Sheep are flock animals and strongly gregarious ; much sheep behavior can be understood on the basis of these tendencies . The dominance hierarchy of sheep and their natural inclination to follow a leader to new pastures were the pivotal factors in sheep being one of the first domesticated livestock species . Furthermore , in contrast to the red deer and gazelle ( two other ungulates of primary importance to meat production in prehistoric times ) , sheep do not defend territories although they do form home ranges . All sheep have a tendency to congregate close to other members of a flock , although this behavior varies with breed , and sheep can become stressed when separated from their flock members . During flocking , sheep have a strong tendency to follow and a leader may simply be the first individual to move . Relationships in flocks tend to be closest among related sheep : in mixed @-@ breed flocks , subgroups of the same breed tend to form , and a ewe and her direct descendants often move as a unit within large flocks . Sheep can become <unk> to one particular local pasture ( heft ) so they do not roam freely in unfenced landscapes . Lambs learn the heft from ewes and if whole flocks are culled it must be <unk> to the replacement animals . 
 Flock behaviour in sheep is generally only exhibited in groups of four or more sheep ; fewer sheep may not react as expected when alone or with few other sheep . Being a prey species , the primary defense mechanism of sheep is to flee from danger when their flight zone is entered . Cornered sheep may charge and butt , or threaten by hoof stamping and adopting an aggressive posture . This is particularly true for ewes with newborn lambs . 
 In regions where sheep have no natural predators , none of the native breeds of sheep exhibit a strong flocking behavior . 
 = = = = Herding = = = = 
 Farmers exploit flocking behavior to keep sheep together on unfenced pastures such as hill farming , and to move them more easily . Shepherds may also use herding dogs in this effort , whose highly bred herding ability can assist in moving flocks . Sheep are food @-@ oriented and association of humans with regular feeding often results in sheep soliciting people for food . Those who are moving sheep may exploit this behavior by leading sheep with buckets of feed , rather than forcing their movements with herding . 
 = = = Dominance hierarchy = = = 
 Sheep establish a dominance hierarchy through fighting , threats and competitiveness . Dominant animals are inclined to be more aggressive with other sheep , and usually feed first at troughs . Primarily among rams , horn size is a factor in the flock hierarchy . Rams with different size horns may be less inclined to fight to establish the dominance order , while rams with similarly sized horns are more so . Merinos have an almost linear hierarchy whereas there is a less rigid structure in Border Leicesters when a competitive feeding situation arises . 
 In sheep , position in a moving flock is highly correlated with social dominance , but there is no definitive study to show consistent voluntary leadership by an individual sheep . 
 = = = Intelligence and learning ability = = = 
 Sheep are frequently thought of as unintelligent animals . Their flocking behavior and quickness to flee and panic can make shepherding a difficult endeavor for the uninitiated . Despite these perceptions , a University of Illinois monograph on sheep reported them to be just below pigs and on par with cattle in IQ . Sheep can recognize individual human and ovine faces , and remember them for years . In addition to long @-@ term facial recognition of individuals , sheep can also differentiate emotional states through facial characteristics . If worked with patiently , sheep may learn their names and many sheep are trained to be led by halter for showing and other purposes . Sheep have also responded well to <unk> training . Sheep have been used as pack animals ; Tibetan nomads distribute baggage equally throughout a flock as it is herded between living sites . 
 It has been reported that some sheep have apparently shown problem @-@ solving abilities ; a flock in West Yorkshire , England allegedly found a way to get over cattle grids by rolling on their backs , although documentation of this has relied on anecdotal accounts . 
 = = = Vocalisations = = = 
 Sounds made by domestic sheep include bleats , grunts , rumbles and snorts . <unk> ( " <unk> " ) is used mostly for contact communication , especially between dam and lambs , but also at times between other flock members . The bleats of individual sheep are distinctive , enabling the ewe and her lambs to recognize each other 's vocalizations . Vocal communication between lambs and their dam declines to a very low level within several weeks after parturition . A variety of bleats may be heard , depending on sheep age and circumstances . Apart from contact communication , bleating may signal distress , frustration or impatience ; however , sheep are usually silent when in pain . Isolation commonly prompts bleating by sheep . Pregnant ewes may grunt when in labor . <unk> sounds are made by the ram during courting ; somewhat similar rumbling sounds may be made by the ewe , especially when with her neonate lambs . A snort ( explosive exhalation through the nostrils ) may signal aggression or a warning , and is often elicited from startled sheep . 
 = = = Senses = = = 
 In sheep breeds lacking facial wool , the visual field is wide . For 10 sheep ( Cambridge , Lleyn and Welsh Mountain breeds , which lack facial wool ) , the visual field ranged from 298 ° to 325 ° , averaging 313 @.@ 1 ° , with binocular overlap ranging from 44 @.@ 5 ° to 74 ° , averaging 61 @.@ 7 ° In some breeds , unshorn facial wool can limit the visual field ; in some individuals , this may be enough to cause " wool blindness " . For 60 Merinos , visual fields ranged from 219 @.@ 1 ° to 303 @.@ 0 ° , averaging 269 @.@ 9 ° , and the binocular field ranged from 8 @.@ 9 ° to 77 @.@ 7 ° , averaging 47 @.@ 5 ° ; 36 percent of the measurements were limited by wool , although photographs of the experiments indicate that only limited facial wool regrowth had occurred since shearing . In addition to facial wool ( in some breeds ) , visual field limitations can include ears and ( in some breeds ) horns , so the visual field can be extended by tilting the head . Sheep eyes possess very low <unk> and little astigmatism . Such visual characteristics are likely to produce a well @-@ focused retinal image of objects in both the middle and long distance . Because sheep eyes have no accommodation , one might expect the image of very near objects to be blurred , but a rather clear near image could be provided by the tapetum and large retinal image of the sheep 's eye , and adequate close vision may occur at muzzle length . Good depth perception , inferred from the sheep 's sure @-@ footedness , was confirmed in " visual cliff " experiments ; behavioral responses indicating depth perception are seen in lambs at one day of age . Sheep are thought to have colour vision and are able to distinguish between a variety of colours : black , red , brown , green , yellow and white Sight is a vital part of sheep communication and when grazing , they maintain visual contact with each other . Each sheep lifts its head upwards to check the position of other sheep in the flock . This constant monitoring is probably what keeps the sheep in a flock as they move along grazing . Sheep become stressed when isolated ; this stress is reduced if they are provided with a mirror , indicating that the sight of other sheep has stress @-@ reducing properties . 
 Taste is the most important sense in sheep establishing forage preferences , with sweet and sour plants being preferred and bitter plants being more commonly rejected . Touch and sight are also important in relation to specific plant characteristics , such as succulence and growth form . 
 The ram uses his vomeronasal organ ( sometimes called the Jacobson 's organ ) for sensing the pheromones of ewes and detecting when they are in estrus . The ewe uses her vomeronasal organ for early recognition of her neonate lamb . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Sheep follow a similar reproductive strategy to other herd animals . A group of ewes is generally mated by a single ram , who has either been chosen by a breeder or has established dominance through physical contest with other rams ( in feral populations ) . Most sheep are seasonal breeders , although some are able to breed year @-@ round . Ewes generally reach sexual maturity at six to eight months of age , and rams generally at four to six months . However , there are exceptions . For example , <unk> ewe lambs may reach puberty as early as 3 to 4 months , and Merino ewes sometimes reach puberty at 18 to 20 months . Ewes have estrus cycles about every 17 days , during which they emit a scent and indicate readiness through physical displays towards rams . A minority of rams display a preference for homosexuality ( 8 % on average ) and a small number of the females that were accompanied by a male fetus in utero are freemartins ( female animals that are behaviorally masculine and lack functioning ovaries ) . 
 In feral sheep , rams may fight during the rut to determine which individuals may mate with ewes . Rams , especially unfamiliar ones , will also fight outside the breeding period to establish dominance ; rams can kill one another if allowed to mix freely . During the rut , even normally friendly rams may become aggressive towards humans due to increases in their hormone levels . 
 After mating , sheep have a gestation period of about five months , and normal labor takes one to three hours . Although some breeds regularly throw larger litters of lambs , most produce single or twin lambs . During or soon after labor , ewes and lambs may be confined to small lambing jugs , small pens designed to aid both careful observation of ewes and to cement the bond between them and their lambs . 
 Ovine obstetrics can be problematic . By selectively breeding ewes that produce multiple offspring with higher birth weights for generations , sheep producers have inadvertently caused some domestic sheep to have difficulty lambing ; balancing ease of lambing with high productivity is one of the dilemmas of sheep breeding . In the case of any such problems , those present at lambing may assist the ewe by extracting or repositioning lambs . After the birth , ewes ideally break the amniotic sac ( if it is not broken during labor ) , and begin licking clean the lamb . Most lambs will begin standing within an hour of birth . In normal situations , lambs nurse after standing , receiving vital colostrum milk . Lambs that either fail to nurse or that are rejected by the ewe require aid to live , such as bottle @-@ feeding or fostering by another ewe . 
 After lambs are several weeks old , lamb marking ( the process of ear tagging , docking , and castrating ) is carried out . Vaccinations are usually carried out at this point as well . Ear tags with numbers are attached , or ear marks are applied for ease of later identification of sheep . <unk> is performed on ram lambs not intended for breeding , although some shepherds choose to avoid the procedure for ethical , economic or practical reasons . However , many would disagree with regard to timing . Docking and castration are commonly done after 24 hours ( to avoid interference with maternal bonding and consumption of colostrum ) and are often done not later than one week after birth , to minimize pain , stress , recovery time and complications . The first course of vaccinations ( commonly anti @-@ <unk> ) is commonly given at an age of about 10 to 12 weeks ; i.e. when the concentration of maternal antibodies passively acquired via colostrum is expected to have fallen low enough to permit development of active immunity . Ewes are often <unk> annually about 3 weeks before lambing , to provide high antibody concentrations in colostrum during the first several hours after lambing . Ram lambs that will either be slaughtered or separated from ewes before sexual maturity are not usually castrated . Tail docking is commonly done for welfare , having been shown to reduce risk of fly strike . Objections to all these procedures have been raised by animal rights groups , but farmers defend them by saying they solve many practical and veterinary problems , and inflict only temporary pain . 
 = = Health = = 
 Sheep may fall victim to poisons , infectious diseases , and physical injuries . As a prey species , a sheep 's system is adapted to hide the obvious signs of illness , to prevent being targeted by predators . However , some signs of ill health are obvious , with sick sheep eating little , vocalizing excessively , and being generally listless . Throughout history , much of the money and labor of sheep husbandry has aimed to prevent sheep ailments . Historically , shepherds often created remedies by experimentation on the farm . In some developed countries , including the United States , sheep lack the economic importance for drug companies to perform expensive clinical trials required to approve more than a relatively limited number of drugs for ovine use . However , extra @-@ label drug use in sheep production is permitted in many jurisdictions , subject to certain restrictions . In the US , for example , regulations governing extra @-@ label drug use in animals are found in 21 CFR ( Code of Federal Regulations ) Part 530 . In the 20th and 21st centuries , a minority of sheep owners have turned to alternative treatments such as homeopathy , herbalism and even traditional Chinese medicine to treat sheep veterinary problems . Despite some favorable anecdotal evidence , the effectiveness of alternative veterinary medicine has been met with skepticism in scientific journals . The need for traditional anti @-@ parasite drugs and antibiotics is widespread , and is the main impediment to certified organic farming with sheep . 
 Many breeders take a variety of preventive measures to ward off problems . The first is to ensure all sheep are healthy when purchased . Many buyers avoid outlets known to be clearing houses for animals culled from healthy flocks as either sick or simply inferior . This can also mean maintaining a closed flock , and quarantining new sheep for a month . Two fundamental preventive programs are maintaining good nutrition and reducing stress in the sheep . Restraint , isolation , loud noises , novel situations , pain , heat , extreme cold , fatigue and other stressors can lead to secretion of cortisol , a stress hormone , in amounts that may indicate welfare problems . Excessive stress can compromise the immune system . " Shipping fever " ( pneumonic <unk> , formerly called <unk> ) is a disease of particular concern , that can occur as a result of stress , notably during transport and ( or ) handling . Pain , fear and several other stressors can cause secretion of epinephrine ( adrenaline ) . Considerable epinephrine secretion in the final days before slaughter can adversely affect meat quality ( by causing glycogenolysis , removing the substrate for normal post @-@ slaughter acidification of meat ) and result in meat becoming more susceptible to colonization by spoilage bacteria . Because of such issues , low @-@ stress handling is essential in sheep management . Avoiding poisoning is also important ; common poisons are pesticide sprays , inorganic fertilizer , motor oil , as well as radiator coolant containing ethylene glycol . 
 Common forms of preventive medication for sheep are vaccinations and treatments for parasites . Both external and internal parasites are the most prevalent malady in sheep , and are either fatal , or reduce the productivity of flocks . Worms are the most common internal parasites . They are ingested during grazing , incubate within the sheep , and are expelled through the digestive system ( beginning the cycle again ) . Oral anti @-@ parasitic medicines , known as drenches , are given to a flock to treat worms , sometimes after worm eggs in the feces has been counted to assess infestation levels . Afterwards , sheep may be moved to a new pasture to avoid ingesting the same parasites . External sheep parasites include : lice ( for different parts of the body ) , sheep <unk> , nose bots , sheep itch mites , and maggots . Keds are blood @-@ sucking parasites that cause general malnutrition and decreased productivity , but are not fatal . Maggots are those of the bot fly and the blow @-@ fly . Fly maggots cause the extremely destructive condition of flystrike . Flies lay their eggs in wounds or wet , manure @-@ soiled wool ; when the maggots hatch they burrow into a sheep 's flesh , eventually causing death if untreated . In addition to other treatments , <unk> ( shearing wool from a sheep 's rump ) is a common preventive method . Some countries allow mulesing , a practice that involves stripping away the skin on the rump to prevent fly @-@ strike , normally performed when the sheep is a lamb . Nose bots are fly larvae that inhabit a sheep 's sinuses , causing breathing difficulties and discomfort . Common signs are a discharge from the nasal passage , sneezing , and frantic movement such as head shaking . External parasites may be controlled through the use of <unk> , sprays or immersive sheep dips . 
 A wide array of bacterial and viral diseases affect sheep . Diseases of the hoof , such as foot rot and foot scald may occur , and are treated with <unk> and other remedies . These painful conditions cause lameness and hinder feeding . Ovine Johne 's disease is a wasting disease that affects young sheep . <unk> disease is an insect @-@ borne illness causing fever and inflammation of the mucous membranes . Ovine rinderpest ( or <unk> des petits ruminants ) is a highly contagious and often fatal viral disease affecting sheep and goats . 
 A few sheep conditions are transmissible to humans . Orf ( also known as scabby mouth , contagious <unk> or <unk> ) is a skin disease leaving lesions that is transmitted through skin @-@ to @-@ skin contact . <unk> anthrax is also called <unk> 's disease , as the spores can be transmitted in unwashed wool . More seriously , the organisms that can cause spontaneous <unk> abortion in sheep are easily transmitted to pregnant women . Also of concern are the prion disease scrapie and the virus that causes foot @-@ and @-@ mouth disease ( <unk> ) , as both can devastate flocks . The latter poses a slight risk to humans . During the 2001 <unk> pandemic in the UK , hundreds of sheep were culled and some rare British breeds were at risk of extinction due to this . 
 = = = Predation = = = 
 Other than parasites and disease , predation is a threat to sheep and the profitability of sheep raising . Sheep have little ability to defend themselves , compared with other species kept as livestock . Even if sheep survive an attack , they may die from their injuries , or simply from panic . However , the impact of predation varies dramatically with region . In Africa , Australia , the Americas , and parts of Europe and Asia predators are a serious problem . In the United States , for instance , over one third of sheep deaths in 2004 were caused by predation . In contrast , other nations are virtually devoid of sheep predators , particularly islands known for extensive sheep husbandry . Worldwide , canids — including the domestic dog — are responsible for most sheep deaths . Other animals that occasionally prey on sheep include : felines , bears , birds of prey , ravens and feral hogs . 
 Sheep producers have used a wide variety of measures to combat predation . Pre @-@ modern shepherds used their own presence , livestock guardian dogs , and protective structures such as barns and fencing . Fencing ( both regular and electric ) , penning sheep at night and lambing indoors all continue to be widely used . More modern shepherds used guns , traps , and poisons to kill predators , causing significant decreases in predator populations . In the wake of the environmental and conservation movements , the use of these methods now usually falls under the purview of specially designated government agencies in most developed countries . 
 The 1970s saw a resurgence in the use of livestock guardian dogs and the development of new methods of predator control by sheep producers , many of them non @-@ lethal . Donkeys and guard llamas have been used since the 1980s in sheep operations , using the same basic principle as livestock guardian dogs . Interspecific pasturing , usually with larger livestock such as cattle or horses , may help to deter predators , even if such species do not actively guard sheep . In addition to animal guardians , contemporary sheep operations may use non @-@ lethal predator deterrents such as motion @-@ activated lights and noisy alarms . 
 = = Economic importance = = 
 Sheep are an important part of the global agricultural economy . However , their once vital status has been largely replaced by other livestock species , especially the pig , chicken , and cow . China , Australia , India , and Iran have the largest modern flocks , and serve both local and exportation needs for wool and mutton . Other countries such as New Zealand have smaller flocks but retain a large international economic impact due to their export of sheep products . Sheep also play a major role in many local economies , which may be niche markets focused on organic or sustainable agriculture and local food customers . Especially in developing countries , such flocks may be a part of subsistence agriculture rather than a system of trade . Sheep themselves may be a medium of trade in barter economies . 
 Domestic sheep provide a wide array of raw materials . Wool was one of the first textiles , although in the late 20th century wool prices began to fall dramatically as the result of the popularity and cheap prices for synthetic fabrics . For many sheep owners , the cost of shearing is greater than the possible profit from the fleece , making subsisting on wool production alone practically impossible without farm subsidies . Fleeces are used as material in making alternative products such as wool insulation . In the 21st century , the sale of meat is the most profitable enterprise in the sheep industry , even though far less sheep meat is consumed than chicken , pork or beef . 
 Sheepskin is likewise used for making clothes , footwear , rugs , and other products . <unk> from the slaughter of sheep are also of value : sheep tallow can be used in candle and soap making , sheep bone and cartilage has been used to furnish carved items such as dice and buttons as well as rendered glue and gelatin . Sheep intestine can be formed into sausage casings , and lamb intestine has been formed into surgical sutures , as well as strings for musical instruments and tennis rackets . Sheep droppings , which are high in cellulose , have even been sterilized and mixed with traditional pulp materials to make paper . Of all sheep byproducts , perhaps the most valuable is lanolin : the waterproof , fatty substance found naturally in sheep 's wool and used as a base for innumerable cosmetics and other products . 
 Some farmers who keep sheep also make a profit from live sheep . Providing lambs for youth programs such as 4 @-@ H and competition at agricultural shows is often a dependable avenue for the sale of sheep . Farmers may also choose to focus on a particular breed of sheep in order to sell registered purebred animals , as well as provide a ram rental service for breeding . The most valuable sheep ever sold to date was a purebred Texel ram that fetched £ 231 @,@ 000 at auction . The previous record holder was a Merino ram sold for £ 205 @,@ 000 in 1989 . A new option for deriving profit from live sheep is the rental of flocks for grazing ; these " mowing services " are hired in order to keep unwanted vegetation down in public spaces and to lessen fire hazard . 
 Despite the falling demand and price for sheep products in many markets , sheep have distinct economic advantages when compared with other livestock . They do not require expensive housing , such as that used in the intensive farming of chickens or pigs . They are an efficient use of land ; roughly six sheep can be kept on the amount that would suffice for a single cow or horse . Sheep can also consume plants , such as noxious weeds , that most other animals will not touch , and produce more young at a faster rate . Also , in contrast to most livestock species , the cost of raising sheep is not necessarily tied to the price of feed crops such as grain , soybeans and corn . Combined with the lower cost of quality sheep , all these factors combine to equal a lower overhead for sheep producers , thus entailing a higher profitability potential for the small farmer . Sheep are especially beneficial for independent producers , including family farms with limited resources , as the sheep industry is one of the few types of animal agriculture that has not been vertically integrated by agribusiness . 
 = = Food = = 
 Sheep meat and milk were one of the earliest staple proteins consumed by human civilization after the transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture . Sheep meat prepared for food is known as either mutton or lamb . " Mutton " is derived from the Old French <unk> , which was the word for sheep used by the Anglo @-@ Norman rulers of much of the British Isles in the Middle Ages . This became the name for sheep meat in English , while the Old English word <unk> was kept for the live animal . Throughout modern history , " mutton " has been limited to the meat of mature sheep usually at least two years of age ; " lamb " is used for that of immature sheep less than a year . 
 In the 21st century , the nations with the highest consumption of sheep meat are the Arab States of the Persian Gulf , New Zealand , Australia , Greece , Uruguay , the United Kingdom and Ireland . These countries eat 14 – 40 lbs ( 3 – 18 kg ) of sheep meat per capita , per annum . Sheep meat is also popular in France , Africa ( especially the Maghreb ) , the Caribbean , the rest of the Middle East , India , and parts of China . This often reflects a history of sheep production . In these countries in particular , dishes comprising alternative cuts and offal may be popular or traditional . Sheep testicles — called <unk> or lamb fries — are considered a delicacy in many parts of the world . Perhaps the most unusual dish of sheep meat is the Scottish haggis , composed of various sheep innards cooked along with oatmeal and chopped onions inside its stomach . In comparison , countries such as the U.S. consume only a pound or less ( under 0 @.@ 5 kg ) , with Americans eating 50 pounds ( 22 kg ) of pork and 65 pounds ( 29 kg ) of beef . In addition , such countries rarely eat mutton , and may favor the more expensive cuts of lamb : mostly lamb chops and leg of lamb . 
 Though sheep 's milk may be drunk rarely in fresh form , today it is used predominantly in cheese and yogurt making . Sheep have only two teats , and produce a far smaller volume of milk than cows . However , as sheep 's milk contains far more fat , solids , and minerals than cow 's milk , it is ideal for the cheese @-@ making process . It also resists contamination during cooling better because of its much higher calcium content . Well @-@ known cheeses made from sheep milk include the Feta of Bulgaria and Greece , Roquefort of France , <unk> from Spain , the Pecorino Romano ( the Italian word for sheep is <unk> ) and Ricotta of Italy . <unk> , especially some forms of strained yogurt , may also be made from sheep milk . Many of these products are now often made with cow 's milk , especially when produced outside their country of origin . Sheep milk contains 4 @.@ 8 % lactose , which may affect those who are intolerant . 
 As with other domestic animals , the meat of <unk> males is inferior in quality , especially as they grow . A " <unk> " lamb is a lamb which was not castrated early enough , or which was castrated improperly ( resulting in one testicle being retained ) . These lambs are worth less at market . 
 = = Science = = 
 Sheep are generally too large and reproduce too slowly to make ideal research subjects , and thus are not a common model organism . They have , however , played an influential role in some fields of science . In particular , the Roslin Institute of Edinburgh , Scotland used sheep for genetics research that produced groundbreaking results . In 1995 , two ewes named Megan and Morag were the first mammals cloned from differentiated cells . A year later , a Finnish Dorset sheep named Dolly , dubbed " the world 's most famous sheep " in Scientific American , was the first mammal to be cloned from an adult somatic cell . Following this , Polly and Molly were the first mammals to be simultaneously cloned and transgenic . 
 As of 2008 , the sheep genome has not been fully sequenced , although a detailed genetic map has been published , and a draft version of the complete genome produced by assembling sheep DNA sequences using information given by the genomes of other mammals . In 2012 , a transgenic sheep named " Peng Peng " was cloned by Chinese scientists , who spliced his genes with that of a roundworm ( C. elegans ) in order to increase production of fats healthier for human consumption . 
 In the study of natural selection , the population of Soay sheep that remain on the island of Hirta have been used to explore the relation of body size and coloration to reproductive success . Soay sheep come in several colors , and researchers investigated why the larger , darker sheep were in decline ; this occurrence contradicted the rule of thumb that larger members of a population tend to be more successful reproductively . The feral Soays on Hirta are especially useful subjects because they are isolated . 
 Sheep are one of the few animals where the molecular basis of the diversity of male sexual preferences has been examined . However , this research has been controversial , and much publicity has been produced by a study at the Oregon Health and Science University that investigated the mechanisms that produce homosexuality in rams . Organizations such as PETA campaigned against the study , accusing scientists of trying to cure homosexuality in the sheep . OHSU and the involved scientists vehemently denied such accusations . 
 Domestic sheep are sometimes used in medical research , particularly for researching cardiovascular physiology , in areas such as hypertension and heart failure . Pregnant sheep are also a useful model for human pregnancy , and have been used to investigate the effects on fetal development of malnutrition and hypoxia . In behavioral sciences , sheep have been used in isolated cases for the study of facial recognition , as their mental process of recognition is qualitatively similar to humans . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 Sheep have had a strong presence in many cultures , especially in areas where they form the most common type of livestock . In the English language , to call someone a sheep or ovine may allude that they are timid and easily led . In contradiction to this image , male sheep are often used as symbols of virility and power ; the logos of the St. Louis Rams and the Dodge Ram allude to males of the bighorn sheep , Ovis canadensis . 
 Counting sheep is popularly said to be an aid to sleep , and some ancient systems of counting sheep persist today . Sheep also enter in colloquial sayings and idiom frequently with such phrases as " black sheep " . To call an individual a black sheep implies that they are an odd or disreputable member of a group . This usage derives from the recessive trait that causes an occasional black lamb to be born into an entirely white flock . These black sheep were considered undesirable by shepherds , as black wool is not as commercially viable as white wool . Citizens who accept overbearing governments have been referred to by the <unk> neologism of sheeple . Somewhat differently , the adjective " sheepish " is also used to describe embarrassment . 
 = = = Religion and folklore = = = 
 In antiquity , symbolism involving sheep cropped up in religions in the ancient Near East , the Mideast , and the Mediterranean area : Çatalhöyük , ancient Egyptian religion , the Cana <unk> and Phoenician tradition , Judaism , Greek religion , and others . Religious symbolism and ritual involving sheep began with some of the first known faiths : Skulls of rams ( along with bulls ) occupied central placement in shrines at the Çatalhöyük settlement in 8 @,@ 000 BCE . In Ancient Egyptian religion , the ram was the symbol of several gods : Khnum , <unk> and Amun ( in his incarnation as a god of fertility ) . Other deities occasionally shown with ram features include the goddess Ishtar , the Phoenician god Baal @-@ Hamon , and the Babylonian god Ea @-@ <unk> . In Madagascar , sheep were not eaten as they were believed to be incarnations of the souls of ancestors . 
 There are many ancient Greek references to sheep : that of <unk> , the golden @-@ fleeced ram , continuing to be told through into the modern era . Astrologically , Aries , the ram , is the first sign of the classical Greek zodiac , and the sheep is the eighth of the twelve animals associated with the 12 @-@ year cycle of in the Chinese zodiac , related to the Chinese calendar . In Mongolia , <unk> are an ancient form of dice made from the cuboid bones of sheep that are often used for <unk> purposes . 
 Sheep play an important role in all the Abrahamic faiths ; Abraham , Isaac , Jacob , Moses , King David and the Islamic prophet Muhammad were all shepherds . According to the Biblical story of the Binding of Isaac , a ram is sacrificed as a substitute for Isaac after an angel stays Abraham 's hand ( in the Islamic tradition , Abraham was about to sacrifice Ishmael ) . Eid al @-@ Adha is a major annual festival in Islam in which sheep ( or other animals ) are sacrificed in remembrance of this act . Sheep are occasionally sacrificed to commemorate important secular events in Islamic cultures . Greeks and Romans sacrificed sheep regularly in religious practice , and Judaism once sacrificed sheep as a <unk> ( sacrifice ) , such as the Passover lamb . Ovine symbols — such as the ceremonial blowing of a shofar — still find a presence in modern Judaic traditions . Followers of Christianity are collectively often referred to as a flock , with Christ as the Good Shepherd , and sheep are an element in the Christian iconography of the birth of Jesus . Some Christian saints are considered patrons of shepherds , and even of sheep themselves . Christ is also portrayed as the Sacrificial lamb of God ( Agnus Dei ) and Easter celebrations in Greece and Romania traditionally feature a meal of Paschal lamb . In many Christian traditions , a church leader is called the pastor , which is derived from the Latin word for shepherd . 
 Sheep are key symbols in fables and nursery rhymes like The Wolf in Sheep 's Clothing , Little Bo Peep , Baa , Baa , Black Sheep , and Mary Had a Little Lamb ; novels such as George Orwell 's Animal Farm and Haruki Murakami 's A Wild Sheep Chase ; songs such as Bach 's Sheep may safely graze ( <unk> können <unk> <unk> ) and Pink Floyd 's Sheep , and poems like William Blake 's " The Lamb " . 
 = Jarrett Brown = 
 Jarrett Brown ( born January 23 , 1987 ) is an American football quarterback who is currently a free agent . He played college football at West Virginia , and was signed by the San Francisco 49ers as an undrafted free agent following the 2010 NFL Draft . He served as the starting quarterback for the West Virginia Mountaineers at West Virginia University during the 2009 season after three seasons as the backup to Pat White . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Brown was born in West Palm Beach , Florida to trucking company owner James and mother Sherry Brown . He attended Palm Beach Lakes High School where he played football and basketball . Brown received a letter in basketball all four years . Over the course of his high school football career , Brown compiled more than 7 @,@ 100 passing yards and 73 touchdowns . As a senior , he recorded 1 @,@ 800 passing yards for 18 touchdowns , and 485 rushing yards . The Sun @-@ Sentinel named him the player of the year and he was also named the all @-@ state quarterback at the 6 @-@ A level . Rivals.com rated him a three @-@ star prospect and the 12th @-@ ranked dual @-@ threat quarterback in the 2005 recruiting class . Brown received scholarship offers from Central Florida , Iowa , Minnesota , NC State , and West Virginia . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = 2005 season = = = 
 In 2005 , Brown enrolled at West Virginia University where he studied athletic coaching education . He sat out his true freshman season on redshirt status after losing the competition for starting quarterback to Pat White . Brown said that he first found out about the decision by reading the team 's website . He discussed transferring to another college with his family once but felt loyal to West Virginia , which was the first school to offer him an athletic scholarship and countenance his playing both football and basketball . Brown spent the offseason working out with the linebackers in the weight room and studying head coach Rich Rodriguez 's playbook . 
 = = = 2006 season = = = 
 In 2006 , Brown played in six games as a backup behind starting quarterback Pat White . Against Marshall , he scored a touchdown on a seven – yard quarterback keeper . Against Eastern Washington , he threw 11 completions on 15 attempts for 129 yards . Brown also saw some action in garbage time against Syracuse , Connecticut , and Cincinnati . Pat White was injured before the regular season finale , so Brown started against Rutgers . Brown completed 14 of 29 passes for 244 yards , one touchdown , and one interception . He also made 17 rushing attempts for 73 yards and one touchdown , and he was sacked twice . Brown threw the game @-@ winning touchdown pass to win the game in triple overtime . 
 = = = 2007 season = = = 
 In 2007 , Brown played in ten games as a reserve . He recorded 31 completions on 48 attempts for 341 yards , two touchdowns , and two interceptions . Brown also rushed 49 times for 327 yards and three touchdowns . Against South Florida , Brown was substituted for an injured White , and passed for 149 yards and a touchdown . After the football season , he played basketball for the Mountaineers and scored 13 points in as many games . 
 = = = 2008 season = = = 
 In 2008 , Brown played in nine games , starting once . He recorded 22 completions on 30 attempts for 114 yards , one touchdown , and one interception . Brown and White alternated as the quarterback during the Rutgers game , with Brown being utilized often in short @-@ yardage situations . He said , " Whatever gets me on the field and whatever helps this team , I enjoy it , I 'm just playing my role . " White was eventually knocked out of that game by injury , and Brown replaced him for the remainder and led West Virginia to win , 24 – 17 . After the season , Brown joined the basketball team , but eventually re @-@ dedicated his focus on football . 
 = = = 2009 season = = = 
 With the graduation of Pat White , Brown was promoted to the starting position for the 2009 season . Against East Carolina , Brown led the Mountaineers to a 35 – 20 victory and completed 24 of 31 pass attempts for 334 yards and four touchdowns . For his performance , the Big East Conference named him the Offensive Player of the Week . The following week , West Virginia lost to Auburn , 41 – 30 . Brown completed 18 of 32 passes for 221 yards and one touchdown , but also threw four interceptions and lost one fumble . After the game , head coach Bill Stewart defended Brown and said , " He 's learning , and we 've got a lot of football to play . And I 'm glad Jarrett Brown is my quarterback . " The Charleston Gazette wrote , " Did he take some chances ? Yes , and a bunch of them paid off , which is why West Virginia led most of the game . " Against Colorado , West Virginia overcame a string of four consecutive fumbles in the first quarter , including one by Brown , to win 35 – 24 . Head coach Stewart credited Brown and running back Noel Devine with keeping the offense 's composure . 
 Brown was injured early in the Marshall game , and replaced by true freshman quarterback Eugene " Geno " Smith . Brown suffered a mild concussion from a helmet @-@ to @-@ helmet hit from two defensive backs , but returned for the next game against Connecticut . Brown completed 19 of 32 passes for 205 yards and one interception in the loss to South Florida , which snapped West Virginia 's four @-@ game winning streak . He threw one touchdown pass against Louisville , but the Mountaineers offense struggled to a 17 – 9 win . Offensive coordinator Jeff Mullen attributed a drop @-@ off in Brown 's performance from earlier in the season to a string of minor injuries . Brown scored touchdowns on a three @-@ yard pass and an eight @-@ yard run in a losing 24 – 21 effort against fifth @-@ ranked Cincinnati . Late in the game against ninth @-@ ranked Pittsburgh , Brown led a 42 @-@ yard drive to set up the game @-@ winning field goal . In the regular season finale , Brown ran for a first down on a naked bootleg to clinch a 24 – 21 victory over Rutgers . West Virginia earned an invitation to the 2010 Gator Bowl , where it faced Florida State , but Brown was replaced by Smith after suffering an ankle injury in the first half . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ draft = = = 
 Brown played in the 2010 Senior Bowl , in which he was a reserve behind Florida quarterback Tim Tebow ; the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch considered him the most impressive quarterback of the game . As an NFL Draft prospect , The Sporting News praised his " strong arm and quick release " . At the NFL Scouting Combine , he ran the 40 @-@ yard dash in 4 @.@ 54 seconds and recorded a 34 @.@ 5 @-@ inch vertical jump and nine @-@ foot , six @-@ inch broad jump . NBC Sports considered him a viable scrambling quarterback in the league . He scored a 15 on the <unk> intelligence test . ESPN considered Brown as the best performing in a mediocre crop of quarterbacks during the combine . 
 = = = San Francisco 49ers = = = 
 After going undrafted in the 2010 NFL Draft , the San Francisco 49ers signed Brown to a free agent contract . He was re @-@ signed to the practice squad , but the franchise released him on September 8 when it signed quarterback Troy Smith and moved Nate Davis to the practice squad . Later in September , Brown tried out with the Pittsburgh Steelers alongside quarterbacks Levi Brown and John David Booty in search of a replacement for the injured Dennis Dixon . 
 = = = BC Lions = = = 
 Brown was a backup quarterback for the BC Lions of the Canadian Football League ( CFL ) during the 2013 season . Brown re @-@ signed with the Lions in 2013 . 
 = = = Spokane Shock = = = 
 On December 16 , 2013 , Brown was assigned to the Spokane Shock of the Arena Football League . On May 20 , 2014 , Brown was placed on reassignment by the Shock . On May 28 , 2014 , Brown was once again assigned to the Shock . He was placed on <unk> reassignment on March 14 , 2015 . Brown was once again assigned the Shock on March 26 , 2015 . Brown made his first career start for the Shock during their Week 2 game against the Philadelphia Soul . Brown was able to lead the Shock to a few scoring plays , but his ineffective play ultimately led to his benching in favor of Matt <unk> . On April 14 , 2015 , he was placed on reassignment by the Shock . 
 = Turok : Dinosaur Hunter = 
 Turok : Dinosaur Hunter is a first @-@ person shooter video game developed by Iguana Entertainment and published by Acclaim for the Nintendo 64 console and Microsoft Windows . It was released in 1997 in North America and Europe . Turok is an adaptation of the Acclaim Comics comic book series of the same name . The player controls a Native American warrior , Turok , who must stop the evil Campaigner from conquering the universe with an ancient and powerful weapon . 
 As Acclaim 's first exclusive title for the Nintendo 64 , Turok was part of a strategy to develop games internally and license merchandise ; Acclaim acquired the rights to Turok when it purchased Acclaim Comics ( né Valiant ) in 1994 . Suffering from cash flow problems and falling sales , Acclaim came to rely on Turok as its best hope for a financial turnaround . Iguana pushed the Nintendo 64 's graphics capabilities to its limits , and were forced to compress or cut elements to fit the game on its 8 megabyte cartridge . Bugs delayed the game 's release from September 1996 to January 1997 . 
 Critical reception of Turok was highly positive . Becoming one of the most popular games for the console on release , Turok won praise for its graphics and evolution of the genre . Complaints centered on graphical slowdowns caused by multiple enemies appearing onscreen and occasionally awkward controls . The game sold 1 @.@ 5 million copies and boosted sales of the Nintendo 64 . Turok spawned a video game franchise that includes six sequels . A remastered version was announced on August 26 , 2015 , and was released in digital stores on December 17 , 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Turok : Dinosaur Hunter is a shooter game in which gameplay takes place from a first @-@ person perspective . The three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) computer graphics and style of play combine elements of the run @-@ and @-@ gun computer game Doom with exploration mechanics of Tomb Raider . Players begin the game in a central hub level , which contains portals to seven other stages . The player must find keys scattered across the stages . When enough keys have been inserted into the lock mechanisms of a hub portal , that level is unlocked . Players explore the large , typically jungle @-@ based levels by jumping , swimming , climbing , crawling , and running . 
 One of the player 's main objectives is to find pieces of a relic known as the Chronoscepter ; there is one piece on each level . In exploring the levels the player fights various enemies such as poachers , gunmen , indigenous warriors , dinosaurs , demons , and insects . Turok features 13 weapons plus the Chronoscepter , ranging from a knife and bow to high tech weaponry . All weapons except the knife require ammunition , which is dropped by dead enemies or picked up in the levels . Enemies and boss characters have multiple death animations depending on what body region the player shot . Because items dropped by fallen enemies rapidly disappear , players must engage foes from close range . 
 The player character 's health is shown as a number at the bottom of the screen . When the player is at full health , the meter reads 100 , while dropping to 0 subtracts one life . Gathering " life force " points scattered across the levels increases the player 's life count by one for every 100 points accumulated . Players restore their health by picking up powerups , which can increase their health above full . Players may also gain health points by shooting deer or non @-@ threatening wildlife . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The player assumes control of Tal <unk> ( Turok ) , a Native American time @-@ traveling warrior . The mantle of Turok is passed down every generation to the eldest male . Each Turok is charged with protecting the barrier between Earth and the Lost Land , a primitive world where time has no meaning . The Lost Land is inhabited by a variety of creatures , from dinosaurs to aliens . An evil overlord known as the Campaigner seeks an ancient artifact known as the Chronoscepter , a weapon so powerful that it was broken into pieces to prevent it from falling into the wrong hands . The Campaigner plans on using a focusing array to magnify the Chronoscepter 's power , destroying the barriers that separate the ages of time and rule the universe . Turok vows to find the Chronoscepter 's eight pieces and prevent the Campaigner 's schemes . 
 = = Development = = 
 Turok originally appeared in comics from Western Publishing and Dell Comics in December 1954 . Valiant Comics revived the series and published the first issue of their Turok series in 1993 . Video game publisher Acclaim Entertainment bought Valiant for $ 65 million in 1994 and acquired developer Iguana Entertainment for $ 5 million plus stock a year later , part of a strategy to develop games in @-@ house and make money licensing characters in different entertainment media . Turok was announced in August 1994 as an exclusive title for Nintendo 's planned " Ultra 64 " console , eventually called the Nintendo 64 . 
 Development of Turok commenced in 1996 . While loosely based on the comic book , Iguana made the game more action @-@ oriented . In early discussions about the project the developers decided that the typical side @-@ scrolling game presentation had become tired . Iguana considered a third @-@ person perspective similar to Super Mario 64 and Tomb Raider , but decided to make the game a first @-@ person shooter instead . According to project manager David Dienstbier , the first @-@ person perspective was a natural way to showcase the 3D power of the Nintendo 64 . While the development team benefited from Acclaim 's clout as a longtime Nintendo supporter , getting earlier feedback from the publisher and more face @-@ to @-@ face time during production , most of the developers at Iguana were new and inexperienced ; Turok was Dienstbier 's first title . Due to the game 's action and violent content , Dienstbier believed they were pushing the limits of what Nintendo would allow on their console , but Nintendo never asked to see or approve anything in the game . 
 The Nintendo 64 platform had superior processing capabilities compared to most personal computers available at the time , but also came with challenges . " The [ Nintendo 64 ] is capable of doing a lot of stuff , " Dienstbier said . " If you want to handle fancy particle lighting , and transparency effects , and you want to throw around huge amounts of math ... or geometry onscreen , it 's got the processing power to do that , and yes it 's a fantastic machine . However , calling it a developer 's dream kinda gives you the impression that it 's easy to crank out a game like Turok , and it 's definitely not . " While Nintendo was supportive , Iguana had to produce all its game development tools internally . Fitting the game on its 8 MB cartridge was difficult ; ultimately , Iguana had to compress everything and reduce the quality of the music to meet size requirements . Despite system constraints the developers were interested in producing the best @-@ looking video game for the system : the game used real @-@ time lighting effects and particle systems for added realism . Iguana was able to use Acclaim 's state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art motion capture studio , allowing humanoid characters to move smoothly and in a convincing manner ; motion capture helped alleviate the problems of Iguana 's limited resources and tight schedule . A stuntman recorded movements for the human characters ; while the developers tried to use emus and ostriches for the dinosaurs , the results were only used as reference material . 
 At the time , Acclaim Entertainment was in financial jeopardy . The company was a major publisher in the 16 bit era of games , but the company 's sales suffered as it was slow to migrate from older game systems like the Sega Genesis and Super Nintendo Entertainment System to next @-@ generation platforms . The company lost $ 222 million in the 1996 fiscal year due to sales falling to $ 162 million compared to $ 567 million the previous year ; in the first quarter of fiscal 1997 , the company lost a further $ 19 million . The company laid off 100 of its 950 workers since March 1996 and its stock had dropped from a high of $ 13 @.@ 875 a share to as low as $ 3 . Turok , Acclaim 's first Nintendo 64 title , became the company 's best hope of a turnaround , as there were only ten Nintendo 64 games on the market , and Turok was the only shooter . Alex . Brown Inc analysts figured that selling one million copies of Turok could bring Acclaim as much as $ 45 million . Due to cash flow issues , much of the money planned for marketing Turok was contingent on strong sales of Magic : The Gathering : <unk> . <unk> Turok 's sales was its high price — $ 79 @.@ 99 in the US , £ 70 in the UK , and $ 129 @.@ 95 in Australia — and Entertainment Software Rating Board 's " mature " rating , which suggested lower sales as parents would not buy the game for their children . 
 Originally slated for a September 30 , 1996 release in North America , the game was initially delayed to January 1997 . Acclaim explained that the game had not reached the desired quality level ; Nintendo maintained that the delay was to " add more depth to the gameplay " . According to The New York Times , the delay stemmed from computer bugs in the program . Acclaim heavily marketed Turok on the covers of video @-@ gaming magazines and in television commercials for the Nintendo 64 . Acclaim gave media outlets such as The Mirror customized Turok @-@ branded game consoles to give away in sweepstakes . Responding to positive pre @-@ orders and advance sales of Turok , Acclaim announced on January 2 , 1997 that a sequel , tentatively titled Turok : Dinosaur Hunter 2 , would be released in late 1997 . Acclaim dubbed the March 4 release date of the game " Turok Tuesday " , reporting that pre @-@ sales at Toys " R " Us had exceeded expectations . Acclaim stock increased in anticipation before the game 's release , up $ 0 @.@ 62 to $ 5 @.@ 94 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Turok was a critical and commercial success , earning rave reviews from video game magazines and becoming the most popular title for the Nintendo 64 in the months following its release . It was judged one of the best console shooters on the platform . On the aggregate review web sites Metacritic and GameRankings , the console version of Turok has an 85 % and 86 @.@ 6 % rating , respectively , each figure based on scores from thirteen contemporary and recent reviews . The PC port was less positively received . 
 Turok was often called a " Doom clone " for its similarity to the id Software title . Douglass Perry of the multimedia website IGN compared Turok favorably to Doom , saying that the title distinguished itself from other clones by allowing a level of 3D movement not possible in its predecessor . The Australian 's Steve Polak wrote that while Turok was highly derivative , the game was evidence of the evolution of the genre , offering more graphics and gameplay options . Video game magazine Edge said that Turok contradicted the prevailing notion at the time that only Nintendo could create superior games for the console . In contrast , William Burrill of The Toronto Star wrote that Turok offered nothing new if players had tried a " first @-@ person action blaster " before , and Next Generation Magazine said that the game its similar gameplay essentially made the game " a very pretty Duke Nukem " . Steve Bauman of Computer Games Magazine reviewed the PC version and said that while it was an excellent port , the game itself was inferior to other shooters such as Quake . Speaking to Shacknews in 2007 , Propaganda Games 's Josh Holmes said that while GoldenEye 007 is commonly considered the standard @-@ setting console shooter , Turok pioneered the console shooter first by offering open environments and deviating from the " corridor crawler Doom [ clones ] " that were the standard until then . 
 Reviewers found that Turok 's controls generally worked well . Perry noted that while many players would not initially like using the Nintendo 64 's analog stick for weapon movement , they would become adept at the control scheme . Polak wrote that the joystick let players aim with a remarkable amount of precision . George <unk> of The Daily News found the controls to be easy to learn and simple to keep track of in comparison to PC shooters , but said the joystick control could be disorienting : " the only problem is when you look up in the air and make the slightest twitch to the left or the right , you can end up like a tourist staring up at the Empire State Building and whirling like a dervish , " he wrote . Reviewers found that the game 's included tutorial helped players adapt to the controls . 
 Critics lauded Turok 's graphics ; while giving the rest of the game a tepid review , Burrill rated the visuals highly . Polak said that the game proved the supremacy of the Nintendo 64 's graphics in the console market . Translucent water , destructible trees and lens flares were among the graphical details praised by reviewers . The Washington Post 's Tom Ham said that " equally impressive " as the environmental detail were the " true @-@ to @-@ life " animations : " Blow away a baddie and he 'll grab his throat , blood <unk> , and then fall to the ground , still convulsing , " Ham wrote . " How can you put a price on that ? " The level of gore and blood in the game lead reviewers such as The Times 's Tim <unk> and The Washington Times 's Joseph Szadkowski to caution against letting children play the game . GameSpot 's Jeff Gerstmann noted that the graphics came at a price ; if more than a few enemies appeared on screen at the same time , the game 's frame rate would slow down . Gerstmann wrote that the distance fog used to reduce the slowdown was a " neat effect " as enemies would appear out of the mist " fangs first " , although it masked the console 's limitations . Perry commented that the inability to look into the distance forced players to rely on the game map . 
 Worldwide sales of Dinosaur Hunter surpassed $ 60 million in late June 1997 . The game also held the top spot for video game rentals for seven weeks consecutively . Acclaim re @-@ issued the game for the 1997 holiday season due to its sales potential for the increased console player base . Turok was later named a Nintendo " Player 's Choice " title in 1998 — the only third @-@ party Nintendo 64 game to be featured at the time — and ultimately sold about 1 @.@ 5 million units . 
 NGC Magazine wrote that Turok changed perceptions of a Nintendo console : " On a machine from a company that had long specialised in primary colours and family fun , the last thing anyone anticipated was the kind of cutting @-@ edge first @-@ person shooter that was previously the sole preserve of expensive gaming PCs . " Not only did Turok change this , but it established a " system @-@ selling franchise " that persisted even after the N64 was replaced . In addition to Turok , the Turok franchise includes five other games : Turok 2 : Seeds of Evil ( 1998 ) , Turok : Rage Wars ( 1999 ) , Turok 3 : Shadow of Oblivion ( 2000 ) , Turok : Evolution ( 2002 ) , and Turok ( 2008 ) . 
 It was announced in August 2015 that Night Dive Studios was producing a remastered version of the game , along with Turok 2 , for the PC . The game will include improved graphics as well as " other improvements " . The remaster was released in digital stores on December 17 , 2015 . In March 2016 , Night Dive Studios confirmed that the game would be released for the Xbox One video game console . 
 = Staurakios ( eunuch ) = 
 Staurakios ( or <unk> ) ( Greek : <unk> ; died on 3 June 800 ) was a Byzantine eunuch official , who rose to be one of the most important and influential associates of Byzantine empress Irene of Athens ( r . 797 – 802 ) . He effectively acted as chief minister during her regency for her young son , Emperor Constantine VI ( r . 780 – 797 ) in 780 – 790 , until overthrown and exiled by a military revolt in favour of the young emperor in 790 . Restored to power by Constantine along with Irene in 792 , Staurakios aided her in the eventual removal , blinding , and possible murder of her son in 797 . His own position thereafter was threatened by the rise of another powerful eunuch , Aetios . Their increasing rivalry , and Staurakios 's own imperial ambitions , were only resolved by Staurakios 's death . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = First minister under Irene 's regency = = = 
 Staurakios emerged into prominence in 781 , when Irene , as regent for her infant son Constantine VI , appointed him to the post of logothetes tou dromou , the Byzantine Empire 's foreign minister . Already holding the high court rank of patrikios , through this appointment Staurakios became , in the words of the chronicler Theophanes the Confessor , " the foremost man of his day and in charge of everything " for most of Irene 's subsequent reign . This appointment was part of Irene 's consistent policy to rely on eunuch officials as ministers and generals , in large part the result of her distrust towards the established generals of her late husband , Leo IV ( r . 775 – 780 ) and his father Constantine V ( r . 741 – 775 ) . The generals , intensely loyal to the Isaurian dynasty and its vehemently iconoclastic policies , could threaten her own position : already a few weeks after Leo IV 's death , Irene had foiled a palace plot to put his surviving brother , the Caesar Nikephoros , on the throne . 
 This reliance on eunuchs caused some hostility in the military ; resentment at Staurakios 's appointment to this powerful post is given by the Byzantine chroniclers as the reason for the ( initially secret ) defection of the prominent Armenian strategos of the Bucellarian Theme , Tatzates , to the Arabs in 782 . This was a critical blow to the Byzantines , who at that time had almost succeeded in encircling the invading army of the future Caliph Harun al @-@ Rashid ( r . 786 – 809 ) . On Tatzates 's suggestion , Harun asked for negotiations , but when the imperial envoys , including Staurakios , arrived , they were seized and held as hostages . At this point , Tatzates and his men publicly went over to the Caliph . Staurakios and the other envoys were released only when Empress Irene accepted the Caliph 's harsh terms for a three @-@ year truce , including the annual payment of an enormous tribute of 70 @,@ 000 or 90 @,@ 000 gold dinars and the handing over of 10 @,@ 000 silk garments . 
 In the next year , Staurakios led an imperial expedition against the Slavic communities ( <unk> ) of Greece . Setting out from Constantinople , the imperial army followed the Thracian coast into Macedonia , and then south into Thessaly , Central Greece and the Peloponnese . This expedition restored a measure of Byzantine imperial authority over these areas , and collected booty and tribute from the locals . Empress Irene rewarded her loyal minister by allowing him to celebrate a triumph in the Hippodrome of Constantinople in January 784 . 
 Buoyed by this success , which was followed by a restoration of imperial control in much of Thrace as far as Philippopolis , Irene moved towards the restoration of the veneration of icons , which had been prohibited by Emperor Constantine V. A new ecumenical council was convened . Initially , in 786 , it was held in the Church of the Holy Apostles in Constantinople , but the soldiers of the tagmata , founded by Constantine V and loyal to his iconoclastic policies , gathered outside in protest and forced the assembly to be broken up . In order to neutralize their reaction , Irene sent the tagmata to the army base of Malagina in Bithynia , allegedly in preparation for a campaign against the Arabs . There , some 1 @,@ 500 of the soldiers were dismissed while Staurakios brought loyal thematic troops from Thrace to guard the capital . Irene then reconvened the council at Nicaea , after dismissing the most recalcitrant iconoclast bishops . Predictably , iconoclasm was overturned as a heresy , and the veneration of images was restored . 
 = = = Clash with Constantine VI = = = 
 In 788 , Staurakios is recorded as attending as a judge in the bride show for the 17 @-@ year @-@ old Constantine VI , along with Irene and the young Byzantine emperor himself . Maria of <unk> was chosen , although Constantine was unhappy about the breaking up of his earlier betrothal with <unk> , Charlemagne 's daughter . From this point on , he began to resent his mother 's control over state affairs and the power of her eunuch officials . Along with a few trusted conspirators , Constantine planned to arrest Staurakios and exile him to Sicily , while he would assume his position as effective co @-@ ruler of the Byzantine Empire . Their plans were preempted by Staurakios , however : he persuaded Irene to arrest , torture , exile or imprison Constantine 's associates , while Constantine himself was placed under house arrest . Next , Irene demanded of the army an oath of loyalty , whose wording placed her before her son in precedence . This demand provoked a mutiny by the soldiers of the Armeniac Theme , which then spread throughout the Anatolian armies , which assembled in Bithynia and demanded Emperor Constantine 's release . Bowing to their pressure , Irene capitulated and Constantine was installed as sole ruler in December 790 . Among Constantine 's first acts was to have Staurakios flogged , tonsured , and exiled to the Armeniac Theme , while all other eunuch officials were likewise exiled . 
 Irene remained confined in a palace at the Harbour of <unk> in the capital and retained her formal title as empress . Then , on 15 January 792 , for reasons not clear , she was recalled to the imperial palace with her title as empress and co @-@ ruler confirmed and her name restored in the imperial acclamations . Staurakios too seems to have been recalled and , along with Irene , again took an active role in the governance of the state . This turn of events drove the Armeniacs once again to mutiny , but their commander , Alexios Mosele , was in Constantinople . Despite guarantees of safety , Mosele was imprisoned and later blinded at the instigation of Irene and Staurakios , both eager to take revenge for his role in their overthrow in 790 . 
 This alienated the army , especially the Armeniacs , who had provided a firm support base for Constantine VI against his mother . In 795 , Constantine also strained relations with the Church in the so @-@ called " <unk> Controversy " , when he divorced Maria and married his mistress <unk> . As a result , Empress Irene 's own position with the capital 's bureaucracy became stronger and she began plotting against her son . While Irene bribed the tagmata , Staurakios and other agents of Irene foiled an expedition headed by Constantine against the Arabs , afraid that a victory would boost the emperor 's standing with the people and the army . As he returned to the capital , Constantine was seized and blinded . Although it was officially stated that he survived and remained imprisoned , he likely died of his wounds sometime after . 
 = = = Irene 's sole rule and Staurakios 's rivalry with Aetios = = = 
 With the removal of Constantine VI , Irene henceforth reigned alone , the first Byzantine empress to do so . Staurakios , however , found his own position increasingly challenged by another powerful eunuch and trusted servant of the empress , Aetios . Both were engaged in an intense rivalry to place their relatives in positions of power so as to secure control of the Empire after Irene 's death . 
 This rivalry intensified when Irene fell seriously ill in May 799 . With the backing of the Domestic of the Schools , Niketas Triphyllios , Aetios accused Staurakios to Irene of planning to usurp the throne . Irene held a council at the Palace of <unk> , where her powerful minister was rebuked but got off with an apology . Staurakios now began preparing his own counter stroke , bribing members of the tagmata , although he seems to have lacked supporters among the higher command echelons . Although a eunuch was legally barred from the imperial throne , Staurakios nevertheless seems to have aspired to seize it for himself . Warned by Aetios , Empress Irene issued orders in February 800 that no one from the military should have any contact with Staurakios . This measure curbed the latter 's designs , and introduced a precarious balance between Staurakios and Aetios , the latter still supported by Niketas Triphyllios . Soon after , Staurakios fell fatally ill , reportedly coughing up blood . Nevertheless , persuaded by doctors , monks and soothsayers that he would live and become Byzantine emperor , he instigated a revolt in Cappadocia against his adversary Aetios , who had by then secured the post of strategos of the Anatolic Theme ( the highest @-@ ranked military position in the Byzantine Empire ) . However , even before news of the revolt , which was swiftly suppressed , reached the capital , Staurakios died on 3 June 800 . 
 = Boeing E @-@ 3 Sentry = 
 The Boeing E @-@ 3 Sentry , commonly known as AWACS , is an airborne early warning and control ( AEW & C ) aircraft developed by Boeing as the prime contractor . Derived from the Boeing 707 , it provides all @-@ weather surveillance , command , control , and communications , and is used by the United States Air Force , NATO , Royal Air Force , French Air Force , and Royal Saudi Air Force . The E @-@ 3 is distinguished by the distinctive rotating radar dome above the fuselage . Production ended in 1992 after 68 aircraft had been built . 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , the US Air Force ( USAF ) was seeking an aircraft to replace its piston @-@ engined Lockheed EC @-@ 121 Warning Star , which had seen service for over a decade . After issuing preliminary development contracts to three companies , the USAF picked Boeing to construct two airframes to test Westinghouse Electric and Hughes 's competing radars . Both radars used pulse @-@ Doppler technology , with Westinghouse 's design emerging as the contract winner . Testing on the first production E @-@ 3 began in October 1975 . 
 The first USAF E @-@ 3 was delivered in March 1977 , and during the next seven years , a total of 34 aircraft were manufactured . NATO , as a single identity , also had 18 aircraft manufactured , basing them in Germany . The E @-@ 3 was also sold to the United Kingdom ( seven ) and France ( four ) and Saudi Arabia ( five , plus eight E @-@ 3 @-@ derived tanker aircraft ) . In 1991 , when the last aircraft had been delivered , E @-@ 3s participated in Operation Desert Storm , playing a crucial role of directing coalition aircraft against the enemy . Throughout the aircraft 's service life , numerous upgrades were performed to enhance its capabilities . In 1996 , Westinghouse Electric was acquired by Northrop before being renamed Northrop Grumman Electronic Systems , which currently supports the E @-@ 3 's radar . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In 1963 , the USAF asked for proposals for an Airborne Warning and Control System ( AWACS ) to replace its EC @-@ 121 Warning Stars , which had served in the airborne early warning role for over a decade . The new aircraft would take advantage of improvements in radar technology which allowed airborne radars to " look down " and detect low @-@ flying aircraft ( see Look @-@ down / shoot @-@ down ) , even over land , which was previously impractical due to ground clutter Contracts were issued to Boeing , Douglas , and Lockheed , the latter being eliminated in July 1966 . In 1967 , a parallel program was put into place to develop the radar , with Westinghouse Electric and the Hughes Aircraft being asked to compete in producing the radar system . In 1968 , it was referred to as Overland Radar Technology ( ORT ) during development tests on the modified EC @-@ <unk> . The Westinghouse radar antenna was going to be used by whichever company won the radar competition , since Westinghouse had pioneered in the design of high @-@ power RF phase @-@ shifters . 
 Boeing initially proposed a purpose @-@ built aircraft , but tests indicated it would not outperform the already @-@ operational 707 , so the latter was chosen , instead . To increase endurance , this design was to be powered by eight General Electric <unk> , or carrying its radar in a rotating dome mounted at the top of a forward @-@ swept tail , above the fuselage . Boeing was selected ahead of McDonnell Douglas 's DC @-@ 8 @-@ based proposal in July 1970 . Initial orders were placed for two aircraft , designated EC @-@ <unk> as test beds to evaluate the two competing radars . As the test @-@ beds did not need the same 14 @-@ hour endurance demanded of the production aircraft , the EC @-@ <unk> retained the Pratt & Whitney JT3D commercial engines , and a later reduction in endurance requirement led to retaining the normal engines in production . 
 The first EC @-@ 137 made its maiden flight on 9 February 1972 , with the fly @-@ off between the two radars taking place during March – July that year . Favorable test results led to the selection of Westinghouse 's radar for the production aircraft . Hughes 's radar was initially thought to be a certain winner , simply because much of its design was also going into the new F @-@ 15 Eagle 's radar program . The Westinghouse radar used a <unk> fast <unk> transform ( <unk> ) to digitally resolve 128 Doppler frequencies , while Hughes 's radars used analog filters based on the design for the F @-@ 15 fighter . Westinghouse 's engineering team won this competition by using a programmable 18 @-@ bit computer whose software could be modified before each mission . This computer was the AN / <unk> @-@ 8 design from the B @-@ 57G program , and designated <unk> @-@ 8 @-@ EP1 for its much expanded memory . This radar also multiplexed a beyond @-@ the @-@ horizon ( BTH ) pulse mode that could complement the pulse @-@ Doppler radar mode . This proved to be beneficial especially when the BTH mode is used to detect ships at sea when the radar beam is directed below the horizon . 
 = = = Full @-@ scale development = = = 
 Approval was given on 26 January 1973 for full @-@ scale development of the AWACS system . To allow further development of the aircraft 's systems , orders were placed for three preproduction aircraft , the first of which performed its maiden flight in February 1975 . To save costs , the endurance requirements were relaxed , allowing the new aircraft to retain the four JT3D ( US Military designation TF33 ) engines . IBM and <unk> were selected to develop the mission computer and display system . The IBM computer receiving the designation <unk> , and the software is written in <unk> . A Semi @-@ Automatic Ground Environment ( SAGE ) or back @-@ up interceptor control ( <unk> ) operator would immediately be at home with the track displays and tabular displays , but differences in symbology would create compatibility problems in tactical ground radar systems in Iceland , Europe , and Korea over Link @-@ 11 ( <unk> @-@ A ) . 
 Modifications to the Boeing 707 for the E @-@ 3 Sentry included a rotating radar dome , single @-@ point ground refueling , air refueling , and a bail @-@ out tunnel or chute . The original design had two ( one forward , and one aft ) , but the aft bail @-@ out chute was deleted to cut mounting costs . Engineering , test and evaluation began on the first E @-@ 3 Sentry in October 1975 . Between 1977 and 1992 , a total of 68 E @-@ 3s were built . 
 = = = Future status = = = 
 Because the Boeing 707 is no longer in production , the E @-@ 3 mission package has been fitted into the Boeing E @-@ 767 for the Japan Air Self Defense Forces . The E @-@ 10 MC2A was intended to replace USAF E @-@ 3s — along with the RC @-@ 135 and the E @-@ 8 , but the E @-@ 10 program was canceled by the Department of Defense . The USAF is now performing a series of incremental improvements , mainly to avionics , to bring the E @-@ 3 up to current standards of performance . Boeing is flight @-@ testing its Block 40 / 45 E @-@ 3s . This modified E @-@ 3 contains upgrades of the mission crew and air battle management sections , as well as significantly upgraded electronic equipment . 
 Another program that the Air Force is considering is the " Avionics Modernization Program " ( AMP ) . AMP would equip the E @-@ 3s with glass cockpits . The Air Force also wants modified E @-@ 3s with jet engines that are more reliable than the original ones , and also with at least 19 % higher fuel efficiencies . New turbofan engines would give these E @-@ 3s longer ranges , longer time @-@ on @-@ station , and a shorter critical runway length . If the modification is carried out , the E @-@ 3s could take off with full fuel loads using runways only 10 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) long , and also at higher ambient temperatures and lower barometric pressures , such as from bases in mountainous areas . Now that the E @-@ 8 Joint STARS are being fitted with the new Pratt & Whitney JT8D @-@ 219 turbofans , which are stated as having one @-@ half the cost of the competing engine , the CFM56 , the Air Force is again studying the possibility of replacing the E @-@ 3 's original turbofan engines with more @-@ efficient ones . 
 Upgrading NATO 's E @-@ 3 fleet is complicated by the heterogeneity of the fleet 's equipment . Each NATO member 's E @-@ 3 aircraft are configured differently , and NATO has not finalized upgrade or replacement plans . The airplanes themselves can be flown to 2050 with appropriate maintenance , but as the world @-@ wide fleet of 707 aircraft dwindles , supporting the E @-@ 3 becomes more difficult . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 The E @-@ 3 Sentry 's airframe is a modified Boeing 707 @-@ 320B Advanced model . USAF and NATO E @-@ 3s have an unrefueled range of some 4 @,@ 000 mi ( 6 @,@ 400 km ) or eight hours of flying . The newer E @-@ 3 versions bought by France , Saudi Arabia , and the UK are equipped with newer CFM56 @-@ 2 turbofan engines , and these can fly for about 11 hours or about 5 @,@ 000 mi ( 8 @,@ 000 km ) . The Sentry 's range and on @-@ station time can be increased through air @-@ to @-@ air refueling and the crews can work in shifts by the use of an on @-@ board crew rest and meals area . 
 When deployed , the E @-@ 3 monitors an assigned area of the battlefield and provides information for commanders of air operations to gain and maintain control of the battle ; while as an air defense asset , E @-@ 3s can detect , identify , and track airborne enemy forces far from the boundaries of the U.S. or NATO countries and can direct fighter @-@ interceptor aircraft to these targets . In support of air @-@ to @-@ ground operations , the E @-@ 3 can provide direct information needed for interdiction , reconnaissance , airlift , and close @-@ air support for friendly ground forces . 
 = = = Avionics = = = 
 The unpressurized <unk> is 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) in diameter , six feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) thick at the center , and is held 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) above the fuselage by two struts . It is tilted down at the front to reduce its aerodynamic drag , which lessens its detrimental effect on take @-@ offs and endurance ( which is corrected electronically by both the radar and secondary surveillance radar antenna phase shifters ) . The dome uses both bleed air and cooling doors to remove the heat generated by electronic and mechanical equipment . The hydraulically rotated antenna system permits the Westinghouse Corporation 's AN / APY @-@ 1 and AN / APY @-@ 2 passive electronically scanned array radar system to provide surveillance from the Earth 's surface up into the stratosphere , over land or water . 
 Other major subsystems in the E @-@ 3 Sentry are navigation , communications , and computers . Consoles display computer @-@ processed data in graphic and tabular format on video screens . Console operators perform surveillance , identification , weapons control , battle management and communications functions . The radar and computer subsystems on the E @-@ 3 can gather and present broad and detailed battlefield information . This includes position and tracking information on enemy aircraft and ships , and location and status of friendly aircraft and naval vessels . The information can be sent to major command and control centers in rear areas or aboard ships . In times of crisis , data can be forwarded to the National Command Authority in the U.S. via RC @-@ 135 or naval aircraft carrier task forces . 
 Electrical generators mounted on each of the E @-@ 3 's four engines provide the one megawatt of electrical power that is required by the E @-@ 3 's radars and other electronics . Its pulse @-@ Doppler radar ( PD ) has a range of more than 250 mi ( 400 km ) for low @-@ flying targets at its operating altitude , and the pulse ( BTH ) radar has a range of approximately 400 mi ( 650 km ) for aircraft flying at medium to high altitudes . The radar , combined with an SSR , provides a look down capability , to detect , identify , and track low @-@ flying aircraft , while eliminating ground clutter ( radar ) returns . 
 = = = Upgrades = = = 
 Starting in 1987 , USAF E @-@ 3s were upgraded under the " Block 30 / 35 Modification Program " to enhance the E @-@ 3 's capabilities . On 30 October 2001 , final airframe to be upgraded under this program was rolled out . Several major enhancements were made , firstly the installation of electronic support measures ( ESM ) and an electronic surveillance capability , for both active and passive means of detection . Also , Joint Tactical Information Distribution System ( JTIDS ) was installed , which provides rapid and secure communication for transmitting information , including target positions and identification data , to other friendly platforms . Global Positioning System ( GPS ) capability was also added . Onboard computers were also overhauled to accommodate JTIDS , Link @-@ 16 , the new ESM systems and to provide for future enhancements . 
 The Radar System Improvement Program ( RSIP ) was a joint US / NATO development program . RSIP enhances the operational capability of the E @-@ 3 radars ' electronic countermeasures , and dramatically improve the system 's reliability , maintainability , and availability . Essentially , this program replaced the older transistor @-@ transistor logic ( TTL ) and emitter @-@ coupled logic ( <unk> ) electronic components , long @-@ since out of production , with off @-@ the @-@ shelf digital computers that utilised a High @-@ level programming language instead of assembly language . Significant improvement came from replacing the old 8 @-@ bit <unk> with 24 @-@ bit <unk> , and the 12 @-@ bit A / D ( Sign + 12 @-@ bits ) with a 15 @-@ bit A / D ( Sign + 15 @-@ bits ) . These hardware and software modifications improve the E @-@ 3 radars ' performance , providing enhanced detection with an emphasis towards low radar cross @-@ section ( RCS ) targets . 
 The RAF had also joined the USAF in adding RSIP to upgrade the E @-@ 3 's radars . The retrofitting of the E @-@ 3 squadrons were completed in December 2000 . Along with the RSIP upgrade was installation of the Global Positioning System / Inertial Navigation Systems which dramatically improve positioning accuracy . In 2002 , Boeing was awarded a contract to add RSIP to the small French AWACS squadron . Installation was completed in 2006 . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 In March 1977 , the 552nd Airborne Warning and Control Wing ( now the <unk> Air Control Wing ) at Tinker AFB , Oklahoma received the first E @-@ 3 aircraft , commanded by Major James R. <unk> . The 34th and last USAF Sentry was delivered in June 1984 . In March 1996 , the USAF activated the 513th Air Control Group ( 513 ACG ) , an ACC @-@ gained Air Force Reserve Command ( AFRC ) AWACS unit under the Reserve Associate Program . <unk> with the 552 ACW at Tinker AFB , the 513 ACG which performs similar duties on active duty E @-@ 3 aircraft shared with the 552 ACW . 
 The USAF has a total of thirty @-@ one E @-@ 3s in active service . Twenty @-@ seven are stationed at Tinker AFB and belong to the Air Combat Command ( ACC ) . Four are assigned to the Pacific Air Forces ( <unk> ) and stationed at Kadena AB , Okinawa and Elmendorf AFB , Alaska . One aircraft ( TS @-@ 3 ) was assigned to Boeing for testing and development ( retired / scrapped June 2012 ) . 
 In 1977 , Iran placed an order for ten E @-@ 3s , however this order was cancelled following the 1979 revolution . 
 NATO acquired 18 E @-@ 3As and support equipment for a NATO air defense force . Since all aircraft must be registered with a certain country , the decision was made to register the 18 NATO Sentries with Luxembourg , a NATO member that previously did not have any air force . The first NATO E @-@ 3 was delivered in January 1982 . The eighteen E @-@ 3s were operated by Number 1 , 2 and 3 Squadrons of NATO 's E @-@ 3 Component , based at NATO Air Base Geilenkirchen . Presently , 17 NATO E @-@ 3As are in the inventory , since one E @-@ 3 was lost in a crash . 
 The United Kingdom and France are not part of the NATO E @-@ 3A Component , instead procuring E @-@ 3 aircraft through a joint project . The UK and France operate their E @-@ 3 aircraft independently of each other and of NATO . The UK operates six aircraft ( with a seventh now retired ) and France operates four aircraft , all fitted with the newer CFM56 @-@ 2 engines . The British requirement came about following the cancellation of the British Aerospace Nimrod <unk> project to replace the Avro Shackleton AEW2 during the 1980s . The UK E @-@ 3 order was placed in February 1987 , with deliveries starting in 1990 . The other operator of the type , delivered between June 1986 and September 1987 , is Saudi Arabia which operates five aircraft , all fitted with CFM56 @-@ 2 engines . This particular sale was hotly contested between the Reagan administration and opponents of the sale . 
 E @-@ 3 Sentry aircraft were among the first to deploy during Operation Desert Shield , where they immediately established as an around @-@ the @-@ clock radar screen to defend against Iraqi forces . During Operation Desert Storm , E @-@ 3s flew 379 missions and logged 5 @,@ 052 hours of on @-@ station time . The data collection capability of the E @-@ 3 radar and computer subsystems allowed an entire air war to be recorded for the first time in history . In addition to providing senior leadership with time @-@ critical information on the actions of enemy forces , E @-@ 3 controllers assisted in 38 of the 41 air @-@ to @-@ air kills recorded during the conflict . 
 NATO E @-@ 3s joined their USAF colleagues for joint air defense as part of Operation Eagle Assist in the wake of the September 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center towers and the Pentagon . 
 NATO and RAF E @-@ 3s participated in the international military operation in Libya . 
 On 27 January 2015 , the RAF deployed an E @-@ 3D Sentry to Cyprus in support of U.S.-led coalition airstrikes against Islamic State militants in Iraq and Syria . The Sentry joins RAF Panavia Tornado , MQ @-@ 9 Reaper , and <unk> Voyager aircraft performing or supporting almost daily strikes against militants . 
 On 23 June 2015 , the first of the original 18 NATO E @-@ 3A AWACS aircraft to retire , arrived at Davis @-@ Monthan AFB near Tucson , AZ . The aircraft , LX @-@ N <unk> , will be placed in parts reclamation storage where critical parts will be removed by NATO technicians to support their remaining fleet of 16 Boeing E @-@ 3A aircraft . It had accumulated 22 @,@ 206 flight hours between 19 August 1983 and 13 May 2015 and operated out of twenty @-@ one different countries in support of NATO operational activities . The aircraft was due in mid @-@ July 2015 for a six @-@ year cycle Depot Level Maintenance ( DLM ) inspection which would have been very costly . Without the inspection , the aircraft would no longer be allowed to fly . The so @-@ called " 449 Retirement Project " will result in reclamation of critical parts with a value of upwards of $ 40 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . Some of the parts to be removed are no longer on the market or have become very expensive . 
 On 18 November 2015 , an E @-@ 3G was deployed to the Middle East to begin " immediately " flying combat missions in support of Operation Inherent Resolve against ISIL , marking the first combat deployment of the upgraded <unk> Block 40 / 45 . The $ 2 @.@ 7 billion development effort started in 2003 , with the first five aircraft achieving initial operational capability ( IOC ) in July 2015 . The Block 40 / 45 upgrade is the most extensive the E @-@ 3 has undergone , replacing its 1970s computer technology with an early 2000s standard and including a deployable ground system that receives , processes , and <unk> data . The Air Force plans to convert 24 AWACS to E @-@ 3G standard , while retiring seven from the fleet to avoid upgrade costs and harvest out @-@ of @-@ production components . 
 = = Variants = = 
 EC @-@ <unk> 
 Two prototype AWACS aircraft with JT3D engines , one fitted with a Westinghouse Electric radar and the other with a Hughes Aircraft Company radar . Both converted to E @-@ 3A standard with TF33 engines . 
 E @-@ 3A 
 Production aircraft with TF33 engines and AN / APY @-@ 1 radar , 24 built for USAF later converted to E @-@ 3B standard , total of 34 ordered but the last 9 completed as E @-@ 3C . One additional aircraft retained by Boeing for testing , 18 built for NATO with TF33 engines and five for Saudi Arabia with CFM56 engines . 
 <unk> @-@ 3A 
 These are not AWACS aircraft but CFM56 powered tankers based on the E @-@ 3 design . Eight were sold to Saudi Arabia . 
 E @-@ 3B 
 E @-@ 3As with improvements , 24 conversions . 
 E @-@ 3C 
 Production aircraft with AN / APY @-@ 2 radar , additional electronic consoles and system improvements , ten built . 
 JE @-@ 3C 
 One E @-@ 3A aircraft used by Boeing for trials later redesignated E @-@ 3C . 
 E @-@ 3D 
 Production aircraft for the Royal Air Force to E @-@ 3C standard with CFM56 engines and British modifications designated Sentry <unk> , seven built . 
 E @-@ 3F 
 Production aircraft for the French Air Force to E @-@ 3C standard with CFM56 engines and French modifications , four built . 
 E @-@ 3G 
 USAF Block 40 / 45 modification . Includes hardware and software upgrades to improve communications , computer processing power , threat tracking , and others , and automates some previously manual functions . IOC reached in July 2015 . 
 = = Operators = = 
 = = = Current operators = = = 
 France 
 The French Air Force purchased four E @-@ 3F aircraft similar to the British E @-@ 3D aircraft . 
 All planes are assigned to the Escadron de <unk> et de <unk> <unk> ( <unk> , Air detection and command squadron ) and are based at <unk> Air Base . 
 NATO 
 Based in Geilenkirchen , Germany , 18 E @-@ 3 AWACS were purchased – one lost in Greece . All of these aircraft are officially registered as aircraft of Luxembourg , a NATO member with no other air force . Responsible for monitoring airspace for NATO operations around the world . 
 Aircrew Training Squadron 
 Flying Squadron 1 
 Flying Squadron 2 
