 Flying Squadron 3 disbanded 2015 
 Saudi Arabia 
 The Royal Saudi Air Force purchased five E @-@ 3A aircraft and eight <unk> @-@ 3A tanker aircraft in 1983 . 
 No. 18 Squadron 
 United Kingdom 
 The Royal Air Force purchased seven E @-@ 3Ds by October 1987 . All seven are still in service ; six are operational and one is used for training . The aircraft are designated Sentry <unk> 
 No. 8 Squadron 
 No. 23 Squadron – ( disbanded in 2009 ) 
 No. 54 Squadron 
 United States of America 
 The United States Air Force currently has 32 E @-@ 3s . 
 Tactical Air Command 1976 – 92 
 Air Combat Command 1992 – present 
 <unk> Air Control Wing – Tinker Air Force Base , Oklahoma 
 <unk> Airborne Air Control Squadron 2001 – present ( NAS Keflavik , Iceland 1979 – 92 ) 
 <unk> Airborne Air Control Squadron 1976 – present 
 <unk> Airborne Air Control Squadron 1977 – present 
 <unk> Airborne Air Control Squadron 1978 – 79 , 1984 – present 
 <unk> Airborne Air Control Squadron 1976 – present 
 380th Air Expeditionary Wing – Al Dhafra Air Base , United Arab Emirates 
 968th Expeditionary Airborne Air Control Squadron 2002 @-@ 2003 , 2013 @-@ present 
 Air Force Reserve Command 
 513th Air Control Group ( Associate ) – Tinker AFB , Oklahoma 
 <unk> Airborne Air Control Squadron 1996 – present 
 Pacific Air Forces 
 3d Wing – Elmendorf AFB , Alaska 
 <unk> Airborne Air Control Squadron 1986 – present 
 18th Wing – Kadena AB , Japan 
 <unk> Airborne Air Control Squadron 1979 – present 
 = = Incidents and accidents = = 
 The E @-@ 3 has been involved in three hull @-@ loss accidents , and one radar antenna destroyed during RSIP development ( see photo under Avionics ) . 
 On 22 September 1995 , a U.S. Air Force E @-@ 3 Sentry ( callsign <unk> 27 , serial number 77 @-@ <unk> ) , crashed shortly after take off from Elmendorf AFB , Alaska . The plane lost power to both left side engines after these engines ingested several Canada geese during takeoff . The aircraft went down about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) northeast of the runway , killing all 24 crew members on board . 
 On 14 July 1996 , a NATO E @-@ 3A , LX @-@ <unk> , c / n <unk> , ex @-@ 79 @-@ <unk> , overran the runway and dipped into the sea on takeoff from Preveza AB , Preveza , Greece . The fuselage broke into two , destroying the aircraft , but there were no casualties among the 16 crew members on board . It allegedly suffered a <unk> during take off , but no evidence of a <unk> was found . 
 On 28 August 2009 , a USAF E @-@ 3C , 83 @-@ 0008 , was severely damaged while landing at Nellis Air Force Base , after experiencing a nose @-@ wheel failure . The failure resulted in a fire that caused a reported US $ 100 million in damage . The accident was determined to be pilot error : at an altitude of about 100 feet ( 30 m ) , both the co @-@ pilot , and the pilot , lost track of their height above ground . The aircraft struck the ground with such force that the nose wheel strut broke . The aircraft slid along the runway for 4 @,@ 500 feet ( 1 @,@ 400 m ) . 
 = = Specifications ( USAF / NATO ) = = 
 Data from <unk> 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : Flight crew : 4 ( aircraft commander , pilot , navigator , flight engineer ) 
 Mission crew : 13 – 19 
 Length : 152 ft 11 in ( 46 @.@ 61 m ) 
 Wingspan : 145 ft 9 in ( 44 @.@ 42 m ) 
 Height : 41 ft 4 in ( 12 @.@ 6 m ) 
 Wing area : 3 @,@ 050 ft2 ( 283 @.@ 4 m2 ) 
 Empty weight : 185 @,@ 000 lb ( 73 @,@ 480 kg ) 
 Loaded weight : 344 @,@ 000 lb ( with aerial refueling ) ( 156 @,@ 036 kg ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 347 @,@ 000 lb ( 157 @.@ 397 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 4 × Pratt and Whitney TF33 @-@ PW @-@ 100A turbofan , 21 @,@ 500 lbf ( 93 kN ) each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 530 mph ( 855 km / h , 461 knots ) 
 Range : 4 @,@ 000 nmi ( 7 @,@ 400 km ) ( 8 hr ) 
 Service ceiling : 41 @,@ 000 ft ( 12 @,@ 500 m ) 
 = American Horror Story = 
 American Horror Story is an American anthology horror television series created and produced by Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk . Described as an anthology series , each season is conceived as a self @-@ contained miniseries , following a disparate set of characters and settings , and a storyline with its own " beginning , middle , and end . " Some plot elements are loosely inspired by true events . 
 The first season , retroactively subtitled Murder House , takes place in Los Angeles , California during the year 2011 and centers on a family that moves into a house haunted by its deceased former occupants . The second season , subtitled Asylum , takes place in Massachusetts during the year 1964 and follows the stories of the patients and staff of an institution for the criminally insane . The third season , subtitled Coven , takes place in New Orleans , Louisiana during the year 2013 and follows a coven of witches who face off against those who wish to destroy them . The fourth season , subtitled Freak Show , takes place in Jupiter , Florida during the year 1952 and centers around one of the few remaining American freak shows . The fifth season , subtitled Hotel , takes place in Los Angeles , California during the year 2015 and focuses on the staff and guests of a supernatural hotel . The only actors to appear in all five iterations of the show are ; Evan Peters , Sarah Paulson and Lily Rabe . 
 The series is broadcast on the cable television channel FX in the United States . The fifth season premiered on October 7 , 2015 , and concluded on January 13 , 2016 . On November 10 , 2015 , the show was renewed for a sixth season ; set to premiere , for the first time out of October , September 14 , 2016 . 
 American Horror Story has been well received by television critics , with the majority of the praise going to the cast , particularly Jessica Lange , who won two Emmy Awards , a Golden Globe Award , and a Screen Actors Guild Award for her performances . Additionally , Kathy Bates and Lady Gaga won an Emmy Award and a Golden Globe Award , respectively , for their performances . The series draws consistently high ratings for the FX network , with its first season being the biggest new cable series of 2011 . 
 = = Overview = = 
 = = = Murder House ( 2011 ) = = = 
 The story takes place in 2011 and follows the Harmon family : psychiatrist Ben ( Dylan McDermott ) , his wife Vivien ( Connie Britton ) , and their teenage daughter Violet ( Taissa Farmiga ) , who move from Boston to Los Angeles after Vivien has a miscarriage and Ben had an affair . The Harmons move into a restored mansion and soon encounter the home 's former residents , the <unk> – Constance ( Jessica Lange ) and her two children ( although Constance has four children ) , Tate ( Evan Peters ) and Addie ( Jamie Brewer ) – and the disfigured Larry Harvey ( Denis O 'Hare ) . Ben and Vivien try to rekindle their relationship , as Violet , suffering from depression , finds comfort with Tate . The <unk> and Larry frequently influence the Harmons ' lives , as the family discovers that the home is haunted by the ghosts of anyone who has ever died on the property . The season is primarily set in the modern day , with flashbacks to the 1920s , 1940s , 1960s , 1970s , 1980s , 1990s , and 2000s . 
 = = = Asylum ( 2012 – 13 ) = = = 
 The story takes place in 1964 and follows the patients , doctors and nuns who occupy the Briarcliff Mental Institution , located in Massachusetts and founded to treat and house the criminally insane . The wardens who run the institution include the stern Sister Jude ( Jessica Lange ) , her protégé Sister Mary Eunice ( Lily Rabe ) and the founder of the institution , Monsignor Timothy Howard ( Joseph Fiennes ) . The doctors charged with treating the patients at the asylum include psychiatrist Dr. Oliver Thredson ( Zachary Quinto ) and the sadistic scientist Dr. Arthur Arden ( James Cromwell ) . The patients , many of whom claim to be unjustly institutionalized , include lesbian journalist Lana Winters ( Sarah Paulson ) , accused serial killer Kit Walker ( Evan Peters ) , nymphomaniac Shelley ( Chloe Sevigny ) and alleged murderer Grace Bertrand ( Lizzie <unk> ) . Briarcliff 's inhabitants are routinely subject to supernatural and scientific influences , including demonic possession and extraterrestrial abduction . The season primarily takes place throughout the 1960s with flash @-@ forwards to 2012 . 
 = = = Coven ( 2013 – 14 ) = = = 
 The story takes place in 2013 and follows the descendants of the witches who survived the Salem Witch Trials , who are nearly extinct and are in danger once again . Those who share this genetic affliction are being subjected to strange and violent attacks . A mysterious all @-@ girls boarding school has opened in New Orleans to protect and house young women who carry this unique bloodline , and keep them from the dangers of the outside world . The long @-@ absent Supreme , and most powerful witch of her generation , Fiona Goode ( Jessica Lange ) , arrives to ensure the safety of the Coven , but also to fulfill her own hidden agenda . Fiona 's daughter , Cordelia ( Sarah Paulson ) , teaches at the school and welcomes its newest student , Zoe Benson ( Taissa Farmiga ) , who harbors her own harrowing secret . Events reveal a long @-@ held rivalry between the witches of Salem and the voodoo practitioners of New Orleans , as well as a historic grudge between Voodoo Queen Marie <unk> ( Angela Bassett ) and socialite serial killer Delphine LaLaurie ( Kathy Bates ) . Other themes include witchcraft , voodoo , racism , death , and family , such as the relationships between mothers and daughters . The season is set primarily in the modern day and includes flashbacks to the early 1970s , 1960s , and the 1830s . 
 = = = Freak Show ( 2014 – 15 ) = = = 
 The story takes place in 1952 in the quiet town of Jupiter , Florida and follows a struggling freak show led by Elsa Mars ( Jessica Lange ) . Decades have passed since the public has looked upon freak shows as a form of entertainment , but Elsa dreams of finding a home for her " monsters " , as well as her own fame . When conjoined twins Bette and Dot Tattler ( Sarah Paulson ) are taken to the hospital , Elsa sees her chance to finally drum up some business for her sideshow , hoping the two sisters will save her troupe once and for all . Other members include Jimmy Darling ( Evan Peters ) , a boy born with <unk> who dreams of leaving the carny life behind and living a normal life . Jimmy 's mother , the bearded lady Ethel Darling ( Kathy Bates ) , is Elsa 's second in command and maintains law and order under the tent . A Strongman from Ethel 's troubled past named Dell Toledo ( Michael Chiklis ) , and his three @-@ breasted wife , Desiree Dupree ( Angela Bassett ) , make waves when they arrive at the sideshow . In a time when the era of television is beginning to reign high above sideshow acts , these individuals must overcome those who persecute them based on their looks . However , as events unfold , it is revealed that multiple dark entities have taken up residence in Jupiter , with all of their eyes being set on the freaks . Flashbacks are set in the 1940s , and a flash forward to the 1960s . 
 = = = Hotel ( 2015 – 16 ) = = = 
 The story takes place in 2015 in Los Angeles , California in the haunted , retro Hotel Cortez which was built to become a torture chamber for the customers by the founder James Patrick March ( Evan Peters ) . The wardens of the hotel includes the 111 year old vampire , Elizabeth Johnson ( Lady Gaga ) , and the front desk clerk and manager , Iris ( Kathy Bates ) . The residents and guests include the drug addicted prostitute ghost , Sally McKenna ( Sarah Paulson ) , Iris ' hateful son and former drug addict turned vampire lover of Elizabeth , Donovan ( Matt Bomer ) , transgender bartender Liz Taylor ( Denis O 'Hare ) , actress and revengeful former lover of Elizabeth , Ramona Royale ( Angela Bassett ) , male model heartthrob and murder addict Tristan Duffy ( Finn Wittrock ) , New York fashion designer and current purchaser Will Drake ( Cheyenne Jackson ) , and the suspicious and soon going insane detective John Lowe ( Wes Bentley ) and his depressed wife Alex ( Chloe Sevigny ) . When Lowe checks in to the hotel , what he doesn 't know is that he is targeted by a serial murderer , The Ten Commandments Killer , which will bring the inside and outside danger crashing together . Main themes include addiction , insanity and forgiveness . Alongside being set in modern day , flashbacks are set in the 1920s , 1970s , 1980s , and 1990s , with an epilogue set in 2022 . 
 = = = Season 6 = = = 
 Little is known or confirmed about the plot for the sixth cycle , but it will have " children and operatic " themes and take place in the present , with echoes of the past . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Creators Murphy and Falchuk began working on American Horror Story before their Fox series Glee began production . Murphy wanted to do the opposite of what he had done previously and thus began his work on the series . He stated : " I went from Nip / Tuck to Glee , so it made sense that I wanted to do something challenging and dark . And I always had loved , as Brad had , the horror genre . So it just was a natural for me . " Falchuk was intrigued by the idea of putting a different angle on the horror genre , stating that their main goal in creating the series was to scare viewers . You want people to be a little bit off balance afterwards , " he said . 
 In February 2011 , FX officially announced that it had ordered a pilot for a possible series from Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk , with both Murphy and Falchuk writing and Murphy directing . Dante Di Loreto was announced as executive producer . Production on the series began in April 2011 . In July 2011 , FX officially announced the project had been picked up to series . 
 From the beginning , Murphy and Falchuk planned that each season of the series would tell a different story . After the first season finale aired , Murphy spoke of his plans to change the cast and location for the second season . He did say , however , that some actors who starred in the first season would be returning . " The people that are coming back will be playing completely different characters , creatures , monsters , etc . [ The Harmons ' ] stories are done . People who are coming back will be playing entirely new characters , " he announced . In November 2012 , FX chief executive , John Landgraf , described the unique format of the series stating : " [ T ] he notion of doing an anthological series of miniseries with a repertory cast – has proven groundbreaking , wildly successful and will prove to be trendsetting . " 
 At the 2013 PaleyFest , Falchuk compared the series to horror films : " It does demand a little bit of compassion at the end because you fall in love with these characters in a different way than you would in a movie , " he said . " If you want to kill everybody in a movie except one person , you can kind of get away with that , but if you 're looking to do a horror TV show , you have a different responsibility to the characters because the audience has a different affection for them . " 
 Murphy then explained the process of planning a series ' season takes about a year . " We come up with story first and then we come up with the characters , " he said . " It is a repertory company , so we 'll move people around and sometimes there won 't yet be a role for somebody . Like when we started [ the second season ] , I really had no idea that Dylan [ McDermott ] would be the person to play Sarah 's son , but the deeper we got , I thought , that would work great . " 
 In an August 2015 article for Entertainment Weekly , Murphy revealed that the show is mulling producing two seasons a year . The first being broadcast in the spring and the second in the fall . He explained , " We 're doing something that we 've never done before on the show where we 're doing two different groups of writers rooms . Some of our writers will be bouncing around but a whole different group coming in late August . The next thing we ’ re crafting up is very , very different than [ Hotel ] . Not smaller . But just not opulent . More rogue and more dark . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Connie Britton was first to be cast in the series , portraying female lead Vivien Harmon on Murder House . Denis O 'Hare joined second as Larry Harvey . Jessica Lange soon followed as Constance , her first regular role on television . Dylan McDermott joined the cast soon after Lange as the male lead Ben Harmon . Taissa Farmiga and Evan Peters were the last actors to be added to the main cast , portraying Violet Harmon and Tate Langdon , respectively . 
 In March 2012 , Murphy revealed that the second season had been conceptualized around Jessica Lange who portrays Sister Jude , a sadistic nun who runs the asylum . Evan Peters , Sarah Paulson , Lily Rabe and Zachary Quinto also return as main cast members in the second season . Peters portrays Kit Walker , an inmate accused of murdering his wife . Paulson portrays Lana , a lesbian reporter who gets committed to the asylum because of her sexuality and intent to snoop around the sanitorium . Rabe 's character is Sister Mary Eunice , clumsy second @-@ in @-@ charge to Sister Jude . Quinto portrays Dr. Thredson , a psychiatrist at the asylum . Lizzie <unk> stars as Grace Bertrand , a character described originally as " a fierce , ferocious , extremely sexual , and dangerous wild @-@ child sexpot " , but the role was later heavily revamped . James Cromwell co @-@ stars as Dr. Arthur Arden , who proclaims to be in charge of the asylum and performs dark experiments on its patients . Joseph Fiennes starred as Monsignor Timothy Howard , a possible love interest for Sister Jude . 
 For the third season , series executive producers and co @-@ creators Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk stated that , as with the second season , " many actors " would return in different roles , beginning with Jessica Lange . Evan Peters and Sarah Paulson were confirmed to return , portraying Kyle Spencer and Cordelia Foxx , respectively . Murphy added that Lange would portray a " real glamour @-@ cat lady " , later revealed to be named Fiona Goode . Taissa Farmiga , Violet in the first season , starred as Zoe Benson , a character that is involved in a prominent romance during the season . Lily Rabe co @-@ starred as Misty Day . Series recurring actress Frances Conroy joined as a main cast member , playing the character of Myrtle Snow . Oscar @-@ winning actress Kathy Bates was confirmed to co @-@ star . It was first reported that she would portray " a woman who , at the start , is Lange 's character 's best friend , but will become her worst enemy " , but this was altered . Murphy stated that Bates ' character will be " five times worse than [ her ] Misery character " and is also inspired by a " true event " . She portrayed Madame Delphine LaLaurie , an immortal racist . It was announced in May 2013 that Emma Roberts had been added to the cast . Roberts played Madison Montgomery , a " self @-@ involved party girl " . 
 In November 2013 , Ryan Murphy confirmed that Jessica Lange would be returning for a fourth season , although in a reduced capacity . It was later revealed she would be playing Freak Show owner Elsa Mars . Kathy Bates returned in a main role , portraying bearded lady Ethel Darling . On March 29 , 2014 , Murphy announced that Sarah Paulson , Evan Peters , Frances Conroy , Emma Roberts , Denis O 'Hare , and Angela Bassett would all return for the fourth season . Paulson portrayed conjoined sisters Bette and Dot Tattler ; Peters portrayed " Lobster Boy " Jimmy Darling ; Conroy played the well @-@ off Gloria Mott ; Bassett portrayed three @-@ breasted hermaphrodite Desiree Dupree ; and O 'Hare played Stanley , a conman working with Roberts ' Maggie Esmerelda . At PaleyFest 2014 , it was revealed that Michael Chiklis would be joining the cast as Dell Toledo , the father of Jimmy , ex @-@ husband of Ethel , and current husband of Desiree . Finn Wittrock later joined the main cast as Conroy 's spoiled son , Dandy Mott . 
 It was announced on February 25 , 2015 , that singer @-@ songwriter Lady Gaga would co @-@ star on the fifth cycle of the series , subtitled Hotel . It was announced at the 2015 PaleyFest that Matt Bomer and Cheyenne Jackson will co @-@ star , and that Lange would not be returning . Since PaleyFest , Murphy has announced the series returns of Wes Bentley , Chloë Sevigny , Kathy Bates , Sarah Paulson , Evan Peters , Angela Bassett , and Finn Wittrock . On June 18 , 2015 , Murphy revealed to Deadline.com that Denis O 'Hare would also return . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The pilot episode was shot on location in a house in Country Club Park , Los Angeles , California , which serves as the haunted house and crime scene in the series . Designed and built in 1908 by Alfred Rosenheim , the president of the American Institute of Architects ' Los Angeles chapter , the Tudor or Collegiate Gothic @-@ style single family home was previously used as a convent . The first season was filmed on sets which are an exact replica of the house . Details such as Louis Comfort Tiffany stained glass windows and hammered bronze light fixtures were re @-@ created to preserve the look of the house . 
 Production and shooting for the second season began in late July 2012 for a scheduled premiere in mid October . The exteriors for the second season were filmed in Hidden Valley , Ventura County , California , a rural area outside Los Angeles . 
 Principal photography for the third season began on July 23 , 2013 , in New Orleans , Louisiana . It was first reported that the season would film in multiple locations , but filming primarily took place in New Orleans . 
 Principal photography for season 4 began on July 15 , 2014 , in New Orleans , though the story takes place in Jupiter , Florida . 
 Principal photography for season 5 began on July 14 , 2015 , in Los Angeles , California , where the story also takes place . Murphy revealed a six @-@ story hotel set was being built on the Fox lot . A dummy set of the hotel was built at the 2015 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , showing an Art Deco style building from the 1920s , inspired by the old Hollywood era . 
 = = = Title sequences = = = 
 American Horror Story 's title screens offer vague hints to important plot elements and events that compose each season . For Murder House , Murphy described the sequence as a mini @-@ mystery and stated that : " By the time you see the ninth episode of this season , every image in that title sequence will be explained , " establishing the purpose of the title sequence for future seasons . 
 The opening title sequence was created by Kyle Cooper and his company Prologue . He also created the title sequence for the AMC series The Walking Dead and the 1995 film Seven . The theme music was composed by sound designer Cesar Davila @-@ Irizarry and musician Charlie Clouser . The cinematography was done by Juan Ruiz <unk> and the editing by Gabriel J. Diaz . 
 For the first season , the sequence is set in the Harmons ' basement and includes images of postmortem young children , fetuses in jars , skulls , a christening dress , a nurse 's uniform , and a figure holding a pair of bloody hedge clippers . A photo of alleged axe murderer Lizzie Borden is shown . 
 The second season 's opening sequence is done by the same creative team . " We are shooting a new title sequence with the same team that did last year 's , " series creator Ryan Murphy said . " The song may stay ... not sure . " The music was kept , and the new title sequence was set around the Asylum , utilising shots of inmates raving and surgeons operating on patients with bandages obscuring their faces . Elements include a young girl walking backwards on her hands and feet up a staircase and a shot of the Virgin Mary 's smile changing from one of benevolence to one of spite . 
 The third season 's opening sequence keeps the same music , and this sequence is the first one to be filmed primarily outside and not in an enclosed location . Shots include figures wearing black robes and <unk> , a bony @-@ skeleton creature with wings and shots of dead goats , the Minotaur from the season also appears . For the first time , there are actual backgrounds that appear with the actor names instead of an all @-@ black background , some of these images include witches hanging and Santa Muerte . Other elements include a black man with piercing eyes and a disturbing smile as well as voodoo dolls . The final shot continues after the figures in black <unk> seize one of their own who is later seen burning at a stake where young , dress @-@ clad witches dance around . 
 The fourth season 's opening sequence changed things up , the series theme music remains intact albeit with an added carnival @-@ like soundscape . The sequence is composed of both CGI and stop @-@ motion animation and features strange characters such as a skeleton chimera of a human being and an elephant riding a bicycle , a skeleton of what appears to be a single head but two bodies , a devil @-@ like creature , a boy in a wheel chair with deformed legs , a character with severe <unk> of the hands and feet , a clown who can twist his head around , a woman with a third leg where her genitalia should be , and a demonic cymbal @-@ banging monkey toy . There are also shots of side show attractions like the Human Blockhead , knife throwing and sword swallowing . The main recurring element features a balloon twister popping balloons with a knife . 
 The fifth season 's opening sequence also was very different from previous seasons ' , taking a more biblical approach . The music is kept but strong vocals are added . The font , while remaining the same as the first four seasons , glow in red against a hotel wallpaper . The Ten Commandments are also shown throughout the video . The intro returns to live @-@ action like the first three seasons . Visuals include many people scrubbing blood all over the walls and the floor , strange things shown through peepholes , people being victims to the hotel , little kids running around the hotel , as well as many different creatures . 
 The title sequence for all seasons of the show use a typeface that very closely resembles a style for which Scottish designer Charles Rennie Mackintosh was known . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 As part of the promotion for the series , FX launched a " House Call " campaign , in which viewers at home could sign up and come face @-@ to @-@ face with a character from the series . Prior to the series premiere , FX released several clues to shine light on the series . They were offered on the show 's official YouTube channel . Ten clues were released . In September 2011 , FX launched a website which allows visitors to tour the Murder House throughout the decades and look for clues . 
 In August 2012 , the first promo for the second season was released on the American Horror Story Facebook page entitled " Special Delivery " , in which a nun carries a couple of buckets filled with body parts through a field . As a church bell rings , the nun empties one bucket 's bloody contents , leaving the empty bucket behind , and resumes her trek . Over 20 subsequent teasers were released . Four photos were also released on <unk> Two televised teasers , titled " Meet the Residents " , were released on August 31 , 2012 . They feature the patients and some staff ( such as Dr. Thredson , played by Zachary Quinto , and Sister Mary Eunice , played by Lily Rabe ) lying in twin beds and dealing with their individual issues as the heads of the asylum ( Jessica Lange , Joseph Fiennes and James Cromwell ) look on . The song " Que Sera , Sera " , mixed with the show 's theme music , plays . 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 The series premiered on October 5 , 2011 , and is broadcast on the cable television channel FX in the United States . In November 2011 , it premiered internationally on the respective countries ' Fox International Channels . The first season premiered on October 5 , 2011 , and concluded on December 21 , 2011 . The second season premiered on October 17 , 2012 , and concluded on January 23 , 2013 . The third season premiered on October 9 , 2013 , and concluded on January 29 , 2014 . The fourth season premiered on October 8 , 2014 , and concluded on January 21 , 2015 . The fifth season premiered on October 7 , 2015 , and concluded on January 13 , 2016 . The latter three seasons premiered on the same day and same time with the American broadcasts on FX in Canada , though the first season followed a slightly different schedule as that network launched on October 31 , 2011 . The series is aired in India on STAR World Premiere HD shortly after its U.S. airing . Along with it , it airs on FX India on standard definition . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The first season of American Horror Story received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 64 % of 42 critics gave the first season a positive review . The site 's consensus stated : " Convoluted yet effective , American Horror Story is strange , gory , and twisted enough to keep viewers hooked . " The first season scored 62 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 30 reviews . Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly awarded the pilot episode a B + , stating : " AHS is pretty much all scare , all the time : a whole lotta screams , sex , jolts , mashed faces , psychotic behavior , and dead babies . " Hank Stuever from The Washington Post said in his review that : " <unk> things is one of Murphy 's trademark flaws , but this show has a captivating style and giddy gross @-@ outs . " Not all reviews were favorable : Alan Sepinwall of HitFix gave the series a D − , saying : " It is so far over the top that the top is a microscopic speck in its rearview mirror , and so full of strange sounds , sights and characters that you likely won 't forget it – even though many of you will wish you could . " Sepinwall would later go on to call it one of the worst TV shows of 2011 . The Los Angeles Times ' Mary McNamara gave it a mixed review , stating that it " collapses into camp ... upon more than one occasion " but also noting that it is " hard to look away . " 
 The second season , American Horror Story : Asylum , received mostly positive reviews from critics . Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 77 % of 43 critics gave the season a positive review . The site 's consensus is : " American Horror Story : Asylum crosses boundaries to shock and scare with sexy subplots and some innovative takes on current social issues . " It scored 65 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 23 reviews . James Poniewozik from Time stated : " AHS : Asylum feels like a more focused , if equally frenetic , <unk> . It 's also gorgeously realized , with a vision of its ' 60s institution setting so detailed you can smell the stale air and incense . " Maureen Ryan of The Huffington Post said : " It 's to the credit of Asylum 's writers , directors and cast that the emotional pain of the characters often feels as real as their uncertainty and terror . " Verne Gay from Newsday gave the season a C grade , stating it " has some good special effects , just not much of a story to hang them on . " Linda Stasi of the New York Post thought the season was " over the top , " adding : " I need to enter [ an asylum ] myself after two hours of this craziness . " 
 The third season , American Horror Story : Coven , received positive reviews . Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 81 % of 36 critics have given the show a positive review . The site 's consensus reads : " A noteworthy ensemble cast combined with creepy storytelling and campy , outrageous thrills make American Horror Story : Coven a potently structured fright @-@ fest . " It scored 71 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 24 reviews , the highest score for the show to date . Not all reviews were positive , however , with criticism focused mainly in regards to the progression of both the story and certain character arcs in the second half of the season . The A.V. Club gave this season the low rating of a D + , with critic Todd Van <unk> remarking : " It lurched drunkenly from idea to idea , never settling on one long enough to build anything of worth . " 
 The fourth season , American Horror Story : Freak Show , received mostly positive reviews . Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 79 % of 32 critics have given the season a positive review . The site 's consensus is : " Though it may turn off new viewers unaccustomed to its unabashed weirdness , Freak Show still brings the thrills , thanks to its reliably stylish presentation and game cast . " It scored 69 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 19 " generally favorable " reviews . 
 The fifth season , American Horror Story : Hotel , received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Rotten Tomatoes reports that 64 % of 41 critics have given the season a positive review . The site 's consensus is : " Favoring garish style over effective storytelling , the fifth American Horror Story strands a talented cast at Ryan Murphy 's Hotel . " Fan reception on the same website was also mixed , at 58 % of viewers giving the show a favorable review . Hotel scored a 60 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 24 " mixed or average " reviews . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The pilot episode of American Horror Story was watched by 3 @.@ 2 million viewers and averaged a 1 @.@ 6 rating in the 18 – 49 years adult demographic , the most sought after by advertisers . These were the best numbers FX had ever received for a series premiere . The episode was seen by 3 @.@ 2 million total viewers in 59 countries . Ratings increased as the season progressed , with the season finale being watched by 3 @.@ 22 million viewers and receiving a 1 @.@ 7 ratings share in the 18 – 49 years adult demographic . The series premiere aired in November 2011 across Europe and Latin America on Fox International Channels , and ranked as first or second most watched telecast in its timeslot among all paid television in most metered markets . " Numbers so strong , it ’ s scary . American Horror Story has brought droves of new viewers to a killer global lineup , " said Hernan Lopez , the president of Fox International Channels . 
 The second season 's premiere gained a 2 @.@ 2 18 – 49 ratings share and gathered 3 @.@ 85 million viewers , marking the highest numbers for the series . By the season 's sixth episode , the numbers dropped to a series @-@ low 0 @.@ 9 18 – 49 ratings share and 1 @.@ 89 million viewers , however , they rebounded to above two million viewers for the subsequent episodes , and reached 2 @.@ 29 million viewers for the season 's finale . The premiere of the fifth season of the series became the second most @-@ watched telecast in the network 's history , only behind the premiere episode of the previous season , which was watched by 6 @.@ 13 million viewers . The show was subsequently renewed for another season ; John Landgraf , the CEO of the network , commented on the show 's success by saying that American Horror Story , the network 's highest rated series , " has unquestionably joined the ranks of television 's landmark series . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 American Horror Story has won 55 of its 227 award nominations . The franchise has garnered 28 Primetime Emmy Award nominations , with Jessica Lange winning for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie and for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie , James Cromwell winning for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie , and Kathy Bates winning for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie . It received an additional 50 Creative Arts Emmy Award nominations , winning nine times , including Outstanding Hairstyling for a Miniseries or a Movie , Outstanding Costumes for a Miniseries , Movie , or Special , Outstanding Sound Editing for a Miniseries , Movie , or Special , and Outstanding Prosthetic Makeup for a Series , Limited Series , Movie or a Special . It has received nine Golden Globe Award nominations , with Lange winning for Best Supporting Actress in a Series , Miniseries or Television Film , and Lady Gaga winning for Best Actress in a Miniseries or Television Film . The series has also received three Screen Actors Guild Award nominations , with Lange winning for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series . Additional accolades include eighteen Critics ' Choice Television Awards nominations , with four wins , the GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding TV Miniseries , four Costume Designers Guild Awards nominations , winning three times , eight wins out of ten nominations at the Make @-@ Up Artists and Hair Stylists Guild Awards , five People 's Choice Awards nominations , winning once , and eleven Satellite Awards nomination , with three wins . 
 = Holmes no Mokushiroku = 
 Holmes no Mokushiroku ( <unk> ? , lit . Holmes ' Revelation ) is the 217th story arc of the Japanese manga series Case Closed , known as <unk> Conan ( <unk> ? , lit . Great Detective Conan , officially translated as Detective Conan ) in Japan . The arc was published in Shogakukan 's Weekly Shōnen Sunday magazine between August and October 2010 in issues 36 to 46 and consisted of 10 chapters . The individual chapters were then collected into tankōbon volumes 71 and 72 which were released in Japan on February 18 , 2011 and June 17 , 2011 respectively . The majority were encapsulated into the 71st volume which became the 21st best selling manga in the first half of 2011 . 
 The Case Closed anime adapted the arc into episodes 616 – 621 and was broadcast on Nippon Television Network System between May 21 , 2011 and June 25 , 2011 . The episodes were the top six watched anime during its run . The arc follows Shinichi Kudo as he visits London and becomes involved in a bombing case . In the beginning of the series , Shinichi was poisoned and turned into a child . Since then , he had been using the identity Conan Edogawa whilst keeping his true identity a secret . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Conan and his caretakers , Ran Mori and <unk> Mori , are given a free trip to London after finding a cat that belongs to Diana Kingstone , a rich British woman . For the trip , Conan is given two pills by Ai Haibara ; the pills will temporarily suppress the poison which turned him into a child allowing him to use his teenage identity , Shinichi Kudo , to bypass airport security . After the medicine wears off , Conan rendezvous with Ran and <unk> to visit the Sherlock Holmes museum . There , Ran phones Shinichi ( Conan using his voice @-@ changing bowtie ) and is upset about his apathy . Shortly after , Conan overhears a child named Apollo Glass who is searching for Holmes . Posing as Holmes ' apprentice , Conan befriends Apollo who reveals a man has given him a list of riddles which needs to be solved in return for sparing someone 's life . Meanwhile , Ran meets Minerva Glass , a professional tennis player and Apollo 's elder sister , who tells her to give up on love relating it to the tennis mantra " Love is Zero " . Ran decides to call Shinichi ; during the conversation , the latter accidentally reveals he is by Big Ben . Ran corners Conan forcing him to take the medicine for the return trip to protect his identity . Believing that Shinichi was hiding from her , Ran is hurt and repeats Minerva 's words . In return Shinichi confesses his love for her and rebukes Minerva 's statement by exclaiming that everything starts from zero . 
 The next day , the man distributing the riddles in London is identified as Sabara Hades , an international serial bomber . Conan begins decoding the riddles in order : " A rolling bell rises me " refers to Big Ben ; " My portion is like a chilled boiled egg like a corpse , " leads them to City Hall where dolls engraved with Mazarin Stone are found . Referring to The Adventure of the Mazarin Stone , the group beheads the doll where they discover the letter T ; " I finished up with a whole pickle , " leads them to 30 St Mary Axe where they find scratched up pens labeled as Dancing Men . As in The Adventure of the Dancing Men , matching the top and bottom caps to reveal the letter N ; " It rings again for my hatred " leads them to cross the Westminster Bridge towards Big Ben . On the bridge , they find a drain engraved with Valley of Fear . Referring to The Valley of Fear , they find a drain cover with the letter A in the river ; " Now I remember to ask a cake to celebrate in advance " leads them to St Bride 's Church where they find envelopes entitled A Scandal in Bohemia . <unk> the envelope in water reveals the letter S ; " I 'm a long nosed wizard in a castle " leads them to Elephant & Castle tube station where they find a man carrying a suitcase with the word identity on it . Referring to A Case of Identity , they find the letter U on the inside of the man 's pants ; " It tells me to finish everything piercing a white back with two swords " refers to the logo of a local porcelain store which displays an ornament with strings and bells attached on the end . Referring to A Study in Scarlet , they locate a red string with the letter R. Rearranging the letters results in Saturn , a reference to Saturday . Connecting the riddle 's locations on a map forms a tennis racquet referencing the Wimbledon championships . 
 Conan enters the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club during the Wimbledon finals . Minerva has been serving " help " in braille into the court . Conan calls out to her revealing he understood her message . In response , Minerva serves more messages revealing Hades intends to kill her mother with a bomb when the match ends . Conan deduces Hades is directly opposite of Minerva 's mother , as he intends to record her death , and is able to locate him . Conan coincidentally finds his parents , Yusaku Kudo and Yukiko Kudo , who assists him in apprehending Hades ; Conan is then given another pill , by his parents , to bypass airport security to return home . With Hades incarcerated , Minerva is able to focus and win her match . As Conan and friends prepare to return home , Ran converses with Minerva and repeats Shinichi 's words . Minerva , having made up with her lover , acknowledges that everything starts from love . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 In 2003 , the creator of the Case Closed series , <unk> Aoyama , had stated he would draw a story arc taking place in London . To this end , he traveled to London and visited the sites that would appear in the story arc ; for sites he had not visited , he used Google Maps . During his trip , Aoyama took special note of a phone booth near Big Ben and a drain pipe , engraved with the words " Valley of Fear " , on the Westminster Bridge ; these two aspects were used in the story . While creating the story , Aoyama expressed difficulty incorporating English in the text . He also revealed Minerva Glass , a fictional tennis player in the story , was based on professional tennis player Steffi Graf and the scene where Conan calls out to Minerva during her tennis match was inspired by an event during the 1996 Wimbledon Championships where a fan jokingly shouted his proposal to Graf during her semi @-@ finals match . For Shinichi 's confession to Ran , Aoyama created the scene with Sherlock Holmes ' poor ability with relationships and the phrase <unk> na <unk> ( <unk> ? , lit . " A troublesome and difficult case " ) in mind . 
 The arc was published in Shogakukan 's Weekly Shōnen Sunday magazine between August and October 2010 from issues 36 to 46 and consisted of 10 chapters . The individual chapters were then collected into tankōbon volumes 71 and 72 which were released in Japan on February 18 , 2011 and June 17 , 2011 respectively . 
 = = Anime adaptation = = 
 The Holmes no Mokushiroku story arc was aired on the Case Closed anime series as episodes 616 – 621 and aired between May 21 , 2011 and June 25 , 2011 on Nippon Television Network System . The episodes were later encapsulated into two DVD volumes released on March 23 , 2012 and April 27 , 2012 . The opening theme music for the episodes were " Don 't Wanna Lie " by B 'z and the ending theme was <unk> no <unk> no Mahō ( <unk> ? , lit . " <unk> Magic on the Moonlit Night " ) by <unk> . Episodes 616 – 617 were directed by <unk> <unk> , 618 – 619 by Shigenori Kageyama , 620 – 621 by Seiki <unk> . Each episode had different producers ; in episode order , the six producers were : Minoru Tozawa , Shigeru Yamazaki , <unk> <unk> , Tomomi Ikeda <unk> Kuroda and Akira Yoshimura . The guest characters , Diana Kingstone , Minerva Glass , Apollo Glass , Juno Glass , Sabara Hades and Ares Ashley were voiced by Rachel Walzer , Rumiko <unk> , Motoko <unk> , <unk> Christelle , Masashi Sugawara , and Osamu Hosoi respectively . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The majority of the arc was collected into volume 71 , which sold 262 @,@ 116 copies in its release week . It reached 526 @,@ 693 in May 2011 and was the 21st top @-@ selling manga between November 22 , 2010 and May 22 , 2011 . The anime episodes of the story arc ranked in the top six anime watched during their respective week of broadcast . The two DVD volumes containing the episodes both appeared on Oricon 's charts . 
 Manga @-@ News reviewed the story arc positively . They praised several aspects of the story arc : the plot and narration for being captivating and for including famous London settings , references to Sherlock Holmes , and the Wimbledon competition ; the characterization for the antagonist Sabara Hades ; and the romance between Shinichi and Ran which was described as an event readers had been waiting for . Manga @-@ News however criticized how Shinichi and Ran 's interaction were covered by flashbacks instead of happening chronologically . AnimeLand reviewed volume 71 and called it the best since volume 59 . 
 = Battle of Kursk = 
 The Battle of Kursk was a Second World War engagement between German and Soviet forces on the Eastern Front near Kursk ( 450 kilometres or 280 miles south @-@ west of Moscow ) in the Soviet Union during July and August 1943 . The German offensive was code @-@ named Operation Citadel ( German : Unternehmen Zitadelle ) and led to one of the largest armoured clashes in history , the Battle of Prokhorovka . The German offensive was countered by two Soviet counter @-@ offensives , Operation Polkovodets Rumyantsev ( Russian : <unk> <unk> ) and Operation Kutuzov ( Russian : <unk> ) . For the Germans , the battle was the final strategic offensive that they were able to launch on the Eastern Front . Their extensive loss of men and tanks ensured that the victorious Soviet Red Army enjoyed the strategic initiative for the remainder of the war . 
 The Germans hoped to weaken the Soviet offensive potential for the summer of 1943 by cutting off a large number of forces that they anticipated would be in the Kursk salient . The Kursk salient or bulge was 250 kilometres ( 160 mi ) long from north to south and 160 kilometres ( 99 mi ) from east to west . By eliminating the Kursk salient , the Germans would also shorten their lines , nullify Soviet numerical superiority in critical sectors and regain the initiative from the Soviet Union . The plan envisioned an envelopment by a pair of pincers breaking through the northern and southern flanks of the salient . German dictator Adolf Hitler believed that a victory here would reassert German strength and improve his prestige with his allies , who were considering withdrawing from the war . It was also hoped that large numbers of Soviet prisoners would be captured to be used as slave labour in the German armaments industry . 
 The Soviet government had foreknowledge of the German intentions , provided in part by the British intelligence service and Tunny intercepts . Aware months in advance that the attack would fall on the neck of the Kursk salient , the Soviets built a defence in depth designed to wear down the German armoured spearhead . The Germans delayed the offensive while they tried to build up their forces and waited for new weapons , mainly the new Panther tank but also larger numbers of the Tiger heavy tank . This gave the Red Army time to construct a series of deep defensive belts . The defensive preparations included minefields , fortifications , artillery fire zones and anti @-@ tank strong points , which extended approximately 300 km ( 190 mi ) in depth . Soviet mobile formations were moved out of the salient and a large reserve force was formed for strategic counter @-@ offensives . 
 The Battle of Kursk was the first time in the Second World War that a German strategic offensive was halted before it could break through enemy defences and penetrate to its strategic depths . The maximum depth of the German advance was 8 – 12 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 – 7 @.@ 5 mi ) in the north and 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) in the south . Though the Red Army had succeeded in winter offensives previously , their counter @-@ offensives following the German attack at Kursk were their first successful strategic summer offensives of the war . 
 = = Background = = 
 As the Battle of Stalingrad slowly ground to its conclusion the Red Army moved to a general offensive in the south , pressuring the exhausted German forces who had survived the winter . By January 1943 , a 160 to 300 km ( 99 to 186 mi ) wide gap had opened between Army Group B and Army Group Don , and the advancing Soviet armies threatened to cut off all German forces south of the Don River , including Army Group A operating in the Caucasus . Army Group Center came under significant pressure as well . Kursk fell to the Soviets on 8 February 1943 , and Rostov on 14 February . The Soviet Bryansk , Western , and newly created Central Fronts prepared for an offensive which envisioned the encirclement of Army Group Center between Bryansk and Smolensk . By February 1943 the southern sector of the German front was in strategic crisis . 
 Since December 1942 Field Marshal Erich von Manstein had been strongly requesting " unrestricted operational freedom " to allow him to use his forces in a fluid manner . On 6 February 1943 , Manstein met with Hitler at the headquarters in <unk> to discuss the proposals he had previously sent . He received an approval from Hitler for a counteroffensive against the Soviet forces advancing in the Donbass region . On 12 February 1943 , the remaining German forces were reorganised . To the south , Army Group Don was renamed as Army Group South and placed under Manstein 's command . Directly to the north , Army Group B was dissolved , with its forces and areas of responsibility divided between Army Group South and Army Group Center . Manstein inherited responsibility for the massive breach in the German lines . On 18 February , Hitler arrived at Army Group South headquarters , at Zaporizhia , hours before the Soviets liberated Kharkov and had to be hastily evacuated on the 19th . 
 Once given freedom of action , Manstein intended to utilise his forces to make a series of <unk> into the flanks of the Soviet armoured formations , with the goal of destroying them while retaking Kharkov and Kursk . The II SS Panzer Corps had arrived from France in January 1943 , refitted and up to near full strength . Armoured units from the 1st Panzer Army of Army Group A had pulled out of the Caucasus and further strengthened Manstein 's forces . 
 The operation was hastily prepared and did not receive a name . Later known as Third Battle of Kharkov , it commenced on 21 February , as 4th Panzer Army under General Hoth launched a counter @-@ attack . The German forces cut off the Soviet mobile spearheads and continued the drive north , retaking Kharkov on 15 March and Belgorod on 18 March . A Soviet offensive launched on 25 February by the Central Front against Army Group Center had to be abandoned by 7 March to allow the attacking formations to disengage and redeploy to the south to counter the threat of the advancing German forces under Manstein . Exhaustion of both the Wehrmacht and the Red Army coupled with the loss of mobility due to the onset of the spring rasputitsa resulted in the cessation of operations for both sides by mid @-@ March . The counteroffensive left a salient extending into the German area of control , centered around the city of Kursk . 
 = = = German plans and preparation = = = 
 The heavy losses sustained by the Heer ( army ) since the opening of Operation Barbarossa had resulted in a shortage in infantry and artillery . Units were in total 470 @,@ 000 men understrength . For the Wehrmacht to undertake an offensive in 1943 the burden of the offensive , in both attacking the Soviet defenses and holding ground on the flanks of the advance , would have to be carried primarily by the panzer divisions . In view of the exposed position of Army Group South , Manstein proposed that his forces should take the strategic defensive . He anticipated that a Soviet offensive would attempt to cut off and destroy Army Group South by a move across the Donets River toward the Dnieper . In February , he proposed waiting for this offensive to develop and then delivering a series of counterattacks into the exposed Soviet flanks . Hitler , concerned about the political implications of taking a defensive stance , and preoccupied with holding the Donbass , rejected this plan . On 10 March , Manstein presented an alternative plan whereby the German forces would pinch off the Kursk salient with a rapid offensive commencing as soon as the spring rasputitsa had subsided . 
 On 13 March , Hitler signed Operational Order No. 5 , which authorised several offensives , including one against the Kursk salient . As the last Soviet resistance in Kharkov petered out , Manstein attempted to persuade Günther von Kluge , commander of Army Group Centre , to immediately attack the Central Front , which was defending the northern face of the salient . Kluge refused , believing that his forces were too weak to launch such an attack . Further Axis advances were blocked by Soviet forces that had been shifted down from the Central Front to the area north of Belgorod . By mid @-@ April , amid poor weather and with the German forces exhausted and in need of refitting , the offensives of Operational Order No. 5 were postponed . 
 On 15 April , Hitler issued Operational Order No. 6 , which called for the Kursk offensive operation , codenamed Zitadelle ( " Citadel " ) , to begin on 3 May or shortly thereafter . The directive was drafted by Kurt <unk> , the OKH Chief of Staff . For the offensive to succeed it was deemed essential to attack before the Soviets had a chance to prepare extensive defences or to launch an offensive of their own . Some military historians have described the operation using the term blitzkrieg ( lightning war ) ; other military historians do not use the term in their works on the battle . 
 Operation Citadel called for a double envelopment , directed at Kursk , to surround the Soviet defenders and seal off the salient . Army Group Centre would provide General Walter Model 's 9th Army to form the northern pincer . It would cut through the northern face of the salient , driving south to the hills east of Kursk , securing the rail line from Soviet attack . Army Group South would commit the 4th Panzer Army , under Hermann Hoth , and Army Detachment Kempf , under Werner Kempf , to pierce the southern face of the salient . This force would drive north to meet the 9th Army east of Kursk . Von <unk> 's main attack was to be delivered by Hoth 's 4th Panzer Army , spearheaded by the II SS Panzer Corps under Paul Hausser . The XLVIII Panzer Corps , commanded by Otto von Knobelsdorff , would advance on the left while Army Detachment Kempf would advance on the right . The 2nd Army , under the command of Walter Weiss , would contain the western portion of the salient . 
 On 27 April Model met with Hitler to review and express his concern for reconnaissance information which showed the Red Army constructing very strong positions at the shoulders of the salient and having withdrawn their mobile forces from the area west of Kursk . He argued that the longer the preparation phase continued , the less the operation could be justified . He recommended completely abandoning Citadel , allowing the army to await and defeat the coming Soviet offensive , or radically revising the plan for Citadel . Though in mid @-@ April Manstein had considered the Citadel offensive profitable , by May he shared Model 's misgivings . He asserted that the best course of action would be for the German forces to take the strategic defensive , ceding ground to allow the anticipated Soviet forces to extend themselves and allow the German panzer forces to counterattack in the type of fluid mobile battle they excelled . Convinced that the Red Army would deliver its main effort against Army Group South , he proposed to keep the left wing of the army group strong while moving the right wing back in stages to the Dnieper River , followed by a counterattack against the flank of the Red Army advance . The counteroffensive would continue until the Sea of Azov was reached and the Soviet forces were cut off . Hitler rejected this idea ; he did not want to give up so much terrain , even temporarily . 
 Hitler called his senior officers and advisors to Munich for a meeting on May 4 . Hitler spoke for about 45 minutes on the reasons to postpone the attack , essentially reiterating Model 's arguments . A number of options were put forth for comment : going on the offensive immediately with the forces at hand , delaying the offensive further to await the arrival of new and better tanks , radically revising the operation or canceling it all together . Manstein advocated an early attack , but requested two additional infantry divisions , to which Hitler responded that none were available . Kluge spoke out strongly against postponement and discounted Model 's reconnaissance materials . Albert Speer , the minister of Armaments and War Production , spoke about the difficulties of rebuilding the armoured formations and the limitations of German industry to replace losses . General Heinz Guderian argued strongly against the operation , stating " the attack was pointless " . The conference ended without Hitler coming to a decision , but Citadel was not aborted . Three days later , OKW , Hitler 's conduit for controlling the military , postponed the launch date for Citadel to 12 June . 
 Following this meeting , Guderian continued to voice his concerns over an operation that would likely degrade the panzer forces that he had been attempting to rebuild . He considered the offensive , as planned , to be a misuse of the panzer forces , as it violated two of the three tenets he had laid out as the essential elements for a successful panzer attack . In his opinion , the limited German resources in men and materiel should be conserved , as they would be needed for the pending defence of western Europe . In a meeting with Hitler on 10 May he asked , 
 Is it really necessary to attack Kursk , and indeed in the east this year at all ? Do you think anyone even knows where Kursk is ? The entire world doesn 't care if we capture Kursk or not . What is the reason that is forcing us to attack this year on Kursk , or even more , on the Eastern Front ? 
 Hitler replied , " I know . The thought of it turns my stomach . " Guderian concluded , " In that case your reaction to the problem is the correct one . Leave it alone . " 
 Despite reservations , Hitler remained committed to the offensive . He and the OKW , early in the preparatory phase , were hopeful that the offensive would revitalise German strategic fortunes in the east . As the challenges offered by Citadel increased , he focused more and more on the expected new weapons that he believed were the key to victory : principally the Panther tank , but also the Elefant tank destroyer and greater numbers of the Tiger heavy tank . He postponed the operation in order to await their arrival . Receiving reports of powerful Soviet concentrations behind the Kursk area , Hitler further delayed the offensive to allow for more equipment to reach the front . 
 With pessimism for Citadel increasing with each delay , in June , Alfred Jodl , the Chief of Staff at the OKW , instructed the armed forces propaganda office to portray the upcoming operation as a limited counteroffensive . Due to concerns of an Allied landing in the south of France or in Italy and delays in deliveries of the new tanks , Hitler postponed again , this time to 20 June . <unk> was profoundly concerned with the delays , but he still supported the offensive . On 17 – 18 June , following a discussion in which the OKW Operations Staff suggested abandoning the offensive , Hitler further postponed the operation until 3 July . Finally , on 1 July , Hitler announced 5 July as the launch date of the offensive . 
 A three @-@ month quiet period descended upon the Eastern Front as the Soviets prepared their defences and the Germans attempted to build up their forces . The Germans used this period for specialised training of their assault troops . All units underwent training and combat rehearsals . The Waffen @-@ SS had built a full @-@ scale duplicate Soviet strong point that was used to practice the techniques for neutralizing such positions . The panzer divisions received replacement men and equipment and attempted to get back up to strength . The German forces to be used in the offensive included 12 panzer divisions and 5 panzergrenadier divisions , four of which had tank strengths greater than their neighboring panzer divisions . However , the force was markedly deficient in infantry divisions , which were essential to hold ground and to secure the flanks . By the time the Germans initiated the offensive , their force amounted to around 777 @,@ 000 men , 2 @,@ 451 tanks and assault guns ( 70 percent of the German armour on the Eastern Front ) and 7 @,@ 417 guns and mortars . 
 = = = Soviet plans and preparation = = = 
 In 1943 an offensive by the Soviet Central , Bryansk and Western Fronts against Army Group Centre was abandoned shortly after it began in early March , when the southern flank of the Central Front was threatened by Army Group South . Soviet intelligence received information about German troop concentrations spotted at Orel and Kharkov , as well as details of an intended German offensive in the Kursk sector through the Lucy spy ring in Switzerland . The Soviets verified the intelligence via their spy in Britain , John Cairncross , at the Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park , who clandestinely forwarded raw decrypts directly to Moscow . Cairncross also provided Soviet intelligence with identifications of the Luftwaffe airfields in the region . Soviet politician Anastas Mikoyan wrote that on 27 March 1943 , Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin notified him of a possible German attack in the Kursk sector . Stalin and some senior officers were eager to strike first once the rasputitsa ended , but a number of key officers , including Deputy Supreme Commander Georgiy Zhukov , recommended a strategic defensive before going on the offensive . In a letter to the Stavka and Stalin , on 8 April , Zhukov wrote : 
 In the first phase the enemy , collecting their best forces — including 13 – 15 tank divisions and with the support of a large number of aircraft — will strike Kursk with their <unk> @-@ Orel grouping from the north @-@ east and their Belgorod @-@ Kharkov grouping from the south @-@ east ... I consider it inadvisable for our forces to go over to an offensive in the near future in order to forestall the enemy . It would be better to make the enemy exhaust himself against our defences , and knock out his tanks and then , bringing up fresh reserves , to go over to the general offensive which would finally finish off his main force . 
 Stalin consulted with his frontline commanders and senior officers of the General Staff from 12 to 15 April 1943 . In the end he and the Stavka agreed that the Germans would probably target Kursk . Stalin believed the decision to defend would give the Germans the initiative , but Zhukov countered that the Germans would be drawn into a trap where their armoured power would be destroyed , thus creating the conditions for a major Soviet counteroffensive . They decided to meet the enemy attack by preparing defensive positions to wear out the German groupings before launching their own offensive . Preparation of defences and fortifications began by the end of April , and continued until the German attack in early July . The two @-@ month delay between the German decision to attack the Kursk salient and its implementation allowed the Red Army ample time to thoroughly prepare . 
 The Voronezh Front , commanded by Nikolai Vatutin , was tasked with defending the southern face of the salient . The Central Front , commanded by Konstantin Rokossovsky , defended the northern face . Waiting in reserve was the Steppe Front , commanded by Ivan Konev . In February 1943 , the Central Front had been reconstructed from the Don Front , which had been part of the northern pincer of Operation Uranus and had been responsible for the destruction of the 6th Army at Stalingrad . 
 The Central and Voronezh Fronts each constructed three main defensive belts in their sectors , with each subdivided into several zones of fortification . The Soviets employed the labour of over 300 @,@ 000 civilians . <unk> each belt was an interconnected web of minefields , barbed @-@ wire fences , anti @-@ tank ditches , deep entrenchments for infantry , anti @-@ tank obstacles , dug @-@ in armoured vehicles , and machine @-@ gun bunkers . Behind the three main defensive belts were three more belts prepared as fallback positions ; the first was not fully occupied or heavily fortified , and the last two , though sufficiently fortified , were unoccupied with the exception of a small area in the immediate environs of Kursk . The combined depth of the three main defensive zones was about 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) . The six defensive belts on either side of Kursk were 130 – 150 kilometres ( 81 – 93 mi ) deep . If the Germans managed to break through these defences they would still be confronted by additional defensive belts to the east , manned by the Steppe Front . These brought the total depth of the defences to nearly 300 kilometres ( 190 mi ) . 
 The Voronezh and Central Fronts dug 4 @,@ 200 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 600 mi ) and 5 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 3 @,@ 100 mi ) of trenches respectively , laid out in criss @-@ cross pattern for ease of movement . The Soviets built more than 686 bridges and about 2 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 200 mi ) of roads in the salient . Red Army combat engineers laid 503 @,@ 663 anti @-@ tank mines and 439 @,@ 348 anti @-@ personnel mines , with the highest concentration in the first main defensive belt . The minefields at Kursk achieved densities of 1 @,@ 700 anti @-@ personnel and 1 @,@ 500 anti @-@ tank mines per kilometre , about four times the density used in the defence of Moscow . For example , the 6th Guards Army of the Voronezh Front , was spread out over nearly 64 kilometres ( 40 mi ) of front and was protected by 69 @,@ 688 anti @-@ tank and 64 @,@ 430 anti @-@ personnel mines in its first defensive belt with a further 20 @,@ 200 anti @-@ tank and 9 @,@ 097 anti @-@ personnel mines in its second defensive belt . Furthermore , mobile obstacle detachments were tasked with laying more mines directly in the path of advancing enemy armoured formations . These units , consisting of two platoons of combat engineers with mines at division level and one company of combat engineers normally equipped with 500 – 700 mines at corps level , functioned as anti @-@ tank reserves at every level of command . 
 In a letter dated 8 April , Zhukov warned that the Germans would attack the salient with a strong armoured force : 
 We can expect the enemy to put [ the ] greatest reliance in this year 's offensive operations on his tank divisions and air force , since his infantry appears to be far less prepared for offensive operations than last year ... In view of this threat , we should strengthen the anti @-@ tank defences of the Central and Voronezh fronts , and assemble as soon as possible . 
 Nearly all artillery , including howitzers , guns , anti @-@ aircraft and rockets , were tasked with anti @-@ tank defence . Dug @-@ in tanks and self @-@ propelled guns further strengthened the anti @-@ tank defences . Anti @-@ tank forces were incorporated into every level of command , mostly as anti @-@ tank strong points with the majority concentrated on likely attack routes and the remainder amply spread out elsewhere . Each anti @-@ tank strong @-@ point typically consisted of four to six anti @-@ tank guns , six to nine anti @-@ tank rifles , and five to seven heavy and light machine guns . They were supported by mobile obstacle detachments as well as by infantry with automatic firearms . Independent tank and self @-@ propelled gun brigades and regiments were tasked with cooperating with the infantry during counterattacks . 
 Soviet preparations also included increased activity of partisans , who attacked German communications and supply lines . The attacks were mostly behind Army Group North and Army Group Centre . In June 1943 , partisans operating in the occupied area behind Army Group Centre destroyed 298 locomotives , 1 @,@ 222 railway wagons and 44 bridges , and in the Kursk sector there were 1 @,@ 092 partisan attacks on railways . These attacks delayed the build @-@ up of German supplies and equipment , and required the diversion of German troops to suppress the partisans , delaying their training for the offensive . Central Partisan Headquarters coordinated many of these attacks . In June Soviet Air Forces ( VVS ) flew over 800 sorties at night to resupply the partisan groups operating behind Army Group Centre . The VVS also provided communication and sometimes even daylight air @-@ support for major partisan operations . 
 Special training was provided to the Soviet infantry manning the defences to help them overcome the tank phobia that had been evident since the start of the German invasion . Soldiers were packed into trenches and tanks were driven overhead until all signs of fear were gone . This training exercise was referred to by the soldiers as " ironing " . In combat , the soldiers would spring up in the midst of the attacking infantry to separate them from the spearheading armoured vehicles . The separated armoured vehicles – now vulnerable to infantry armed with anti @-@ tank rifles , demolition charges and Molotov cocktails – could then be disabled or destroyed at point @-@ blank range . These types of attacks were mostly effective against the massive Ferdinand tank destroyers , which lacked machine guns as secondary armament . The soldiers were also promised financial rewards for each tank destroyed , with the People 's <unk> of Defence providing 1 @,@ 000 rubles for destroyed tanks . 
 The Soviets employed maskirovka ( military deception ) to mask defensive positions and troop dispositions and to conceal the movement of men and materiel . These included camouflaging gun emplacements , constructing dummy airfields and depots , generating false radio @-@ traffic , and spreading rumours among the Soviet frontline troops and the civilian population in the German @-@ held areas . Movement of forces and supplies to and from the salient took place at night only . Ammunition caches were carefully concealed to blend in with the landscape . Radio transmission was restricted and fires were forbidden . Command posts were hidden and motor transport in and around them forbidden . 
 According to a Soviet General Staff report , 29 of the 35 major Luftwaffe raids on Soviet airfields in the Kursk sector in June 1943 were against dummy airfields . According to historian Antony Beevor , in contrast , Soviet aviation apparently succeeded in destroying more than 500 Luftwaffe aircraft on the ground . The Soviet deception efforts were so successful that German estimates issued in mid @-@ June placed the total Soviet armoured strength at 1 @,@ 500 tanks . The result was not only a vast underestimation of Soviet strength , but a misperception of Soviet strategic intentions . 
 The main tank of the Soviet tank arm was the T @-@ 34 , on which the Red Army attempted to concentrate production . The tank arm also contained large numbers of the T @-@ 70 light tank . For example , the 5th Guards Tank Army roughly contained 270 T @-@ 70s and 500 T @-@ 34s . In the salient itself the Soviets assembled a large number of lend @-@ lease tanks . These included <unk> M3 Lees and British @-@ built Churchills , Matildas and Valentines . However , the T @-@ 34 made up the bulk of the Soviet armour . Without including the deeper reserves organised under the Steppe Front , the Soviets massed about 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 men , 3 @,@ 600 tanks , 20 @,@ 000 artillery pieces and 2 @,@ 792 aircraft to defend the salient . This amounted to 26 percent of the total manpower of the Red Army , 26 percent of its mortars and artillery , 35 percent of its aircraft and 46 percent of its tanks . 
 = = = Contest for air superiority = = = 
 By 1943 the Luftwaffe 's strength on the Eastern Front had started to weaken , especially after Stalingrad . The Luftwaffe forces in the east were further depleted with squadrons being shifted back to Germany to defend against the increasing Allied bombing campaign . By the end of June , only 38 @.@ 7 percent of the Luftwaffe 's total aircraft remained in the east . In 1943 the Luftwaffe could still achieve local air superiority by concentrating its forces . The majority of German aircraft left available on the Eastern Front were slated for Citadel . The goal of the Luftwaffe remained unchanged . The priority of the German air fleet ( s ) was to gain air superiority , then to isolate the battlefield from enemy reinforcements , and finally , once the critical point had been reached in the land battle , to render close air support . 
 The changing strengths between the two opponents prompted the Luftwaffe to make operational changes for the battle . Previous offensive campaigns had been initiated with Luftwaffe raids against opposing airfields to achieve air superiority . By this point in the war Red Army equipment reserves were extensive and the Luftwaffe commanders realised that aircraft could be easily replaced , making such raids futile . Therefore , this mission was abandoned . In addition , previous campaigns had made use of medium bombers flying well behind the frontline to block the arrival of reinforcements . This mission , however , was rarely attempted during Citadel . 
 The Luftwaffe command understood that their support would be crucial for the success of Operation Citadel , but problems with supply shortfalls hampered their preparations . Partisan activity , particularly behind Army Group Center , slowed the rate of re @-@ supply and cut short the Luftwaffe 's ability to build up essential stockpiles of petrol , oil , lubricants , engines , munitions , and , unlike Red Army units there were no reserves of aircraft that could be used to replace damaged aircraft over the course of the operation . Fuel was the most significant limiting factor . To help build up supplies for the support of Citadel , the Luftwaffe greatly curtailed its operations during the last week of June . Despite this conservation of resources , the Luftwaffe did not have the resources to sustain an intensive air effort for more than a few days after the operation began . 
 For Citadel , the Luftwaffe confined its operations to the direct support of the forces on the ground . In this mission the Luftwaffe continued to make use of the Junkers Ju 87 " Stuka " dive @-@ bombers . A new development to this aircraft was the " Bordkanone " 3 @,@ 7 cm calibre cannon , one of which could be slung under each wing of the Stuka in a gun pod . Half of the Stuka groups assigned to support Citadel were equipped with these <unk> ( literally " cannon @-@ bird " ) <unk> aircraft . The air groups were also strengthened by the recent arrival of the Henschel Hs 129 , with its 30 mm MK 103 cannon , and the ground attack ( " <unk> " ) version of the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 . 
 In the months preceding the battle , Luftflotte 6 supporting Army Group Center noted a marked increase in the strength of the opposing VVS formations . The VVS formations encountered displayed better training , and were flying improved equipment with greater aggressiveness and skill than the Luftwaffe had seen earlier . The introduction of the Yakovlev Yak @-@ 9 and Lavochkin La @-@ 5 fighters gave the Soviet pilots near parity with the Luftwaffe in terms of equipment . Furthermore , large numbers of ground @-@ attack aircraft , such as the Ilyushin Il @-@ 2 " Shturmovik " and the Pe @-@ 2 , had become available as well . The Soviet Air Force also fielded large quantities of aircraft supplied via lend @-@ lease . Huge stockpiles of supplies and ample reserves of replacement aircraft meant the Red Army and VVS formations would be able to conduct an extended campaign without slackening in the intensity of their effort . 
 = = Opposing forces = = 
 = = = Germans = = = 
 For the operation , the Germans used four armies along with a large portion of their total tank strength on the Eastern Front . On 1 July , the 9th Army of Army Group Centre based in the northern side of the salient contained 335 @,@ 000 men ( 223 @,@ 000 combat soldiers ) ; in the south , the 4th Panzer Army and Army Detachment " Kempf " , of Army Group South , had 223 @,@ 907 men ( 149 @,@ 271 combat soldiers ) and 100 @,@ 000 – 108 @,@ 000 men ( 66 @,@ 000 combat soldiers ) respectively . The 2nd Army , that held the western side of the salient contained an estimated 110 @,@ 000 . In total , the German forces had a total strength of 777 @,@ 000 – 779 @,@ 000 men , and the three attacking armies contained 438 @,@ 271 combat soldiers . Army Group South was equipped with more armoured vehicles , infantry and artillery than the 9th Army of Army Group Center . The 4th Panzer Army and Army Detachment " Kempf " had 1 @,@ 377 tanks and assault guns , while the 9th Army possessed 988 tanks and assault guns . 
 German industry produced 2 @,@ 816 tanks and self @-@ propelled guns between April and June , of which 156 were Tigers and 484 Panthers . At Kursk , a total of 259 Panthers , about 211 Tigers , and 90 Ferdinands were used . 
 The two new Panther battalions – the 51st and 52nd – together equipped with 200 Panthers , for which the offensive had been delayed , were attached to the Großdeutschland Division in the XLVIII Panzer Corps of Army Group South . With the 51st and 52nd Battalions arriving on 30 June and 1 July , the two units had little time to perform reconnaissance or to orient themselves to the terrain they found themselves in . This was a breach of the methods of the <unk> , considered essential for the successful use of armour . Though led by experienced panzer commanders , many of the tank crews were new recruits and had little time to become familiar with their new tanks , let alone train together to function as a unit . The two battalions came direct from the training ground and lacked combat experience . In addition , the requirement to maintain radio silence until the start of the attack meant that the Panther units had little training in battalion @-@ level radio procedures . Furthermore , the new Panthers were still experiencing problems with their transmissions , and proved mechanically unreliable . By the morning of 5 July , the units had lost 16 Panthers due to mechanical breakdown , leaving only 184 available for the launching of the offensive . 
 = = = Red Army = = = 
 The Red Army used two Fronts for the defence of Kursk , and created a third front behind the battle area which was held as a reserve . The Central and Voronezh Fronts fielded 12 armies , with 711 @,@ 575 men ( 510 @,@ 983 combat soldiers ) and 625 @,@ 591 men ( 446 @,@ 236 combat soldiers ) respectively . In reserve , the Steppe Front had an additional 573 @,@ 195 men ( 449 @,@ 133 ) . Thus the total size of the Soviet force was 1 @,@ 910 @,@ 361 men , with 1 @,@ 426 @,@ 352 actual combat soldiers . 
 = = = Comparison of strength = = = 
 = = = = Operation Citadel = = = = 
 = = = = Red Army offensive phase = = = = 
 = = = Preliminary actions = = = 
 Fighting started on the southern face of the salient on the evening of 4 July 1943 , when German infantry launched attacks to seize high ground for artillery observation posts prior to the main assault . During these attacks , a number of Red Army command and observation posts along the first main belt of defence were captured . By 16 : 00 , elements of the Panzergrenadier Division " Großdeutschland " , 3rd and 11th Panzer Divisions had seized the village of <unk> and proceeded to capture Gertsovka before midnight . At around 22 : 30 , Vatutin ordered 600 guns , mortars and Katyusha rocket launchers , of the Voronezh Front , to bombard the forward German positions , particularly those of the II SS Panzer Corps . 
 To the north , at Central Front headquarters , reports of the anticipated German offensive came in . At around 02 : 00 5 July , Zhukov ordered his preemptive artillery bombardment to begin . The hope was to disrupt German forces concentrating for the attack , but the outcome was less than hoped for . The bombardment delayed the German formations , but failed in the goal of disrupting their schedule or inflicting substantial losses . The Germans began their own artillery bombardment at about 05 : 00 , which lasted 80 minutes in the northern face and 50 minutes in the southern face . After the barrage , the ground forces attacked , aided by close air support provided by the Luftwaffe . 
 In the early morning of 5 July , the VVS launched a large raid against German airfields , hoping to destroy the Luftwaffe on the ground . This effort failed , and the Red Army air units suffered considerable losses . The VVS lost 176 aircraft on 5 July , compared to the 26 aircraft lost by the Luftwaffe . The losses of the VVS 16th Air Army operating in the northern face were lighter than those suffered by the 2nd Air Army . The Luftwaffe was able to gain and maintained air superiority over the southern face until 10 – 11 July , when the VVS began to obtain ascendency but the control of the skies over the northern face was evenly contested until the VVS began to gain air superiority on 7 July , which it maintained for the rest of the operation . 
 = = Operation along the northern face = = 
 Model 's main attack was delivered by XLVII Panzer Corps , supported by 45 Tigers of the attached 505th Heavy Tank Battalion . Covering their left flank was XLI Panzer Corps , with an attached regiment of 83 Ferdinand tank destroyers . On the right flank , XLVI Panzer Corps consisted at this time of four infantry divisions with just 9 tanks and 31 assault guns . To the left of XLI Panzer Corps was XXIII Army Corps , which consisted of the reinforced 78th Assault Infantry Division and two regular infantry divisions . While the corps contained no tanks , it did have 62 assault guns . Opposing the 9th Army was the Central Front , deployed in three heavily fortified defensive belts . 
 = = = Initial German advance = = = 
 Model chose to make his initial attacks using infantry divisions reinforced with assault guns and heavy tanks , and supported by artillery and the Luftwaffe . In doing so he sought to maintain the armoured strength of his panzer divisions to be used for exploitation once the Red Army defences were breached . Once a breakthrough had been achieved the panzer forces would move through and advance towards Kursk . Jan <unk> , a major in Model 's staff , later commented that Model expected a breakthrough on the second day . If a breakthrough did occur the briefest delay in bringing up the panzer divisions would give the Red Army time to react . His corps commanders thought a breakthrough extremely unlikely . 
 Following a preliminary bombardment and Red Army counter bombardments , the 9th Army opened its attack at 05 : 30 on 5 July . Nine infantry divisions and one panzer division , with attached assault guns , heavy tanks , and tank destroyers , pushed forward . Two companies of Tiger tanks were attached to the 6th Infantry Division , and were the largest single grouping of Tigers employed that day . Opposing them were the 13th and 70th Armies of the Central Front . 
 The 20th Panzer and 6th Infantry Divisions of the XLVII Panzer Corps , spearheaded the advance of the XLVII Panzer Corps . Behind them the remaining two panzer divisions followed , ready to exploit any breakthrough . The heavily mined terrain and fortified positions of the 15th Rifle Division slowed the advance . By 08 : 00 safe lanes had been cleared through the minefield . That morning information obtained from prisoner interrogation identified a weakness at the boundary of the 15th and 81st Rifle Divisions caused by the German preliminary bombardment . The Tigers were redeployed and struck towards this area . Red Army formations countered with a force of around 90 T @-@ 34s . In the resulting three @-@ hour battle , Red Army armoured units lost 42 tanks while the Germans lost two Tigers and a further five more immobilized with track damage . While the Red Army counter @-@ attack was defeated and the first defensive belt breached , the fighting had delayed the Germans long enough for the rest of 29th Rifle Corps of the 13th Army – initially deployed behind the first belt – to move forward and seal the breach . Red Army minefields were covered by artillery fire , making efforts to clear paths through the fields difficult and costly . Goliath and <unk> IV remote @-@ controlled engineer mine @-@ clearing vehicles met with limited success . Of the 653rd Heavy Panzerjäger Battalion 's 45 Ferdinands sent into battle , all but 12 of them were immobilized by mine damage before 17 : 00 . Most of these were later repaired and returned to service , but the recovery of these very large vehicles was difficult . 
 On the first day , the XLVII Panzer Corps penetrated 6 mi ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) into the Red Army defences before stalling , and the XLI Panzer Corps reached the heavily fortified small town of Ponyri , in the second defensive belt , which controlled the roads and railways leading south to Kursk . In the first day , the Germans penetrated 5 to 6 mi ( 8 @.@ 0 to 9 @.@ 7 km ) into the Red Army lines for the loss of 1 @,@ 287 men killed and missing and a further 5 @,@ 921 wounded . 
 = = = Red Army counter @-@ attack = = = 
 Rokossovsky ordered the 17th Guards and 18th Guards Rifle Corps with the 2nd Tank Army and 19th Tank Corp , backed up by close air support , to counterattack the German 9th Army the following day on 6 July . However , due to poor coordination , only the 16th Tank Corps of the 2nd Tank Army commenced the counterattack on the dawn of 6 July after the preparatory artillery barrage . The 16th Tank Corps , fielding about 200 tanks , attacked the XLVII Panzer Corps and ran into the Tiger tanks of the 505th Heavy Tank Battalion , which knocked out 69 tanks and forced the rest to withdraw to the 17th Guards Rifle Corps of the 13th Army . Later that morning , the XLVII Panzer Corps responded with its own attack against the 17th Guards Rifle Corps entrenched around the village Olkhovatka in the second defensive belt . The attack commenced with an artillery barrage and was spearheaded by the 24 serviceable Tigers of the 505th Heavy Tank Battalion , but it failed to break the Red Army defence at Olkhovatka , and the Germans suffered heavy casualties . Olkhovatka was on a high ground that provided a clear view of much of the frontline . At 18 : 30 , the 19th Tank Corps joined the 17th Guards Rifle Corps further bolstering resistance . Rokossovsky also decided to dig in most of his remaining tanks to minimize their exposure . Ponyri , defended by the 307th Rifle Division of the 29th Rifle Corps , was also <unk> attacked on 6 July by the German <unk> and 86th Infantry , 78th Assault Infantry and 9th Panzer Divisions , but the Germans were unable to dislodge the defenders from the heavily fortified village . 
 = = = Ponyri and Olkhovatka = = = 
 Over the next three days from 7 to 10 July , Model concentrated the effort of the 9th Army at Ponyri and Olkhovatka , which both sides considered as vital positions . In response , Rokossovsky pulled forces from other parts of the front to these sectors . The Germans attacked Ponyri on 7 July , and captured half of the town after intense house @-@ to @-@ house fighting . A Soviet counterattack the following morning forced the Germans to withdraw , and a series of counterattacks ensued by both sides with control of the town being exchanged several times over the next few days . By 10 July , the Germans had secured most of the town , but Soviet counterattacks continued . The back and forth battles for Ponyri and the nearby Hill 253 @.@ 5 were battles of attrition , with heavy casualties on both sides . It became referred to by the troops as " mini @-@ Stalingrad " . The war diary of the 9th Army described the heavy fighting as a " new type of mobile attrition battle " . German attacks on Olkhovatka and the nearby village of <unk> failed to penetrate the Soviet defences ; including a powerful concerted attack on 10 July by about 300 Germans tanks and assault guns from the 2nd , 4th , and 20th Panzer Divisions , supported by every available Luftwaffe air power in the northern face . 
 On 9 July a meeting between Kluge , Model , Joachim Lemelsen and Josef Harpe was held at the headquarters of the XLVII Panzer Corps . It had become clear to the German commanders that the 9th Army lacked the strength to obtain a breakthrough , and their Soviet counterparts had also realized this , but Kluge wished to maintain the pressure on the Soviets in order to aid the southern offensive . 
 While the operation on the northern side of the salient began with a 45 @-@ kilometre @-@ wide ( 28 mi ) attack front , by 6 July it had been reduced to 40 @-@ kilometre @-@ wide ( 25 mi ) . The following day the attack frontage dropped to 15 @-@ kilometre @-@ wide ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) , and on both the 8 and 9 July penetrations of only 2 @-@ kilometre @-@ wide ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) occurred . By 10 July , the Soviets had completely halted the German advance . 
 On 12 July the Soviets launched Operation Kutuzov , their counter @-@ offensive upon the Orel salient , which threatened the flank and rear of Model 's 9th Army . The 12th Panzer Division , thus far held in reserve and slated to be committed to the northern side of the Kursk salient , along with the 36th Motorized Infantry , 18th Panzer and 20th Panzer Divisions were redeployed to face the Soviet spearheads . 
 = = Operation along the southern face = = 
 At around 04 : 00 on 5 July , the German attack commenced with a preliminary bombardment . Manstein 's main attack was delivered by Hoth 's 4th Panzer Army , which was organized into densely concentrated spearheads . Opposing the 4th Panzer Army was the Soviet 6th Guards Army , which was composed of the 22nd Guards Rifle Corps and 23rd Guards Rifle Corps . The Soviets had constructed three heavily fortified defensive belts to slow and weaken the attacking armoured forces . Though they had been provided superb intelligence , the Voronezh Front headquarters had still not been able to pinpoint the exact location where the Germans would place their offensive weight . 
 = = = Initial German advance = = = 
 = = = = XLVIII Panzer Corps = = = = 
 The panzergrenadier division Großdeutschland , commanded by Walter <unk> , was the strongest single division in the 4th Panzer Army . It was supported on its flanks by the 3rd and 11th Panzer Divisions . Großdeutschland 's Panzer IIIs and IVs had been supplemented by a company of 15 Tigers , which were used to spearhead the attack . At dawn on 5 July , Grossdeutschland , backed by heavy artillery support , advanced on a three @-@ kilometre front upon the 67th Guards Rifle Division of the 22nd Guards Rifle Corps . The <unk> Regiment , advancing on the left wing , stalled in a minefield and subsequently 36 Panthers were immobilized . The stranded regiment was subjected to a barrage of Soviet anti @-@ tank and artillery fire , which inflicted numerous casualties . Engineers were moved up and cleared paths through the minefield , but suffered casualties in the process . The combination of fierce resistance , minefields , thick mud and mechanical breakdowns took its toll . With paths cleared , the regiment resumed its advance towards Gertsovka . In the ensuing battle , heavy casualties were sustained including the regimental commander Colonel <unk> . Due to the fighting , and the marshy terrain south of the village , surrounding the <unk> stream , the regiment once more bogged down . The panzergrenadier regiment of Großdeutschland , advancing on the right wing , pushed through to the village of <unk> . The tanks were deployed in an arrow formation to minimise the effects of the Soviet <unk> defence , with the Tigers leading and the Panzer IIIs , IVs and assault guns fanning out to the flanks and rear . They were followed by infantry and combat engineers . Attempts by the VVS to impede the advance were repulsed by the Luftwaffe . 
 The 3rd Panzer Division , advancing on the left flank of Großdeutschland , made good progress and by the end of the day had captured Gertsovka and reached <unk> . The 167th Infantry Division , on the right flank of the 11th Panzer Division , also made sufficient progress , reaching <unk> by the end of the day . By the end of 5 July , a wedge had been created in the first belt of the Soviet defences . 
 = = = = II SS Panzer Corps = = = = 
 To the east , during the night of 4 – 5 July , SS combat engineers had infiltrated no @-@ man 's land and cleared lanes through the Soviet minefields . At dawn , 5 July , the three divisions of II SS Panzer Corps – SS Panzergrenadier Division Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler , 2nd SS Panzergrenadier Division Das Reich and the 3rd SS Panzergrenadier Division Totenkopf – attacked the 6th Guards Army 's 52nd Guards Rifle Division . The main assault was led by a spearhead of 42 Tigers , but in total 494 tanks and assault guns attacked across a twelve @-@ kilometre front . Totenkopf , the strongest of the three divisions , advanced towards <unk> and screened the right flank . The 1st SS Panzergrenadier Division advanced on the left flank towards <unk> . The 2nd SS Panzer Division advanced between the two formations in the center . Following closely behind the tanks were the infantry and combat engineers , coming forward to demolish obstacles and clear trenches . In addition , the advance was well supported by the Luftwaffe , which greatly aided in breaking Soviet strong points and artillery positions . 
 By 09 : 00 hours , the II SS Panzer Corps had broken through the Soviet first belt of defence along its entire front . While probing positions between the first and second Soviet defensive belts , at 13 : 00 , the 2nd SS Panzer Division 's vanguard came under fire from two T @-@ 34 tanks , which were destroyed . Forty more Soviet tanks soon engaged the division . The 1st Guards Tank Army clashed with the 2nd SS Panzer Division in a four @-@ hour battle , resulting in the Soviet tanks withdrawing . However , the battle had bought enough time for units of the 23rd Soviet Guards Rifle Corps , lodged in the Soviet second belt , to prepare itself and be reinforced with additional anti @-@ tank guns . By the early evening , 2nd SS Panzer Division had reached the minefields that marked the outer perimeter of the Soviet second belt of defence . The 1st SS Division had secured <unk> by 16 : 10 . It then pushed forward towards the second belt of defence at <unk> , but its attempts to break through were rebuffed . By the end of the day , the 1st SS Division had sustained 97 dead , 522 wounded , and 17 missing and lost about 30 tanks . Together with the 2nd SS Panzer Division , it had forced a wedge far into the defences of the 6th Guards Army . 
 The 3rd SS Panzer Division was making slow progress . They had managed to isolate the 155th Guards Regiment , of the 52nd Guards Rifle Division ( of the 23rd Guards Rifle Corps ) , from the rest of its parent division , but its attempts to sweep the regiment eastward into the flank of the neighbouring 375th Rifle Division ( of the 23rd Guards Rifle Corps ) had failed when the regiment was reinforced by the 96th Tank Brigade . Hausser , the commander of II SS Panzer Corps , requested aid from the III Panzer Corps to his right , but the panzer corps had no units to spare . By the end of the day , the 3rd SS Division had made very limited progress due in part to a tributary of the Donets river . The lack of progress undermined the advance made by its sister divisions and exposed the right flank of the corps to Soviet forces . The temperatures , reaching over 30 degrees Celsius , and frequent thunderstorms made fighting conditions difficult . 
 The 6th Guards Army , which confronted the attack by the XLVIII Panzer Korps and II SS Panzer Korps , was reinforced with tanks from the 1st Tank Army , the 2nd Guards Tank Corps and the 5th Guards Tank Corps . The 51st and 90th Guards Rifle divisions were moved up to the vicinity of Pokrovka ( not Prokhorovka , 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) to the north @-@ east ) , in the path of the 1st SS Panzer Division . The 93rd Guards Rifle Division was deployed further back , along the road leading from Pokrovka to Prokhorovka . 
 = = = = Army Detachment Kempf = = = = 
 Facing Army Detachment Kempf , consisting of III Panzer Corps and Corps Raus ( commanded by Erhard Raus ) , were the 7th Guards Army , dug in on the high ground on the eastern bank of the Northern Donets . The two German corps were tasked with crossing the river , breaking through the 7th Guards Army and covering the right flank of the 4th Panzer Army . The 503rd Heavy Tank Battalion , equipped with 45 Tigers , was also attached to the III Panzer Corps , with one company of 15 Tigers attached to each of the three panzer divisions . 
 At the <unk> bridgehead , just south of Belgorod , eight infantry battalions of the 6th Panzer Division crossed the river under heavy Soviet bombardment . Part of a company of Tigers from the 503rd Heavy Tank Battalion was able to cross before the bridge was destroyed . The rest of the 6th Panzer Division was unable to cross further south due to a traffic jam at the crossing , and remained on the western bank of the river throughout the day . Those units of the division that had crossed the river attacked Stary <unk> , but were unable to break through due to poorly cleared minefields and strong resistance . 
 To the south of the 6th Panzer Division , the 19th Panzer Division crossed the river but was delayed by mines , moving forward 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) by the end of the day . Luftwaffe bombed the bridgehead in a friendly fire incident , wounding 6th Panzer Division commander Walther von <unk> and Hermann von Oppeln @-@ <unk> of the 19th Panzer Division . Further south , infantry and tanks of 7th Panzer Division crossed the river . A new bridge had to be built specifically for the Tigers , causing further delays . Despite a poor start , the 7th Panzer Division eventually broke into the first belt of the Soviet defence and pushed on between <unk> and <unk> Log , advancing 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) , the furthest Kempf got during the day . 
 Operating to the south of 7th Panzer Division , were the 106th Infantry Division and the 320th Infantry Division of Corps Raus . The two formations attacked across a 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) front without armour support . The advance began well , with the crossing of the river and a swift advance against the 72nd Guards Rifle Division . Corps Raus took the village of <unk> <unk> , penetrating the first Red Army defence line . A Soviet counter @-@ attack supported by about 40 tanks was beaten off , with the assistance from artillery and flak batteries . After having suffered 2 @,@ 000 casualties since the morning and still facing considerable resistance from the Soviet forces , the corps dug in for the night . 
 Delaying the progress of Kempf allowed Red Army forces time to prepare their second belt of defence to meet the German attack on 6 July . The 7th Guards Army , which had absorbed the attack of III Panzer Corps and Corps " Raus " , was reinforced with two rifle divisions from the reserve . The 15th Guards Rifle Division was moved up to the second belt of defence , in the path of the III Panzer Corps . 
 = = = Development of the battle = = = 
 By the evening of 6 July , the Voronezh Front had committed all of its reserves , except for three rifle divisions under the 69th Army ; yet it could not decisively contain the 4th Panzer Army . The XLVIII Panzer Corps along the Oboyan axis , where the third defensive belt was mostly unoccupied , now had only the Red Army second defensive belt blocking it from breakthrough into the unfortified Soviet rear . This forced the Stavka to commit their strategic reserves to reinforce the Voronezh Front : the 5th Guards and 5th Guards Tank Armies , both from the Steppe Front , as well as the 2nd Tank Corps from the Southwestern Front . Ivan Konev objected to this premature piecemeal commitment of the strategic reserve , but a personal call from Stalin silenced his complaints . In addition , on 7 July Zhukov ordered the 17th Air Army – the air fleet serving the Southwestern Front – to support the 2nd Air Army in serving the Voronezh Front . On July 7 , the 5th Guards Tank Army began advancing to Prokhorovka . 5th Guards Tank Army commander , Lieutenant General Pavel Rotmistrov , described the journey : 
 By midday , the dust rose in thick clouds , settling in a solid layer on roadside bushes , grain fields , tanks and trucks . The dark red disc of the sun was hardly visible . Tanks , self @-@ propelled guns , artillery tractors , armoured personnel carriers and trucks were advancing in an unending flow . The faces of the soldiers were dark with dust and exhaust fumes . It was intolerably hot . Soldiers were tortured by thirst and their shirts , wet with sweat , stuck to their bodies . 
 The 10th Tank Corps , then still subordinate to the 5th Guards Army , was rushed ahead of the rest of the army , arriving at Prokhorovka on the night of 7 July , and 2nd Tank Corps arrived at <unk> , 25 miles ( 40 km ) southeast of Prokhorovka , by morning of 8 July . Vatutin ordered a powerful counterattack by the 5th Guards , 2nd Guards , 2nd and 10th Tank Corps , in all fielding about 593 tanks and self @-@ propelled guns and supported by most of the Front 's available air power , which aimed to defeat the II SS Panzer Corps and therefore expose the right flank of XLVIII Panzer Corps . Simultaneously , the 6th Tank Corps was to attack the XLVIII Panzer Corps and prevent it from breaking through to the free Soviet rear . Although intended to be concerted , the counterattack turned out to be a series of piecemeal attacks due to poor coordination . The 10th Tank Corps ' attack began on the dawn of 8 July but they ran straight into the antitank fire of the 2nd and 3rd SS Divisions , losing most of its forces . Later that morning , the 5th Guards Tank Corps ' attack was repelled by the 3rd SS Division . The 2nd Tank Corp joined in the afternoon and was also repelled . The 2nd Guards Tank Corps , masked by the forest around the village <unk> , 10 miles ( 16 km ) north of Belgorod , with its presence unknown to the II SS Panzer Corps , advanced towards the 167th Infantry Division . But it was detected by German air reconnaissance just before the attack had materialized , and was subsequently decimated by German ground @-@ attack aircraft armed with MK 103 anti @-@ tank cannons and at least 50 tanks were destroyed . This marked the first time in military history an attacking tank formation had been defeated by air power alone . Although a fiasco , the Soviet counterattack succeeded in stalling the advance of the II SS Panzer Corps throughout the day . 
 By the end of 8 July , II SS @-@ Panzer Corps had advanced about 29 kilometres ( 18 mi ) since the start of Citadel and broken through the first and second defensive belts . However , slow progress by the XLVIII Panzer Corps caused Hoth to shift elements of the II SS @-@ Panzer Corps to the west to help the XLVIII Panzer Corps regain its momentum . On 10 July the full effort of the corps was shifted back to its own forward progress . The direction of their advance now shifted from Oboyan due north to the northeast , toward Prokhorovka . Hoth had discussed this move with Manstein since early May , and it was a part of the 4th Panzer Army 's plan since the outset of the offensive . By this time , however , the Soviets had shifted reserve formations into its path . The defensive positions were manned by the 2nd Tank Corps , reinforced by the 9th Guards Airborne Division and 301st Anti @-@ tank Artillery Regiment , both from the 33rd Guards Rifle Corps . 
 Though the German advance in the south was slower than planned , it was faster than the Soviets expected . On 9 July , the first German units reached the Psel River . The next day , the first German infantry crossed the river . Despite the deep defensive system and minefields , German tank losses were low . At this point , Hoth turned the II SS Panzer Corps from a northward heading directed toward Oboyan to a northeast heading towards Prokhorovka . The main concern of Manstein and Hausser was the inability of Army Detachment Kempf to advance and protect the eastern flank of the II SS Panzer Corps . On 11 July , Army Detachment Kempf finally achieved a breakthrough . In a surprise night attack , the 6th Panzer Division seized a bridge across the Donets . Once across , <unk> made every effort to push troops and vehicles across the river for an advance on Prokhorovka from the south . A linkup with the II SS Panzer Corps would result with the Soviet 69th Army becoming encircled . It appeared the hoped for breakthrough was at hand . 
 = = = Battle of Prokhorovka = = = 
 Hausser had expected to continue his advance on Prokhorovka , and late on the evening of 11 July issued orders for the attack the next day . The attack would begin north of the Psel River , with the 3rd SS Panzer Division driving northeast until reaching the <unk> @-@ Prokhorovka road . Once there , they were to strike southeast to attack the Soviet positions at Prokhorovka from the rear . The 1st and 2nd SS Panzer divisions were to wait until Totenkopf 's attack had destabilised the Soviet positions at Prokhorovka . Once the Soviet position at Prokhorovka was under attack from the rear , the Leibstandarte was to move forward , advancing through the main Soviet defences dug in on the west slope before Prokhorovka . To the Leibstandarte 's right , the 2nd SS was to advance eastward to the high ground south of Prokhorovka , then turn south to roll up the Soviet line and open a gap . Unknown to Hausser , on the night of 11 – 12 July Rotmistrov had moved his 5th Guards Tank Army to an assembly area just behind Prokhorovka in preparation for a massive attack the following day . At 5 : 45 Leibstandarte headquarters started receiving reports of the ominous sound of tank engines as the Soviets moved into their assembly areas . Soviet artillery and Katyusha regiments were redeployed in preparation for the counterattack . 
 At around 08 : 00 , a Soviet artillery barrage began . At 08 : 30 , Rotmistrov radioed his tankers : " Steel , Steel , Steel ! " , the order to commence the attack . Down off the west slopes , before Prokhorovka , came the massed armour of five tank brigades from the two Soviet tank corps . The 1st SS had just started to advance , when it was taken largely by surprise . As the Soviet tanks aggressively advanced down the corridor , they carried the infantrymen of the 9th Guards Airborne Division into battle mounted on the tanks with the paratroopers holding onto rails . Amid the swirls of dust , a highly confused tank battle began . To the north and east , the 3rd SS was engaged by the Soviet 33rd Guards Rifle Corps . Tasked with destabilising the Soviet defences before Prokhorovka , the unit first had to beat off a number of attacks before they could go over onto the offensive . Most of the division 's tank losses occurred late in the afternoon as they advanced through mine fields against well @-@ hidden Soviet anti @-@ tank guns . Although the 3rd SS succeeded in reaching the <unk> @-@ Prokhorovka road , their hold was tenuous and it cost the division half of its armour . The majority of German tank losses suffered at Prokhorovka occurred here . To the south , the Soviet 18th and 29th Tank Corps , of the 5th Guards Tank Army , had been thrown back by the 1st SS acting alone . Meanwhile , the 2nd SS was holding a line to the south against the 2nd Tank Corps and the 2nd Guards Tank Corps . 
 By early afternoon , it was clear that Rotmistrov 's attack had failed . Luftwaffe local air superiority over the battlefield also contributed to the Soviet losses , partly due to the VVS being directed against the German units on the flanks of II SS Panzer Corps . By the end of the day , the Soviets had fallen back to their starting positions . 
 The battle is considered a tactical defeat for the Red Army due to the heavy tank losses , but operationally was a draw or a Soviet victory . Neither the 5th Guards Tank Army nor the II SS Panzer Corps accomplished their objectives . Though the Soviet counterattack failed and they were thrown back onto the defensive , they did enough to stop a German breakthrough . Tank losses during the battle have been a contentious subject . Soviet tank losses have been estimated from 200 to 822 , but Soviet records show about 300 complete losses and as many damaged . The Soviets claimed enormous German losses , stating they had destroyed at least 400 tanks , including 100 Tiger tanks and inflicting 3 @,@ 500 deaths . German records indicate 3 to 5 of their own tanks destroyed , and between 40 and 70 damaged . Their manpower losses are estimated at 500 killed . 
 = = Termination of Operation Citadel = = 
 On the evening of 12 July , Hitler summoned Kluge and Manstein to his headquarters at Rastenburg in East Prussia . Two days earlier , the Western Allies had invaded Sicily . The threat of further Allied landings in Italy or along southern France made Hitler believe it was essential to move forces from Kursk to Italy and to discontinue the offensive . Kluge welcomed the news , as he was aware that the Soviets were initiating a massive offensive against his sector , but Manstein was less welcoming . Manstein 's forces had just spent a week fighting through a maze of defensive works and he believed they were on the verge of breaking through to more open terrain , which would allow him to engage and destroy the Soviet armoured reserves in a mobile battle . Manstein stated , " On no account should we let go of the enemy until the mobile reserves he [ has ] committed [ are ] completely beaten . " Hitler agreed to temporarily allow the continuance of the offensive in the south part of the salient , but the following day he ordered Manstein 's reserve – the XXIV Panzer Corps – to move south to support the 1st Panzer Army . This removed the force Manstein believed was needed to succeed . 
 On 16 July , German forces withdrew to their start line . The following day , OKH ordered the II SS Panzer Corps to be withdrawn and transferred to Italy . The strength of the Soviet reserve formations had been greatly underestimated by German intelligence , and the Soviets soon went onto the offensive . 
 In his post @-@ war memoirs Lost Victories , Manstein was highly critical of Hitler 's decision to call off the operation at the height of the tactical battle . The veracity of Manstein 's claims of a near victory is debatable . The extent of Soviet reserves was far greater than he realised . These reserves were used to re @-@ equip the mauled 5th Guards Tank Army , which launched Operation Rumyantsev a couple of weeks later . However , rebuilding this formation did take time . The essential thing was to concentrate the available force for a decisive action ; Hitler 's unwillingness to accept risk resulted in his commanders being unable to do so . Further , he restricted them from fighting the type of mobile battle they wanted , despite Manstein 's success in this type of action only a few months before at the Third Battle of Kharkov . The result was a battle of attrition they were ill prepared for and which they had little chance of winning . 
 = = Soviet counteroffensives = = 
 = = = In the north : Operation Kutuzov = = = 
 Soviet offensive operations for the summer of 1943 were planned to begin after the strength of the German forces had been dissipated by their Kursk offensive . As the German momentum in the north slowed , the Soviets launched Operation <unk> on 12 July against Army Group Centre in the Orel salient , directly north of the Kursk salient . The Bryansk Front , under the command of <unk> Popov , attacked the eastern face of the Orel salient while the Western Front , commanded by Vasily Sokolovsky , attacked from the north . The Western Front 's assault was led by the 11th Guards Army , under Lieutenant General Hovhannes Bagramyan , and was supported by the 1st and 5th Tank Corps . The Soviet spearheads sustained heavy casualties , but pushed through and in some areas achieved significant penetrations . These thrusts endangered German supply routes and threatened the 9th Army with encirclement . With this threat , 9th Army was compelled to go over fully to the defensive . 
 The thinly stretched 2nd Panzer Army stood in the way of this Soviet force . The German commanders had been wary of such an attack and forces were quickly withdrawn from the Kursk offensive to meet the Soviet offensive . 
 Operation Kutuzov reduced the Orel salient and inflicted substantial losses on the German military , paving the way for the liberation of Smolensk . Soviet losses were heavy , but were replaced . The offensive allowed the Soviets to seize the strategic initiative , which they retained for the remainder of the war . 
 = = = In the south : Operation Rumyantsev = = = 
 Operation Polkovodets Rumyantsev was intended as the main Soviet offensive for 1943 . Its aim was to degrade the 4th Panzer Army and cut off the extended southern portion of Army Group South . After the heavy losses sustained by the Voronezh Front , during Operation Citadel , the Soviets needed time to regroup and refit , delaying the start of the offensive until 3 August . Diversionary attacks , launched two weeks earlier across the Donets and Mius Rivers into the Donbass , drew the attention of German reserves and thinned the defending forces that would face the main blow . The offensive was initiated by the Voronezh Front and Steppe Fronts against the northern wing of Army Group South . They drove through the German positions , making broad and deep penetrations . By 5 August , the Soviets had liberated Belgorod . 
 By 12 August , the outskirts of Kharkov had been reached . The Soviet advance was finally halted by a counter @-@ attack by the 2nd and 3rd SS Panzer Divisions . In the ensuing tank battles , the Soviet armies suffered heavy losses in armour . After this setback , the Soviets focused on Kharkov . After heavy fighting the city was liberated on 23 August . This battle is referred to by the Germans as the Fourth Battle of Kharkov , while the Soviets refer to it as the Belgorod – Kharkov offensive operation . 
 = = Results = = 
 The campaign was a strategic Soviet success . For the first time , a major German offensive had been stopped before achieving a breakthrough . The Germans , despite using more technologically advanced armour than in previous years , were unable to break through the in @-@ depth Soviet defences and were caught off guard by the significant operational reserves of the Red Army . This result changed the pattern of operations on the Eastern Front , with the Soviet Union gaining the operational initiative . The Soviet victory , however , was costly , with the Red Army losing considerably more men and materiel than the German Army . However , the Soviet Union 's larger industrial potential and pool of manpower allowed them to absorb and replenish these losses , with their overall strategic strength unaffected . Guderian wrote : 
 With the failure of Zitadelle we have suffered a decisive defeat . The armoured formations , reformed and re @-@ equipped with so much effort , had lost heavily in both men and equipment and would now be unemployable for a long time to come . It was problematical whether they could be rehabilitated in time to defend the Eastern Front ... Needless to say the [ Soviets ] exploited their victory to the full . There were to be no more periods of quiet on the Eastern Front . From now on , the enemy was in undisputed possession of the initiative . 
 With victory , the initiative firmly passed to the Red Army . For the remainder of the war the Germans were limited to reacting to Soviet advances , and were never able to regain the initiative or launch a major offensive on the Eastern Front . The Western Allied landings in Italy opened up a new front , further diverting German resources and attention . 
 Though the location , plan of attack , and timing were determined by Hitler , he blamed the defeat on his General Staff . Unlike Stalin , who gave his commanding generals the liberty to make important command decisions , Hitler 's interference in German military matters progressively increased while his attention to the political aspects of the war decreased . The opposite was true for Stalin ; throughout the Kursk campaign , he trusted the judgment of his commanders , and as their decisions led to battlefield success it increased his trust in their military judgment . Stalin stepped back from operational planning , only rarely overruling military decisions , resulting in the Red Army gaining more freedom of action during the course of the war . 
 = = Casualties and losses = = 
 The casualties suffered by the two combatants are difficult to determine , due to several factors . In regard to the Germans , equipment losses were complicated by the fact that they made determined efforts to recover and repair tanks . For example , tanks disabled one day often appeared a day or two later repaired . German personnel losses are clouded by the lack of access to German unit records , which were seized at the end of the war . Many were transferred to the United States national archives and were not made available until 1978 , while others were taken by the Soviet Union , which declined to confirm their existence . 
 = = = Soviet losses = = = 
 Russian military historian Grigoriy <unk> , who based his figures on the Soviet archives , is considered by historian David Glantz as the most reliable source for Soviet casualty figures . His figures are supported by historian Karl @-@ Heinz Frieser . <unk> calculated total Soviet losses during the German offensive as 177 @,@ 877 casualties . The Central Front suffered 15 @,@ 336 irrecoverable casualties and 18 @,@ 561 medical casualties , for a total of 33 @,@ 897 casualties . The Voronezh Front suffered 27 @,@ 542 irrecoverable casualties and 46 @,@ 350 medical casualties , for a total of 73 @,@ 892 . The Steppe Front suffered 27 @,@ 452 irrecoverable casualties and 42 @,@ 606 medical casualties , for a total of 70 @,@ 085 . 
 During the two Soviet offensives , total casualties amounted to 685 @,@ 456 men . During Operation Kutuzov , Soviet losses amounted to 112 @,@ 529 irrecoverable casualties and 317 @,@ 361 medical casualties , for a total loss of 429 @,@ 890 men . The Western Front reported 25 @,@ 585 irrecoverable casualties and 76 @,@ 856 medical casualties . The Bryansk Front suffered 39 @,@ 173 irrecoverable casualties and 123 @,@ 234 medical casualties . The Central Front lost 47 @,@ 771 irrecoverable casualties and 117 @,@ 271 medical casualties . Soviet losses during Operation Polkovodets Rumyantsev totaled 255 @,@ 566 men , with 71 @,@ 611 listed as irrecoverable casualties and 183 @,@ 955 as medical casualties . The Voronezh Front lost 48 @,@ 339 irrecoverable casualties and 108 @,@ 954 medical casualties , for a total of 157 @,@ 293 . The Steppe Front lost 23 @,@ 272 irrecoverable casualties and 75 @,@ 001 medical casualties , for a total of 98 @,@ 273 . 
 Soviet equipment losses during the German offensive came to 1 @,@ 614 tanks and self @-@ propelled guns destroyed or damaged of the 3 @,@ 925 vehicles committed to the battle . The Soviet losses were roughly three times larger than the German losses . During Operation Kutuzov , 2 @,@ 349 tanks and self @-@ propelled guns were lost out of an initial strength of 2 @,@ 308 ; a loss of over 100 percent . During Polkovodets Rumyantsev 1 @,@ 864 tanks and self @-@ propelled guns were lost out of the 2 @,@ 439 employed . The loss ratio suffered by the Soviets was roughly 5 : 1 in favour of the German military . However , large Soviet reserves of equipment and their high rate of tank production enabled the Soviet tank armies to soon replace lost equipment and maintain their fighting strength . The Red Army repaired many of its damaged tanks ; many Soviet tanks were rebuilt up to four times to keep them in the fight . Soviet tank strength went back up to 2 @,@ 750 tanks by 3 August due to the repair of damaged vehicles . 
 According to historian Christer Bergström , Soviet Air Forces losses during the German offensive amounted to 677 aircraft on the northern flank and 439 on the southern flank . Total casualties are uncertain . Bergström 's research indicates total Soviet air losses between 12 July and 18 August , during the German offensive and the Operation Kutuzov counteroffensive , were 1 @,@ 104 . 
 = = = German losses = = = 
 Karl @-@ Heinz Frieser , who reviewed the German archive record , calculated that during Operation Citadel 54 @,@ 182 casualties were suffered . Of these , 9 @,@ 036 were killed , 1 @,@ 960 were reported missing and 43 @,@ 159 were wounded . The 9th Army suffered 23 @,@ 345 casualties , while Army Group South suffered 30 @,@ 837 casualties . Throughout the Soviet offensives , 86 @,@ 064 casualties were suffered . In facing Operation Kutuzov , 14 @,@ 215 men were killed , 11 @,@ 300 were reported missing ( presumed killed or captured ) and 60 @,@ 549 were wounded . During Polkovodets Rumyantsev , 25 @,@ 068 casualties were incurred , including 8 @,@ 933 killed and missing . Total casualties for the three battles were about 170 @,@ 000 men . 
 During Operation Citadel , 252 to 323 tanks and assault guns were destroyed . By 5 July , when the Battle of Kursk started , there were only 184 operational Panthers . Within two days , this had dropped to 40 . On 17 July 1943 after Hitler had ordered a stop to the German offensive , Guderian sent in the following preliminary assessment of the Panthers : 
 Due to enemy action and mechanical breakdowns , the combat strength sank rapidly during the first few days . By the evening of 10 July there were only 10 operational Panthers in the frontline . 25 Panthers had been lost as total writeoffs ( 23 were hit and burnt and two had caught fire during the approach march ) . 100 Panthers were in need of repair ( 56 were damaged by hits and mines and 44 by mechanical breakdown ) . 60 percent of the mechanical breakdowns could be easily repaired . Approximately 40 Panthers had already been repaired and were on the way to the front . About 25 still had not been recovered by the repair service ... On the evening of 11 July , 38 Panthers were operational , 31 were total writeoffs and 131 were in need of repair . A slow increase in the combat strength is observable . The large number of losses by hits ( 81 Panthers up to 10 July ) attests to the heavy fighting . 
 By 16 July , Army Group South claimed 161 tanks and 14 assault guns lost . Up to 14 July , 9th Army reported they had lost as total writeoffs 41 tanks and 17 assault guns . These losses break down as 109 Panzer IVs , 42 Panthers , 38 Panzer IIIs , 31 assault guns , 19 <unk> , 10 Tigers and three flame tanks . Before the Germans ended their offensive at Kursk , the Soviets began their counteroffensive and succeeded in pushing the Germans back into a steady retreat . Thus , a report on 11 August 1943 showed that the numbers of total writeoffs in Panthers swelled to 156 , with only 9 operational . The German Army was forced into a fighting retreat and increasingly lost tanks in combat as well as from abandoning and destroying damaged vehicles . Across the entire Eastern Front 50 Tiger tanks were lost during July and August , with some 240 damaged . Most of these occurred during their offensive at Kursk . Some 600 tanks sustained damage in the period from 5 July to 18 July . 
 The total number of German tanks and assault guns destroyed during July and August along the entire Eastern Front amount to 1 @,@ 331 . Of these , Frieser estimates that 760 were destroyed during the Battle of Kursk . Beevor writes that " the Red Army had lost five armoured vehicles for every German panzer destroyed . " 
 Frieser reports Luftwaffe losses at 524 planes , with 159 lost during the German offensive , 218 destroyed during Operation Kutuzov , and a further 147 lost during Operation Polkovodets Rumyantsev . In reviewing the reports of the quartermaster of the Luftwaffe , Bergström presents different figures . Between 5 and 31 July , Bergström reports 681 aircraft lost or damaged ( 335 for Fliegerkorps VIII and 346 for Luftflotte 6 ) with a total of 420 being written off ( 192 from Fliegerkorps VIII and 229 from Luftflotte 6 ) . 
 = Eli Todd = 
 Dr. Eli Todd ( July 22 , 1769 – November 17 , 1833 ) was a pioneer in the treatment of the mentally ill . His efforts in the medical field of mental care and smallpox treatment had a significant impact on not only the residents of his town , Farmington , Connecticut , but contributed to the establishment of high standards for the rest of the newly formed nation . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Eli Todd was born in 1769 in New Haven , Connecticut . He had two sisters , named Polly and Eunice . His mother was Mary Rowe , and his father , a New Haven merchant , died in 1776 , a few months before his 7th birthday . He was then sent to live with his great uncle , Reverend Dr. Todd , who resided in East Guilford , in the same state . He remained with Reverend Dr. Todd until he was ten , when he was then under the care and instruction of Reverend Dr. Goodrich , of Durham , Connecticut , during which time he was introduced to the practice of medicine . He began to attend Yale University at the age of fourteen in 1783 , and graduated with honors at the age of eighteen in 1787 . His graduation was a significant milestone in his medical career . He studied medicine as an apprentice under Dr. Ebenezer Beardsley of New Haven , and began his own medical practice in Farmington at the age of 21 . He soon became the favorite practitioner of the wealthy class in the community . He used gentle treatment methods as opposed to the harsh remedies commonly used at that time . Todd was 23 years old when he established Hospital Rock on Rattlesnake Mountain . He helped found the Hartford County and Connecticut Medical Societies , and was later a member of the Conversation Club . He also founded the Society of Medical Friends in Farmington , where doctors from around Connecticut could share treatments and discuss opinions . 
 = = Accomplishments = = 
 = = = Hospital Rock = = = 
 In 1791 , working with Dr. Theodore Wadsworth , Todd gained permission to start a hospital near the present @-@ day Farmington / Plainville border for smallpox inoculation . The facility , commonly called Hospital Rock , is found deep in the second @-@ growth hardwood forest of Rattlesnake Mountain in Connecticut and was used from 1792 @-@ 1794 . Though the building is no longer present , the nearby rock ledge upon which patients would socialize remains . It was this rock that lent the facility its name . At this location , they could also receive mail and various packages . 
 The actual rock has been marked with over 100 distinct carvings , 66 of which are the full names of contemporary patients . Other carvings include initials , names , and dates . Prior to widespread vaccination , the treatment at Hospital Rock was extremely important . Hospital Rock was no longer needed when the smallpox vaccination was available and eventually faded away into the woods . 
 = = = Contributions to mental health care = = = 
 Todd was a pioneer doctor in the field of psychiatry . At the time , treatment of the mentally ill was typically inhumane : “ A mentally ill patient was locked up in an insane asylum with little or no care and treated as if they were a criminal ” . Prior to 1800 , it was common for people deemed mad to be locked away and forgotten about . Some individuals , such as Todd and Dorothea Dix wanted more humane care for the mentally ill as they were appalled at the treatment of such people . The Connecticut Retreat for the Insane was built in 1823 , and was opened to admissions in 1824 . Eli Todd was its first director . It was often referred to as the Hartford Retreat for the Insane , and is now known as The Institute of Living . The Hartford Retreat for the Insane cost $ 12 @,@ 000 to build and could serve up to 40 patients at a time . “ It cost $ 3 @.@ 00 a week for a state resident and $ 4 @.@ 00 a week for an out of state resident ” . 
 = = = Alcoholism treatment and theory = = = 
 The widespread consumption of alcohol was recognized as a problem by Dr. Eli Todd in 1812 . In a conversation with Edward Hooker on March 30 , 1812 , he stated that there was no single solution to alcoholism . “ He advised a 3 @-@ pronged attack that was as follows : there should be an association of respectable men who would make it unfashionable to take ardent spirits ; work houses of ‘ idle , drinking persons ’ after their third conviction for drunkenness ; and heavy taxes on imported and domestic liquor ” . 
 Dr. Eli Todd also viewed alcohol as the “ prominent evil of the day ” . On February 22 , 1842 , the Washington Society of Farmington was formed . They practiced total abstinence , and employed social pressure for temperance in Farmington . By 1847 , 569 people were part of this society . This was a step forward as part of Dr. Eli Todd ’ s attack against alcoholism . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 After graduating Yale at the age of 18 , Todd had a two @-@ year apprenticeship in Farmington , Connecticut . After finishing his apprenticeship , he spent the next 25 years serving as Farmington 's resident doctor , retiring in 1815 . He often consulted with farmers to help them with the productivity of their produce . Todd concluded that “ the return to social and political stability during the first years of independence was undoubtedly eased by the availability of unlimited land to the west ” . 
 He was not a very good businessman and although his fame grew statewide , his wealth never swelled to match until he became director of the Connecticut Retreat . In 1796 , shortly after starting his work in Farmington , he married Rachel Hills . In the same year , his half @-@ brother Michael died at sea . In 1797 , his sister Polly died of spotted fever . His mother died in 1806 . In 1811 , Rachel 's brother Reuben died , and Todd and his wife adopted his two daughters Theresa and Jennet . Rachel died in 1825 , and Todd subsequently married her younger sister , Catherine . She would outlive him by 33 years , dying herself in 1866 . 
 His interest in psychology began when his sister Eunice committed suicide , because of the issue of depression . He received a letter from Eunice 's husband in August 1829 , which told of her death . Todd had thought he had cured her , multiple times , but she still had episodes , and when she had to attend to a large farm in empty Vermont alone , she was pushed over the edge . This began his theory that mental retardation ( insanity at the time ) was a disease and had a cause and possibly a cure . This began his revolutionary treatments , and what made the government give so much money for the mental hospital to be built . 
 = Tintin in the Land of the Soviets = 
 Tintin in the Land of the Soviets ( French : Tintin au pays des Soviets ) is the first volume of The Adventures of Tintin , the comics series by Belgian cartoonist Hergé . Commissioned by the conservative Belgian newspaper Le Vingtième Siècle as anti @-@ communist propaganda for its children 's supplement Le Petit Vingtième , it was serialised weekly from January 1929 to May 1930 before being published in a collected volume by Éditions du Petit Vingtième in 1930 . The story tells of young Belgian reporter Tintin and his dog Snowy , who are sent to the Soviet Union to report on the policies of Joseph Stalin 's Bolshevik government . Tintin 's intent to expose the regime 's secrets prompts agents from the Soviet secret police , the OGPU , to hunt him down with the intent to kill . 
 Bolstered by publicity stunts , Land of the Soviets was a commercial success in Belgium , and also witnessed serialisation in France and Switzerland . Hergé continued The Adventures of Tintin with Tintin in the Congo , and the series became a defining part of the Franco @-@ Belgian comics tradition . Damage to the original plates prevented republication of the book for several decades , while Hergé later expressed embarrassment at the crudeness of the work . As he began to redraw his earlier Adventures in second , colour versions from 1942 onward , he decided against doing so for Land of the Soviets ; it is the only completed Tintin story not to have appeared in colour . Growing demand among fans of the series resulted in the production of unauthorised copies of the book in the 1960s , with the first officially sanctioned republication appearing in 1969 , after which it was translated into several other languages , including English . Critical reception of the work has been largely negative , with commentators on The Adventures of Tintin describing it as one of Hergé 's weakest works . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Tintin , a reporter for Le Petit Vingtième , is sent with his dog Snowy on an assignment to the Soviet Union , departing from Brussels . En route to Moscow , an agent of the OGPU ( Soviet secret police ) sabotages the train and declares the reporter to be a " dirty little bourgeois " . The Berlin police blame Tintin for the bombing but he escapes to the border of the Soviet Union . Following closely , the OGPU agent finds Tintin and brings him before the local Commissar 's office , instructing the Commissar to make the reporter " disappear ... accidentally " . Escaping again , Tintin finds " how the Soviets fool the poor idiots who still believe in a Red Paradise " by burning bundles of straw and clanging metal in order to trick visiting English Marxists into believing that non @-@ operational Soviet factories are productive . 
 Tintin witnesses a local election , where the Bolsheviks threaten the voters to ensure their own victory ; when they try to arrest him , he dresses as a ghost to scare them away . Tintin attempts to make his way out of the Soviet Union , but the Bolsheviks pursue and arrest him , then threaten him with torture . Escaping his captors , Tintin reaches Moscow , remarking that the Bolsheviks have turned it into " a stinking slum " . He and Snowy observe a government official handing out bread to homeless Marxists but denying it to their opponents ; Snowy steals a loaf and gives it to a starving boy . Spying on a secret Bolshevik meeting , Tintin learns that all the Soviet grain is being exported abroad for propaganda purposes , leaving the people starving , and that the government plans to " organise an expedition against the kulaks , the rich peasants , and force them at gunpoint to give us their corn . " 
 Tintin infiltrates the Soviet army and warns some of the kulaks to hide their grain , but the army catches him and sentences him to death by firing squad . By planting blanks in the soldiers ' rifles , Tintin fakes his death and is able to make his way into the snowy wilderness , where he discovers an underground Bolshevik hideaway in a haunted house . A Bolshevik then captures him and informs him , " You 're in the hideout where Lenin , Trotsky and Stalin have collected together wealth stolen from the people ! " With Snowy 's help , Tintin escapes , commandeers a plane , and flies into the night . The plane crashes , but Tintin fashions a new propeller from a tree using a penknife , and continues to Berlin . The OGPU agents appear and lock Tintin in a dungeon , but he escapes with the aid of Snowy , who has dressed himself in a tiger costume . The last OGPU agent attempts to kidnap Tintin , but this attempt is foiled , leaving the agent threatening , " We 'll blow up all the capitals of Europe with dynamite ! " Tintin returns to Brussels amidst a huge popular reception . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Georges Remi — best known under the pen name Hergé — had been employed as an illustrator at Le Vingtième Siècle ( " The Twentieth Century " ) , a staunchly Roman Catholic and conservative Belgian newspaper based in Hergé 's native Brussels . Run by the Abbé Norbert Wallez , the paper described itself as a " Catholic Newspaper for Doctrine and Information " and disseminated a far @-@ right and fascist viewpoint ; Wallez was an admirer of Italian fascist leader Benito Mussolini and kept a signed picture of him on his desktop , while Léon Degrelle , who later became the leader of the fascist <unk> , worked as a foreign correspondent for the paper . According to Harry Thompson , such political ideas were common in Belgium at the time , and Hergé 's milieu was permeated with conservative ideas revolving around " patriotism , Catholicism , strict morality , discipline , and naivety " . Anti @-@ communist sentiment was strong , and a Soviet exhibition held in Brussels in January 1928 was vandalised amid demonstrations by the fascist National Youth Movement , in which Degrelle took part . 
 Wallez appointed Hergé editor of a children 's supplement for the Thursday issues of Le Vingtième Siècle , titled Le Petit Vingtième ( " The Little Twentieth " ) . Propagating Wallez 's socio @-@ political views to its young readership , it contained explicitly pro @-@ fascist and anti @-@ Semitic sentiment . In addition to editing the supplement , Hergé illustrated L 'extraordinaire aventure de Flup , Nénesse , Poussette et Cochonnet ( " The Extraordinary Adventures of Flup , Nénesse , Poussette and Cochonnet " ) , a comic strip authored by a member of the newspaper 's sport staff , which told the adventures of two boys , one of their little sisters , and her inflatable rubber pig . Hergé became dissatisfied with mere illustration work , and wanted to write and draw his own cartoon strip . 
 Hergé already had experience creating comic strips . From July 1926 he had written a strip about a boy scout patrol leader titled Les Aventures de Totor C.P. des <unk> ( " The Adventures of Totor , Scout Leader of the Cockchafers " ) for the Scouting newspaper Le Boy Scout Belge ( " The Belgian Boy Scout " ) . The character of Totor was a strong influence on Tintin ; Hergé described the latter as being like Totor 's younger brother . Jean @-@ Marc and Randy Lofficier stated that graphically , Totor and Tintin were " virtually identical " except for the scout uniform , also noting many similarities between their respective adventures , particularly in the illustration style , the fast pace of the story , and the use of humour . Hergé also had experience creating anti @-@ communist propaganda , having produced a number of satirical sketches for Le <unk> in October 1928 titled " 70 percent of Communist chefs are odd ducks . " 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Hergé wanted to set Tintin 's first adventure in the United States in order to involve Native Americans — a people who had fascinated him since boyhood — in the story . Wallez rejected this idea , which later saw realisation as the series ' third instalment , Tintin in America ( 1932 ) . Instead , Wallez wanted Hergé to send Tintin to the Soviet Union , founded in 1922 by the Marxist – Leninist Bolshevik Party after seizing power in the Russian Empire during the 1917 October Revolution . The Bolsheviks greatly altered the country 's society by nationalising industry and replacing a capitalist economy with a state socialist one . By the late 1920s , the Soviet Union 's first leader , Vladimir Lenin , had died and been replaced by Joseph Stalin . Being both Roman Catholic and politically right @-@ wing , Wallez was opposed to the atheist , anti @-@ Christian , and extreme left @-@ wing Soviet government , and wanted Tintin 's first adventure to reflect this , indoctrinating its young readers with anti @-@ Marxist and anti @-@ communist ideas . Later commenting on why he produced a work of propaganda , Hergé said that he had been " inspired by the atmosphere of the paper " , which taught him that being a Catholic meant being anti @-@ Marxist , and since childhood he had been horrified by the Bolshevik shooting of the Romanov family in July 1918 . 
 Hergé did not have the time to visit the Soviet Union or to analyse any available published information about it . Instead , he obtained an overview from a single pamphlet , Moscou sans voiles ( " Moscow Unveiled " ) by Joseph Douillet ( 1878 – 1954 ) , a former Belgian consul to Rostov @-@ on @-@ Don who had spent nine years in Russia following the 1917 revolution . Published in both Belgium and France in 1928 , Moscou sans voiles sold well to a public eager to believe Douillet 's anti @-@ Bolshevik claims , many of which were of doubtful accuracy . As Michael Farr noted , " Hergé freely , though selectively , lifted whole scenes from Douillet 's account " , including " the chilling election episode " , which was " almost identical " to Douillet 's description in Moscou sans voiles . Hergé 's lack of knowledge about the Soviet Union led to many factual errors ; the story contains references to bananas , Shell petrol and Huntley & Palmers biscuits , none of which existed in the Soviet Union at the time . He also made errors in Russian names , typically adding the Polish ending " <unk> " to them , rather than the Russian equivalent " <unk> " . 
 In creating Land of the Soviets , Hergé was influenced by innovations within the comic strip medium . He claimed a strong influence from French cartoonist Alain Saint @-@ Ogan , producer of the Zig et Puce series . The two met the following year , becoming lifelong friends . He was also influenced by the contemporary American comics that reporter Léon Degrelle had sent back to Belgium from Mexico , where he was stationed to report on the Cristero War . These American comics included George McManus 's Bringing Up Father , George Herriman 's Krazy Kat and Rudolph Dirks 's Katzenjammer Kids . Farr believed that contemporary cinema influenced Tintin in the Land of the Soviets , indicating similarities between scenes in the book with the police chases of the Keystone Cops films , the train chase in Buster Keaton 's The General and with the expressionist images found in the works of directors such as Fritz Lang . Farr summarised this influence by commenting , " As a pioneer of the strip cartoon , Hergé was not afraid to draw on one modern medium to develop another " . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 Prior to serialisation , an announcement ran in the 4 January 1929 edition of Le Petit Vingtième , proclaiming , " [ W ] e are always eager to satisfy our readers and keep them up to date on foreign affairs . We have therefore sent Tintin , one of our top reporters , to Soviet Russia . " The illusion of Tintin as a real reporter for the paper , and not a fictional character , was emphasised by the claim that the comic strip was not a series of drawings , but composed of photographs taken of Tintin 's adventure . Biographer Benoît Peeters thought this a private joke between staff at Le Petit Vingtième ; alluding to the fact that Hergé had originally been employed as a reporter @-@ photographer , a job that he never fulfilled . Literary critic Tom McCarthy later compared this approach to that of 18th @-@ century European literature , which often presented fictional narratives as non @-@ fiction . 
 The first instalment of Tintin in the Land of the Soviets appeared in the 10 January 1929 edition of Le Petit Vingtième , and ran weekly until 8 May 1930 . Hergé did not plot out the storyline in advance ; he improvised new situations on a weekly basis , leaving Jean @-@ Marc and Randy Lofficier to observe that both " Story @-@ wise and graphically , Hergé was learning his craft before our eyes . " Hergé admitted that the work was rushed , saying , " The Petit Vingtième came out on Wednesday evening , and I often didn 't have a clue on Wednesday morning how I was going to get Tintin out of the predicament I had put him in the previous week . " Michael Farr considered this evident , remarking that many drawings were " crude , rudimentary , [ and ] rushed " , lacking the " polish and refinement " that Hergé would later develop . Contrastingly , he thought that certain plates were of the " highest quality " and exhibited Hergé 's " outstanding ability as a draughtsman " . 
 The story was an immediate success among its young readers . As Harry Thompson remarked , the plotline would have been popular with the average Belgian parent , exploiting their anti @-@ communist sentiment and feeding their fears regarding the Russians . The series ' popularity led Wallez to organise publicity stunts to boost interest . The first of these was the April Fools ' Day publication of a faked letter purporting to be from the OGPU ( Soviet secret police ) confirming Tintin 's existence , and warning that if the paper did not cease publication of " these attacks against the Soviets and the revolutionary proletariat of Russia , you will meet death very shortly . " 
 The second was a staged publicity event , suggested by the reporter Charles Lesne , which took place on Thursday 8 May 1930 . During the stunt , the 15 @-@ year @-@ old Lucien Pepermans , a friend of Hergé 's who had Tintin 's features , arrived at Brussels ' Gare du Nord railway station aboard the incoming Liège express from Moscow , dressed in Russian garb as Tintin and accompanied by a white dog ; in later life Hergé erroneously claimed that he had accompanied Pepermans . They were greeted by a crowd of fans , who mobbed Pepermans and pulled him into their midst . Proceeding by limousine to the offices of Le Vingtième Siècle , they were greeted by further crowds , largely of Catholic Boy Scouts ; Pepermans gave a speech on the building 's balcony , before gifts were distributed to fans . 
 From 26 October 1930 , Tintin in the Land of the Soviets was syndicated to French Catholic magazine Cœurs Vaillants ( " Brave Hearts " ) , recently founded by the Abbé Gaston Courtois . Courtois had travelled to Brussels to meet Wallez and Hergé , but upon publication thought that his readers would not understand the speech bubble system , adding explanatory sentences below each image . This angered Hergé , who unsuccessfully " intervened passionately " to stop the additions . The publication was highly significant for initiating Hergé 's international career . The story was also reprinted in its original form in L <unk> illustré , a Swiss weekly magazine , from 1932 onward . Recognising the continued commercial viability of the story , Wallez published it in book form in September 1930 through the Brussels @-@ based Éditions du Petit Vingtième at a print run of 10 @,@ 000 , each sold at twenty francs . The first 500 copies were numbered and signed by Hergé using Tintin 's signature , with Snowy 's paw print drawn on by Wallez 's secretary , Germaine Kieckens , who later became Hergé 's first wife . 
 In April 2012 an original copy of the first album was sold for a record price of € 37 @,@ 820 by specialised auctioneers Banque Dessinée of Elsene , with another copy being sold for € 9 @,@ 515 . In October the same year a copy was sold at the same auction house for € 17 @,@ 690 . 
 = = = Later publications = = = 
 By 1936 there was already a demand for reprints of Tintin in the Land of the Soviets , with Lesne sending a letter to Hergé enquiring if this was possible . The cartoonist was reluctant , stating that the original plates for the story were now in a poor condition and that as a result he would have to redraw the entire story were it to be re @-@ published . Several years later , amid the German occupation of Belgium during World War II , a German @-@ run publishing company asked Hergé for permission to republish Tintin in the Land of the Soviets , with the intent of using it as anti @-@ Soviet propaganda , but again Hergé declined the offer . 
 From 1942 onwards , Hergé began redrawing and colouring his earlier Tintin adventures for Casterman , but chose not to do so for Tintin in the Land of the Soviets , considering its story too crude . Embarrassed by it , he labeled it a " transgression of [ his ] youth " . Jean @-@ Marc and Randy Lofficier believed that another factor in his decision might have been the story 's virulently anti @-@ Marxist theme , which would have been unpopular amidst growing West European sympathies for Marxism following the Second World War . In an article discussing Hergé 's work which was published in the magazine Jeune Afrique ( " Young Africa " ) in 1962 , it was noted that despite the fact that fans of his work visited the Bibliothèque Nationale to read the copy of Land of the Soviets that was held there , it " will never ( and with good cause ) be republished " . In 1961 , Hergé wrote a letter to Casterman suggesting that the original version of the story be republished in a volume containing a publisher 's warning about its content . Louis @-@ Robert Casterman replied with a letter in which he stated that while the subject had been discussed within the company , " There are more hesitant or decidedly negative opinions than there are enthusiastic ones . Whatever the case , you can rest assured that the matter is being actively considered " . 
 As The Adventures of Tintin became more popular in Western Europe , and some of the rarer books became collectors ' items , the original printed edition of Tintin in the Land of the Soviets became highly valued and unauthorized editions began to be produced . As a result , Studios Hergé published 500 numbered copies to mark the series ' 40th birthday in 1969 . This encouraged further demand , leading to the production of further " mediocre @-@ quality " unlicensed editions , which were sold at " very high prices " . To stem this illegal trade , Hergé agreed to a 1973 republication as part of the Archives Hergé collection , where it appeared in a collected volume alongside Tintin in the Congo and Tintin in America . With unofficial copies continuing to be sold , Casterman produced a facsimile edition of the original in 1981 . Over the next decade , it was translated into nine languages , with an English @-@ language edition translated by Leslie Lonsdale @-@ Cooper and Michael Turner published by <unk> in 1989 . This edition was republished in 1999 for the 70th anniversary of Tintin in the Land of the Soviets . 
 Sociologist John Theobald noted that by the 1980s , the book 's plot had become " socially and politically acceptable " in the western world as part of the <unk> intensification of the Cold War and increased hostility towards Marxism and socialism . This cultural climate allowed it to appear " on hypermarket shelves as suitable children 's literature for the new millennium " . That same theme prevented its publication in Communist Party @-@ governed China , where it was the only completed adventure not translated by Wang <unk> and officially published in the early 21st century . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In his study of the cultural and literary legacy of Brussels , André De Vries remarked that Tintin in the Land of the Soviets was " crude by Hergé 's later standards , in every sense of the word " . Simon Kuper of the Financial Times criticised both Land of the Soviets and Tintin in the Congo as the " worst " of the Adventures , being " poorly drawn " and " largely plot @-@ free " . Sociologist John Theobald of the Southampton Institute argued that Hergé had no interest in providing factual information about the Soviet Union , but only wanted to indoctrinate his readers against Marxism , hence depicting the Bolsheviks rigging elections , killing opponents and stealing the grain from the people . According to literary critic Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès of Stanford University , Hergé cast the Bolsheviks as " absolute evil " but was unable to understand how they had risen to power , or what their political views were . This meant that Tintin did not know this either , thereby observing the Soviet " world of misery " and fighting Bolsheviks without being able to foment an effective counter @-@ revolution . Literary critic Tom McCarthy described the plot as " fairly straightforward " and criticised the depiction of Bolsheviks as " pantomime cut @-@ outs " . 
 Hergé biographer Benoît Peeters was critical of the opening pages to the story , believing that the illustrations in it were among Hergé 's worst and stating , " One couldn 't have imagined a less remarkable debut for a work destined for such greatness " . He believed that Tintin was an existentialist " Sartre @-@ esque character " who existed only through his actions , operating simply as a narrative vehicle throughout the book . Where Hergé showed his talent , Peeters thought , was in conveying movement , and in utilising language in a " constantly imaginative " way . He considered the story 's " absurdity " to be its best feature , rejecting plausible scenarios in favour of the " joyously bizarre " , such as Tintin being frozen solid and then thawing , or Snowy dressing in a tiger skin to scare away a real tiger . Hergé biographer Pierre Assouline described the comic writer 's image of the Soviet Union as being " a <unk> vision of poverty , famine , terror , and repression " . 
 Marking the release of Steven Spielberg 's The Adventures of Tintin : The Secret of the Unicorn film in 2011 , the British Broadcasting Corporation ( BBC ) commissioned a documentary devoted to Tintin in the Land of the Soviets in which journalist Frank Gardner — who considered Tintin to be his boyhood hero — visited Russia , investigating and defending the accuracy of Hergé 's account of Soviet human rights abuses . In an article for conservative newspaper the Daily Mail , Gardner discussed his experience , stating that upon first reading the comic , he thought the drawings crude and the plot improbable . However , during his trip to Russia , he learned from a Muscovite historian that the spirit of Hergé 's story was in keeping with what was going on in Russia at the time . The historian confirmed that one of the great tragedies of the 20th century was the wholesale persecution of the Kulak farmers by the Bolsheviks , where " literally thousands perished . " First airing on Sunday 30 October 2011 on BBC Two , it was produced by Graham Strong , with <unk> <unk> as producer and Tim Green as executive producer . David Butcher reviewed the documentary for the Radio Times , opining that Gardner 's trip was dull compared to the comic 's adventure , but praising a few " great moments " , such as the scene in which Gardner tested an open @-@ topped 1929 <unk> , just as Tintin did in the adventure . 
 = David Watts Morgan = 
 David Watts Morgan CBE DSO JP ( 18 December 1867 – 23 February 1933 ) , who later in life hyphenated his name to Watts @-@ Morgan , was a Welsh trade unionist , a Labour politician , and a Member of Parliament ( MP ) from 1918 to 1933 . 
 Described as " [ straddling ] the transition in south Wales miners ' politics from Lib @-@ <unk> to socialism , but ... never fully representative of either " , Morgan encouraged Rhondda miners to enlist in the army in 1914 following the outbreak of the First World War , and was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire for his efforts . He initially served in the Welsh Regiment , before becoming a lieutenant @-@ colonel in the Labour Corps . Morgan was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for bravery at the Battle of Cambrai in 1917 , earning him the nickname " Dai Alphabet " in South Wales . 
 = = Early life = = 
 David Watts Morgan was born in <unk> , Wales , in 1867 to Thomas and Margaret Morgan . He was educated at <unk> Elementary School until the age of eleven , when he began work as a pit boy , helping miners with the less strenuous work such as manning ventilation doors . At the age of seventeen he was employed as a coal miner in Ynyshir in the Rhondda . In 1880 Watts Morgan became a <unk> at the newly opened National Colliery in Wattstown , a responsible position that involved tallying the weight of coal extracted by each miner when it reached the surface . During his time at Wattstown he took evening classes to become a mining engineer . He never practised once qualified , but the knowledge he gained was useful to him in his role as the leader of several mine rescues , and gave him a practical knowledge that informed his later political life . 
 = = Trade unionism = = 
 From <unk> Watts Morgan rose to the position of district miners ' agent in 1898 , becoming a member of the Rhondda Labour and Liberal Association ( <unk> ) . Watts Morgan followed in the political Liberalism of William " Mabon " Abraham , and began speaking at <unk> meetings and banquets . In 1899 the Porth and Cymmer seat for the Glamorgan County Council ( GCC ) fell vacant , and Watts Morgan was seen as a viable candidate from both Liberal and Labour standpoints , but was surprisingly defeated at the by @-@ election by local timber merchant David Jenkins . The next year Jenkins declined to stand for re @-@ election , but the miners ' district committee refused Watts Morgan time off from his agent 's duties and the seat was won uncontested by colleague James Baker . 
 In 1902 , James Baker died at the age of 41 , leaving an opening in the GCC . On this occasion Watts Morgan was permitted to advance as a Labour candidate and was returned unopposed . By 1903 he was being talked of as a possible candidate for a south Wales parliamentary constituency . He joined the South Wales Miners ' Federation at its inception and by 1902 he was pushing for a greater political role for the organisation . By 1908 the Federation was making great headway in the Rhondda and was substantially improving conditions for the miners . At this time Watts Morgan was Agent and District Secretary at No.1 Rhondda District under William Abraham . 
 A moderate leader , he worked fruitlessly alongside William Abraham to resolve the 1910 – 11 Cambrian Combine dispute , after the two men were shunned by the more radical miners ' leaders . Although espousing Gladstonian Liberalism and opposing the affiliation of The Miners ' Federation of Great Britain to the Labour Party , Watts Morgan joined the more radical and Marxist Plebs ' League and sat on the board of governors for the Central Labour College . 
 = = Military service = = 
 On 4 August 1914 , Watts Morgan enlisted as a private in the 10th Battalion ( 1st Rhondda ) of the Welsh Regiment , one of the service battalions formed as part of Kitchener 's Army . He was commissioned as a lieutenant in the 17th Battalion ( 1st Glamorgan ) on 7 October , and was promoted to captain on 16 January 1916 . Watts Morgan was not initially sent to France , being used instead as a strong voice in the recruitment of men from the Rhondda into the British Army . He also took part in recruitment campaigns in North Wales , where his fluency in the Welsh language was invaluable . Watts Morgan regularly made known his opposition to " peace cranks " who were " insulting the boys of whom we are all so proud . " In March 1915 , a committee of Rhondda figures presented Morgan with a cheque for 100 guineas to mark his contribution to recruiting , and the Western Mail named him " The Organiser of Victory " . 
 On 15 May 1916 Watts Morgan transferred to a Works Battalion of the King 's Liverpool Regiment , he was promoted to major on 24 November 1916 , and went to serve in France . The Works Battalions were absorbed by the Labour Corps ( forerunner of the Royal Pioneer Corps ) in 1917 . Watts Morgan was three times Mentioned in Despatches , and on 4 May 1918 was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for leading his pioneer unit in a counter @-@ attack against German forces that were breaking through British lines . The citation for this award was published on 5 July 1918 and read : 
 T. / Maj. David Watts Morgan , Labour Corps . 
 For conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty . When his camp was heavily shelled with a few N.C.O. ' s and men he turned some dug @-@ outs into a temporary dressing station and assisted the wounded in the vicinity . When shelling rendered his position untenable he brought back his men in good order . He displayed great coolness and resource . 
 After the armistice he commanded a demobilisation station ; for his work there he received a letter of thanks from the king . Despite the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography reporting Watts Morgan being promoted to lieutenant @-@ colonel on 8 March 1919 , his retirement from the forces , the London Gazette entry of May 1919 describes him as major . Until early June 1921 he is described in The Times and London Gazette as Major D. Watts Morgan , later in the month this changed to Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Watts Morgan . On 30 March 1920 was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire for " services in connection with recruiting in South Wales " . 
 = = Member of Parliament = = 
 In February 1918 , Watts Morgan was selected as the Labour candidate for the newly formed Rhondda East constituency . As one of the " patriotic " miners ' leaders , the Lloyd George coalition did not run a candidate against him , therefore Watts Morgan was elected to the seat unopposed . There was evidence that some wished to run a Liberal candidate against Watts Morgan , but nothing came of it . Watts Morgan made his maiden speech in the House of Commons in April 1919 , on one of his special interests , housing . He addressed the House on the state and shortage of housing in the Welsh coalfields as " the chief cause of the industrial unrest . People have been herded together , and that is the reason why there is much unrest in our district at present " . 
 Not a regular speaker in the House , Watts Morgan busied himself with work on various committees , dealing mainly with gas , electricity , river pollution , the Home Office and the Police Council . Despite his work on private bills and his friendly relationship with Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald he was never considered for office . In the 1922 election , Watts Morgan was forced to contest his seat for the first time when he was challenged by Frederick William Heale . Watts Morgan made it clear that he would defend the interests of ex @-@ servicemen and those injured in industry ; he opposed the temperance demand for the local veto . It was a close result for a Rhondda election ; Heale lost by just over 3 @,@ 000 votes . The 1923 election was a different affair , with Watts Morgan defeating Conservative candidate Alfred John Orchard by nearly 13 @,@ 000 votes . 
 Watts Morgan was a socialist and trade unionist , but he was also a strong anti @-@ communist and opposed " the local men of Moscow " , trade unionists who had embraced communism and whom he saw as extremists . In the 1929 election his main rival was well @-@ known local Liberal Dr. R. D. Chalke , but the biggest interest came from the first communist challenger in the Rhondda , Arthur Horner . Although Watts Morgan had been unwell for the first few months of the year , he roused himself to attend the Ferndale May Day demonstration . When he discovered he was sharing the platform with Communist Party of Great Britain members , Horner , A. J. Cook and Dai Lloyd Davies , he left the stage and joined the crowd so he could heckle Horner 's speech from the floor . Watts Morgan described Horner as " the emissary of the blood @-@ stained Comintern of Russia ... working to break down the democratic Government and Trades Union organization of this country . " He had little cause for concern , and was re @-@ elected to Rhondda East by a majority of almost 9 @,@ 000 . A smaller turnout in the 1931 election and the absence of a Liberal candidate may have led to Horner making a considerable advance against Watts Morgan in the number of votes polled , but Watts Morgans ' majority remained substantial . Watts Morgan 's death in 1933 forced a by @-@ election , which was won by William Mainwaring . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Watts Morgan was married twice , first to Elizabeth Williams then to Blanche Amy Morgan . Blanche was herself a strong campaigner for miners ' rights , and was among a group of agents ' wives who promoted the provision of pithead baths , bathing areas for the miners at the surface . She was outspoken in her views , and once supported a political rival of her husband 's party , forcing Watts Morgan to make a public apology . 
 Watts Morgan was a keen sportsman and enjoyed playing golf and bowls . He was a member of several organisations including the Freemasons ' , <unk> ' and Foresters ' friendly societies and was president of the Rhondda and Pontypridd district of the British Legion . A Calvinist Methodist his local place of worship was Bethlehem Church in Porth . 
 Watts Morgan died at his home in Porth on 23 February 1933 while still in office . He was survived by his wife , two sons , and four daughters . Thousands of people lined the route along which his funeral cortege passed on its way to his burial at <unk> Du cemetery in Trealaw . Local shops and businesses closed as a mark of respect . 
 = Guanglan Road Station = 
 Guanglan Road Station ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> Zhàn ) is a station on Line 2 of the Shanghai Metro . The station is located along Zuchongzhi Road and is located between the Tangzhen station and the Jinke Road station on Line 2 . The station is located at an intersection of Zuchongzhi Road and Guanglan Road , and has four exits . The station was opened on February 24 , 2010 , after Line 2 was extended from the <unk> Hi @-@ Tech Park station . 
 The station has three tracks , an island platform , and a side platform . All service is on the island platform as of May 2013 . 
 = = History = = 
 By 2008 , the Line 2 terminated at the <unk> Hi @-@ Tech Park station . On February 24 , 2010 , the line was expanded from this station through the Jinke Road station to the Guanglan Road station . Two months later , the line was extended past the station through the Tangzhen , Middle Chuangxin Road , East Huaxia Road , Chuansha , <unk> Road , <unk> Avenue , and <unk> Road stations to the Pudong Airport station , which serves the Shanghai Pudong International Airport . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The station is located in Shanghai 's Pudong New Area , along Zuchongzhi Road near an intersection with Guanglan Road and <unk> Road . 
 = = = Exits = = = 
 Shaped like an oblong rectangle , the station has 4 exits . 
 Exits 1 and 5 are located north of Zuchongzhi Road , with exit 1 further to the east than exit 5 . 
 Exits 2 and 4 are located south of the road , with exit 4 further to the west than exit 2 . Exit 4 is located south of the <unk> <unk> <unk> Elementary School , which occupies the area above the western section of the station . The eastern section of the station is located beneath a Shanghai <unk> Garment Manufacturing Ltd . Co. building . The station is served by bus routes 615 , 636 , and 990 . 
 = = Service = = 
 Along Line 2 , the station is located between the Jinke Road station and the Tangzhen station . It takes approximately 60 minutes to ride the train to the East <unk> station , the west end of the line , and 34 minutes to the Pudong Airport station , the eastern terminus . The train operates from 5 : 30 to 22 : 45 westbound and from 6 : 30 to 21 : 00 eastbound . On weekdays , trains leave the station approximately every 3 minutes and 30 seconds during peak hours and every four to ten minutes during non @-@ peak hours . Peak hours are defined as from 7 : 30 to 9 : 30 and 17 : 00 to 19 : 00 on Monday through Thursday , as well as 7 : 00 to 9 : 00 and 12 : 50 to 20 : 30 on Friday . On weekends , trains leave the stations every 4 minutes and 5 seconds from 8 : 00 to 20 : 30 , and every five to ten minutes during other times . The station is a transfer station for passengers traveling to or from points east on Line 2 . From Guanglan Road to the east , Line 2 uses 4 @-@ carriage trains ; to the west Line 2 uses 8 @-@ carriage trains . 
 = Bart Gets Hit by a Car = 
 " Bart Gets Hit by a Car " is the tenth episode of The Simpsons ' second season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 10 , 1991 . At the start of the episode , Bart is hit by Mr. Burns ' car . Prompted by ambulance @-@ chasing lawyer Lionel Hutz and quack doctor Dr. Nick Riviera , the Simpsons sue Mr. Burns , seeking extensive damages for Bart 's injuries . Hutz and Dr. Nick exaggerate Bart 's injuries so they can gain sympathy at the trial . Marge is against the whole thing and grows concerned with the fact that Homer is asking Bart to lie . 
 " Bart Gets Hit by a Car " was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Mark Kirkland . The episode 's plot was based on Billy Wilder 's 1966 film The Fortune Cookie . Much of the ending of the show was pitched by executive producer James L. Brooks , who felt the episode needed a more emotional ending . The episode includes the debuts of three recurring characters , Lionel Hutz , Dr. Nick and the Blue @-@ Haired Lawyer . The Devil also appears on the show for the first time . Recurring guest star Phil Hartman makes his first appearance as Hutz . The show 's then @-@ script supervisor Doris Grau also voices a character in the show for the first time . 
 In its original broadcast , " Bart Gets Hit by a Car " received a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 5 , finishing the week ranked 32nd . The episode received generally positive reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While skateboarding one day , Bart crosses a road where he is hit by Mr. Burns ' car . Bart has an out @-@ of @-@ body experience as he ends up on the escalator to heaven . He then ends up in Hell after spitting over the side of it and ends up meeting the Devil . He floats back into his body as it was not his time yet . Bart wakes up in a hospital room , surrounded by his family and a strange man . The man introduces himself as attorney Lionel Hutz , and suggests that the Simpsons sue Mr. Burns . Marge refuses the offer and tells Hutz to leave at once . However , Bart 's injuries are minor : a bump on the head and a broken toe . Because of this , Homer is hesitant to sue his boss . Later , Mr. Burns tries to avoid a potential lawsuit by offering Homer $ 100 . Homer is hesitant to accept the offer because it barely covers Bart 's medical bills , so Burns , who is an extortionist , throws him out . After the meeting , Homer goes to see Lionel Hutz , who promises him a cash settlement of $ 1 million . To stack the odds in his favor , Hutz takes Bart to see Dr. Nick Riviera , a quack doctor who claims that Bart has extensive injuries on Bart 's x @-@ ray and claims it as trauma . However , Marge is skeptical of Dr. Nick 's real medical qualifications and attempts to decry him for exaggerating Bart 's condition , by immediately confronting Hutz for his action and tells him that Dr. Hibbert has been their family physician for years and knows Bart is fine . At the house , Hutz coaches Bart on what to say on the witness stand during the trial , encouraging him to exaggerate his condition . Meanwhile , Marge and Lisa state their opinion that they were against suing Burns and encourage Bart to tell the truth . 
 At the trial , both Bart and Mr. Burns tell inaccurate versions of what happened . The jury shows sympathy for Bart , but Marge and Lisa are angry at this . They are still convinced that Hutz made him lie and Homer did nothing to help stop it . Things seem to be looking up for both Homer and Hutz . After the trial , Mr. Burns yells at his lawyers , ordering them to bring Homer and Marge to his house . At his mansion , Burns offers Homer a $ 500 @,@ 000 settlement and leaves them to discuss it . Feeling guilty for lying , Marge pleads with Homer to drop the case and accept the money . He objects to her request and demands to know why he should accept the settlement . Marge reveals that she was against suing Mr. Burns from the start and would have been happy with settling the case by having him apologizing for the incident and paying for Bart 's medical bills . Homer refuses , insisting that Burns knows he will lose the trial and will have to pay the family $ 1 million . Marge admits she dislikes the situation for what it has become , including the " phony doctors " . Mr. Burns overhears this , withdraws his offer and sends them on their way out . 
 The next day at the trial , Mr. Burns ' lawyer calls an unprepared Marge to the stand . When asked about her opinion on Dr. Nick , she is hesitant to talk stating that she does not talk about anyone that they have nothing nice to say about them . Mr. Burns ' lawyer asks Marge again and reminds her that she is under oath . In her testimony , she denounces Dr. Riviera as a fake and outlines how limited Bart 's injuries actually were . Marge also denounces Hutz by revealing that he made Bart lie about his injuries and being in intense pain , when he was really fine . She gives the hardships resulting from the accident a dollar value of $ 5 ( the same sum they would 've paid Bart to take out the trash ) . Homer watches in disbelief and betrayal as the case slips away . Marge 's testimony destroys Hutz 's case and the Simpsons get nothing , although Bart receives good treatment for his injuries . 
 That night , Homer angrily blames Marge for costing them $ 1 million . He leaves for Moe 's to drown his sorrows . Marge visits him at Moe 's and asks him to forgive her for her testimony , even though she did the right thing by telling the truth . Homer says that he does not love her anymore , but he looks her in the eyes and realizes he still loves her as much as ever . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode 's plot was based on Billy Wilder 's 1966 film The Fortune Cookie , in which Walter Matthau plays a dishonest lawyer who convinces Jack Lemmon 's character to fake an injury for a large cash settlement . While working on the court room scenes , director Mark Kirkland watched To Kill a Mockingbird and The Verdict to get ideas for different angles he could use . Although the episode was written by John Swartzwelder , a lot of the ending was pitched by executive producer James L. Brooks . Brooks felt that the episode needed a more emotional ending , so some shots were reworked so that voice @-@ overs could be added . 
 The episode includes the debuts of three recurring characters , Lionel Hutz , Dr. Nick Riviera and the Blue @-@ Haired Lawyer . Lionel Hutz was designed by Mark Kirkland , who gave him an evil design , but was asked to make him more " bland looking " . He gave him a powder blue suit to make him stand out more . Phil Hartman , who voices Hutz , also guest stars for the first time . He would later become one of the most frequently appearing guest stars , with Hutz and Troy McClure ( who was introduced later in the second season ) being his most well @-@ known characters . 
 Dr. Nick Riviera is voiced by Hank Azaria , who used a " bad Ricky Ricardo " impression . The animators modeled Dr. Nick after then @-@ supervising director Gábor Csupó , because they mistakenly believed that Azaria was impersonating him . The Blue @-@ Haired Lawyer , who does not have a proper name , was based on Roy Cohn , who became famous as Senator Joseph McCarthy 's lawyer . His voice , provided by Dan Castellaneta , was also an impression of Cohn . The Devil is also shown for the first time , and he was designed by Mark Kirkland , who originally tried to give him a scary design , but the writers asked him to use a more comedic look . 
 The show 's then @-@ script supervisor Doris Grau also appears in the show for the first time . She was used because of her unique voice , and appears as a minor character in this episode , but would later become known for voicing Lunchlady Doris . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The Devil says " Please allow me to introduce myself " , a reference to The Rolling Stones song " Sympathy for the Devil " . In addition , When Bart wakes up from his out @-@ of @-@ body experience , he says , " I did go away , Mom ! I was miles and miles and miles away , writhing in agony in the pits of Hell ! And you were there ! And you and you and you , " a reference to the 1939 film adaptation of The Wizard of Oz , when Dorothy awakens from her slumber . The design of Hell in the episode references Hieronymus Bosch 's triptych The Garden of Earthly Delights , particularly the Hell panel . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Bart Gets Hit by a Car " finished 32nd in ratings for the week of January 7 – 13 , 1991 , with a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 5 and was viewed in approximately 13 @.@ 5 million homes , down from show 's season average rank of 28th . It was the highest rated program on Fox that week . The episode finished second in its timeslot to The Cosby Show , which aired at the same time on NBC , which had a Nielsen Rating of 17 @.@ 8 . 
 The episode 's reference to The Wizard Of Oz was named the fourth greatest film reference in the history of the show by Nathan Ditum of Total Film . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , praised " Bart Gets Hit by a Car " as " An interesting episode in that we begin to see the very dark side of Burns that will develop later , although Smithers is still just a <unk> . A good introduction for Lionel Hutz and a nice look at Hell , Heaven and the original Snowball " . Doug Pratt , a DVD reviewer and Rolling Stone contributor , concurred , stating that the episode led to " inspired looks at Heaven , Hell , and ambulance @-@ chasing lawyers " . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson lauded the episode for " provid [ ing ] a lot of great moments , especially in court when we heard the differing viewpoints of the accident offered by Bart and Mr. Burns . ' Car ' worked well and was consistently amusing and lively . " Dawn Taylor of The DVD Journal thought that the best line was Bart 's testimony , " It was a beautiful Sunday afternoon . I was playing in my wholesome childlike way , little realizing that I was about to be struck down by the Luxury Car of Death " . 
 = Shumen fortress = 
 The Shumen fortress ( Bulgarian : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is an archaeological site overlooking the city of Shumen in north @-@ eastern Bulgaria . 
 It is an ancient fortress with historical links to a village nearby traced to early Iron Age and later owned by the Thracians in the 5th century BC . Then , from 2nd to 4th centuries AD , it was controlled by the Romans who built towers and walls , and it was refurbished by the Byzantines as their garrison town . Shumen thrived in the Middle Ages as an important stronghold of the Bulgarian Empire . In 1444 the fort was destroyed by the Ottomans after their victory in the Battle of Varna over a Christian army under Władysław III of Poland . The fortress remained deserted ever since . 
 Restoration works on the fortress commenced in 2012 under the project titled “ Bulgaria Begins Here ” , and was completed partially in 2015 with financial assistance provided under the European Economic Area ( EEA ) and Norway Grants to the Shumen Municipality and the Shumen Regional Museum of History . 
 = = Location = = 
 The fortress is built over a hill which gives a commanding view of the Shumen city . It is located at a distance of 5 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) from the Shumen city 's <unk> Mosque . It is located within the Shumen Plateau Nature Park . From the entrance of the fortress , about 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) away is the " Creators of the Bulgarian State " Monument erected in 1981 during the communist regime to commemorate the 1300th anniversary of the Bulgarian state . An information center is 300 metres ( 980 ft ) away from this monument and a 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) track from here leads to the fortress . 
 = = History = = 
 The fortress represents a substantial part of the history of Bulgaria . The Ancient Bulgars , semi @-@ nomadic warrior tribes of Turkic extraction , arrived in what is in now north @-@ eastern Bulgaria to the south of the Danube in the late 7th century AD and founded the First Bulgarian Empire . The fortress formed the town of Shumen during the First and Second Bulgarian Empire . During archaeological excavations , carried out since 1957 , a village dating back to the Iron Age ( around 4th century BC ) of the First Empire was revealed . Thracians ruled over the territory from 5th to 2nd century BC , which was followed by Romans who ruled from first century BC to 3rd century AD , and then by the early Byzantine from 4th to 6th century AD . 
 During the First Bulgarian Empire the fortress was part of a system of fortifications providing for the defense of Pliska and Preslav , capital cities , and the religious centre of Madara . It then functioned as a minor fort during the 10th – 12th centuries , as compared to the glory , economic prosperity and military might it had during the 4th – 6th centuries . In the 13th century it again prospered as a political and economic entity of the reborn Bulgarian Empire . When the Byzantines temporarily took control of Preslav in 1278 during the Uprising of Ivaylo Shumen also acquired importance as an administrative and military centre . The fortress continued to thrive in the 14th century until the Ottoman Turks captured it in 1388 during a campaign of their first vizier <unk> Ali Pasha . 
 In 1444 King Władysław III of Poland ( <unk> ) ( r . 1440 – 1444 ) of Polish @-@ Hungarian descent attempted to drive the Ottomans out of Europe at the head of a large Christian army but was defeated and killed in the Battle of Varna . Following this battle the fortress was looted and gutted , and the Ottoman rulers eventually abandoned it completely . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fortress was the best developed citadel during the 14th century . Archaeological excavations have been carried out since 1957 and many artefacts and structures have been unearthed . The ruined fort was partially restored during the period 2012 – 2015 . At the foot of the fortress , monasteries and churches were found ; some of which were reconstructed in the 1980s . The restoration works completed in 2015 covered walls of the fortress , creating tracks for walking around the fortress , and also building turnstiles . Other infrastructure created to encourage tourism are artistic lighting and equipment for temperature and humidity control , publicity brochures and overall management aspects . 
 Coins and seals from the site were studied . A particular circular seal cast in bronze with two headed eagle at the top has been identified as belonging to tsar John Alexander ( r . 1331 – 1371 ) . The image on the seal is stated to be a common feature of the 14th century seals , which were also made of gold and silver . 
 Another feature noted in the fortress was of a limestone projection which was carved on one side with a " double @-@ headed eagle and a three @-@ pointed crown seen between the heads of the birds . " It was inferred that this marking was either made on the occasion of the visit of the ruler of Bulgaria to the fortress or may be a representation of the last emperor who ruled from Tarnovo , Ivan Shishman ( r . 1371 – 1395 ) . In the 1970 excavations to the south of Shumen fortress , archaeologist Karel Škorpil unearthed the remnants of a church of 7 @.@ 3 by 4 @.@ 5 metres ( 24 ft × 15 ft ) size . An inscription found on the wall of the fortress , dated to 13th century , relates to frequent terror attacks by Mongols . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 The restoration of the fortress was initiated in 2012 under the project titled “ Bulgaria Begins Here ” . The works were completed partially in 2015 with financial assistance provided under the European Economic Area ( EEA ) and Norway Grants to the Shumen Municipality and the Shumen Regional Museum of History . 
 = Animal ( Kesha album ) = 
 Animal is the debut studio album by American pop singer Kesha . The album was released on January 1 , 2010 , by RCA Records . Kesha worked with a variety of producers and writers such as Lukasz Gottwald ( Dr. Luke ) , Benny Blanco , David Gamson , Greg Kurstin , Max Martin , and others . Kesha had been recording demos for several years when one eventually ended up in the hands of Samantha Cox , senior director of writer / publisher relations at BMI . Cox passed along the demo and it ended up in the hands of Gottwald , who decided to have Kesha perform on the song " Right Round " . Within two months , the song became a hit in multiple countries around the world . The event led to Kesha being sought after by many major labels , and she eventually signed a multi @-@ album deal with RCA Records . 
 The album received mixed reviews from music critics . Some appreciated its fun , carefree nature , while others dismissed it as juvenile and said that it seemed insincere . Lyrically , the majority of the album 's songs are based on Kesha 's past life experiences of love , heartbreak , boys , and having a good time . Musically , Animal draws from the electropop genre , while incorporating elements of dance @-@ pop in its production and beats . The album attained chart success , debuting at number one in Canada , the United States , and Greece , while charting within the top ten in seven other countries . Animal was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 million copies and has sold over 4 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 million copies worldwide . 
 Four singles were released from the album . Its lead single , " Tik Tok " , was released on August 7 , 2009 and was a worldwide hit , reaching number one in eleven countries . It reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 and stayed at the top for nine consecutive weeks . The song sold 12 @.@ 8 million digital copies worldwide in 2010 , making it the best selling single of the year ; it sold 5 @,@ 633 @,@ 000 downloads in the United States alone , making it the sixth best @-@ selling song in digital history . It has now sold over 15 million copies worldwide , and as of August 7 , 2014 ( exactly five years after its release ) , it is the second best @-@ selling digital single worldwide . The album 's second , third and fourth singles , " Blah Blah Blah " , " Your Love Is My Drug " and " Take It Off " all achieved similar success reaching the top ten in multiple countries including Australia , Canada and the United States . The album 's commercial success led to its nomination for the Juno Award for " Best International Album " in 2011 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Kesha had been recording demos for several years , when one of her demos ended up in the hands of Samantha Cox , senior director of writer / publisher relations at BMI . Cox , who had worked with Kesha before , passed along the demos to a friend at BMI , who passed it to the manager of Lukasz Gottwald , known as Dr. Luke . At the age of eighteen , Kesha signed to Dr. Luke 's label , Kemosabe Records , and his publishing company , Prescription Songs . Luke was busy with other projects at the time , and Kesha ultimately wound up signed to David Sonenberg 's management company , DAS . While at DAS she worked with several top writers and producers , but rarely worked with or even spoke to Luke . DAS searched for a label deal for Kesha despite her still being in a signed contract with Luke . Kara DioGuardi , an artists and repertoire ( A & R ) representative for Warner , was also interested in signing Kesha but the deal never went through because of the outstanding contract with Luke . Shortly after , Kesha and DAS parted ways and Kesha wound up reunited with Luke . At the end of 2008 , Luke was working on a track with Flo Rida called " Right Round " , and the two decided they needed a female hook . Luke decided to have Kesha perform on the song and within two months , it was a number one hit in multiple countries around the world . The event led to Kesha being sought after by many major labels , and she eventually signed a multi @-@ album deal with RCA Records . Kesha explained that she chose to sign with the company due to how well she got along with RCA A & R executive Rani Hancock , explaining that " Rani doesn 't ever try to censor me , [ ... ] and I like being surrounded by strong , intelligent women . " 
 = = Development and inspiration = = 
 Kesha had been working on Animal for seven years prior to its release , and had written over 200 songs for the album . The abundance of material extended it from its originally planned twelve tracks to fourteen . Kesha felt that the album had an empowering , carefree message for young women . " For girls , I think it 's an empowering record , it 's funny , it 's cheeky , " she said . " I think people need to have fun with whatever they 're doing — makeup , their clothes , music , live shows — anything you don 't need to take too seriously , don 't take too seriously . " When asked how the album related to her life , Kesha explained that the album was completely autobiographical . " I just write about what I live — literally , [ ... ] I think there 's a great pop song in anything and everything , any situation . " She cites her songs " Stephen " and " Dinosaur " as examples of this . She explained : " it 's about this guy I 've been stalking since I was 15 . I wrote the song when I was 16 with my mom , and I was like , " This song 's so dope , I know it is " . " Dinosaur " came " about [ when ] this old guy who was hitting on me , and his toupee was kind of falling off , and I was like , " Oh my God , you 're so old , you 're prehistoric , you 're like a dinosaur . D @-@ I @-@ N @-@ O @-@ S @-@ A @-@ you are a dinosaur . " Explaining the reasoning behind the title track being placed at the end of the album 's tracklist , Kesha said : 
 " I believe , sonically , the next record might be going . Me and my brother had a silly punk band before , and I loved pop music and I liked catchy music , but I think I also am possessed to be what some critics might deem as silly pop music . I think I have more shit to offer , so I think that " Animal " is a nice segue into the next record , hopefully . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Musically , Animal is of the dance @-@ pop and electro @-@ pop genres , while incorporating elements of electro in its production and beats . Kesha 's vocals uses Auto @-@ Tune and vocoders to alter her voice and includes samples . David Jeffries of Allmusic noted that the album lyrically revolves around avoiding reality with a preference for a " garbage chic " life , with lyrics such as " Maybe I need some rehab , or maybe just need some sleep " from the opening song " Your Love Is My Drug " . Lyrically , the majority of the album 's songs are based on Kesha 's past life experiences of love , heartbreak , boys , and having a good time . " Your Love Is My Drug " is a dance song that is layered with a heavy electronic backdrop . Her vocals throughout the song have been described as a shouty sing @-@ speak style . Musically , the song uses a simple , upbeat lyric line . On " Tik Tok " Kesha uses a spoken word rap style on the verses while the chorus is sung . According to her the lyrics are representative of herself , stating " it 's about my life , it 's 100 per cent me " . " Take It Off " has been described as " a heavily Auto @-@ Tuned reworking " of " There 's a Place in France " . 
 " Kiss n Tell " ' s lyrics depict a tale of the " “ slutty ” ex of [ Kesha ] [ who is ] spreading his wild oats around the town " . The writing of the song came about after Kesha discovered that her boyfriend was cheating on her with a famous pop starlet . " Kiss n Tell " is a dance @-@ pop track that features standard elements of " party pop " music that is prominent on Animal . According to sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " Kiss n Tell " is written in the time signature of common time , with a moderate beat rate of 144 beats per minute . The song is written in the key of E Major and Kesha 's vocal range in the song spans from the note of G ♯ 3 to the note of B4 . " Stephen " is opened in " Kansas @-@ style vocal harmonies " as Kesha sings about an unattainable lover depicting their story . " Blah Blah Blah " combines heavy use of Auto @-@ Tune with drum machines while infusing hints of R & B. Lyrically , " Blah Blah Blah " depicts a woman who would rather have sex than listen to a man speak . " Dinosaur " features a whistle @-@ synth infused backing while the lyrics describe the story of older men hitting on younger girls . " Party at a Rich Dude 's House " is reminiscent of music from the 1980s which according to Jeffries could have appeared on the soundtrack to the 1982 film Fast Times at Ridgemont High . " Dancing with Tears in My Eyes " is an upbeat pop @-@ rock ballad ; one of a small minority of tracks to incorporate Guitars in the instrumental , as Kesha tried to exclude the style from the album . " Boots & Boys " is a " lusty " song reminiscent of INXS 's " Suicide Blonde " , but from a female point of view . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Animal received mixed to positive reviews from music critics upon its release . The album holds a score 54 out of 100 based on 18 critical reviews , according to the music review aggregator Metacritic . Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times stated that Kesha was " offer [ ing ] a thoroughly fleshed @-@ out character to embrace or despise , " comparing her persona to " classic screwball blond [ s ] " such as Jean Harlow and Mae West , while praising her and Dr. Luke for " refashion [ ing ] the screwball heroine role to suit a new era of aggressive superficiality and libertine self @-@ empowerment " . Her conclusion about Kesha and the album was that " [ h ] er total commitment to the deliberately stupid script Animal provides makes [ the album ] work . " Ailbhe Malone of NME gave Animal a mixed review but concluded that " [ b ] <unk> the patina of <unk> Freshers ' <unk> @-@ <unk> lyrics ( ' got a water @-@ bottle full of whiskey in my handbag ' ) " it seems there " lies a talent . " Andrew Burgess of musicOMH was impressed with Kesha , calling her an " auto @-@ tuned talk @-@ singing , gum @-@ <unk> " that may well be " a pop @-@ genius , a gutter @-@ glam Jonathan Swift . " He described the album as " an infectiously good dance @-@ pop album . " Daniel Brockman of The Phoenix thought that the album was " a clear subversion of pop norms " with " effortless hooks " . 
 Monica Herrera of Billboard commented that the prevalent use of Auto @-@ Tune on Kesha 's vocals made it difficult to tell if she could actually sing , citing the song " Take It Off " as an example of " how easily individuality can get lost in a sea of Auto @-@ Tune " . On the other hand , Herrera was impressed with the " choruses that stick with the listener for days . " David Jeffries of AllMusic was not impressed with the album 's ballads , calling them " completely unsatisfying . " However , he noted " that with so many fun , ' Tik Tok ' -type tracks , the album has plenty for both brats and the bratty at heart . " James Reed of The Boston Globe believed that Kesha 's " personality is completely missing from [ the songs ] , " resulting in her sounding " vapid and faceless . " Jonathan Keefe of Slant Magazine was extremely critical of the album and Kesha , saying that her attempts to sing and rap were " pitiful " , describing her as " insincere " and " <unk> " . Dave Simpson of The Guardian also questioned the honesty of her lyrics while comparing her unfavorably to Lady Gaga , Katy Perry , and Britney Spears . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , Animal debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 on the week of January 23 , 2010 with sales of 152 @,@ 000 ( setting a record for digital sales of a number one album , at 76 % ) . With " Tik Tok " occupying the top spot on the Billboard Hot 100 at the same time , Kesha became the first act to achieve this feat since 2008 when Spirit and " Bleeding Love " by Leona Lewis simultaneously held the pole positions . At the end of 2010 , the album ranked at position twenty on Billboard 's year end chart . Animal became the tenth best selling album in the US in 2010 , selling 1 @.@ 14 million copies that year . In October , 2010 , the album received platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of 1 million units and has since sold 1 @.@ 47 million copies in the country alone . 
 In Canada , the album debuted at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart with sales of 16 @,@ 000 , later going on to become the biggest @-@ selling digital album in the country . On the Canadian album year end chart the album ranked at position twelve . In May 2011 , the album was certified double platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) for shipment of 160 @,@ 000 units . The album was released a month later in the United Kingdom and debuted at number eight on the UK Albums Chart with first week sales of 18 @,@ 723 . 
 In Australia , the album debuted at number four , where it stayed consecutively for two weeks before falling to the number five position . On the countries 2010 year end chart the album ranked at position eleven . The album has since been certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for sales of 140 @,@ 000 copies . Animal was released on January 11 , 2010 in New Zealand and debuted and peaked at number six . The album was listed at position thirty on New Zealand 's 2010 , year end chart . It has since been certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for sales of 7 @,@ 500 units . As of September 2014 , the album has sold over 4 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Tik Tok " was released as the album 's lead single commercially worldwide on August 7 , 2009 , through digital distribution . Upon its release the single generated mixed to generally positive reviews . Critics generally praised the lyrics and celebration of party lifestyle ; the song 's production was generally well received although some critics criticized the song for sounding irritating and being too similar to other tracks performed by the likes of Lady Gaga and Uffie . The song achieved commercial success by topping charts in eleven countries , as well as reaching the top ten in many other countries . It reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 and stayed at the top for nine consecutive weeks . " Tik Tok " had sold over 6 million downloads in the United States alone and 15 million worldwide , making it the second best @-@ selling song in digital history . The song sold 12 @.@ 8 million digital copies worldwide in 2010 , making it the best selling single of the year , trumping the previous year 's song by more than three million downloads . 
 " Blah Blah Blah " was released as the second single from the album on February 19 , 2010 . It had charted before being released in the album 's debut week in the United States due to strong digital download sales on par with " Tik Tok " , which influenced RCA 's decision to release it as the next single . The song also debuted and peaked in the top ten in three other countries under similar circumstances , only improving upon its peak in Australia . The single was met with mixed reaction from music critics , some praised Kesha 's unapologetic lyrics combined with an auto @-@ tuned working hook , while others called it trashy . Although reviews were mainly positive , a common complaint amongst critics was the appearance of 3OH ! 3 . 
 " Your Love Is My Drug " was released as the album 's third single . The song generated generally positive reviews from music critics . Critics complimented the song for its strong hook , but had mixed reactions about the chorus . Kesha was praised for knowing her way around a " strong pop chorus " , while others critics called it predictable and dull . It reached the top ten in the United States , Canada , and Australia — peaking at number four , six and three — giving her her third consecutive top ten hit in all regions . The single reached the top ten in five countries . 
 " Take It Off " was released on July 13 , 2010 as the album 's fourth and final single . Upon its release the single generated mixed to positive reviews from music critics . A common complaint amongst critics was the demonstration of overly processed vocals with the use of auto @-@ tune . Other critics complimented the song for its carefree dance feel and its catchiness . Due to strong digital sales from the release of Animal , the song charted in the United States , the United Kingdom , and Canada before being announced as a single . After being released as a single the song reached the top ten in Canada , Australia and the United States . It has also reached the top twenty in Ireland , the United Kingdom and New Zealand . 
 = = Marketing and promotion = = 
 RCA noticed Kesha 's strong following on social media when negotiating her contract and thus relied on viral marketing to build a following for her debut single , " Tik Tok " offering it for free a month before releasing it for digital download . " Tik Tok " was released for digital download in August 2009 and reached number one on iTunes in New Zealand without radio airplay . Radio stations soon began expressing interest in the song , but RCA / Jive Label Group chairman / CEO Barry Weiss decided to delay its shipping to radio by a month , to October , to let the song continue to build viral support digitally and good word of mouth . While " Tik Tok " ' s airplay was not stellar right out of the gates , it soon gained enough momentum to give RCA the go ahead to release Animal in January 2010 . Finance executives had pushed for a Christmas release to capitalize on the usual strong sales during that time period , but Weiss thought that the album would be lost in the shuffle among the many other releases released at that time . 
 To promote the album , Kesha did several performances worldwide . Her first performance was on MTV Push , a program broadcast on MTV Networks worldwide . She made several television appearances across North America to promote the album : It 's on with Alexa Chung , The Wendy Williams Show , Lopez Tonight , Late Night with Jimmy Fallon , The Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien , and The Ellen DeGeneres Show . " Blah Blah Blah " was performed on January 18 , 2010 at MuchOnDemand . While in the United Kingdom , Kesha made two appearances on television to promote the album and " Blah Blah Blah " . The first was on February 18 , 2010 , on Alan Carr : Chatty Man . It was followed by a performance on breakfast television show GMTV , on February 19 . The song was also performed live on American Idol on March 17 , 2010 . She wore her trademark glitter eye make @-@ up and bounced throughout the stage while her backup dancers were dressed as human TV sets showing intermittent images of the American flag , owls , and skulls . The performance was accompanied by 3OH ! 3 . 
 Kesha performed " Your Love Is My Drug " and " Tik Tok " on Saturday Night Live on April 17 , 2010 . On May 29 , 2010 , Kesha performed " Your Love Is My Drug " alongside her previous single " Tik Tok " at the MTV Video Music Awards Japan . She performed a set for BBC Radio 1 's Big Weekend . On August 13 , 2010 Kesha performed " Take It Off " alongside earlier singles " Your Love Is My Drug " and " Tik Tok " on NBC 's Today . In the performance she was seen wearing boots , fishnets , glitter shorts and a loose tank top . By the second verse , her dancers – dressed head to toe in black – started to appropriately undress to the music as the chorus starts revealing gold shirts and tank @-@ tops . The performance featured smoke machines with Kesha playing notes on an electric keyboard while crawling on the floor . Her performance of " Backstabber " for the Bud Light Hotel Super Bowl event on February 5 , 2011 was broadcast on February 9 on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Animal + Cannibal = = = 
 Originally planned to only be a re @-@ release of Animal , Cannibal was instead released both as a deluxe edition of Animal as well as a stand @-@ alone EP . The EP has been classified as a follow up " nine @-@ song companion " record to Animal . Cannibal was originally intended to contain anywhere between four and eight tracks with the final outcome consisting of eight tracks and one previously heard song remixed , for a total of nine tracks . 
 Notes 
 ^ A signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ B signifies an additional producer 
 ^ C signifies a vocal producer 
 ^ D signifies a remix producer 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Animal . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Michael Bostwick = 
 Michael Paul Trevor Bostwick ( born 17 May 1988 ) is an English professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for League One club Peterborough United . 
 Bostwick started his career at Millwall , and played regularly for the club 's Under @-@ 18 side and reserve team . At the age of 17 , he joined Conference National side Crawley Town on work experience during the latter stages of 2005 – 06 season . On return to Millwall , Bostwick signed a new one @-@ year contract with the club , but was sent back to Crawley Town on loan in August 2006 . Bostwick played regularly for Crawley until he was recalled by Millwall in January 2007 , and was told he was surplus to requirements at the club . He subsequently signed for Rushden & Diamonds on an 18 @-@ month contract , but only played eight games before falling out of favour at Nene Park , and was released by Rushden at the end of the 2006 – 07 campaign . 
 He joined Ebbsfleet United in August 2007 ahead of the 2007 – 08 season , playing regularly throughout the campaign , helping Ebbsfleet win the FA Trophy at Wembley Stadium in May 2008 . Bostwick rejected a contract offer from Ebbsfleet , and signed for Stevenage just ten days after the FA Trophy success . He was a regular fixture in the club 's defence and midfield throughout the season , winning the FA Trophy once more in May 2009 . His second season at the club was a successful one , scoring eight goals in all competitions , as well as helping the Hertfordshire side earn promotion to the Football League for the first time in the club 's history . The following season , Bostwick played an instrumental part in Stevenage earning back @-@ to @-@ back promotions following their sixth @-@ place finish and subsequent League Two play @-@ off victory in May 2011 . After four years at Stevenage , Bostwick signed for Peterborough United in July 2012 . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Bostwick began his career as a trainee with Millwall , and was a regular in the club 's Under @-@ 18 team , as well as playing several times for the reserve team . During the latter stages of the 2005 – 06 season , Bostwick joined Conference National side Crawley Town on work experience . The move counted as work experience , as opposed to a loan , because of Bostwick 's age – subsequently he could not appear for the first @-@ team of another Football League side , but was eligible to play for the first @-@ team of a non @-@ league club . He made his debut for Crawley a week after joining the club , coming on as an 89th minute substitute in a 1 – 0 victory against Forest Green Rovers . He came on in the 83rd minute in the following game against Southport at Haig Avenue , as well as playing for 25 minutes against Burton Albion , setting up Tony Scully 's 89th @-@ minute equaliser . He subsequently started his first game in April 2006 , playing the whole match in a 2 – 0 win against Aldershot Town , scoring Crawley 's second . A week later , Bostwick scored both of Crawley 's goals in the club 's 2 – 2 draw against Halifax Town , netting in quick succession to give Crawley a two @-@ goal lead . He played a total of eight games for Crawley during his two @-@ month work experience , scoring three times . On return to his parent club in May 2006 , Bostwick signed a one @-@ year contract with Millwall . Shortly before the start of the 2006 – 07 season , Bostwick was loaned out to Crawley Town for a second spell at the club . He played in the club 's first five games of the season , scoring twice from midfield in a 3 – 2 away win at Stevenage . In late August 2006 , Crawley Town extended the loan deal until the end of the season , although Millwall were able to recall him in the January transfer window if they deemed it necessary . Bostwick played a total of 25 times during the first half of the season , scoring twice , before Millwall recalled him in January 2007 . 
 Bostwick returned to Millwall , but failed to make any first @-@ team appearances . In late January 2007 , he was allowed to leave the club on a free transfer to sign for Rushden & Diamonds on an 18 @-@ month contract . Rushden were managed by Graham Westley , who had previously written about Bostwick 's credentials in his weekly column in The Non @-@ League Paper when Westley was out of work . Bostwick made his Rushden debut in the club 's 2 – 1 away win at league leaders Dagenham & Redbridge , and came off the bench in the following match against St Albans City . He was sent @-@ off for the first time in his career in Rushden 's 2 – 2 draw with Aldershot Town , receiving a red card for two bookable offences . Bostwick played eight matches for Rushden , but fell out of favour at the club in March 2007 after Westley was fired . As a result , Bostwick did not play for Rushden again , and was released by the club at the end of the 2006 – 07 season . 
 At the start of the 2007 – 08 season , Bostwick signed for Ebbsfleet United on an initial three @-@ month contract , with a view to a contract extension after the three @-@ month period . He was signed to add " depth to the squad " , as well as to " provide cover at the back and midfield areas " . He made his Ebbsfleet debut a day after signing for the club , starting the match in central defence in a 1 – 0 victory at Nene Park against his former employers , Rushden . He scored his first goal for the club in a 1 – 1 draw against Exeter City in September 2007 , turning in Stacy Long 's corner to give Ebbsfleet the lead . A month later , he was sent @-@ off in the club 's 3 – 1 away win against Altrincham for picking up two yellow cards . He returned to the first @-@ team in November 2007 , assisting Stacy Long 's goal in the club 's 2 – 1 win against Stafford Rangers . Shortly before the match , Bostwick signed a new contract at Ebbsfleet , keeping him at the club until the end of the season . In January 2008 , Bostwick netted Ebbsfleet 's third goal in a 4 – 1 victory against Grays Athletic at Stonebridge Road , and scored again just four days later in another 4 – 1 win , this time in the 90th minute against Weymouth . He scored his fourth league goal of the season against Stevenage at Broadhall Way in March 2008 , scoring with a close @-@ range header in a 3 – 1 defeat . Bostwick also came off the bench on the hour mark against Farsley Celtic to assist two of Ebbsfleet 's goals in a 3 – 1 victory – with Liam Daish saying Bostwick " changed the game " . He made another assist in the club 's next home fixture , a 2 – 0 win against Altrincham . Bostwick was also instrumental in the club 's FA Trophy campaign during the season , playing in seven of the club 's eight FA Trophy games , and scoring in a 1 – 1 draw against Aldershot Town in the semi @-@ final second leg . He also played the whole match in the Final as Ebbsfleet ran out 1 – 0 winners against Torquay United at Wembley Stadium . He made 51 appearances for Ebbsfleet in all competitions during the season , scoring five times . 
 = = = Stevenage = = = 
 Bostwick was offered a new deal by Ebbsfleet ahead of the 2008 – 09 season , but rejected the offer and instead opted to join Stevenage on a two @-@ year deal , playing under the management of Graham Westley once more . He made his debut for Stevenage in the club 's opening game of the season , a 5 – 0 defeat to Wrexham at the Racecourse Ground . Bostwick was used in both the centre of defence and the centre of midfield during the first half of the 2008 – 09 season , as well as playing at full back in the club 's 1 – 0 defeat to Kettering Town in September 2008 . Bostwick provided the assist for Lee Boylan 's second @-@ minute goal against Forest Green Rovers in a 3 – 0 victory . A month later , he scored his first goal for the club , scoring in the 80th minute against Mansfield Town to give Stevenage a 3 – 2 lead . He scored his second goal of the season against Weymouth in February 2009 , latching onto a long pass and sliding the ball past the goalkeeper to secure a 3 – 0 away win . Bostwick also scored Stevenage 's first in a 2 – 0 away win at Crawley Town , scoring with a strike from just outside the area as Stevenage finished in the final play @-@ off spot . He subsequently played in both of Stevenage 's Conference Premier play @-@ off games against Cambridge United in April 2009 , as the club lost 4 – 3 on aggregate . Bostwick played in all seven of the club 's successful FA Trophy campaign , as well as playing the whole match in Stevenage 's 2 – 0 win against York City in the Final at Wembley Stadium . The FA Trophy win meant that Bostwick had won the competition in consecutive years . Bostwick made a total of 49 appearances in his first season at Stevenage , scoring three times . 
 Bostwick started in Stevenage 's first game of the 2009 – 10 season , in a 1 – 1 draw against Tamworth , and also provided the assist for Joel Byrom 's goal in Stevenage 's next home fixture against Ebbsfleet United . His first goal of the season came in the club 's 2 – 1 home win against Rushden & Diamonds , scoring from the edge of the area to give Stevenage the lead . He also provided an assist in the club 's 3 – 2 away fixture against Mansfield Town at Field Mill , as Stevenage came from two goals down to win the match . A week later , Bostwick scored a volley away at Chester City , although due to Chester City being expelled from the league , Bostwick 's goal , and subsequently Stevenage 's 1 – 0 win , were removed from the records . Bostwick continued his goalscoring form , scoring from 25 @-@ yards after a well @-@ worked corner in injury time , in a 4 – 0 win against Hayes & Yeading . He scored a similar goal against Gateshead in November 2009 , his fifth of the season . His next goal came in March 2010 , scoring the opener from 30 @-@ yards against Crawley Town as Stevenage won 2 – 0 , and he scored another goal two weeks later , heading in an Andy Drury corner as Stevenage came from behind to win 2 – 1 at Grays Athletic . Bostwick also played in the club 's 2 – 0 win against Kidderminster Harriers at Aggborough in April 2010 – the game that secured Stevenage 's place in the Football League for the first time in the club 's history . He played in five of the club 's FA Trophy fixtures during the 2009 – 10 season , scoring once in a game against Dover Athletic in January 2010 . He also played in the Final at Wembley Stadium , but was unable to record a third Wembley victory as Stevenage lost 2 – 1 to Barrow after extra @-@ time . In total , Bostwick played 52 matches in all competitions , scoring eight times . At the end of the season , Bostwick was out of contract and Westley announced that he expected him to leave , saying it would be " very difficult " to keep hold of him . However , in June 2010 , Bostwick signed a new two @-@ year deal with Stevenage , despite attracting interest from several League One clubs . 
 Ahead of the 2010 – 11 season , Bostwick scored in a pre @-@ season friendly against Hitchin Town , and made his first league appearance in the club 's 2 – 2 draw with Macclesfield Town , playing the whole game . He scored his first goal of the season in the club 's first ever Football League victory , in a 3 – 1 win against Stockport County , scoring with a shot from 30 @-@ yards to double Stevenage 's lead just before the interval . In November 2010 , Bostwick provided two assists for Stevenage 's goals in the club 's 3 – 0 win away at local rivals Barnet . Bostwick scored his second goal of the 2010 – 11 season in Stevenage 's 3 – 1 FA Cup win over Newcastle United in January 2011 . Bostwick picked up a loose pass and rifled a shot that went in off the post from 25 yards out to give Stevenage a two @-@ goal lead . A month later , he scored his third goal of the season in a 4 – 0 win against Cheltenham Town , cutting in from the right and drilling a low shot across the face of goal and past the goalkeeper . Bostwick played a total of 51 games during the 2010 – 11 season , scoring three goals . This included three appearances in the 2010 – 11 League Two play @-@ offs following Stevenage 's sixth @-@ placed finish . Following a 3 – 0 aggregate victory over Accrington Stanley , Stevenage earned promotion to League One after a 1 – 0 win against Torquay United at Old Trafford on 28 May 2011 , with Bostwick playing the whole game . 
 Prior to the start of the 2011 – 12 season , Bostwick scored in Stevenage 's 2 – 1 pre @-@ season victory at Dagenham & Redbridge on 30 July 2011 . A week later , he started in Stevenage 's first ever League One fixture , a 0 – 0 draw against Exeter City . Three days after the draw , on 9 August , Bostwick scored his first goal of the campaign in a 4 – 3 extra @-@ time defeat to Championship side Peterborough United , scoring with a 25 @-@ yard shot that took the game to extra @-@ time . In Stevenage 's next league fixture , a 1 – 1 draw away at Chesterfield , he was sent @-@ off after receiving two yellow cards , resulting in a one @-@ match suspension . Bostwick signed a two @-@ year contract extension with the club on 26 August 2011 . He scored his second goal of the 2011 – 12 season in Stevenage 's 5 – 1 home win over Sheffield Wednesday , with his 25 @-@ yard half @-@ volley rebounding off of the post and into the net to give Stevenage a three @-@ goal lead in the first @-@ half . Bostwick was also instrumental in the club 's 6 – 1 away victory at Colchester United on 26 December , scoring one goal and assisting another . His goal restored Stevenage 's two @-@ goal cushion in the match on the hour mark , before he assisted Scott Laird from a well @-@ worked free @-@ kick routine ten minutes later . He beat his goal tally from the previous season when he scored his fourth goal of the campaign in Stevenage 's 4 – 2 victory against Milton Keynes Dons at Broadhall Way on 24 January 2012 , with Bostwick restoring parity in the first @-@ half with a long @-@ range strike . Bostwick also scored in a 2 – 2 draw against Huddersfield Town on 28 February 2012 , heading in Joel Byrom 's cross to half the deficit as Stevenage fought back to earn a point after being two goals down . He scored two goals in as many games in late March 2012 , both of which were long @-@ range strikes that drew Stevenage level in games against Walsall and Bournemouth respectively . Four days after the goal against Bournemouth , Bostwick was on the scoresheet once again , his third goal within the space of a week , scoring late @-@ on to give Stevenage a brief lead in an eventual draw against Wycombe Wanderers . He was almost ever @-@ present during the campaign , playing 53 times and scoring eight goals , as Stevenage narrowly lost over two legs in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final . During his successful four seasons with the club , Bostwick made 207 appearances , scoring 22 goals . 
 = = = Peterborough United = = = 
 In July 2012 , Bostwick signed for Championship side Peterborough United on a three @-@ year contract , for an undisclosed fee . Peterborough chairman Darragh MacAnthony stated that Bostwick was manager Darren Ferguson 's " number one transfer target for the summer " . He made his Peterborough debut in the club 's first game of the 2012 – 13 season , playing the whole match in a 4 – 0 home win over Southend United in the League Cup . Bostwick scored his first goal for the club in his fourth appearance , halving the deficit with a " stunning volley from the edge of the area " as Peterborough lost 2 – 1 at home to Leeds United on 25 August 2012 . He was made captain ahead of Peterborough 's home game against Derby County in October 2012 , and opened the scoring in the match with a volley , his second goal of the season , in a 3 – 0 victory . Bostwick 's third goal of the campaign came in Peterborough 's surprise victory over table @-@ topping Cardiff City , scoring a powerful 30 @-@ yard free @-@ kick in a 2 – 1 win . He added another goal to his tally in the club 's important 2 – 1 win over Barnsley at London Road on 1 January 2013 , again scoring courtesy of a free @-@ kick . 
 = = International career = = 
 Bostwick was called up to play for the England C team , who represent England at non @-@ league level , in a game against Italy C in Benevento in November 2008 . He came on as a 56th @-@ minute substitute in a game that ended 2 – 2 . He was called up again to represent England C in a game against Belgium U23 at the Kassam Stadium in May 2009 . However , he was forced to withdraw due to injury , and was subsequently replaced by fellow Stevenage midfielder Joel Byrom . Bostwick was called up once more to play against Poland U23 in Grodzisk Wielkopolski , but again had to withdraw due to injury . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bostwick grew up in South East London . He supports West Ham United , and states that his footballing hero when growing up was Rio Ferdinand . He has one daughter , whom his partner gave birth to in 2007 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 26 December 2015 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Ebbsfleet United 
 FA Trophy : 2007 – 08 
 Stevenage 
 FA Trophy : 2008 – 09 
 Conference Premier : 2009 – 10 
 Football League Two play @-@ offs : 2010 – 11 
 Individual 
 Conference Premier Team of the Year : 2009 – 10 
 = 108 North State Street = 
 108 North State Street is a site currently under development as an urban center located in the Loop community area of downtown Chicago , Illinois . The 3 building structure was being developed by Joseph Freed and Associates LLC , as a project inherited from the Mills Corporation . However , in 2011 Bank of America foreclosed on the property and sold it in 2012 to CIM Group . Retail development responsibilities were undertaken by Joseph Freed and Associates LLC . It is located on the square block bounded clockwise from the North by West Randolph Street , North State Street , West Washington Street and North Dearborn Street that is known as " Block 37 " , which was its designated number as one of the original 58 blocks of the city . The project broke ground on November 15 , 2005 . On July 31 , 2006 , the construction phase began . July 2008 marked the opening of the first of the three structures and the shopping center opened in November 2009 . 
 The Mills Corporation has also been contracted to develop an underground transit center beneath Block 37 that will be jointly funded by the City of Chicago , the Chicago Transit Authority and The Mills Corporation . The planned project includes a new subway station , track connections and a common downtown airport check @-@ in facility for train service to both O 'Hare and Midway airports . Since the purchase in April 2007 the project has stalled . The CTA has pulled out of the project and the current economic climate has stalled the project . Delays in completion have caused the project to lose major tenants . 
 Both Block 37 and The Mills Corporation have histories of financial difficulties . Block 37 had been demolished in 1989 for a hotly contested redevelopment plan under the then new Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley . The debates included the demolition of the Chicago Landmark McCarthy Building , which proceeded after the Illinois Supreme Court decided private preservation groups did not have standing to challenge the city 's decision . Once the site was cleared , the initial redevelopment plan fell through , as did several subsequent plans , leaving the block vacant and undeveloped for nearly a generation . The Mills Corporation has itself been in financial difficulty in the past . This reputation and changing financial climate caused a delay in 2006 as contractors feared not getting paid . During the construction , cost overruns and delays have forced the city of Chicago and the Chicago Transit Authority to make up for a shortfall of over $ 100 million . In November 2009 , the developer was declared in default and CB Richard Ellis was named receiver . 
 By February 2012 , the building remained only 26 percent occupied due to the undesirability of leasing space in bankruptcy proceedings . Construction of the apartment tower began in October 2014 . The retail spaces remained only 52 percent leased at the time . 
 = = Details = = 
 According to plans , it will be composed of three united structures : a 21 @-@ story residential condominium tower called 108 North State Condominium Tower at North State Street and West Randolph Street , a 20 @-@ story hotel tower called 108 North State Hotel Tower at West Randolph Street and North Dearborn street , and a 17 @-@ story tower called CBS Broadcast Center at North State Street and West Washington Street ( for WBBM @-@ TV , CBS 2 ) . At one point , there was talk that the hotel tower has been abandoned in favor of a second residential tower . However , more recently it seems that the hotel tower is still anticipated . These structures will rise above lower level retail space . It is expected to have a very eclectic mix of shopping , entertainment , and dining in its lower retail floors . There were plans for an underground CTA transit station providing express service to O 'Hare and Midway airports via the " L " , as well as local connections via the CTA Blue and Red line subways ( connecting the Washington / Dearborn and Washington / State stations , respectively ) . The CTA superstation has been mothballed due to $ 100 million cost overruns & limited interest in private operator of the express service . In November 2008 , the city proposed new financing to enable Loews Hotels build the 354 @-@ room planned hotel . 
 Architecturally , the main floor will feature transparent cornered project <unk> and clear glass street level views . The multiple structures will feature approximately 400 @,@ 000 square feet ( 40 @,@ 000 m ² ) of retail , entertainment and dining space ; 200 @,@ 000 to 450 @,@ 000 square feet ( 42 @,@ 000 m ² ) of office space ; a 354 @-@ room hotel ; a 200- to 300 @-@ unit residential tower ; and a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art CTA transit station providing service to and from Chicago ’ s O ’ Hare and Midway airports . 
 It will be flanked to the west by the Richard J. Daley Center and to the east by the former Marshall Field and Company Building . It is part of the central business district that includes Chicago City Hall and the James R. Thompson Center ( the State of Illinois office building ) within 2 blocks . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Block 37 = = = 
 In 1829 , the legislature appointed commissioners to locate a canal and layout the surrounding town . The commissioners employed James Thompson to survey and plat the town of Chicago , which at the time had a population of less than 100 . Historians regard the August 4 , 1830 , filing of the plat as the official recognition of a <unk> known as Chicago . Block 37 is one of the city 's original 58 blocks in the layout of the town , . 
 Even before the Chicago Fire , the block was home to one of Chicago 's largest theaters . During the late 19th century , tall office buildings proliferated on the block . By 1970 , the block was densely developed with 11 buildings , housing theaters , offices , a YMCA , and retailers like Stop & Shop , a grocer . On June 14 , 1973 , Mayor Richard J. Daley announced a broad urban renewal initiative centered on the North Loop theater district . Over the ensuing 16 years , numerous private developers , notably the Rubloff Company and JMB Realty , planned large mixed @-@ use developments on the site , with a mall along State Street and hotels and office towers above . Property assembly was facilitated by Mayor Harold Washington 's creation of the North Loop tax increment financing district in 1983 , which gave the urban renewal effort a steady revenue stream and eminent domain authority . 
 There was much consternation when it was demolished in 1989 , after Mayor Richard M. Daley approved its demolition to erect a multi @-@ use skyscraper with retail , hotel , office , and residential spaces . The McCarthy Building , a Chicago Landmark , was even stripped of landmark status over the objection of preservationists and public interest groups in order for the block to be cleared . Due to Block 37 's central location in the Loop , between the State Street retail district , the city / county government complex , and the Randolph Street theater district , its history is a microcosm of the city 's history . Block 37 was a nearly vacant city block from 1989 until 2005 after several attempts at redevelopment failed due to Chicago politics and insufficient funding of several past developers . The single remaining building from the pre @-@ 1989 Block 37 architecture is an active Commonwealth Edison transformer building that distributes power to a great portion of the Loop . 
 In 1988 , Chicago Mayor Harold Washington approved a $ 24 million subsidy to <unk> Venture to develop Block 37 . There were a series of subsequent alternate redevelopment plans . Among the prior redevelopment plans for the block were the original Block 37 Towers , for which the original block was demolished and which included a 47 @-@ story tower designed by Murphy / Jahn , Inc . Another failed plan was a Solomon Cordwell Buenz plan including a 711 @-@ foot 66 @-@ story residential tower and a 12 @-@ story Marriott Hotel towering over a 4 @-@ story retail base . This had followed the 39 @-@ story Kohn Pedersen Fox Associates design scheduled for 2004 completion . The developments fell through , which put the property back into the city 's possession . In 2002 , the city initiated a competition for the development rights to the property . In 2004 , the city sold the property to Mills Corp. at a $ 20 million loss . Mills sold the development rights to Joseph Freed and Associates in 2005 , when the city committed $ 42 million in tax @-@ increment funding . In 2007 , the city learned the development was $ 150 million over budget . The complex was originally being developed by commercial real estate developer Mills Corporation , best known for its ownership of numerous super @-@ regional shopping malls . However , Joseph Freed and Associates LLC has inherited the development rights . 
 = = = The Mills Corporation = = = 
 = = = = Corporate difficulties = = = = 
 Mills ' troubles began in November 2005 , with revelations of large losses on failed projects , a cash crunch and a U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission investigation into its accounting . The SEC inquiry was upgraded to a formal investigation in March 2006 . The reclassification as a formal investigation allows for the use of additional techniques such as subpoenas . On April 6 , 2007 Simon Property Group , Inc. announced the joint acquisition of Mills Corporation along with Farallon Capital Management for $ 25 @.@ 25 per share of common stock . 
 = = = = Block 37 troubles = = = = 
 In March 2006 , contractors halted construction because of fears that they will not be paid . This caused Morningstar to reconsider their lease commitment . As a result , the value of the project declined , which made the resale of the project rights difficult . Mills was close to a deal with German investment firm , Deutsche <unk> Fonds A.G. prior to the difficulties . <unk> had outbid Chicago developer Golub & Co . , which then became the frontrunner . Golub , an international real estate investment company headquartered in Chicago , has closed on the office space portion of the project . Mills eventually sold the retail space rights to Chicago developer Joseph Freed & Associates , who had previously purchased the nearby Carson , Pirie , Scott and Company Building ( located at 1 South State Street ) that closed in early 2007 . 
 Golub and Mills are now in a legal entanglement over certain leases to Morningstar for 211 @,@ 000 square feet ( 19 @,@ 600 m2 ) . Golub claims Mills knew the measurements of the floors actually totalled 237 @,@ 000 square feet ( 22 @,@ 000 m2 ) although they contracted for 211 @,@ 000 square feet ( 19 @,@ 600 m2 ) . Golub claims a Morningstar affiliate " ... induced Morningstar to agree in the lease to be bound by an after @-@ the @-@ fact re @-@ measurement of the space . " Additionally , Golub claims that Mills has acted without Daley administration authorizations for plans such as elimination of a proposed hotel in favor of a second apartment tower , as required by an agreement between Golub and Mills . In addition , Golub has sued over the residential portion of the project , which was given to Freed . Golub claims to have accepted the office space part of the project at a low profit with the expectation of making a larger profit on the residential portion . However , a court ruling has paved the way for Mills to terminate its contract with Chicago @-@ based Golub & Co. to develop the project ’ s two residential towers and to sell the residential portion of the Block 37 project in the Loop to developer Joseph A. Freed & Associates LLC . 
 = = = = 2009 Foreclosure = = = = 
 Lenders , including Bank of America , moved to foreclose on the retail and transit portion of the mixed @-@ use development on October 19 , 2009 , because the developer , Joseph Freed and Associates LLC , ran out of money . Freed technically defaulted in March . With cost overruns exceeding $ 34 million as of August 25 , Freed owes $ 128 @.@ 5 million on a $ 205 million construction loan , according to a lawsuit filed in Cook County Circuit Court . On November 3 , the developer announced it had landed 13 new tenants to open within the succeeding few months . On November 20 , a circuit court judge stripped Freed of the development rights and turn the responsibility over to CB Richard Ellis . On the same day a partial occupancy permit for the underground pedway connecting the red line and the blue line as well as the first floor retail space was granted . Freed claimed that the loan payments were current and that the default was based on a technicality . As receiver , CB Richard Ellis was scheduled to file a status report with the court December 8 and a full report , including financials , on January 15 , 2010 . In March 2011 , Bank of America acquired the $ 206 million property with a credit bid of $ 100 million at a sheriff 's foreclosure sale . Then in February 2012 , CIM Group was expected to close on a negotiated purchase of the entire 305 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot shopping center from Bank of America Corp. 
 = = Progress = = 
 = = = Phase I construction = = = 
 The Mills Corporation purchased the property for the project from the city on November 11 , 2005 . Phase I of the project , the groundbreaking , began formally on November 15 , 2005 . This followed winning the competition to be master developer and having their plan approved by the city . The Mills Corporation has letters of intent from CBS 2 Chicago Broadcast Center , <unk> Milano , Sisley , Andrew ’ s Ties , Banana Republic , Rosa Mexicano , David Barton Gym and new concepts by Steve Lombardo , creator of Gibson 's Steakhouse and Hugo ’ s Frog Bar , and Steven Foster , creator of Lucky Strike Lanes in Hollywood as future tenant commitments . Morningstar , Inc. has signed a lease to occupy about 210 @,@ 000 square feet ( 20 @,@ 000 m ² ) across eight floors , making it the largest tenant in the office tower . In April 2005 , Mills had announced a lease commitment with WBBM @-@ Channel 2 for about 100 @,@ 000 square feet ( 10 @,@ 000 m ² ) of space for offices and a showcase television studio . In February 2008 , developer Joseph Freed & Associates announced Club Monaco , a Muvico Entertainment LLC theatre , a David Barton Gym , a Rosa Mexican restaurant , a coffee shop and a yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ named Lettuce Entertain You Enterprises Inc. restaurant will be located in the State Street complex . In June 2008 , Puma confirmed it is opening a two @-@ level flagship store on Block 37 . Also , the Muvico Theatre was reported to have an eight screen multiplex . In October 2008 , Spanish clothing store Zara signed a lease for Block 37 along with German athletic @-@ wear company Puma athletic wear and British clothing label Ben Sherman . Other confirmed retailers include clothier Steve Madden , Godiva Chocolatier , sporting apparel seller Lululemon Athletica Inc . , hair and skin products retailer <unk> as well as body and bath products retailer Sabon . Other stores rumored to be considering Block 37 at that time were Apple Computer and Crate & Barrel home furnishings 
 = = = Phase II construction = = = 
 On July 31 , 2006 , the retail and CTA construction began . The retail portion entails the construction of the CBS 2 Broadcast Center building at North State Street and West Washington Street . The building will also serve as the corporate headquarters of Morningstar , Inc . This 17 @-@ story building will be 276 feet ( 84 m ) in height . After a series of previous failures on this project , this marks the first time redevelopment has gone past ground breaking to the construction phase . The construction of the condominium Tower at State Street and Randolph was visible on May 2 , 2007 . 
 The first phase of construction ( Phase II ) had been contracted to be completed by March 2008 . This would enable Morningstar , Inc. to move before its early 2009 lease expiration at its present location , 225 W. Wacker Drive . However , financial troubles have caused delays that have necessitated that Morningstar who had intended to occupy over half of the building seek lease proposals from other downtown office towers . Morningstar would suffer holdover penalties and other damages if it were unable to move before its lease expires . Morningstar is hesitant to pursue other opportunities because their lease at 108 North State Street is at a below market price in the low $ 20s / square foot . 
 On June 11 , 2008 , the CTA board was scheduled to hear the city 's plan of a three @-@ phase bailout of the construction of the rapid transit station under block 37 . The plan included $ 20 million in additional tax increment financing . This comes on top of an extra $ 60 – 70 million in excess of its budgeted amount that the CTA has been forces to expend . The building developer , Joseph Freed & Associates , has agreed to accept $ 19 million of cost overruns . This round of assistance only covers costs that have been incurred to date . No further funds have been committed and the station 's development is being halted until such funds arise . The original budget was $ 213 million ( $ 173 from CTA ) and costs to date have been $ 320 million . As of last year the costs were $ 150 million over budget and the city is seeking private investment . Construction finally began on the third building , the hotel and residences in the end of 2009 . 
 = = = = You Are Beautiful = = = = 
 During construction , 100 local artists created cutout woodblock letters to place on the temporary construction wall . They were posted on the wall adjacent to the temporary pedestrian walkway next to the construction site . The phrase " You Are Beautiful " is spelled out in various languages . 
 = = = Completion = = = 
 In September 2008 , the mixed @-@ use 16 @-@ story building held its ribbon cutting ceremony . The CBS studio includes a 30 by 19 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 by 5 @.@ 8 m ) outside video display , which has been a controversial addition to the Loop community . Morningstar has moved its global headquarters into the building . Also , the world 's first luxury shared office will host 100 individual workspaces for rent on the 15th floor in a space that includes a spa , pool hall , recording studio , graphic design shop , audio @-@ visual board room , penthouse suites and concierge . 
 The shopping center is expected to include Bebe , Coach and J.Crew. Lettuce Entertain You who also operates the food court at Water Tower Place will operate a cafe , food court and market . The top floor was to be occupied by Muvico Theaters , however they pulled out in 2009 . The David Barton Gym , the first and largest tenant of the Block 37 project , has pulled out of the project favoring , instead , the Roosevelt Collection in the south loop . The reason the gym opted out was the delayed opening of the mall , which is scheduled for fall 2009 opening rather than fall 2008 as scheduled . In March 2009 , Apple Inc. also withdrew from its leasing agreement , and less than a month later it signed an agreement to develop a new storefront in the Clybourn Corridor on property bounded by North Avenue , Halsted Street and Clybourn Avenue . After Apple backed out of its lease , Lululemon backed out of its lease to be located next to Apple . Other March 2009 tenant signings included Chicago 's haberdashery Bigsby & <unk> , <unk> Hut , crystal jewelers Swarovski , <unk> Cafe , and Fast @-@ casual eatery <unk> . Also , in the face of declining advertising revenue , CBS sought to sublease part of its studio . A Loews Hotel will be built in forthcoming years . 
 On November 20 , 2009 , the underground pedway connecting the blue line and the red line opened . The following day Steve Madden shoes , opened the first retail establishment in the structure . As of February , 2012 , the theatre , food court and gym had not opened and were no longer planned . The building remained only 26 percent occupied at that time due to hesitance by retailers to commit to leases while lender Bank of America and developer Joseph Freed battled in bankruptcy court . 
 = = = Apartment building = = = 
 In 2014 , CIM began moving forward with adding a rental residential tower atop Block 37 . In March 2014 , rumors began that an apartment building exceeding 500 units was being planned . On September 11 , CIM issued a press release that it had obtained permits for a 34 @-@ story , 690 @-@ unit apartment tower , which Crain 's Chicago Business described as " the biggest apartment tower the Loop has seen in decades " . The official commencement of the glass @-@ walled project was on October 29 with expected completion by Summer 2016 to include amenities such as outdoor pool and spa , plus a rooftop spa and fitness center . At the time the retail spaces were only 52 percent occupied . The apartment building construction eliminated the plans to build a hotel atop the structure . The apartment building construction coincided with plans to bring an 11 @-@ screen AMC Theatres dine @-@ in movie theater to the building . The 4th floor AMC theater opened its doors on December 17 , 2015 as scheduled as the Loop 's only major chain movie theatre . The theatre is Chicago 's first Dine @-@ In Theatre in which patrons order food by the touch of a button from their seats . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = M @-@ 123 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 123 is a state trunkline highway in the eastern Upper Peninsula of the U.S. state of Michigan . It is one of only a few highways in Michigan that curve around and form a U @-@ shape . In fact , M @-@ 123 has three intersections with only two state trunklines . It meets M @-@ 28 twice as a result of its U @-@ shaped routing . M @-@ 123 also has a rare signed concurrency with a County @-@ Designated Highway in Michigan ; in Trout Lake , there is a concurrency with H @-@ 40 . All of M @-@ 123 north of M @-@ 28 is a Scenic Heritage Route within the Michigan Heritage Route system . 
 The highway was first designated before 1936 along a section of its current routing . Sections added since then encompass segments formerly belonging to US Highway 2 ( US 2 ) and M @-@ 48 . The last changes came to the highway in 1962 and 1963 , when the northern end was extended and the southern end was truncated slightly . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 123 serves a thinly @-@ populated section of the state . Much of the highway passes through the eastern unit of the Hiawatha National Forest . No part of the highway is listed on the National Highway System , a system of strategically important highways . The section of highway north of the two M @-@ 28 junctions is both a Michigan Scenic Heritage Route and part of the Lake Superior Circle Tour . 
 = = = Rogers Park to Paradise = = = 
 The southern terminus of the highway is at exit 352 along Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) north of St. Ignace in Rogers Park . The roadway also connects to County @-@ Designated Highway H @-@ 63 ( Old US 2 ) at the interchange . From the interchange north , the highway runs northwest as Tahquamenon Trail to the community of Allenville near <unk> Lake in <unk> Township . Here it meets H @-@ 57 . Just north of Allenville , the trunkline crosses through the adjacent community of Moran . Allenville was a stop on the Detroit , Mackinac and Marquette Railroad , and Moran was named after William B. Moran , one of the early settlement 's founders . The roadway runs parallel to a rail line north of Moran . Before crossing into Chippewa County , the highway passes through the community of Ozark , home of a rock quarry . North of the county line is the community of Trout Lake , where M @-@ 123 meets and merges with H @-@ 40 across railroad tracks and through town near <unk> , Frenchman and Carp lakes . Continuing to the north , the highway is renamed <unk> Road and serves the Three Lakes Campground , a unit of the Hiawatha National Forest , before meeting M @-@ 28 at Eckerman . 
 M @-@ 123 is designated as a Scenic Heritage Route north of M @-@ 28 . Here it continues northwest to East – West Road and turns to run along the shores of Whitefish Bay and cross the Tahquamenon River near its mouth . Continuing along the bay as Whitefish Road , M @-@ 123 meets the community of Paradise , the northernmost point along the highway . It is here that M @-@ 123 intersects Whitefish Point Road , which continues north to Whitefish Point , home of the Great Lakes Shipwreck Museum . In either direction , M @-@ 123 runs southbound from Paradise , changing direction . Continuing east of Paradise , M @-@ 123 is the only paved road that serves the Tahquamenon Falls State Park and the Whitefish Point region . 
 = = = Tahquamenon Falls State Park = = = 
 The Tahquamenon Falls State Park is a 46 @,@ 179 acre ( 186 @.@ 9 km ² ) state park in the U.S. state of Michigan . It is the second largest of Michigan 's state parks . Bordering on Lake Superior , most of the park is located within Chippewa County , with the western section of the park extending into Luce County . The park follows the Tahquamenon River as it passes over Tahquamenon Falls and drains into Whitefish Bay , Lake Superior . The Tahquamenon Falls include a single 50 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) drop , the Upper Falls , plus the cascades and rapids collectively called the Lower Falls . During the late @-@ spring runoff , the river drains as much as 50 @,@ 000 gallons ( 200 @,@ 000 liters ) of water per second , making the upper falls the second most voluminous vertical waterfall east of the Mississippi River , after only Niagara Falls . 
 = = = Paradise to Newberry = = = 
 East of Paradise , M @-@ 123 runs along the Tahquamenon River inside the state park boundaries . Past the park , the highway is known as Falls Road in Luce County . The trunkline turns southwest at the county line . It runs south and west across Murphy Creek and the Auger River before intersecting with H @-@ 37 at Four Mile Corner . The highway crosses a branch of the Tahquamenon River one last time before becoming Newberry Avenue in the city of Newberry . The highest annual average daily traffic , a measure of traffic volume , was recorded by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) for M @-@ 123 in 2007 along Newberry Avenue at 7 @,@ 500 vehicles . South of downtown , M @-@ 123 meets M @-@ 28 a second time west of Twin Lake . This intersection is the " northern " terminus of the 96 @.@ 110 @-@ mile ( 154 @.@ 674 km ) highway . 
 = = History = = 
 The construction of M @-@ 123 started in the 1930s near Eckerman , the location of the current eastern M @-@ 28 / M @-@ 123 junction . By 1936 , M @-@ 123 was designated running north of M @-@ 28 on 10 miles ( 16 km ) of hard @-@ surface pavement . At this time , US 2 is routed along Worth Road and uses roadway later used by M @-@ 123 from Moran to Rogers Park , and M @-@ 48 was routed north of Newberry to Four Mile Corner . The first extension of M @-@ 123 southward from Eckerman , through Trout Lake to Rogers Park north of St. Ignace , came in 1954 . Part of this routing in Trout Lake uses M @-@ 48 ( now a portion of H @-@ 40 ) . An additional extension is shown north to the Tahquamenon River Bridge , lengthening the highway to the north on the April 15 , 1954 official state map . The section north to the Tahquamenon River Bridge is remarked on the October 1 , 1954 state map as a county road , however . In 1957 , M @-@ 123 was permanently extended north to the bridge , and in 1962 the final extension north to Paradise and south to Newberry was completed . From Four Mile Corner south , M @-@ 123 replaced M @-@ 117 to a new terminus at M @-@ 28 south of Newberry . The southernmost section of roadway between the I @-@ 75 / US 2 freeway and H @-@ 63 ( Old US 2 ) was transferred to Mackinac County for maintenance with the opening of the freeway in 1963 . 
 On November 9 , 2007 , MDOT expanded the Tahquamenon Scenic Heritage Route designation previously applied to M @-@ 123 . This expanded the designation to all of the highway north of M @-@ 28 , recognizing it for its " outstanding natural beauty " and the scenic views of " rivers , forests , trails and Tahquamenon Falls State Park . " Previously , the designation was limited to between Luce County Road 500 to Galloway Creek . The expansion was planned by the Eastern Upper Peninsula Regional Planning & Development Commission along with local governments and businesses . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Ian Hummer = 
 Ian MacDonald Hummer ( born August 23 , 1990 ) is an American professional basketball player for BG Göttingen of the German Bundesliga . He previously played professionally with the <unk> Ulm and the Nilan Bisons <unk> . He is from Vienna , Virginia and completed his senior season of college basketball for the 2012 – 13 Princeton Tigers men 's basketball team . He was the 2009 The Washington Post Boys basketball Player of the Year for Gonzaga College High School as a senior in high school and the 2013 Ivy League Men 's Basketball Player of the Year as a senior in college for Princeton . 
 At Princeton , he is the second leading scorer ( behind Bill Bradley ) and fifth leading rebounder in program history . He led the team to three postseason tournaments and the 2010 – 11 Ivy League Championship . He holds the Ivy League record for most single @-@ season and career Player of the Week Awards . He earned Associated Press 2013 All @-@ American honorable mention recognition . Both his father , Ed , and uncle , John , are distinguished former Princeton Tigers men 's basketball players . His 2008 Gonzaga team won the District of Columbia championships during his junior year . 
 = = Background = = 
 Hummer played for Gonzaga College High School of the Washington Catholic Athletic Conference ( <unk> ) . He joined the starting lineup for the final two months of his sophomore season . Hummer was a second team 2007 – 08 All @-@ Metro DC selection by The Washington Post as Gonzaga finished as the top @-@ ranked school in the Metro area during his junior year . The team 's point guard was sophomore Tyler Thornton . Hummer scored 16 points and added 14 rebounds in the 2008 city championship game victory against Theodore Roosevelt High School . He was a 2008 – 09 All @-@ Metro DC selection and Boys basketball Player of the Year by The Washington Post . Hummer scored a career @-@ high 32 points and added 15 rebounds against <unk> Catholic High School on January 21 , 2009 . His performance earned him recognition by ESPN RISE as its ESPN RISE National Boys Basketball Player of the Week . The team 's success over # 15 @-@ ranked <unk> propelled it from 43 to 13 in the national rankings . However , Gonzaga lost the 2009 <unk> championship by a 62 – 61 margin on a last second shot to <unk> despite 18 points and 10 rebounds by Hummer . Hummer was a 2009 Capital All @-@ Star selection . 
 Hummer was a 6 @-@ foot @-@ 7 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 01 m ) back to the basket player who generally defended opposing high school centers . He had an underdeveloped face @-@ up game yet he was undersized to play that style of game in power conferences . Power conference schools questioned how much potential he had in a league where his low post skills would likely be defended by larger , stronger and / or more athletic players who relegated him to perimeter play . When Princeton head coach Sydney Johnson recruited him , the only competition was mid @-@ major schools and Hummer was not interested in any of them . During his campus visit with his father at his brother Alex 's ( Princeton Class of 2011 ) dorm room , he decided at midnight to go hang out at Dan Mavraides room across campus , signalling to his father that he was pretty comfortable with Princeton and likely to attend . Due to Hummer 's relationship with former Princeton and current Georgetown Hoyas men 's basketball head coach John Thompson III , he was able to train at the Georgetown University gym over the summers . He also played in the Kenner League ( the only National Collegiate Athletic Association – sanctioned summer league in the Washington , D.C. ) during the summer . 
 = = College = = 
 = = = Freshman season = = = 
 On December 13 , 2009 , Hummer scored 17 points and added 2 steals and 2 rebounds with no turnovers in a 65 – 50 Princeton victory over UNC Greensboro . It marked the first game in which Hummer led Princeton in scoring . The following day he earned his first Ivy League Rookie of the Week recognition . On January 29 , 2010 , Hummer posted 10 points against Brown . He tallied 8 points and 4 rebounds against Yale the following night . He earned his second Ivy League Rookie of the Week award on February 1 as a result . Two of his three highest scoring games for the 2009 – 10 Tigers came in Princeton 's two victories during the postseason 2010 College Basketball Invitational against Duquesne and IUPUI . 
 = = = Sophomore season = = = 
 On November 30 , 2010 , Hummer posted 22 points , 6 rebounds , 4 assists and 2 blocks against Lafayette . On December 5 , he added 17 points , 8 rebounds , 3 assists and a steal against Saint Joseph 's . In the two games , he shot 18 @-@ for @-@ 24 from the field for a 75 % field goal percentage . On December 6 , he earned Ivy League Player of the week . While starting 31 of 32 games , Hummer helped the 2010 – 11 team earn a share of the 2010 – 11 Ivy League men 's basketball season championship , win a one @-@ game playoff against Harvard and contest Kentucky with a two @-@ point loss in the 2011 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . That year , Hummer was a 2011 Second team All @-@ Ivy and National Association of Basketball Coaches ( NABC ) First Team All @-@ District selection . 
 = = = Junior season = = = 
 In the December 7 contest against Rutgers , Hummer scored the game @-@ winning layup with three seconds left in the game . On December 14 , 2011 , Hummer tallied 21 points , 12 rebounds , 7 assists , and 4 steals in an overtime victory over Rider . Then on December 18 , he had 20 points , 5 rebounds , 6 assists , 5 steals and 2 blocks against Northeastern . These back @-@ to @-@ back 20 point performances , which included a career high in assists against Rider and a career high in steals against Northeastern , earned him Ivy League Player of the Week recognition on December 19 , 2011 . His 25 @-@ point , 15 @-@ rebound effort in the December 30 triple overtime victory over eventual 2012 ACC Men 's Basketball Tournament Champion Florida State tied his career @-@ high point production and established a career high in rebounds . When Hummer scored 18 points on February 4 , 2012 against Yale , he became the 29th Princeton Tiger ( and 5th Princeton junior as well as 2nd Hummer family member ) to reach the 1000 @-@ point plateau . Hummer 's 515 points was the highest single @-@ season total by a Princeton player since Bill Bradley . Hummer 's efforts helped the 2011 – 12 team earn a bid to the 2012 College Basketball Invitational . He was a 2012 unanimous first team All @-@ Ivy and a second team NABC All @-@ District selection . 
 = = = Senior season = = = 
 Hummer was the unanimous preseason selection as Ivy League Player of the Year by a wide variety of media outlets , including Rivals.com and CBS Sports . On November 24 , Hummer posted a career @-@ high 28 points against Lafayette along with 7 rebounds , 5 assists , 4 steals , and a block . Hummer tallied 19 points , 7 rebounds , 5 assists and a steal against Drexel on December 8 . He then earned Ivy League Player of the Week on December 10 , 2012 . Hummer tallied 18 points , 7 rebounds , 5 assists , 1 steal and 2 blocks against Fordham on December 15 . This earned him a second straight Ivy League Player of the Week on December 17 , 2012 That week he matched Bill Bradley as the only two Tigers with 1300 career points and 600 career rebounds . On December 20 and 22 against Rider and Bucknell , Hummer posted 15 points , 7 rebound , 5 assists , 2 steals and a block and then 17 points , 8 rebounds , 2 assists and 2 blocks . These performances earned Hummer a third straight Ivy League Player of the Week award on December 24 , 2012 . He was the first Princeton Tiger to earn three consecutive Player of the Week recognitions . On January 5 , Hummer tied his career high with 28 points and added 6 rebounds , 1 assist , 2 steals and a block against Elon . Hummer was recognized with his fourth Ivy League Player of the Week award on January 7 , 2013 . The fourth Player of the Week recognition established a Princeton single @-@ season record , surpassing Kareem Maddox ' 11 . 
 Hummer tied the Ivy League record for single @-@ season Player of the Week awards with his fifth on February 4 . Hummer averaged 19 points , 8 rebounds and 5 @.@ 5 assists in wins against Cornell and Columbia on February 1 and February 2 . His seven assists against Columbia was a career high . On February 22 , Hummer posted 17 points , 3 rebounds , 5 assists and 3 steals against Columbia . The following night , he scored 17 points while adding 7 rebounds , 3 assists , 1 steal and 2 blocks against Cornell . The weekend victories mark the first weekend road sweep in two seasons . Hummer was rewarded as Ivy League Player of the week on February 25 . His sixth player of the week recognitions doubled the previous school record and give him 8 career POTW honors . Hummer posted his first double @-@ double of the season on March 2 , when he had 23 points and 14 rebounds as Princeton hosted Harvard for a 58 – 53 victory . The game marked Princeton 's 24th consecutive home win against Harvard . In the game , Hummer passed Kit Mueller and Doug Davis to move into second place on the Princeton career scoring list . The following night he had 13 points and 6 rebounds against Dartmouth . For the week , he earned Ivy League player of the week giving him a record seventh single @-@ season recognition and record tying ninth career recognition . On March 12 , the U.S. Basketball Writers Association named Hummer to its 2012 – 13 Men 's All @-@ District II ( NY , NJ , DE , DC , PA , WV ) Team , based upon voting from its national membership . Hummer was a unanimous First Team All @-@ Ivy selection as well as Ivy League Men 's Basketball Player of the Year , becoming Princeton 's first since 1999 . Hummer also surpassed Davis as the Ivy League 's career leader in games played . On March 26 , the National Association of Basketball Coaches named Hummer to its Division I All ‐ District 13 team as selected and voted on by member coaches of the NABC , making him eligible for the State Farm Coaches ’ Division I All @-@ America team . It was Hummer 's third consecutive NABC honor . Hummer also earned Associated Press honorable mention All @-@ American recognition . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Hummer was invited to tryout to be a member of the Los Angeles Lakers ' roster for the July 12 – 22 , 2013 NBA Summer League . In January 2014 , he signed with <unk> Ulm of the Basketball Bundesliga . In August 2014 , Hummer signed with the Nilan Bisons <unk> of the Finnish <unk> . 
 In January , 2016 , Hummer signed with BG Göttingen of the German Bundesliga . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Ian 's father , Ed , was a member of Princeton 's class of 1967 and a former high school All @-@ American . Ed helped Bill Bradley take the 1964 – 65 Princeton Tigers to the semifinals of the 1965 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . His uncle , John Hummer , was a member of Princeton 's class of 1970 and played six seasons in the National Basketball Association . Ian 's mother , Judy , died of breast cancer at the end of his freshman year of high school . His older brother Alex is a Princeton class of 2011 graduate . 
 = Heckscher State Parkway = 
 The Heckscher State Parkway ( formerly known as the Heckscher Spur ) is an 8 @.@ 24 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 13 @.@ 26 km ) parkway on Long Island , New York , in the United States . The parkway , located entirely within the Suffolk County town of Islip , begins at the south end of the Sagtikos State Parkway in West Islip , from where it continues west as the Southern State Parkway . It proceeds east as a six @-@ lane parkway through Brentwood and Central Islip , loosely paralleling New York State Route 27 ( NY 27 ) . At Islip Terrace , the Heckscher Parkway turns southward , crossing NY 27 before ending at the toll barrier for Heckscher State Park in Great River . The parkway comprises the eastern portion of New York State Route <unk> ( NY <unk> ) , an unsigned reference route , with the Southern State Parkway occupying the western section . In order to avoid confusion , the highway is signed as an extension of the Southern State Parkway west of the NY 27 interchange ( exit 44 ) . 
 The parkway was originally built in 1929 as a connector between NY 27A and the newly opened Heckscher ( formerly Deer Range ) State Park . In 1959 , bids were announced for a new Heckscher State Parkway , which would connect the original road to the Sagtikos State Parkway . This section was officially opened on November 3 , 1962 , with a ceremony featuring speeches by Robert Moses and Governor Nelson Rockefeller . The Long Island Transportation Plan 2000 , a long @-@ term study done in the late 1990s , called for the Heckscher Parkway to be widened west of NY 27 to accommodate a carpool and bus lane . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Heckscher State Parkway begins at an interchange with the southern terminus of the Sagtikos State Parkway in the hamlet of West Islip on Long Island . The junction is signed as exit 41A on the Heckscher Parkway and the Southern State Parkway , the Heckscher Parkway 's westward continuation toward New York City . Past the interchange , the Heckscher Parkway heads east as a six @-@ lane divided highway , passing through residential areas in West Islip and the North Bay Shore section of town of Islip . It soon enters exit 42 , a cloverleaf interchange with County Route 13 ( CR 13 , named Fifth Avenue ) . Half of the junction 's ramps directly connect to CR 13 while the others use one of the parkway 's two service roads , named Spur Drive South and Spur Drive North . After the interchange , the parkway continues generally eastward through Brentwood , running past dense woods buffering the highway from more developed areas . 
 Brentwood eventually gives way to Islip Terrace , where the parkway enters another cloverleaf interchange , exit 43 for NY 111 ( Islip Avenue ) . Exit 43A , a junction for CR 17 ( Carleton Avenue ) , follows shortly afterward . After exit 43A , the Heckscher State Parkway makes a gradual bend to the southeast toward exit 44 , a cloverleaf interchange with NY 27 ( Sunrise Highway ) . The two service roads flanking the Heckscher Parkway end just north of the junction , with both feeding into local streets adjacent to the parkway . Past Sunrise Highway , the Heckscher State Parkway enters East Islip , crossing over Long Island Rail Road 's Montauk Branch at a point just west of the Great River station . 
 On the other side of the tracks , the parkway begins to run along the western edge of Bayard Cutting Arboretum State Park while crossing over CR 50 ( Union Boulevard ) . The CR 50 overpass is located just north of exit 45 , a cloverleaf interchange serving NY 27A ( Montauk Highway ) . South of here , the Heckscher narrows from six to four lanes as it heads into Great River . Here , the road passes alongside residential neighborhoods while slowly curving to the south toward Heckscher State Park . The parkway intersects Timber Point Road at exit 46 before ending shortly afterward at the tollbooth for Heckscher State Park . While the parkway designation ends here , the highway 's right @-@ of @-@ way continues southwest into the park , 8 @.@ 52 miles ( 13 @.@ 71 km ) from the Southern State . 
 = = History = = 
 Heckscher State Park , formerly known as Deer Range State Park , dates back to 1925 . At that time , the construction of the Northern State Parkway was opposed by area residents as they believed it would hurt their ability to hunt foxes in the area . Their representatives in the New York State Legislature refused to provide money for a park , leading a group to contact August Heckscher , a local philanthropist . He donated $ 262 @,@ 000 ( 1929 USD ) to the Long Island State Park Commission ( LISPC ) and got land appropriated for a new park , which became Deer Range State Park . On June 2 , 1929 , the park was rededicated in the name of August Heckscher . Former Governor Alfred E. Smith , LISPC chairman and highway designer Robert Moses , and Heckscher all made remarks at a ceremony for the name change , and Heckscher was presented with a bronze tablet honoring his work . Heckscher died in April 1941 . 
 A two @-@ lane highway providing access from NY 27A to Heckscher State Park was constructed in 1929 . This highway became the basis for what eventually became the Heckscher State Parkway . Plans for the parkway called for it to extend northwest to a junction at Bay Shore Road in West Islip , where the Heckscher , Southern , <unk> and Captree Parkway ( now the Robert Moses Causeway ) would meet . Thus , when the extension of the Southern State Parkway opened in November 1949 , the junction was built to accommodate the proposed Heckscher Parkway . In 1952 , the state acquired the W. Bayard Cutting estate in Great River . Projections made at this time called for the Heckscher Parkway to be constructed by 1954 so the Cutting land could be turned into an arboretum . 
 Work on the road was delayed until March 1959 when bids were finally announced by the State of New York Department of Public Works to construct the last 6 @.@ 27 miles ( 10 @.@ 09 km ) section of the Heckscher State Parkway from the Sagtikos State Parkway to NY 27A . This , along with a widening of the Southern State Parkway , would fill the gaps in the original 200 @-@ mile ( 320 km ) parkway system proposed by Robert Moses . The estimated cost of construction was $ 8 @,@ 327 @,@ 000 ( 1959 USD ) , and the road was slated to be completed in September 1960 . An additional two years were ultimately needed to finish the highway , and LISPC announced on November 1 , 1962 , that the parkway would open on the upcoming Saturday ( November 3 ) with a ceremony featuring Robert Moses and Governor Nelson Rockefeller . 
 On the morning of November 3 , the Heckscher State Parkway 's full alignment was opened to traffic in rainy conditions . A motorcade of 110 vehicles followed the new parkway to the Bayard Cutting Arboretum , but Governor <unk> was late due to mechanical difficulties with his personal plane . The new parkway led to the expansion of facilities along the road , which included an additional 1 @,@ 658 acres ( 671 ha ) of land and 18 @,@ 000 feet ( 5 @,@ 500 m ) of new beachfront . Opening the parkway also created connections to the nearby Southside Sportsmen 's Club , which would be turned into a recreation area , and the Bayard Cutting Arboretum . A new set of trees were planted along the parkway in 1963 . LISPC was to plant 67 @,@ 000 trees , shrubs and ground cover along the new parkway and several others on Long Island . Evergreen trees , Japanese crab , cherry , mimosa , magnolia , forsythia and laurel plants were among those planted . 
 From 1997 – 2001 , engineers at Parsons Brinckerhoff worked on " Long Island Transportation Plan 2000 " , a $ 6 @.@ 5 million ( 2001 USD ) study focused on improving Long Island 's transportation system by 2020 . The study 's findings included 130 miles ( 210 km ) of road widening . One widening proposal would give the Heckscher Parkway an extra restricted @-@ access lane for buses and carpooling drivers between the Sagtikos State Parkway and NY 27 . The added lane would be part of a 60 @-@ mile ( 97 km ) system of restricted @-@ access lanes across Long Island . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 Exit numbers continue sequentially from those of the Southern State Parkway . The entire route is in Suffolk County . 
 = Snow Prince = 
 Snow Prince - Forbidden Love Melody ( Japanese : スノープリンス <unk> , Hepburn : Sunō <unk> : <unk> Koi no <unk> ) is a 2009 Japanese film . This film is adapted from the novel A Dog of Flanders and is inspired by the 1971 film A Small Love Melody . Directed by Joji Matsuoka and written by Kundō Koyama — the scriptwriter for the film Departures , it is a poignant story of a middle class woman 's teenage friendship with a poor artist . Shintaro Morimoto plays the role of Sota , the orphan artist who lives with his grandfather , and Marino Kuwashima plays the role of Sota 's friend , Sayo . Together , they have to weather the many challenges that come their way because of their lowly social status . Snow Prince marked the film debuts of Morimoto and Kuwashima . 
 The main and supporting cast of Snow Prince was revealed on 11 May 2009 , and the filming subsequently took place at a movie village located in Shōnai , Yamagata from November 2008 to February 2009 . The theme song of this film , entitled Snow Prince , was sung by a group of 10 boys including Shintaro Morimoto , the lead actor of this film . This song debuted at the 9th position on the Oricon weekly charts . 
 Snow Prince had its international debut in Flanders , Belgium , the setting for A Dog of Flanders . It then showcased at the 2009 Hawaii International Film Festival , and subsequently opened in Japanese cinemas on 12 December 2009 . The film , which grossed $ 845 @,@ 375 in Japan and Singapore , received mixed reviews from critics . Actor Teruyuki Kagawa was nominated for the best supporting actor award at the 52nd Blue Ribbon Awards for his role . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film opens when Sayo Arima , a girl brought up in a wealthy family and now an elderly woman , unexpectedly receives a manuscript written by Haigo , a circus clown whom she met many years ago . It deals with the events seventy years earlier when Sayo was friends with Sota , a poor village boy who lived with his grandfather and dreamt of being a painter . The film moves back to that time , when a circus came to the town where Sayo and Sota lived . Despite Sota 's grandfather warning him not to go near the circus , Sota goes with Sayo . After the performance , they sneak backstage and are caught by the circus clown Haigo , who kindly gives Sota an egg , which he had intended to buy for his grandfather . Sota believes that the clown can read his mind , and calls him Kamisama , which means " god " in Japanese . 
 Later , while talking to Sayo 's classmates , Sota learns about a legendary paint nicknamed " Night @-@ Sky " which can only be produced from materials unique to a particular pond . Sayo and Sota resolve to find the pond together . However , the route to the pond is dangerous , and involves passing through a train tunnel . In the tunnel Sayo trips and is nearly run over by a train . Sota manages to pull her out just in time , but is scolded by Mr. Arima , Sayo 's father , for taking her to such a dangerous place . He tells his wife not to let them meet again . Later , Sota returns to the pond with the circus clown . Sota offers to paint a picture of him , but the clown refuses and advises Sota to paint whatever his heart desires . He decides to paint Sayo playing the piano after he watches Sayo play the " Clair de lune " . To save money for the painting paper , Sota goes hungry and eats just a few grains of rice each day . Sota 's grandfather dies , and after the funeral , Sota goes to the circus to find solace in the circus clown , only to discover that the circus has moved away . 
 In the present again , the manuscript the old man brought has ended , and Sayo recounts the rest of the story . Despite the difficulties he faces , Sota manages to complete the painting , which he decides to give to Sayo . He and Chibi go to Sayo 's house , where Sayo is having a birthday party with her classmates . Sota gives the painting to Soya 's father , who agrees to pass the painting to Sayo . Sota continues walking in the snow . Just as he settles down to rest , he discovers that Mr. Arima 's warehouse is on fire . Sota helps to put out the fire and calls for help . He leaves before Soya 's father arrives , and Mr. Arima launches a manhunt to find Sota to thank him . When this hunt is unsuccessful , Sayo suggests that they look for him at the pond . They find him there , dead . In the present day again , the old man leaves and Sayo starts playing the " Clair de lune " on the piano . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The actors cast for roles in the film include : 
 Shintaro Morimoto as Sota , a poor orphaned boy who lives with his grandfather . He is talented in drawing , and spends much of his time drawing because he cannot afford to go to school . He is frequently accompanied by the dog Chibi , whom he and Sayo found abandoned and injured . 
 Marino Kuwashima as Sayo Arima , Sota 's soulmate and best friend . She is a member of the wealthy Arima family , and thus her father opposes her relationship with Sota . 
 Teruyuki Kagawa as Masamitsu Arima , Sayo 's father . He is a rich merchant in the village , and Sota 's grandfather works for him . He strongly opposes the relationship between Sota and his daughter Sayo because he hopes that she will marry into a rich family . 
 Rei Dan as <unk> Arima , Sayo 's mother . She is caught between her husband 's resistance to Sota and her belief in romantic love . 
 Maiko as Yasuko Hasegawa , Sayo 's granddaughter in the present . 
 Manabu Yamamoto as the old man , who delivers the letter which sparks the flashback of this incident . He is also Sota 's half @-@ brother and Haigo 's son . 
 Tadanobu Asano as the circus clown , Haigo . He is also Sota 's father , but does not tell him . He helps Sota find the legendary " night @-@ sky " paint , and tells Sota to paint whatever his heart desires . 
 Katsuo Nakamura as Masayoshi Harada , Sota 's grandfather . He gives many words of wisdom to Sota , and gently advises Sota not to hate anyone or bear any grudges for the circumstances and predicaments in his life . He later dies due to a long @-@ running illness . 
 Keiko Kishi as Sayo in the present . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Snow Prince was directed by Joji Matsuoka , whose previous works include the films Tokyo Tower : Mom and Me , and Sometimes Dad ( 2007 ) and Sayonara , Kuro ( 2003 ) . Kundō Koyama wrote the screenplay of his film . Snow Prince is <unk> Koyama 's second work , after his work on the Departures , which won the Best Foreign Language Film award at the 81st Academy Awards . 
 The film was inspired by the 1872 English novel A Dog of Flanders , written by Marie Louise de la <unk> , and by the film Small Love Melody , both of which were popular with Japanese audiences and well known in Japan . In the movie , an Akita dog was used instead of the Flemish breed used in the novel , and the setting was moved to Yamagata Prefecture in Japan instead of Flanders , Belgium . When asked about these changes , director Joji Matsuoka said that " this film is not specifically shot at any location " and that he used an Akita because it is " representative of Japan " . Asahi Shinbun reported that Snow Prince 's script was also partly inspired by the script of an anime version of A Dog of Flanders that was released previously . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 New actor Shintaro Morimoto and new actress Marino Kuwashima were officially revealed as the lead cast members of this film at the film 's 10th press conference on 11 May 2009 . They were handpicked from a group of 10 @,@ 000 people in an audition by director Joji Matsuoka . Matsuoka reportedly decided to choose Shintaro and Marino because they " had a different twinkle in their eyes " . In particular , Shintaro , the younger brother of Hey ! Say ! JUMP member Ryutaro Morimoto , was praised by the director , who said that he was looking for a child " who can exist for real " . Matsuoka described Shintaro 's qualities as " rare nowadays " , and also described him as an " angel " . 
 Other notable cast members of the film includes actors Teruyuki Kagawa and Tadanobu Asano , and actress Rei Dan . Actor Teruyuki Kagawa previously starred in films like 20th Century Boys ( 2009 ) and Dear Doctor ( 2009 ) , and was also the two @-@ time recipient of the " Best Supporting Actor " award at 29th and 31st Japan Academy Awards respectively . He has also starred in television series like Mr. Brain ( 2009 ) and Diplomat <unk> Kuroda ( 2011 ) . In this film , he stars as Masamitsu Arima , the father of Sayo and a rich village merchant . The actor Tadanobu Asano made his debut appearance in the 1990 film <unk> <unk> , another film that this film 's director Joji Matsuoka directed . Asano is also the winner of the " Best Lead Actor " award at the 33rd Japan Academy Awards . He plays the role of the circus clown Haigo , who is also the secret father of Sota , in this film . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Scenes of Sota 's and the Arima family 's houses , the village and the playhouse of Sota and Sayo were shot at the " <unk> Movie Village " ( <unk> , Shōnai <unk> ) in Shōnai , Yamagata . The filming at this location took place from November 2008 to February 2009 . In addition , the scene where Mr. Arima 's warehouse caught fire was filmed in " Sakata , Sankyo <unk> " ( <unk> <unk> ) , Yamagata Prefecture . The railway tracks in the movie are those of the former " Naruto no <unk> Koen Railway Line " ( <unk> , Naruto no <unk> Koen <unk> ) , which used to operate in Miyagi Prefecture . The scene where Sayo played the " Clair de lune " and the ending scene of the film was shot at the former <unk> Elementary School ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) . 
 Matsuoka described the filming conditions as " very harsh " , but said that " the film was completed thanks to the children " and ended by praising the perseverance of Shintaro and <unk> . Shintaro Morimoto said that the scene where the warehouse caught fire " was the scariest scene in the entire film " . Fellow actor Maiko also said that when she was seeing Shintaro and Marino acting like lovers , it reminded her of her " first love " . 
 = = = Theme song = = = 
 The film 's theme song is " Snow Prince " ( スノープリンス , Sunō <unk> ) , and it is sung by the group Snow Prince Gasshōdan ( <unk> ) . This theme song and the formation of the Snow Prince Gasshōdan group was unveiled at an animal welfare organization event on 1 November 2009 . Songwriter Shinji Nojima wrote the song 's lyrics . " Snow Prince " is a choral song inspired by Claude Debussy 's Clair de lune , or the third movement of the Suite <unk> . The piece " Clair de lune " is also featured in the film . 
 The Snow Prince Gasshōdan group is a temporary boy choir that was formed specially for this movie , and it is led by actor Shintaro Morimoto . The group comes under the management of Johnny Jr . , a Japanese talent agency that specially trains male idols . Snow Prince Gasshōdan is made up of 10 boys , who together , had an average age of 10 @.@ 5 years at the time of the filming . This makes the group Snow Prince Gasshōdan the youngest group in the history of all the Johnny Jr. idol groups to release a single . According to the movie 's release committee , the group Snow Prince Gasshōdan existed until the end of 2010 before it was disbanded . Leader Shintaro Morimoto expressed hope the group could be reunited again after 10 years . 
 Snow Prince was recorded and released as a single album on 2 December 2009 . This single debuted at the ninth position on the weekly Oricon charts , later achieving its peak of the fifth position in the same charts . 
 = = Release = = 
 Snow Prince had its first special screening in Flanders , Belgium , where the novel A Dog of Flanders was set . This was the first time lead actor Shintaro Morimoto traveled overseas , and he said that , " My heart was beating very fast , but seeing the audience response , I gained more confidence in this film " . Morimoto became the spokesperson for the Flanders government 's tourism board because he was the lead actor of the film . Snow Prince was then shown in Hawaii , where it made its film festival debut at the Hawaii International Film Festival ( <unk> ) on 20 October 2009 . 
 The film was then opened in Japan cinemas on 12 December 2009 . It was officially released at a ceremony held at Marunouchi Piccadilly in <unk> , Tokyo , on 12 December 2010 . The entire cast of the film , together with the film 's director Joji Matsuoka , were present at the ceremony . Also , at the ceremony , it was revealed to the media that negotiations for the film 's distribution rights overseas were ongoing . It was announced that distributors from 25 different countries in Asia and Europe were interested in releasing the films in their home countries , though these were not specifically mentioned . This is a high number as , usually , Japanese films will only receive around 10 to 15 different offers . During its debut weekend , Snow Prince debuted in 234 cinema screens across Japan . It grossed a total of $ 362 @,@ 879 in the opening week , making it the 10th highest grossing movie over the weekend of 12 and 13 December . Overall , it earned $ 837 @,@ 724 in Japanese cinemas . 
 In Singapore cinemas , Snow Prince was released on 13 May 2010 by local distributor Cathay @-@ keris Films . It grossed US $ 4 @,@ 088 on the first weekend ( 13 – 16 May ) and US $ 2 @,@ 320 on the second weekend ( 20 – 23 May ) , for a total gross of US $ 7 @,@ 651 in Singapore cinemas . 
 The home media for Snow Prince was released in DVD ( format 2 ) and Blu @-@ ray Disc versions . The distributor Toei released the film in Japan on 20 August 2010 . In Taiwan , a DVD version of Snow Prince was released on 5 April 2011 under the film 's Chinese name of <unk> with Chinese subtitles and Japanese dialog . Later , Snow Prince was showcased at the inaugural Beijing International Film Festival , where it became one of the six Japanese films to be shown on 24 April 2011 . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The single for this film 's theme song Snow Prince was released in a limited edition version and a regular version by Sony Music Entertainment on 2 December 2009 . 
 = = = Soundtrack ( limited edition album ) = = = 
 The limited edition version of the single Snow Prince contains a CD and a bonus DVD . 
 Track list : 
 " Snow Prince " ( スノープリンス ) 
 " Snow Prince ( choral version ) " ( スノープリンス <unk> ) 
 " Snow Prince ( original karaoke ) " ( スノープリンス ( オリジナル ・ <unk> ) ) 
 " Snow Prince [ choral version ] ( accompaniment ) " ( スノープリンス <unk> ( <unk> ) ) 
 " Snow Prince ( music video ) " ( スノープリンス ( <unk> ) ) ( DVD ) 
 " Snow Prince ( Making @-@ of ) " ( スノープリンス ( <unk> ) ) ( DVD ) 
 = = = Soundtrack ( regular album ) = = = 
 Track list : 
 " Snow Prince " ( スノープリンス ) 
 " Christmas Song Medley " ( <unk> ) 
 " Bitter Moon " 
 " Christmas Song Medley ( original karaoke version ) " ( <unk> ( オリジナル ・ <unk> ) ) 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 In a pre @-@ release review of the film , Asahi Shimbun 's Atsushi Ohara said that " the film has adapted Dog of Flanders well " , but he took issue with the treatment of Sota and Chibi , saying that they were treated too harshly . He rounded off his review by saying that the dog acted superbly and was very adorable , and that the scenery in the film had a rare beauty . In another article written by him , he said that the audience should " expect to ponder about the events in this film " , and finished by saying that the film allows the audience to gain important messages . In another pre @-@ release review , Nobuko Yamasaki , writing on behalf of <unk> , said that Snow Prince was filled with " tears of gratitude " and Shintaro Morimoto 's acting was lovely . He also said that the movie ' s dog role reminded him of the director 's previous work Sayonara , Kuro . He added that he had to take out a handkerchief as he watched the film . 
 The Japan Times gave Snow Prince a score of 2 out of 5 . In the critical review entitled " Weep over this princely pile of slush " , Mark Schilling criticized the film as " a weeper that ... left me surprisingly dry eyed " and added that " There 's hardly a spark of originality in the entire enterprise , unless you count the casting of Tadanobu Asano – the coolest Japanese actor of his generation – as a sad @-@ but @-@ wise circus clown . " Reviewer <unk> Wataru of the " Eiga @-@ Judge " website said that " this innocent and sad tale tragedy of the boy is too simplistic and the screenplay did not do much . " . However , the review praised the " beautiful scenery of the city of <unk> " and said the film was a " sad and beautiful combination of children and animals " . 
 The Guardian rated it third on its list of " The top 10 films of 2009 you probably won 't have seen " . The reviewer , David Parkinson , praised this work as " the most beautiful children 's film of the year " . He elaborated by saying , " Everything about this poignant account ... is exquisite . The photography and period design are impeccable , while the script deftly <unk> younger viewers with the good that can still emerge from the harsher realities of life . " . He ended his review with : " This is the kind of family entertainment that Hollywood has long forgotten how to make . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = Nostalgia , Ultra = 
 Nostalgia , Ultra ( stylized as nostalgia , <unk> and occasionally nostalgia / ultra ) is the second mixtape by American recording artist Frank Ocean . It was released on February 16 , 2011 . Ocean was inspired to make the mixtape , after Hurricane Katrina in his native New Orleans and his subsequent relocation to Los Angeles . After joining alternative hip hop group Odd Future in 2010 , he self @-@ released the mixtape , without initial promotion . Nostalgia , Ultra has a unique R & B aesthetic and features surreal themes and nostalgic lyrics . The songs mostly focus on interpersonal relationships , personal reflection , and social commentary . Following its release , the mixtape received rave reviews from music critics . The cover features a picture of a bright orange 1980s BMW <unk> M3 , Ocean 's " dream car " , in plain sight amidst lush greenery . 
 In May 2011 , Def Jam announced its plans to release the mixtape as an EP on July 26 , 2011 . However , the release of the EP was indefinitely delayed in July 2011 and has since been cancelled . Two singles were released from the aborted EP version : " Novacane " , and " Swim Good " . Both songs received music videos directed by Australian director Nabil Elderkin . Ocean embarked on a solo concert tour through North America and Europe to promote the record , playing a total of 7 shows . In addition , his 2012 performance at the Coachella Music Festival included several live renditions from the release including " Strawberry Swing " and " <unk> " . 
 The mixtape appeared on several music critics ' and publications ' end @-@ of @-@ year albums lists . Controversy arose in March 2012 over the song " American Wedding " , a remake of the song " Hotel California " by American rock band Eagles . Recording artist Kanye West was reportedly a fan of the mixtape , which led to Ocean appearing on the album Watch the Throne . Subsequently , Ocean collaborated with artists Beyoncé Knowles and Jay @-@ Z after they were introduced to the mixtape through West . Following its release , both Ocean and the mixtape have developed a cult following . The mixtape was followed by the release of Ocean 's debut album Channel Orange to similar critical acclaim in 2012 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Frank Ocean was born in New Orleans , Louisiana . He made the decision to pursue a career in music at a young age , and as a teen , he did neighborhood chores to fund his early studio sessions . After Hurricane Katrina hit his hometown of New Orleans , Ocean moved to Los Angeles to pursue a recording career . He initially had problems maintaining a career while juggling a job , due to spending too much time in the recording studios , making him late for his jobs . He began to write songs and he sold them to other recording artists ; selling his first song to Noel <unk> at the age of 19 . Discussing as to why he chose to write songs , Ocean commented that " I feel at a higher level of consciousness when I 'm being creative . " 
 Eventually , he landed songwriting gigs for established artists like John Legend and Justin Bieber where he made substantially more money . In late 2009 , he met producer Tricky Stewart , who helped Ocean sign a contract with Def Jam Recordings as a solo artist . However , he was initially unable to build a relationship with the company . In protest , Ocean joined the rap collective Odd Future which introduced him to artists such as Tyler , The Creator and Hodgy Beats . His debut song was " <unk> " on the Domo Genesis album Rolling Papers . Ocean garnered acclaim and generated interest while in the group , and Rolling Stone magazine 's Jonah Weiner called him a " gifted avant @-@ R & B smoothie " . During his time with the group he recorded and self @-@ released Nostalgia , Ultra without any pre @-@ release promotion on his Tumblr account . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The mixtape samples songs from Radiohead , Coldplay , MGMT , Mr. Hudson and The Eagles , which Ocean sings over . Ocean , when uploading the album to iTunes , labeled it as bluegrass and death metal , out of arbitrariness . When asked about why he uploaded the songs in that way , he replied ; " I don 't want to seem like I have a cause against genres , or maybe I do ... Bluegrass is swag . Bluegrass is all the way swag . " Ocean described the making of his mixtape as a labor of love , stating that " It was like difficult to make . Not like writing the songs [ or ] arranging the songs . That had a level of difficulty , too . But just piecing together all the levels to do it at the level , the quality of records I wanted to make … But , it was a process I appreciate so much . " 
 In his own words , Ocean calls the album " nostalgic . " He explains , " it 's a longing for the past . That 's what this record felt like . " The lyrical content , according to Ocean , relates to heartbreak and other familiar tropes of interpersonal relationships : " I wasn 't trying to make a record that people could relate to . I was just trying to make a record with the shit that I wanted to express . The shit that I wanted to get off my chest . [ ... ] A lot of this record is influenced by one relationship , but I don 't owe that whole project to one situation . It doesn 't matter what the details of it are . " Discussing the writing process behind the album , he mused that he was just inspired to tell stories . He continued , " you gotta make sure the listener is listening to you , so if you put it into a song , often times , if the song is striking enough , then you can really deliver the story most effectively while keeping the ear of the listener the whole time . I guess it all starts with the stories for me . " 
 When asked by The Quietus if the songs from the album drew from his personal experiences , Frank commented " My kitchen is usually pretty clean , you know . But you have fun with the imagery , and for me the whole concept that everything has to be ... Like , nobody gets upset with a director when a director 's film isn 't about his life . People think that with a recording artist that shit has to be like a fucking play by play of their whole life , but it 's not . It 's imagery , and a little bit of satire . " When asked if he made R & B music , Ocean replied that he disliked how that in the United States , " if you 're a singer and you 're black , you 're an R & B artist . Period . " Ocean stated that the songs on the mixtape do contain R & B influences , but that it is not an R & B album entirely . 
 = = Songs = = 
 The album begins with a melodic cover of " Strawberry Swing " by English alternative rock band Coldplay . Connor O 'Neill of The Miscellany News writes that the cover begins the album with " so much atmosphere you almost melt into it " and then " spreads you over an apocalyptic swan song " . The song ends abruptly with the rude sound of an alarm clock , followed by the " nightmarish " song " Novacane " . It has been called a love song of sorts , with influence taken from alternative hip hop group The Pharcyde . Lyrically the track explores a narrative in which the singer meets a girl attempting to pay her way through dental school by working in porn . Ocean meets the girl at Coachella , a musical festival which takes place in Indio , California . Ocean serves as the protagonist in the song , in love with a girl " so gone on drugs that Ocean , wanting to be close to her , has no choice but to get gone on those same drugs " . The pair get high using dental local anesthetics . Ocean serves as an unreliable narrator . 
 Several interludes are placed throughout the album , named after video games , such as Street Fighter , Metal Gear Solid , GoldenEye 007 and Soulcalibur . This is reported to give the album a more nostalgic feel ; the record is " held together by tiny interludes named after 1990s video games in which the unmistakable sounds of a cassette player rewinding , fast @-@ forwarding , and stopping are heard " . On the track " We All Try " , Ocean speaks out against homophobia . According to The Guardian , " Odd Future 's frequent use of the word ' faggot ' unsettled liberal stomachs " , and that " Ocean was brave enough to stand alone once more , declaring on ' We All Try ' : ' I believe that marriage isn 't between a man and woman , but between love and love ' . On the same song he reveals his opinion of the pro @-@ choice debate : ' I believe a woman 's temple , gives her the right to choose / But baby don 't abort . ' " He obliquely " announces his support of a woman 's right to choose and gay marriage " , both of which are " hardly typical r & b tropes . " The song contains " smooth , bedroom @-@ type grooves " . 
 Pitchfork Media wrote that " in a skit called " Bitches Talkin " , the ladies tell him to cut it out with the damn Radiohead , while " Optimistic " is playing in the background ; in ' Songs 4 Women ' , he obliges — he 's an indie kid when it comes to alienation but a pragmatist when it comes to sex . " " Songs 4 Women " is a song where Ocean can 't decide whether to rue or revel in his conflicted feelings about women . The song offers a self @-@ effacing perspective , with a numbed , restrained delivery . Lyrically the track expresses a narrative where he tries to arrange an after @-@ school meeting in his dad 's empty house and brags about harmonizing to Otis , Isley and Marvin . He laments that his woman doesn 't listen to him or his music : " It 's like she never heard of me . " In spite of the " suave delivery and the song 's inherent tunefulness " , the object of Ocean 's affection soon ditches his love songs in favor of those sung " by real R & B big @-@ shots ( Drake included ) " . 
 The mixtape also contains several references to American director Stanley Kubrick and his films , most notably Eyes Wide Shut . Nicole Kidman 's adulterous soliloquy from the film can be heard during the song " <unk> " , adding a sense of manic dread . " The film is also referenced on the track " Novacane " , where Ocean also sings that he 's " feelin like Stanley Kubrick " . Following that is the track " There Will Be Tears " . The song has been described as emotional in nature , containing a glitchy beat sampled from Mr Hudson , with heavily synthesised vocals . " There Will Be Tears " has a thundering bass flat over a hyperactive 808 beat . Ocean sings about not having a father ; " Hide my face , hide my face , can 't let ' em see me crying / Cause these boys didn 't have no fathers neither / And they weren 't crying " , where he " lets his guard down completely . " 
 " Swim Good " has been called an " astonishing suicide song " and that Ocean finds himself dressed in black ( ' Like I 'm ready for a funeral ' ) , tormented by heartbreak and on the verge of driving his car into the sea . The song is a grim escape fantasy describing a murder suicide , which " has the singer driving his car to the shore , his trunk ' bleeding ' with ' broken hearts ' . " The hook of the song ends with the refrain of " I feel like a ghost , no Swayze , ever since I lost my baby . " " Dust " uses books as an extended metaphor for memories and experience , with lines like " so many pages I wrote , wish I could revise ' em / But there 's no erasing " . 
 The penultimate track is " American Wedding " , a 7 @-@ minute remake of " Hotel California " by American rock band Eagles . The track expresses an extended tale of a shotgun marriage and subsequent divorce . Its here that we " might get a little peek into the psychology of the man shirking the foremost genre for love songs : He doesn 't believe in love . At least not in the United States . " The song has a " totally unexpected ending for a song told as a flashback . " The album ends with " Nature Feels " , a reinterpretation of MGMT 's " Electric Feel " . The song exhibits Ocean as an " openly fun character " , opening the song with the line " I 've been meaning to fuck you in the garden . " According to Pitchfork , no matter the mood , Ocean is always " quick to add fine particulars that make his songs his songs " . Pitchfork called " Nature Feel " an " MGMT @-@ sampling Garden of Eden fuck ode " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Nostalgia , Ultra received critical acclaim from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the mixtape received an average score of 83 , based on nine reviews , which indicates " universal acclaim " . Anupa Mistry of Exclaim ! called it " sophisticated " , " pulsing and expansive " , and wrote that Ocean 's " alt sensibilities " prove " musically intuitive " AllMusic 's Andy Kellman felt that Ocean 's uniqueness lies in his " wistful , often self @-@ effacing perspective and numbed , restrained delivery " rather than his production choices , which he found " neither exceptional nor particularly left of center " . AbsolutePunk praised the beats as " unique , well @-@ executed originals " and commented that songs such as " Swim Good " and " Strawberry Swing " show that " Ocean 's voice is as great as his knack for writing thoughtful pop songs . " Steven Hyden of The A.V. Club called the mixtape " dark , playful , a little tasteless , and absolutely riveting " . Connor O 'Neill of The Miscellany News wrote that , " by funneling [ the primary means of R & B decadence ] through his diverse and diverging palette , Ocean <unk> both his nostalgic impulses and the odd future of which he is a part . " The Village Voice 's Sean Fennessey called him " an intuitive r & b stylist , with a firm sense of song structure . " Rudy K. of Sputnikmusic felt that the mixtape sounds " so fresh , so real " for a member from Odd Future and stated , " With Ocean , it never sounds contrived . " 
 In his review for MSN Music , Robert Christgau described Ocean 's " romantic laments " as " models of texture , respect , and profound loss , their beats subtle , seductive , weird , and seized like time whether he 's deploying ' songs for women ' that are soon trumped by Drake 's , not feeling a porn @-@ moonlighting dental student and her ' <unk> , ' or annulling a courthouse wedding solemnized just before his bride turned in her term paper on hijab . " Pitchfork Media 's Ryan Dombal commented that " There are distinct elements of Drake 's melancholic paranoia and The @-@ Dream 's high melodrama , too . But there 's also a heady surreality surrounding Nostalgia , Ultra that makes it unique . " Jon Caramanica of The New York Times called it " slick and intuitive ... full of astral soul that owes debts to Terence Trent D 'Arby , Pharrell Williams , even Drake " , adding that " [ Ocean ] sings casually but precisely , stretching out syllables as if he 's forgetting to let them go . " NPR 's Andrew Noz commented that " It 's his songwriting , smart and subtle , that sets Ocean far apart from that pack " , adding that " The finest moments of Nostalgia , Ultra orbit the same soul @-@ baring and minutiae @-@ obsessed space as Marvin Gaye 's breakup opus Here , My Dear or any number of Prince 's more idiosyncratic ballads " . No Ripcord 's Charlie Jebb wrote that " Nostalgia , Ultra has more than enough good stuff to establish Ocean as an artist to watch , " calling it " [ an ] R & B record with crossover potential without sacrificing soul that creates a complete picture of its author , warts and all . " 
 = = Planned reissue = = 
 On May 19 , 2011 , Ocean 's record label Def Jam announced its plans to release an EP containing tracks from nostalgia , Ultra . Ocean announced that the re @-@ release would have been titled Nostalgia , Lite and that it was expected to feature seven tracks . The EP was originally scheduled to be released on July 26 , 2011 , however , Ocean noted on his official Tumblr page on July 24 , 2011 that Nostalgia , Lite would no longer be released on July 26 and that the project was cancelled . Both " Swim Good " and " Novacane " were set to be featured on the release . Talking about which other songs would make it onto the reissue , Ocean commented that " The Eagles sample ' American Wedding ' has no chance in hell of being cleared " . He continued , " Coldplay sample ' Strawberry Swing ' , possibly . I hear ' possibly ' from people who say they know . MGMT , those guys seem chill . I heard they heard the record ' Nature Feels ' and they liked it a lot , so hopefully that can go someway . " Other tracks on the reissue were set to be " Acura <unk> " , which appeared on the unofficial release The Lonny Breaux Collection , and " Whip Appeal " which was released in 2012 . In 2012 , Ocean commented again on his blog that " Nostalgia Lite is " never coming out . " 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Novacane " was officially released as the first single from Nostalgia , Ultra on May 31 , 2011 . " Novacane " first charted on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs on May 11 , 2011 at number 65 . The subsequent week , it rose to number 58 , and on its third week , the single rose to number 52 . In its fourth week , it rose to number 17 . The music video for " Novacane " was released on June 16 , directed by Australian director Nabil Elderkin . When discussing the video , Ocean commented " I was just trying to connect or articulate visually the feeling of being numb . The feeling of wanting to feel something you can 't feel . A lot of things can cause that numbing , but in the video it was some sort of topical aesthetic and a little bit of special effects . " The song also charted on the Billboard Hot 100 at position 82 and at 6 on the Billboard Heatseekers Songs . 
 " Swim Good " was released as the second single from the mixtape on October 18 , 2011 , and the song charted at position 70 on the Billboard R & B chart for three weeks . It entered the top 40 in Belgium . The music video ( directed by Nabil Elderkin ) was released via Ocean 's tumblr account on September 16 . Ocean performed " Novacane " and " She " with Tyler , The Creator at an Odd Future performance in New York . During Odd Future 2012 's tour promoting The Odd Future Tape Vol . 2 , Frank performed with the group . 
 = = Tour = = 
 Ocean embarked on a six @-@ date concert tour from November 5 to November 15 , 2011 , through North America and Europe to promote both the mixtape and his other musical projects . Originally , six shows were scheduled with a New York performance at the Bowery Ballroom on the 6th . The original date for that show was postponed to the 27th , and that an additional show on the 28th had been added . The reported reason was because Ocean was sick . The performances featured no opening act , and the only performer on stage at any given time was Ocean . 
 Rolling Stone reviewed the debut show , calling Ocean awkward at times , though they stated that " fortunately his dispassionately told stories of love and loss in a world that assumes impermanence could handle the load of the audience . " MTV commented that it took Ocean " some time to warm up to the crowd " at his debut New Orleans performance , though they noted the performance started the tour to a " promising start " . MTV later reviewed the New York performance on the 27th and called Ocean " an audience charmer " . The New York Times critic Jon Caramanica gave a positive review to the same New York performance , calling Ocean a " versatile singer " and writing that " in his elegant , savvy , slightly crooked <unk> , he shifts sneakily between the two topics , singing about love as a byproduct of music and using the subject of music to dig deep about love . " 
 The set lists to the various shows varied , though singles " Swim Good " and " Novacane " were performed at all shows . Others tracks like " <unk> " , " Dust " and " American Wedding " were performed at a majority of the shows , and " Strawberry Swing " " We All Try " were performed four times each . Portions of " No Church in the Wild " and " Made in America " , along with " I Miss You " and " Thinkin Bout You " were also performed . The performances of " American Wedding " were accompanied by comedic moments where Ocean played Guitar Hero . Ocean performed at the April 2012 Coachella Musical Festival . 
 = = Impact = = 
