 Before the release of Nostalgia , Ultra , Ocean was a relatively unknown artist who made a majority of his money from ghostwriting . Within six months , it was noted that Ocean had become the " go @-@ to vocal hook man . " The release of the mixtape interested rap recording artist and producer Kanye West , who was reported to be a big fan . West invited Ocean to write and sing on two songs off Watch the Throne , a collaborative record with rapper Jay @-@ Z. Frank wrote and provided vocals on tracks " No Church in the Wild " and " Made in America " . Singer Beyoncé Knowles heard of the mixtape through her husband Jay @-@ Z and was a fan of it . She subsequently invited Ocean to co @-@ write " I Miss You " for her album 4 . Discussing how she first heard of Ocean and Nostalgia , Ultra , she commented ; " Jay @-@ Z had a CD playing in the car one Sunday when we were driving to Brooklyn . I noticed his tone , his arrangements , and his storytelling . I immediately reached out to him — literally the next morning . I asked him to fly to New York and work on my record . 
 West also offered to appear on Ocean 's debut album , but Ocean refused , saying " as much as I want to work with you … I kind of want to do this without you . I kind of want to do it on my own . " Rapper Nas was also a fan of the mixtape , writing that " He 's new , he 's fresh . He doesn 't sound fly @-@ by @-@ night . The moment you hear it — I hear what he 's sayin ' , and I relate . " Nas also stated on Twitter that he and Ocean were collaborating on a song from Nas 's tenth studio album Life Is Good , though the material never made the album . Chicago born rapper Lupe Fiasco expressed a positive opinion of the release too . 
 Ocean quickly became Odd Future 's main singing highlight , providing vocal hooks on Odd Future albums like <unk> , Goblin , and The Odd Future Tape Vol . 2 . Ocean toured with the group on several occasions and made appearances during their shows . On January 5 , 2012 , the BBC announced that Ocean had finished in second place of the BBC 's Sound of 2012 poll . In addition , MTV described the mixtape as a " cult classic " . On August 2 , 2012 , the music video for " Swim Good " was nominated for three MTV Video Music Awards : Best Direction and Best Male Video , with Ocean being nominated for Best New Artist for his work with the video . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 The record was nominated for Best International Album at the 2012 Swedish Grammis Awards . Despite being a mixtape , Nostalgia , Ultra was featured on several music critics ' and publications ' end @-@ of @-@ year albums lists . Pitchfork Media put it number 35 on its list of the year 's top albums , writing that " Chris Breaux , who goes by Frank Ocean , is a male R & B singer with male R & B contradictions : As much as he wants to listen to his heart , he can 't completely ignore his dick . " The Guardian writer Tim Jonze named it the year 's third best album , musing " unafraid to tackle suicide , abortion and absent fathers , this free mixtape introduced one of our most refreshing new R & B stars . " The A.V. Club ranked the album number 15 on its year @-@ end list , commenting that " Nostalgia , Ultra became a runaway Internet hit that showed off Ocean 's coaxing croon as well as his outré songwriting skills . <unk> romantic , yet pensive and moody , Nostalgia is an R & B record for <unk> , from the hazy lament of ' Novacane ' to the inward @-@ looking contradiction of ' Songs For Women ' to the clever pop remakes of The Eagles ' ' Hotel California ' and Coldplay 's ' Strawberry Swing ' . " 
 Rolling Stone named it the 24th best album of the year , writing " the debut mixtape from the 24 @-@ year @-@ old singer ( and Odd Future member ) is an avant @-@ R & B killer . " Complex named it the fourth best album of the year and the second best mixtape . Time named it the fifth best album of the year , and wrote that " Ocean also weaves audio of a tape recorder in rewind , video games and Nicole Kidman 's adulterous monologue from Eyes Wide Shut into his songs to give the album a personal feel — as if Ocean were gifting us with a collection of sounds that he finds emotionally meaningful . " Spin named it the 41st best album of the year while Mojo placed the album at number 49 . Robert Christgau named it the fourth best album of the year in his Pazz & Jop dean 's list . 
 The track Novacane also received widespread critical acclaim . It was listed as one of the best songs of the year by The New York Times , Ology , Spin , Zimbio , and Pitchfork Media named both the video and the song as amongst the best of the year . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 In March 2012 , controversy arose over the track " American Wedding " , which samples The Eagles ' song " Hotel California " . Don Henley of the Eagles " had threatened legal action over Ocean 's track " , claiming that Ocean 's version of the song was illegal . The track was widely removed from the internet following this controversy , being removed from music sharing sites such as YouTube . A spokesman for the band announced that a lawsuit would be filed against Ocean if performed the song live . 
 " Frank Ocean did not merely ' sample ' a portion of the Eagles ' Hotel California ; he took the whole master track , plus the song 's existing melody , and replaced the lyrics with his own . This is not creative , let alone ' intimidating . ' It 's illegal . For the record , Don Henley has not threatened or instituted any legal action against Frank Ocean , although the Eagles are now considering whether they should . " 
 Several publications noted that the song was released for free on a non @-@ profitable mixtape , and that " live covers of famous songs are common in live performances " , and that sampling is a common practice on mixtapes . Ocean responded to the controversy via his tumblr account : 
 " He ( They ) threatened to sue if I perform it again . I think that 's fuckin awesome . I guess if I play it at Coachella it 'll cost me a couple hundred racks . If I don 't show up to court , it 'll be a judgement against me & will probably show up on my credit report . Oh well . I try to buy my shit cash anyway . They asked that I release a statement expressing my admiration for Mr. Henley , along with my assistance pulling it off the web as much as possible . Shit 's weird . Ain 't this guy rich as fuck ? Why sue the new guy ? I didn 't make a dime off that song . I released it for free . If anything I 'm paying homage . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Sample credits 
 " Strawberry Swing " contains samples of the song of the same name by Coldplay . 
 " Bitches Talkin ' " contains samples from " Optimistic " as performed by Radiohead . 
 " <unk> " contains dialogue excerpts from the film " Eyes Wide Shut " . 
 " There Will Be Tears " contains samples of " There Will Be Tears " as performed by Mr Hudson . 
 " Swim Good " contains additional background vocals by Tyler , The Creator . 
 " American Wedding " contains samples from " Hotel California " as performed by Eagles . 
 " Nature Feels " contains samples from " Electric Feel " as performed by MGMT , and uncredited background vocals by Brandy and Rich King . 
 = SMS Moltke = 
 SMS Moltke was the lead ship of the Moltke @-@ class battlecruisers of the German Imperial Navy , named after the 19th @-@ century German Field Marshal Helmuth von Moltke . Commissioned on 30 September 1911 , the ship was the second battlecruiser commissioned into the Imperial Navy . 
 Moltke , along with her sister ship Goeben , was an enlarged version of the previous German battlecruiser design , Von der Tann , with increased armor protection and two more main guns in an additional turret . Compared to her British rivals — the Indefatigable class — Moltke and her sister Goeben were significantly larger and better armored . 
 The ship participated in most of the major fleet actions conducted by the German Navy during the First World War , including the Battles of Dogger Bank and Jutland in the North Sea , and the Battle of the Gulf of Riga and Operation Albion in the Baltic . Moltke was damaged several times during the war : the ship was hit by heavy caliber gunfire at Jutland , and torpedoed twice by British submarines while on fleet advances . 
 Following the end of the war in 1918 , Moltke , along with most of the High Seas Fleet , was interned at Scapa Flow pending a decision by the Allies as to the fate of the fleet . The ship met her end when she was scuttled , along with the rest of the High Seas Fleet in 1919 to prevent them from falling into British hands . The wreck of Moltke was raised in 1927 and scrapped at Rosyth from 1927 to 1929 . 
 = = Development = = 
 In a conference in May 1907 , the Germany Navy Office decided to follow up the unique Von der Tann battlecruiser with an enlarged design . The sum of 44 million marks was allocated for the 1908 fiscal year , which created the possibility of increasing the main guns to 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 in ) in diameter , instead of the 28 cm ( 11 in ) weapons on the preceding design . However , Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz , along with the Construction Department , argued that increasing the number of guns from 8 to 10 would be preferable instead of increasing the size of the previous battery . The General Navy Department held that for the new design to fight in the battle line , 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 in ) guns were necessary . Ultimately , Tirpitz and the Construction Department won the debate , and Moltke was equipped with ten 28 cm ( 11 in ) guns . The guns were mounted in five twin gun turrets , three of which were on the centerline — one was forward and two were in a superfiring pair aft . The other two turrets were staggered wing turrets amidships . The Construction Department also mandated that armor protection was to be at least as good as that of Von der Tann . The ship was also to have a top speed of at least 24 @.@ 5 knots ( 45 @.@ 4 km / h ; 28 @.@ 2 mph ) . 
 During the design process , the ship 's weight continued to grow due to the increase in the size of the citadel , armor thickness , the additions to the ammunition stores , and the rearrangement of the boiler system . The naval arms race between Germany and Britain put a great deal of stress on the Navy design staff , and prompted the decision to build two ships of the new design . They were assigned under the contract names of " Cruiser G " and " Cruiser H. " Blohm & Voss received both contracts in 1908 ; " Cruiser G " was assigned to the 1908 – 1909 building year , while " Cruiser H " was assigned to 1909 – 1910 . The contract for " Cruiser G " was awarded on 17 September 1908 , under building number 200 . The keel was laid on 7 December 1908 , and the ship was launched on 7 April 1910 . " Cruiser G " was commissioned on 30 September 1911 , as SMS Moltke . 
 = = Service record = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ war = = = 
 At the launching of the ship on 7 April 1910 , Helmuth von Moltke the Younger christened her after his uncle , Helmuth von Moltke the Elder , the Chief of Staff of the Prussian Army in the mid 19th century . On 11 September 1911 , a crew composed of dockyard workers transferred the ship from Hamburg to Kiel through the Skagerrak . On 30 September , the ship was commissioned , under the command of Kapitän zur See von Mann , and replaced Roon in the Reconnaissance Unit . Sea trials continued until 1 April 1912 . 
 Moltke was the only German capital ship to ever visit the United States . On 11 May 1912 she left Kiel , accompanied by the light cruisers Stettin and Bremen , and arrived off Hampton Roads , Virginia , on 30 May 1912 . After touring the East Coast for two weeks , she returned to Kiel on 24 June . 
 In July 1912 , Moltke escorted Kaiser Wilhelm II 's yacht to Russia . Upon returning , Moltke 's commander was replaced by KzS Magnus von <unk> , and the ship became the Reconnaissance Force flagship until 23 June 1914 , when the commander 's flag was transferred to the new battlecruiser Seydlitz . There was some consideration given to deploying Moltke to the Far East in order to replace the armored cruiser Scharnhorst , but the plan was abandoned when it became apparent that Goeben needed replacement in the Mediterranean . Moltke was then scheduled to transfer to replace her sister ship , but this plan was interrupted by the outbreak of World War I. 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 As was the case with almost all German capital ships during World War I , Moltke 's action was somewhat limited . However , she did participate in most of the major fleet actions conducted by the High Seas Fleet . At the start of the war , the ship was assigned to the I Scouting Group of the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Rear Admiral Franz Hipper . 
 = = = = Battle of Heligoland Bight = = = = 
 Shortly after the outbreak of World War I , on 28 August 1914 , Moltke participated in the Battle of Heligoland Bight . During the morning , British cruisers from the Harwich Force attacked the German destroyers patrolling the Heligoland Bight . Six German light cruisers — Cöln , Strassburg , Stettin , Frauenlob , Stralsund , and Ariadne — responded to the attack and inflicted serious damage to the British raiders . However , the arrival at approximately 13 : 37 of the British 1st Battlecruiser Squadron , under the command of Vice Admiral David Beatty , quickly put the German ships at a disadvantage . 
 Along with the rest of the I Scouting Group battlecruisers , Moltke was stationed in the Wilhelmshaven Roads on the morning of the battle . By 08 : 50 , Rear Admiral Hipper had requested permission from Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander in chief of the High Seas Fleet , to send Moltke and Von der Tann to relieve the beleaguered German cruisers . Moltke was ready to sail by 12 : 10 , but the low tide prevented the ships from being able to pass over the sand bar at the mouth of the Jade Estuary safely . At 14 : 10 , Moltke and Von der Tann were able to cross the Jade bar ; Hipper ordered the German cruisers to fall back to his ships , while Hipper himself was about an hour behind in the battlecruiser Seydlitz . At 14 : 25 , the remaining light cruisers — Strassburg , Stettin , Frauenlob , Stralsund , and Ariadne — rendezvoused with the battlecruisers . Seydlitz arrived on the scene by 15 : 10 , while Ariadne succumbed to battle damage and sank . Hipper ventured forth cautiously to search for the two missing light cruisers , Mainz and Cöln , which had already sunk . By 16 : 00 , the German flotilla turned around to return to the Jade Estuary , arriving at approximately 20 : 23 . 
 = = = = Bombardment of Yarmouth = = = = 
 On 2 November 1914 , Moltke , Rear Admiral Hipper 's flagship Seydlitz , Von der Tann , and Blücher , along with four light cruisers , left the Jade Estuary and steamed towards the English coast . The flotilla arrived off Great Yarmouth at daybreak the following morning and bombarded the port , while the light cruiser Stralsund laid a minefield . The British submarine D5 responded to the bombardment , but struck one of the mines laid by Stralsund and sank . Shortly thereafter , Hipper ordered his ships to turn back to German waters . However , while Hipper 's ships were returning to German waters , a heavy fog covered the Heligoland Bight , so the ships were ordered to halt until visibility improved so they could safely navigate the defensive minefields . The armored cruiser Yorck left the Jade without permission , and while en route to Wilhelmshaven made a navigational error that led the ship into one of the German minefields . Yorck struck two mines and quickly sank ; the coastal defense ship Hagen was able to save 127 men of the crew . 
 = = = = Bombardment of Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby = = = = 
 It was decided by Admiral von Ingenohl that another raid on the English coast was to be carried out , in the hopes of luring a portion of the Grand Fleet into combat , where it could be destroyed . At 03 : 20 on 15 December , Moltke , Seydlitz , Von der Tann , Derfflinger , and Blücher , along with the light cruisers Kolberg , Strassburg , Stralsund , and Graudenz , and two squadrons of torpedo boats left the Jade . The ships sailed north past the island of Heligoland , until they reached the Horns Reef lighthouse , at which point the ships turned west towards Scarborough . Twelve hours after Hipper left the Jade , the High Seas Fleet , consisting of 14 dreadnoughts and 8 pre @-@ dreadnoughts and a screening force of 2 armored cruisers , 7 light cruisers , and 54 torpedo boats , departed to provide distant cover . 
 On 26 August 1914 , the German light cruiser Magdeburg had run aground in the Gulf of Finland ; the wreck was captured by the Russian navy , which found code books used by the German navy , along with navigational charts for the North Sea . These documents were then passed on to the Royal Navy . Room 40 began decrypting German signals , and on 14 December , intercepted messages relating to the plan to bombard Scarborough . However , the exact details of the plan were unknown , and it was assumed that the High Seas Fleet would remain safely in port , as in the previous bombardment . Vice Admiral Beatty 's four battlecruisers , supported by the 3rd Cruiser Squadron and the 1st Light Cruiser Squadron , along with the 2nd Battle Squadron 's six dreadnoughts , were to ambush Hipper 's battlecruisers . 
 During the night of 15 December , the main body of the High Seas Fleet encountered British destroyers . Fearing the prospect of a nighttime torpedo attack , Admiral Ingenohl ordered the ships to retreat . Hipper was unaware of Ingenohl 's reversal , and so he continued with the bombardment . Upon reaching the British coast , Hipper 's battlecruisers split into two groups . Seydlitz , Moltke , and Blücher went north to shell Hartlepool , while Von der Tann and Derfflinger went south to shell Scarborough and Whitby . During the bombardment of Hartlepool , Moltke was struck by a 6 in ( 15 @.@ 2 cm ) shell from a coastal battery , which caused minor damage between decks , but no casualties . Blücher was hit six times and Seydlitz three times by the coastal battery . By 09 : 45 on the 16th , the two groups had reassembled , and they began to retreat eastward . 
 By this time , Beatty 's battlecruisers were in position to block Hipper 's chosen egress route , while other forces were en route to complete the encirclement . At 12 : 25 , the light cruisers of the II Scouting Group began to pass through the British forces searching for Hipper . One of the cruisers in the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron spotted Stralsund and signaled a report to Beatty . At 12 : 30 , Beatty turned his battlecruisers towards the German ships . Beatty presumed that the German cruisers were the advance screen for Hipper 's ships , however those were some 50 km ( 31 mi ) ahead . The 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron , which had been screening for Beatty 's ships , detached to pursue the German cruisers , but a misinterpreted signal from the British battlecruisers sent them back to their screening positions . This confusion allowed the German light cruisers to escape and alerted Hipper to the location of the British battlecruisers . The German battlecruisers wheeled to the northeast of the British forces and made good their escape . 
 Both the British and the Germans were disappointed that they failed to effectively engage their opponents . Admiral Ingenohl 's reputation suffered greatly as a result of his timidity . The captain of Moltke was furious ; he stated that Ingenohl had turned back " because he was afraid of eleven British destroyers which could have been eliminated ... under the present leadership we will accomplish nothing . " The official German history criticized Ingenohl for failing to use his light forces to determine the size of the British fleet , stating : " he decided on a measure which not only seriously jeopardized his advance forces off the English coast but also deprived the German Fleet of a signal and certain victory . " 
 = = = = Battle of Dogger Bank = = = = 
 In early January 1915 , it became known that British ships were conducting reconnaissance in the Dogger Bank area . Ingenohl was initially reluctant to destroy these forces , because the I Scouting Group was temporarily weakened while Von der Tann was in drydock for periodic maintenance . However , Konteradmiral Richard Eckermann , the Chief of Staff of the High Seas Fleet , insisted on the operation , and so Ingenohl relented and ordered Hipper to take his battlecruisers to the Dogger Bank . 
 On 23 January , Hipper sortied , with his flag in Seydlitz , followed by Moltke , Derfflinger , and Blücher , along with the light cruisers Graudenz , Rostock , Stralsund , and Kolberg and 19 torpedo boats from V Flotilla and II and XVIII Half @-@ Flotillas . Graudenz and Stralsund were assigned to the forward screen , while Kolberg and Rostock were assigned to the starboard and port , respectively . Each light cruiser had a half @-@ flotilla of torpedo boats attached . 
 Again , interception and decryption of German wireless signals played an important role . Although they were unaware of the exact plans , the cryptographers of Room 40 were able to deduce that Hipper would be conducting an operation in the Dogger Bank area . To counter it , Beatty 's 1st Battlecruiser Squadron , Rear Admiral Archibald Moore 's 2nd Battlecruiser Squadron and Commodore William Goodenough 's 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron were to rendezvous with Commodore Reginald Tyrwhitt 's Harwich Force at 8 : 00 on 24 January , approximately 30 mi ( 48 km ) north of the Dogger Bank . 
 At 08 : 14 , Kolberg spotted the light cruiser Aurora and several destroyers from the Harwich <unk> challenged Kolberg with a search light , at which point Kolberg attacked Aurora and scored two hits . Aurora returned fire and scored two hits on Kolberg in retaliation . Hipper immediately turned his battlecruisers towards the gunfire , when , almost simultaneously , Stralsund spotted a large amount of smoke to the northwest of her position . This was identified as a number of large British warships steaming towards Hipper 's ships . 
 Hipper turned south to flee , but was limited to 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) , which was the maximum speed of the older armored cruiser Blücher . The pursuing British battlecruisers were steaming at 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) , and quickly caught up to the German ships . At 09 : 52 , Lion opened fire on Blücher from a range of approximately 20 @,@ 000 yards ( 18 @,@ 300 m ) ; shortly thereafter , Queen Mary and Tiger began firing as well . At 10 : 09 , the British guns made their first hit on Blücher . Two minutes later , the German ships began returning fire , primarily concentrating on Lion , from a range of 18 @,@ 000 yards ( 15 @,@ 460 m ) . At 10 : 28 , Lion was struck on the waterline , which tore a hole in the side of the ship and flooded a coal bunker . At 10 : 30 , New Zealand , the fourth ship in Beatty 's line , came within range of Blücher and opened fire . By 10 : 35 , the range had closed to 17 @,@ 500 yards ( 16 @,@ 000 m ) , at which point the entire German line was within the effective range of the British ships . Beatty ordered his battlecruisers to engage their German counterparts . However , confusion aboard Tiger led the captain to believe he was to fire on Seydlitz , which left Moltke able to fire without distraction . 
 At 10 : 40 , one of Lion 's 13 @.@ 5 in ( 34 cm ) shells struck Seydlitz causing nearly catastrophic damage that knocked out both of the rear turrets and killed 159 men . Disaster was averted when the executive officer ordered the flooding of both magazines to avoid a flash fire that would have destroyed the ship . By this time , the German battlecruisers had zeroed in on Lion and began scoring repeated hits . At 11 : 01 , an 11 in ( 28 cm ) shell from Seydlitz struck Lion and knocked out two of her dynamos . At 11 : 18 , Lion was hit by two 12 in ( 30 cm ) shells from Derfflinger , one of which struck the waterline and penetrated the belt , allowing seawater to enter the port feed tank . This shell eventually crippled Lion by forcing the ship to turn off its engines because of seawater contamination . 
 By this time , Blücher was severely damaged after having been pounded by heavy shells . However , the chase ended when there were several reports of U @-@ boats ahead of the British ships ; Beatty quickly ordered evasive maneuvers , which allowed the German ships to increase the distance from their pursuers . At this time , Lion 's last operational dynamo failed , which dropped her speed to 15 knots . Beatty , in the stricken Lion , ordered the remaining battlecruisers to " Engage the enemy 's rear , " but signal confusion caused the ships to solely target Blücher , allowing Moltke , Seydlitz , and Derfflinger to escape . By the time Beatty regained control over his ships , after having boarded Princess Royal , the German ships had too far a lead for the British to catch them ; at 13 : 50 , he broke off the chase . 
 = = = = Battle of the Gulf of Riga = = = = 
 On 3 August 1915 , Moltke was transferred to the Baltic with I Reconnaissance Group ( AG ) to participate in the foray into the Riga Gulf . The intention was to destroy the Russian naval forces in the area , including the pre @-@ dreadnought Slava , and to use the minelayer Deutschland to block the entrance to Moon Sound with naval mines . The German forces , under the command of Vice Admiral Hipper , included the four Nassau and four Helgoland @-@ class battleships , the battlecruisers Moltke , Von der Tann , and Seydlitz , and a number of smaller craft . 
 On 8 August , the first attempt to clear the gulf was made ; the old battleships Braunschweig and Elsass kept Slava at bay while minesweepers cleared a path through the inner belt of mines . During this period , the rest of the German fleet remained in the Baltic and provided protection against other units of the Russian fleet . However , the approach of nightfall meant that Deutschland would be unable to mine the entrance to Moon Sound in time , and so the operation was broken off . 
 On 16 August , a second attempt was made to enter the gulf . The dreadnoughts Nassau and Posen , four light cruisers , and 31 torpedo boats breached the defenses to the gulf . Nassau and Posen engaged in an artillery duel with Slava , resulting in three hits on the Russian ship that prompted her withdrawal . After three days , the Russian minefields had been cleared , and the flotilla entered the gulf on 19 August , but reports of Allied submarines in the area prompted a German withdrawal from the gulf the following day . 
 Throughout the operation , Moltke remained in the Baltic and provided cover for the assault into the Gulf of Riga . On the morning of the 19th , Moltke was torpedoed by the British E @-@ class submarine E1 . The torpedo was not spotted until it was approximately 200 yards ( 183 m ) away ; without time to maneuver , the ship was struck in the bow torpedo room . The explosion damaged several torpedoes in the ship , but they did not detonate themselves . Eight men were killed , and 435 tonnes ( 480 short tons ) of water entered the ship . The ship was repaired at Blohm & Voss in Hamburg , between 23 August and 20 September . 
 = = = = Bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft = = = = 
 Moltke also took part in the bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft on 24 – 25 April . Hipper was away on sick leave , so the German ships were under the command of Konteradmiral Friedrich Boedicker . The German battlecruisers Derfflinger , Lützow , Moltke , Seydlitz and Von der Tann left the Jade Estuary at 10 : 55 on 24 April , and were supported by a screening force of six light cruisers and two torpedo boat flotillas . The heavy units of the High Seas Fleet sailed at 13 : 40 , with the objective to provide distant support for Boedicker 's ships . The British Admiralty was made aware of the German sortie through the interception of German wireless signals , and deployed the Grand Fleet at 15 : 50 . 
 By 14 : 00 , Boedicker 's ships had reached a position off Norderney , at which point he turned his ships northward to avoid the Dutch observers on the island of Terschelling . At 15 : 38 , Seydlitz struck a naval mine , which tore a 50 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) hole in her hull , just abaft of the starboard broadside torpedo tube , allowing 1 @,@ 400 short tons ( 1 @,@ 250 long tons ) of water to enter the ship . Seydlitz turned back , with the screen of light cruisers , at a speed of 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The four remaining battlecruisers turned south immediately in the direction of Norderney to avoid further mine damage . By 16 : 00 , Seydlitz was clear of imminent danger , so the ship stopped to allow Boedicker to disembark . The torpedo boat V28 brought Boedicker to Lützow . 
 At 04 : 50 on 25 April , the German battlecruisers were approaching Lowestoft when the light cruisers Rostock and Elbing , which had been covering the southern flank , spotted the light cruisers and destroyers of Commodore Tyrwhitt 's Harwich Force . Boedicker refused to be distracted by the British ships , and instead trained his ships ' guns on Lowestoft . The German battlecruisers destroyed two 6 in ( 15 cm ) shore batteries and inflicted other damage to the town . In the process , a single 6 in shell from one of the shore batteries struck Moltke , but the ship sustained no significant damage . 
 At 05 : 20 , the German raiders turned north , towards Yarmouth , which they reached by 05 : 42 . The visibility was so poor that the German ships fired one salvo each , with the exception of Derfflinger , which fired fourteen rounds from her main battery . The German ships turned back south , and at 05 : 47 encountered for the second time the Harwich Force , which had by then been engaged by the six light cruisers of the screening force . Boedicker 's ships opened fire from a range of 13 @,@ 000 yards ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) . Tyrwhitt immediately turned his ships around and fled south , but not before the cruiser Conquest sustained severe damage . Due to reports of British submarines and torpedo attacks , Boedicker broke off the chase and turned back east towards the High Seas Fleet . At this point , Scheer , who had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's sortie from Scapa Flow , turned back towards Germany . 
 = = = = Battle of Jutland = = = = 
 Moltke , and the rest of Hipper 's battlecruisers in the I Scouting Group , lay anchored in the outer Jade Roads on the night of 30 May 1916 . The following morning , at 02 : 00 CET , the ships slowly steamed out towards the Skagerrak at a speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . Moltke was the fourth ship in the line of five , ahead of Von der Tann , and to the rear of Seydlitz . The II Scouting Group , consisting of the light cruisers Frankfurt , Rear Admiral Boedicker 's flagship , Wiesbaden , Pillau , and Elbing , and 30 torpedo boats of the II , VI , and IX Flotillas , accompanied Hipper 's battlecruisers . 
 An hour and a half later , the High Seas Fleet under the command of Admiral Scheer left the Jade ; the force was composed of 16 dreadnoughts . The High Seas Fleet was accompanied by the IV Scouting Group , composed of the light cruisers Stettin , München , Hamburg , Frauenlob , and Stuttgart , and 31 torpedo boats of the I , III , V , and VII Flotillas , led by the light cruiser Rostock . The six pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the II Battle Squadron had departed from the Elbe roads at 02 : 45 , and rendezvoused with the battle fleet at 5 : 00 . 
 Shortly before 16 : 00 , Hipper 's force encountered Vice Admiral Beatty 's battlecruiser squadron . The German ships were the first to open fire , at a range of approximately 15 @,@ 000 yards ( 14 @,@ 000 m ) . When the British ships began returning fire , confusion amongst the British battlecruisers resulted in Moltke being engaged by both New Zealand and Tiger . The British rangefinders had misread the range to their German targets , and so the first salvos fired by the British ships fell a mile past the German battlecruisers . At 16 : 52 , Moltke hit Tiger with two main gun shells , but neither of these hits caused any significant damage . Moltke then fired a further four shells , two of which hit simultaneously on the midships and after turrets , knocking both out for a significant period of the battle . 
 Approximately 15 minutes later , the British battlecruiser Indefatigable was suddenly destroyed by Von der Tann . Shortly thereafter , Moltke fired four torpedoes at Queen Mary at a range between 11 @,@ 500 – 10 @,@ 400 yards ( 10 @,@ 500 – 9 @,@ 500 m ) . This caused the British line to fall into disarray , as the torpedoes were thought to have been fired by U @-@ boats . At this point , Hipper 's battlecruisers had come into range of the V Battle Squadron , composed of the new Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships , which mounted powerful 15 in ( 38 cm ) guns . At 17 : 06 , Barham opened fire on Von der Tann . She was joined a few minutes later by Valiant , Malaya , and Warspite ; the ships concentrated their fire on Von der Tann and Moltke . At 17 : 16 , one of the 15 in shells from the fast battleships struck Moltke , where it pierced a coal bunker , tore into a casemate deck , and ignited ammunition stored therein . The explosion burned the ammunition hoist down to the magazine . 
 Von der Tann and Moltke changed their speed and direction , which threw off the aim of the V Battle Squadron and earned the battered ships a short respite . While Moltke and Von der Tann were drawing the fire of the V Battle Squadron battleships , Seydlitz and Derfflinger were able to concentrate their fire on the British battlecruisers ; between 17 : 25 and 17 : 30 , at least five shells from Seydlitz and Derfflinger struck Queen Mary , causing a catastrophic explosion that destroyed the ship . Moltke 's commander , Kapitän zur See von Karpf , remarked that " The enemy 's salvos lie well and close ; their salvos are fired in rapid succession , the fire discipline is excellent ! " 
 By 19 : 30 , the High Seas Fleet , which was by that point pursuing the British battlecruisers , had not yet encountered the Grand Fleet . Scheer had been considering retiring his forces before darkness exposed his ships to torpedo boat attack . However , he had not yet made a decision when his leading battleships encountered the main body of the Grand Fleet . This development made it impossible for Scheer to retreat , for doing so would have sacrificed the slower pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of the II Battle Squadron , while using his dreadnoughts and battlecruisers to cover their retreat would have subjected his strongest ships to overwhelming British fire . Instead , Scheer ordered his ships to turn 16 points to starboard , which would bring the pre @-@ dreadnoughts to the relative safety of the disengaged side of the German battle line . 
 Moltke and the other battlecruisers followed the move , which put them astern of König . Hipper 's badly battered ships gained a temporary moment of respite , and uncertainty over the exact location and course of Scheer 's ships led Admiral Jellicoe to turn his ships eastward , towards what he thought was the likely path of the German retreat . The German fleet was instead sailing west , but Scheer ordered a second 16 @-@ point turn , which reversed course and pointed his ships at the center of the British fleet . The German fleet came under intense fire from the British line , and Scheer sent Moltke , Von der Tann , Seydlitz , and Derfflinger at high speed towards the British fleet , in an attempt to disrupt their formation and gain time for his main force to retreat . By 20 : 17 , the German battlecruisers had closed to within 7 @,@ 700 yards ( 7 @,@ 040 m ) of Colossus , at which point Scheer directed the ships to engage the lead ship of the British line . However , three minutes later , the German battlecruisers turned in retreat , covered by a torpedo boat attack . 
 A pause in the battle at dusk allowed Moltke and the other German battlecruisers to cut away wreckage that interfered with the main guns , extinguish fires , repair the fire control and signal equipment , and ready the searchlights for nighttime action . During this period , the German fleet reorganized into a well @-@ ordered formation in reverse order , when the German light forces encountered the British screen shortly after 21 : 00 . The renewed gunfire gained Beatty 's attention , so he turned his battlecruisers westward . At 21 : 09 , he sighted the German battlecruisers , and drew to within 8 @,@ 500 yards ( 7 @,@ 800 m ) before opening fire at 20 : 20 . The attack from the British battlecruisers completely surprised Hipper , who had been in the process of boarding Moltke from the torpedo boat G39 . The German ships returned fire with every gun available , and at 21 : 32 hit both Lion and Princess Royal in the darkness . The maneuvering of the German battlecruisers forced the leading I Battle Squadron to turn westward to avoid collision . This brought the pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the II Battle Squadron directly behind the battlecruisers , and prevented the British ships from pursuing the German battlecruisers when they turned southward . The British battlecruisers opened fire on the old battleships ; the German ships turned southwest to bring all of their guns to bear against the British ships . 
 By 22 : 15 , Hipper was finally able to transfer to Moltke , and then ordered his ships to steam at 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) towards the head of the German line . However , only Moltke and Seydlitz were in condition to comply ; Derfflinger and Von der Tann could make at most 18 knots , and so these ships lagged behind . Moltke and Seydlitz were in the process of steaming to the front of the line when the ships passed close to Stettin , which forced the ship to drastically slow down to avoid collision . This forced Frauenlob , Stuttgart , and München to turn to port , which led them into contact with the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron ; at a range of 800 yards ( 730 m ) , the cruisers on both sides pummeled each other . Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter decided to attempt to lure the British cruisers towards Moltke and Seydlitz . However , nearly simultaneously , the heavily damaged British cruisers broke off the attack . As the light cruisers were disengaging , a torpedo fired by Southampton struck Frauenlob , and the ship exploded . The German formation fell into disarray , and in the confusion , Seydlitz lost sight of Moltke . Seydlitz was no longer able to keep up with Moltke 's 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) , and so detached herself to proceed to the Horns Reef lighthouse independently . 
 By 23 : 30 on her own , Moltke encountered four British dreadnoughts , from the rear division of the 2nd Battle Squadron . Moltke 's commander Kapitän von Karpf ordered the ship to swing away , hoping he had not been detected . The British ships in fact had seen Moltke , but had decided to not open fire in order to not reveal their location to the entire German fleet . At 23 : 55 , and again at 00 : 20 , Kapitän von Karpf tried to find a path through the British fleet , but both times was unable to do so . It was not until 01 : 00 , after having steamed far ahead of the Grand Fleet , that Moltke was able to make good her escape . 
 Close to the end of the battle , at 03 : 55 , Hipper transmitted a report to Admiral Scheer informing him of the tremendous damage his ships had suffered . By that time , Derfflinger and Von der Tann each had only two guns in operation , Moltke was flooded with 1 @,@ 000 tons of water , and Seydlitz was severely damaged . Hipper reported : " I Scouting Group was therefore no longer of any value for a serious engagement , and was consequently directed to return to harbour by the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , while he himself determined to await developments off Horns Reef with the battlefleet . " 
 During the course of the battle , Moltke had hit Tiger 13 times , and was hit herself 4 times , all by 15 in ( 38 cm ) shells . The starboard No. 5 15 cm gun was struck by one of the 15 in shells and put out of action for the remainder of the battle . The ship suffered 16 dead and 20 wounded , the majority of which were due to the hit on the 15 cm gun . Flooding and counter @-@ flooding efforts caused 1 @,@ 000 tons of water to enter the ship . 
 = = = = Later operations = = = = 
 During the fleet advance on 18 – 19 August , the I Scouting Group was to bombard the coastal town of Sunderland in an attempt to draw out and destroy Beatty 's battlecruisers . As Moltke was one of only two remaining German battlecruisers still in fighting condition in the Group ( Von der Tann being the other ) , three dreadnoughts were assigned to the Group for the operation : Markgraf , Grosser Kurfürst , and the newly commissioned Bayern . Admiral Scheer and the rest of the High Seas Fleet , with 15 dreadnoughts of its own , would trail behind and provide cover . The British were aware of the German plans and sortied the Grand Fleet to meet them . By 14 : 35 , Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and , unwilling to engage the whole of the Grand Fleet just 11 weeks after the decidedly close call at Jutland , turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . 
 In September 1917 , KzS von Karpf left Moltke ; KzS <unk> assumed command of the ship . Between September and October 1917 , the ship took part in Operation Albion supporting the German invasion of the Russian islands of Ösel , Dagö , and Moon ( in present @-@ day Estonia ) . Following the successful operation in the Baltic , Moltke was detached to support the II Reconnaissance Group ( II AG ) , but did not actively participate in the Second Battle of Heligoland Bight . 
 Late 1917 saw the High Seas Fleet beginning to conduct anti @-@ convoy raids in the North Sea between Britain and Norway . In October and December 1917 , two British convoys to Norway were intercepted and destroyed by German cruisers and destroyers , prompting Beatty , now the Commander in Chief of the Grand Fleet , to detach several battleships and battlecruisers to protect convoys . This presented to Admiral Scheer the opportunity for which he had been waiting the entire war : the chance to isolate and eliminate a portion of the Grand Fleet . 
 At 05 : 00 on 23 April 1918 , the High Seas Fleet left harbor with the intention of intercepting one of the heavily escorted convoys . Wireless radio traffic was kept to a minimum to prevent the British from learning of the operation . At 05 : 10 on 24 April , Moltke suffered machinery failure : the starboard propeller had fallen off the shaft , and before the turbine could be stopped , a gear wheel was destroyed . The destroyed wheel flung pieces of steel into an auxiliary condenser , which flooded the engine room and stopped the operation of the center and starboard engines . Saltwater entered the boilers , reducing the ship 's speed to a mere four knots ; by 08 : 45 , the captain of Moltke reported to Scheer that his ship was " out of control " , and that the ship would need to be towed . At 09 : 38 , the cruiser Strassburg attempted to take the ship under tow , but was unable to do so . At 10 : 13 , the dreadnought Oldenburg was detached from the battle fleet to tow Moltke back to port . At 14 : 10 , the convoy had still not yet been located , and so Scheer turned the High Seas Fleet back towards German waters . By 17 : 10 , Moltke 's engines had been repaired , and the ship was able to steam at a speed of 17 knots . At 19 : 37 , the British submarine E42 spotted the ship and fired a torpedo into Moltke . The ship took in 1 @,@ 800 tons of water , but was able to reach harbor under her own power . Repairs were carried out in Wilhelmshaven in the Imperial Dockyard , between 30 April and 9 September 1918 . 
 Following repairs , Moltke took part in training operations in the Baltic from 19 September to 3 October . Starting on 1 November , the ship served as the I Scouting Group flagship for Rear Admiral von Reuter , after the battlecruiser Hindenburg had gone into dry dock for repairs . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Moltke was to have taken part in what would have amounted to the " death ride " of the High Seas Fleet shortly before the end of World War I. The bulk of the High Seas Fleet was to have sortied from their base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet ; Scheer — by now the Großadmiral of the fleet — intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , in order to retain a better bargaining position for Germany , whatever the cost to the fleet . However , while the fleet was consolidating in Wilhelmshaven , war @-@ weary sailors began deserting en masse . As Von der Tann and Derfflinger passed through the locks that separated Wilhelmshaven 's inner harbour and roadstead , some 300 men from both ships climbed over the side and disappeared ashore . 
 On 24 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on several battleships mutinied ; three ships from the III Squadron refused to weigh anchor , and acts of sabotage were committed on board the battleships Thüringen and Helgoland . The order to sail was rescinded in the face of this open revolt . In early November 1918 , the German Revolution began ; it led to the Armistice that ended the war and it toppled the monarchy . 
 Moltke was surrendered with the rest of the High Seas Fleet on 24 November 1918 and interned at Scapa Flow , under the command of Kapitänleutnant <unk> . Believing that the Treaty of Versailles had been signed and his fleet was about to be seized by the British , Rear Admiral von Reuter ordered the scuttling of the High Seas Fleet on 21 June 1919 , while the British Grand Fleet was away on exercises . The ship sank in two hours and fifteen minutes . Moltke was raised in 1927 and scrapped at Rosyth in 1929 . 
 = Harvest Festival ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " Harvest Festival " is the seventh episode of the third season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 37th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on March 17 , 2011 . In the episode , Leslie and her co @-@ workers hold Pawnee 's harvest festival , the success of which will determine the future of the parks department . The festival faces several obstacles , including a supposed Native American curse , a missing miniature horse and a scandal @-@ hungry media . Meanwhile , Ann tries to cope with her recent break @-@ up , and April confesses her love to Andy , then becomes angry when he does not reciprocate . 
 Written by Daniel J. Goor and directed by Dean Holland , the episode marked the culmination of a seven @-@ episode story arc about the harvest festival that began with the third season premiere , " Go Big or Go Home " . Unlike the first six episodes of the season , it was not written and produced immediately following the second season , which had been done to accommodate actress Amy Poehler 's pregnancy . The episode also does not feature Rob Lowe as he was originally only expected to be a guest star when the episode was conceived ; however , he does return for subsequent episodes as a regular cast member . 
 The episode featured appearances by regular guest stars Mo Collins and Jay Jackson , as well as the first appearance by Jonathan Joss as the leader of a local Native American tribe . The harvest festival scenes were shot at Los Angeles Pierce College , and an aerial shot of the festival itself was the most expensive shot in the series . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Harvest Festival " was seen by 4 @.@ 08 million household viewers , one of the lowest ratings of the series . 
 The episode received critical acclaim , with many reviewers calling it one of the show 's best episodes as well as a major turning point in the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 With the Harvest Festival days away , Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) surprises everyone by booking Li 'l Sebastian , a miniature horse and legendary Pawnee celebrity . Everyone is thrilled except Ben ( Adam Scott ) , who doesn 't understand the fascination . The chief of the local Wamapoke tribe , Ken Hotate ( Jonathan Joss ) , visits the parks department and requests the harvest festival be moved , as it is built upon the site of a Wamapoke massacre . When Leslie explains it is too late , Ken warns them the festival may become cursed , although he privately tells the documentary crew that " there are two things [ he ] know [ s ] about white people : they love Rachel Ray , and they are terrified of curses . " Ann ( Rashida Jones ) works the harvest festival first aid tent , where she confides in Donna ( Retta ) that she has not taken the break @-@ up with Chris ( Rob Lowe ) well . April ( Aubrey Plaza ) tells Andy ( Chris Pratt ) that she loves him , but grows angry when he replies , " Dude , shut up ! That is <unk> ! " 
 Joan Callamezzo ( Mo Collins ) arrives to report on the festival and is determined to find a negative story , although she does show excitement over Li 'l Sebastian . She initially fails to find a scandal , but then overhears Leslie and Ben discussing the curse . It becomes the focus of her story , especially after Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) tells Leslie that Li 'l Sebastian escaped his pen . Tom blames Jerry ( Jim O 'Heir ) , although it was entirely Tom 's fault . The Pawnee media swarms the festival to cover the curse , endangering its opening the next day with the bad press , with one reporter likening Ben 's past as a failed teen mayor with the curse . Now believing himself to be the curse , Ben leaves the festival . As Leslie reassures the reporters there is no curse , the power generator blows out , leaving the festival dark and stranding most of the parks department on a Ferris wheel . Using the blackout as an excuse , Ann takes Donna 's advice to make out with random people , starting with Kiley ( Joey Russo ) , her dumb but attractive patient . 
 On the Ferris wheel , with April and Andy arguing below him and Tom and Jerry arguing above him , an annoyed Ron ( Nick Offerman ) clears the air by announcing the obvious : April is mad at Andy for not telling her that he loves her back , and the missing Li 'l Sebastian is Tom 's fault . Andy tells April that he clearly loves her and they hug , and Tom apologizes to Jerry . Later , everyone spots Li 'l Sebastian in the corn maze and recover him . Leslie learns the power outage was due to television crews plugging into the grid and overloading it . The only replacement generator in Pawnee is at the Wamapoke casino , and Leslie humbly asks Ken to loan it to her in exchange for placing a Wamapoke cultural exhibit near the Harvest Festival entrance . Ken agrees , and during the festival opening the next morning , he performs a meaningless ceremony to remove the fake curse . People begin to swarm into the festival , and Ben returns to apologize to Leslie for leaving , admitting that he is not over his past . She reassures him the festival is as much his accomplishment as hers , and even has Ken break Ben 's " curse " , although Ken 's gesture is also completely meaningless . At the end , Ben appears to have been won over by Li 'l Sebastian , but admits to the camera crew that he still fails to see the appeal and remains as baffled as ever . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Harvest Festival " was written by Daniel J. Goor and directed by Dean Holland . The episode marked the culmination of a seven @-@ episode story arc that began with the third season premiere , " Go Big or Go Home " , in which Leslie and the parks department prepare to relaunch the harvest festival , which had previously been a Pawnee tradition before it ended . The storyline stemmed from serious budget problems facing Pawnee which forced a government shutdown and threatened major cuts to the parks department , prompting Leslie to bring the harvest festival back and stake the future of the entire department on its success or failure . Amy Poehler said she believed the storyline was appropriate for a series about small government and was well handled by the writers : " What I like about the show is it doesn 't spend 25 episodes talking about this thing , it talks about it in the right amount of time . It happens and then there 's consequences of it . The show keeps moving forward , which is always really fun . " 
 " Harvest Festival " was the first episode of the season written and produced separately from the second season . The previous six episodes from the third season were filmed almost immediately after the second season ended as part of an early shooting schedule to accommodate Poehler 's pregnancy . Series co @-@ creator Michael Schur described it as a particularly empowering episode for the Leslie Knope character : " When you see this episode [ ... ] it makes you love her even more . This episode is about Leslie being noticed for the incredible hard work she does . " Schur also said he believed the subplot with April and Andy was one that several young people in their situation have faced in real life : " Andy is put into a situation that a lot of people have been put into in our lives and he does the exact wrong thing you can do . And that 's sort of the template for them going forward is what 's the <unk> thing you can do ? That 's sort of how we follow them . " Chris Pratt said he believed the conflict provided strong romantic and comedic potential for the characters : " There definitely will be conflict in their relationship [ and ] there 's still a lot of room for comedy in there , because we have good writers . " 
 Rob Lowe , a regular cast member with Parks and Recreation , did not appear in " Harvest Festival " because the actor was originally slated to only appear in the first six episodes of the season as a guest star . However , after those episodes were filmed , Lowe joined the cast as a permanent cast member , and his character Chris Traeger will return in the next episode , " Camping " , as well as all subsequent episodes . " Harvest Festival " included guest appearances by Mo Collins and Jay Jackson as , respectively , Joan Callamezzo and Perd Hapley , two Pawnee television journalists who have appeared in multiple Parks and Recreation episodes . It also featured the first guest appearance of Jonathan Joss as Wamapoke tribe leader Ken Hotate . Joss previously voiced John <unk> in the animated television series King of the Hill , which was co @-@ created by Parks and Recreation co @-@ creator Greg Daniels . Schur said while writing about the Native American curse , the writing staff wanted it to be the local media that turned it into an issue rather than the citizens of Pawnee , because they felt it would be too cartoonish and unbelievable for the residents to take it so seriously . 
 Due to budget constraints , the Parks and Recreation set department did not build the harvest festival and corn maze sets , but instead filmed the episode at the annual Halloween Harvest Festival at Los Angeles Pierce College , a community college in California . Michael Schur said the aerial shot of the harvest festival at the end of the episode was the most expensive in the entire series . The episode was filmed out of sequence from the rest of the season so the weather would be cooler when the scenes were shot ; Schur jokingly said if this was not done , " the week that we would have been shooting it was like 148 degrees here and the actors would be dead now " . " Harvest Festival " was screened for members of the media during a January 2011 NBC press junket . Afterward , the reporters were taken to the set of Parks and Recreation where they were able to greet and pose for photos with the actual miniature horse who played Li 'l Sebastian . Shortly after the episode aired , a " Producer 's Cut " version was made available on the official NBC website . It was about five minutes longer than the televised version and included several scenes that were originally cut due to length limitations , including an extended cold open with the parks department meeting Li 'l Sebastian , and additional scenes of Leslie meeting with Pawnee constituents before the Harvest Festival . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Ben fails to understand the appeal of Li 'l Sebastian , Ron explains the miniature horse has an honorary degree from the University of Notre Dame , a school in Indiana , the state where Parks and Recreation series is set . In a later scene , Ben compares Leslie to a Jedi , a type of warrior in the science fiction franchise Star Wars , prompting Leslie and Tom to mock him as a nerd . During one scene , Ken Hotate says , " I know two things about white people : they love Matchbox Twenty , and they are terrified of curses . " The former refers to an American rock band , which is later also featured on the marquee of an exterior shot of a Wamapoke casino . ( The extended cut replaces Matchbox Twenty with Rachael Ray in both instances . ) Ann claims that , while distraught from her breakup with Chris , she bought $ 700 @-@ worth of candles from Anthropologie , a retail store that sells women 's apparel and home accessories . 
 One of the harvest festival booths features Pawnee celebrity Aunt Tilda , the fictional aunt of basketball player Larry Bird , who is from Indiana . " American Girl " , a song by the rock band Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers , plays during one scene showing an overview of the harvest festival . A news report about the supposed curse is presented in a Taiwanese animation clip featuring Leslie and Ken Hotate , in the style of the animation company Next Media Animation . While interviewing Hotate , Perd Hapley compared the curse to the horror film Poltergeist ( 1982 ) . Several commentators compared the man who flirted with Ann to the characters of Jersey Shore , an MTV reality series about young people living in a house by the Jersey Shore beach . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Harvest Festival " was seen by an estimated 4 @.@ 08 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , with a 1 @.@ 8 rating / 5 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 . It was one of the lowest ratings of the series to date , and marked a 25 percent drop from the previous original episode , " Indianapolis " . The ratings suffered in part because its lead @-@ in show , The Office , was a repeat ; all the other NBC comedy shows that Thursday , including 30 Rock , Community , Perfect Couples and Outsourced , also saw lower ratings than their previous episodes . Parks and Recreation was defeated in its 9 : 30 p.m. timeslot by the Fox comedy @-@ drama series Bones , which was seen by 11 @.@ 34 million households ; the ABC medical drama Private Practice ( TV series ) , which was seen by 5 @.@ 97 million households ; and CBS coverage of NCAA basketball , which was seen by 4 @.@ 44 million household . In network television , it defeated only a remake of the CW Network drama Nikita , which drew 1 @.@ 37 million households . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Harvest Festival " received critical acclaim . New York magazine writer Steve Kandell called it the most pivotal episode of the season in terms of " resolving and resetting narrative stakes " , as well as the most complex from a production perspective . Kandell wrote , " There 's something that feels particularly satisfying about watching a wholly sympathetic , albeit fictional , character like Leslie Knope do well by her own ambition and by her friends . " Entertainment Weekly writer Ken Tucker said the episode placed Parks and Recreation " squarely in the tradition of great gentle @-@ hearted sitcoms " that treated its characters " with equal affection , and has relatively little patience for irony and cool detachment " . He praised Amy Poehler 's performance , and enjoyed how the characters ' excitement over Li 'l Sebastian demonstrated how " in some parts of this great land , there are people who aren ’ t jaded , who are open to wonderment , who find vessels in which to pour their joy " . HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall said " Harvest Festival " may be his favorite episode of the season thus far , and demonstrates how the series has evolved . While in the first season he said Leslie was too over @-@ the @-@ top in a relatively ordinary setting , Sepinwall said this episode showed Parks and Recreation " has successfully made the rest of Pawnee seem as believably crazy as Leslie , if not <unk> " . TV Squad television reviewer Maureen Ryan called " Harvest Festival " a " delightful , comedically deft episode , one that depicts the mildly demented world of Pawnee in loving detail " . 
 Joel Keller , also of TV Squad , called it one of the best episodes of the season , and that it provided each member of the ensemble cast moments to shine . He praised how the episode combined the " funny small @-@ <unk> of a place like Pawnee and the realities of being in city government " . James Poniewozik of Time magazine called it a " splendid " episode that " combined slapstick , authentic stakes and a holistic picture of the oddball history and commonalities that bond the folks we 've come to know in Pawnee " . Punchline Magazine writer Megan Gilbert said the episode featured " plenty of laugh @-@ out @-@ loud moments " and particularly enjoyed the " sweet non @-@ aggressive fighting " between April and Andy . Gilbert felt Adam Scott was underused , but praised the performances of Rashida Jones , Aziz Ansari and Mo Collins . TV Guide writer Damian Holbrook said the difficulties that plague the harvest festival were funny , " but like the best of Parks , these hiccups are matched with acres of heart " . He praised the growing romantic interest between Leslie and Ben , as well as the subplot about Andy and April . Alex Strachan of the Montreal Gazette praised the show for being funny without resorting to cynicism or cruel jokes , and called the series " one of the sharpest , smartest comedies on TV at the moment " . He also called the Wamapoke curse subplot " wildly politically incorrect , but funny " . National Post writer Scott Stinson said Parks and Recreation " continues to challenge for the title of best comedy on television " , and called the continuing romance between April and Andy a " welcome development " for both characters . 
 Hollywood.com writer Eric Sundermann enjoyed the new direction Ann 's character was taking , as well as how " Harvest Festival " accurately portrays small @-@ town life . Rick Porter of Zap2it said the episode " put a great cap on the first portion of the season " . He called Andy and April " a recipe for excellent comedy " and called the slowly developing romance of Ben and Leslie extremely rewarding . Andy Daglas of ChicagoNow called it a " pure delight from beginning to end " and a good entry point for newcomers to the show . Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club called the episode " celebration of the <unk> that live in Pawnee and how their singular focus can make for some adorably naive comedy " . While he praised the main subplot , he said it was too early in April and Andy 's relationship for them to declare their love for each other , and said April 's declaration " came out of nowhere " . Matt Fowler of IGN said it was not his favorite episode , as the jokes about Ben 's past felt repetitive compared to past episodes , and the April and Andy subplot " fell a little flat " . However , he said it was " chock full of dozens of little moments that make the entire episode worthwhile " , and particularly praised the Native American curse and the parody of the media . 
 = Ursula Franklin = 
 Ursula Martius Franklin , CC <unk> FRSC ( 16 September 1921 – 22 July 2016 ) , was a German @-@ Canadian metallurgist , research physicist , author , and educator who taught at the University of Toronto for more than 40 years . She was the author of The Real World of Technology , which is based on her 1989 Massey Lectures ; The Ursula Franklin Reader : Pacifism as a Map , a collection of her papers , interviews , and talks ; and Ursula Franklin Speaks : Thoughts and <unk> , containing 22 of her speeches and five interviews between 1986 and 2012 . Franklin was a practising Quaker and active in working on behalf of pacifist and feminist causes . She wrote and spoke extensively about the futility of war and the connection between peace and social justice . Franklin received numerous honours and awards , including the Governor General 's Award in Commemoration of the Persons Case for promoting the equality of girls and women in Canada and the Pearson Medal of Peace for her work in advancing human rights . In 2012 , she was inducted into the Canadian Science and Engineering Hall of Fame . A Toronto high school , Ursula Franklin Academy , has been named in her honour . 
 Franklin is best known for her writings on the political and social effects of technology . For her , technology is much more than machines , gadgets or electronic transmitters . It is a comprehensive system that includes methods , procedures , organization , " and most of all , a mindset " . She distinguishes between holistic technologies used by craft workers or artisans and prescriptive ones associated with a division of labour in large @-@ scale production . Holistic technologies allow artisans to control their own work from start to finish . <unk> technologies organize work as a sequence of steps requiring supervision by bosses or managers . Franklin argues that the dominance of prescriptive technologies in modern society discourages critical thinking and promotes " a culture of compliance " . 
 For some , Franklin belongs in the intellectual tradition of Harold Innis and Jacques Ellul who warn about technology 's tendency to suppress freedom and endanger civilization . Franklin herself acknowledges her debt to Ellul as well as to several other thinkers including Lewis Mumford , C. B. Macpherson , E. F. Schumacher , and Vandana Shiva . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ursula Maria Martius was born in Munich , Germany on September 16 , 1921 . Her mother was Jewish and an art historian and her father , an ethnographer , came from an old German Protestant family . Because of the Nazi persecution of the Jews , her parents tried to send their only child to school in Britain when World War II broke out , but the British refused to issue a student visa to anyone under 18 . Ursula studied chemistry and physics at Berlin University until she was expelled by the Nazis . Her parents were interned in concentration camps while Franklin herself was sent to a forced labour camp . The family survived The Holocaust and was reunited in Berlin after the war . 
 = = Academic career = = 
 Franklin decided to study science because she went to school during a time when the teaching of history was censored . " I remember a real subversive pleasure , " she told an interviewer many years later , " that there was no word of authority that could change either the laws of physics or the conduct of mathematics . " In 1948 , Franklin received her Ph.D. in experimental physics at the Technical University of Berlin . She began to look for opportunities to leave Germany after realizing there was no place there for someone fundamentally opposed to militarism and oppression . Franklin moved to Canada after being offered the Lady Davis postdoctoral fellowship at the University of Toronto ( U of T ) in 1949 . She then worked for 15 years ( from 1952 to 1967 ) as first a research fellow and then as a senior research scientist at the Ontario Research Foundation . In 1967 , Franklin became a researcher and associate professor at the Department of Metallurgy and Materials Science University of Toronto 's Faculty of Engineering where she was an expert in metallurgy and materials science . She was promoted to full professor in 1973 and was given the designation of University Professor in 1984 , becoming the first female professor to receive the university 's highest honour . She was appointed professor emerita in 1987 , a title she retained until her death . She served as director of the university ’ s Museum Studies Program from 1987 to 1989 , was named a Fellow of the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education in 1988 , and a Senior Fellow of Massey College in 1989 . 
 = = = Scientific research = = = 
 Franklin was a pioneer in the field of <unk> , which applies modern materials analysis to archaeology . She worked for example , on the dating of prehistoric bronze , copper and ceramic artifacts . In the early 1960s , Franklin investigated levels of strontium @-@ 90 — a radioactive isotope in fallout from nuclear weapons testing — in children 's teeth . Her research contributed to the cessation of atmospheric weapons testing . Franklin published more than a hundred scientific papers and contributions to books on the structure and properties of metals and alloys as well as on the history and social effects of technology . 
 As a member of the Science Council of Canada during the 1970s , Franklin chaired an influential study on conserving resources and protecting nature . The study 's 1977 report , Canada as a <unk> Society , recommended a wide range of steps aimed at reducing wasteful consumption and the environmental degradation that goes with it . The work on that study helped shape Franklin 's ideas about the complexities of modern technological society . 
 = = Activism = = 
 Franklin was also active in the Voice of Women ( VOW ) , now the Canadian Voice of Women for Peace , one of Canada 's leading social advocacy organizations . In 1968 , she and VOW national president Muriel Duckworth presented a brief to a House of Commons committee asserting that Canada and the United States had entered into military trade agreements without adequate public debate . They argued that these commercial arrangements made it difficult for Canada to adopt independent foreign policy positions such as calling for an immediate U.S. military withdrawal from South Vietnam . In 1969 , Franklin and Duckworth called on a committee of the Canadian Senate to recommend that Canada discontinue its chemical and biological weapons research and spend money instead on environmental research and preventive medicine . Franklin was also part of a 1969 VOW delegation that urged the federal government to withdraw from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and establish a special agency to oversee Canadian disarmament . 
 In the 1980s , Franklin participated in an organized campaign to win the right for conscientious objectors to redirect part of their income taxes from military uses to peaceful purposes . Her 1987 paper , written to support the campaign , argued that the well @-@ recognized right to refuse military service on grounds of conscience should be extended to include the right to refuse to pay taxes for war preparations . Franklin asserted that the freedom of conscience provision of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guaranteed this form of conscientious objection . Her paper was to be part of an appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada . The lower courts had convicted those withholding part of their taxes of violating the Income Tax Act . In 1990 however , the Supreme Court declined to hear the appeal . 
 Following Franklin 's retirement , she and several other retired female faculty members filed a class action lawsuit against the University of Toronto claiming it had been unjustly enriched by paying women faculty less than comparably qualified men . In 2002 , the lawsuit was settled when the university acknowledged that many of its female professors had suffered from gender barriers and pay discrimination during their careers . As a result , about 60 retired women faculty received a pay equity settlement intended to compensate them for the lower salaries and pensions they had received . 
 Franklin continued to have a strong association with the University of Toronto 's Massey College as a continuing senior fellow and senior resident . Her many activities include encouraging young women to pursue careers in science , promoting peace and social justice , and speaking and writing about the social effects of science and technology . Many of her articles and speeches on pacifism , feminism , technology and teaching are collected in The Ursula Franklin Reader published in 2006 . Franklin is also the author of The Real World of Technology which is based on her 1989 Massey Lectures broadcast on CBC Radio . 
 = = Pacifism , feminism and war = = 
 Ursula Franklin explains in a prelude to her 2006 collection of papers , interviews and talks that her lifelong interest in structures , in what she terms " the arrangement and interplay of the parts within a whole , " has been at the root of most of her activities . Looking back after almost 40 years , she adds , " I can see how I have tried to wrestle with just one fundamental question : ' How can one live and work as a pacifist in the here and now and help to structure a society in which oppression , violence , and wars would diminish and co @-@ operation , equality , and justice would rise ? ' " As part of the answer , Franklin turns to the metaphor of <unk> to explain her intellectual journey . " Increasingly I found the maps of conventional wisdom inadequate for my travels , " she writes . " I became unwilling and unable to orient my life according to national maps depicting the realms of ' them ' and ' us , ' of good guys and bad guys , of winning , defeating , and being defeated ; in short , all those maps drawn up for travel towards private gain and personal advancement . " Franklin concludes that she has been guided in understanding what she calls " the real world " by " the maps of pacifism and feminism " . 
 For her , feminism meant a completely new point of view : " Feminism isn 't an employment agency for women ; it 's an alternative way of ordering the social space , in which women are the prototype rather than men . It is based on collaboration rather than competition . As a youngster , I still remember my feeling of joy that one could look at the earth differently . That 's feminism ; everything is differently oriented . Seeing the same world with different eyes . " 
 = = = Pacifism and conscience = = = 
 Central to Franklin 's pacifism and her view of life is what she calls " the Quaker vision of the world " . Individual conscience is at the heart of that vision . So too , is the need to discern appropriate ways of working for peace in each time and place " rather than relying on a dogma of unvarying rules of conduct " . She notes that for more than 300 years , Quakers have opposed war and violence and have objected to military service and conscription . They have worked on reconciliation , peace research and disarmament and in many countries have won the right for conscientious objectors to perform alternative service instead of taking part in war . Franklin remarks that Quaker principles have not changed , but technology has changed the nature of war . In a modern technological society she argues , there is no longer a clear boundary between war and peace . War planning is constant during peacetime and when wars are fought , women and children become targets . Nations no longer depend primarily on conscripting military recruits , but rely on advanced weapons systems that are costly to build or acquire . She writes that the arms race is driven by a " technological imperative " which requires the creation of an enemy as a permanent social institution : 
 Modern weapons technologies , including the required research and development , are particularly capital @-@ intensive and costly . The time between initial research and the deployment of weapon systems can be as long as a decade , during which the government must provide financial security and political justification for the project . In other words , the state not only provides the funding but also identifies a credible external enemy who warrants such expenditure . 
 Franklin points out that the technological nature of war requires states to conscript the resources needed to pay for hi @-@ tech devices designed for destruction . Thus , people opposed to war are forced — through taxation — to pay for war preparations even if it violates their individual conscience . 
 = = = Peace and social justice = = = 
 In her 1987 paper , Reflections on Theology and Peace , Ursula Franklin contends that " peace is not the absence of war — peace is the absence of fear . " She asserts however , that fear of war and violence is not the only kind of fear that destroys peace . She includes fears arising for example , from economic insecurity , unemployment and the lack of adequate shelter . Franklin points to what she calls " the threat system " which manages people by instilling fear and uncertainty at all levels of society . 
 For her , social justice is the essential element needed to banish fear and bring peace . Justice means freedom from oppression , but it also implies equality for all . " In God 's eyes , " she writes , " all creatures have value and are subjects of equal care and love ; similarly , in a society of justice and peace , all people matter equally . " Franklin suggests that in consumer @-@ oriented societies , war and violence are the inevitable result of an acquisitive lifestyle that rejects caring and social justice . She quotes historian Lewis Mumford 's observation that during the rise of capitalism , the sins of greed , gluttony , avarice , envy and luxury became cardinal virtues . Mumford goes on to argue that the " moral change that took place under capitalism can be summed up in the fact that human purposes , human needs , and human limits no longer exercised a directing and restraining influence upon industry : people worked , not to maintain life , but to increase money and power and to minister to the ego that found satisfaction in vast accumulations of money and power . " Franklin extends Mumford 's argument by pointing to new global realities such as militarized economies dependent on weapons production and national borders increasingly closed to refugees . " Any modern theology of peace , " she writes , " must , I think , take into account the worldwide drift towards ' techno @-@ fascism , ' the anti @-@ people , anti @-@ justice form of global management and power sharing that is developing around the world . " 
 = = = Globalization as warfare = = = 
 Franklin argues that the end of the Cold War brought two main changes . First , the threat of war between the United States and Soviet Union was replaced by regional wars among smaller states . Second , war was transposed to what Franklin calls " another key " — the struggle for global commercial and economic dominance . She asserts that this new form of war is now called globalization and its battlefields are global stock and currency markets . This economic warfare defines the enemy as all those who care about the values of community . " Whatever cannot be merely bought and sold , " Franklin writes , " whatever cannot be expressed in terms of money and gain @-@ loss transactions stands in the way of the ' market ' as enemy territory to be occupied , transformed and conquered . " A main strategy in this kind of warfare is the privatization of formerly public domains such as culture , health care , prisons and education to generate private profit . Franklin contends that the new economic warlords or " marketeers " aim , for example , to transform " the ill health or misery of our neighbours into investment opportunities for the next round of capitalism . " She argues that marketeers have become occupying forces served by " puppet governments who run the country for the benefit of the occupiers . " Franklin has also noted that in democratic politics , the economy is all that seems to matter . " Canada has almost no foreign policy , " she says , " but rather is part of an elaborate network of trade agreements . " 
 Franklin recommends that resistance take the form of refusing to speak the language of the occupiers . This language includes such terms as stakeholders , users , health @-@ care providers and consumers of education to refer to teachers and students , doctors , nurses , patients and communities . Franklin also calls for resistance through court challenges and " the creative use of electronic media to bypass the occupation forces ' control of information . " Finally , Franklin is a strong supporter of citizen politics , a civic movement which focuses on practical solutions to common problems — everything from the absence of peace to homelessness and local traffic congestion . Borrowing a Quaker term , Franklin calls on citizens to engage in <unk> , the process of sitting down together to discuss and clarify common moral and political concerns . She writes that citizen politics does not seek to overthrow existing governments but to improve them " whether those in power like it or not . " The movement also tries to defend communities against those intent , in Franklin 's words , on " turning the globe into one giant commercial resource base , while denying a decent and appropriate habitat to many of the world 's citizens . " 
 = = = War , failure and 9 / 11 = = = 
 Again and again in her writings , speeches and interviews , Ursula Franklin insists that war and its violence are not only morally wrong , but also ineffective , impractical , and costly . During a radio interview broadcast two days after the September 11 attacks in the U.S. , Franklin argued that violence nowadays is always unsuccessful even for the powerful who try to use it . " Nothing has been resolved by violence over the past fifty years , " Franklin said . " The rational thinking that force does not work , even for the enforcer , is staring us in the face . " In a newspaper article published just before the first anniversary of 9 / 11 , Franklin wrote , " It is crucial to recognize that war and war measures are fundamentally dysfunctional instruments of problem @-@ solving . Violence begets more violence , war begets further wars , more enemies and more suffering . " 
 Franklin suggested that it would have been more effective if , instead of launching a War on Terrorism , the U.S. had interpreted the attacks as a political earthquake instead of an act of war . She argued that social and political structures are as inherently unstable as geological ones . " Geological fissures and human terrorists are created in a context of forces that can be understood and — at times — mitigated . Neither can be eliminated by bombing . " 
 Franklin asserts that militarism is the ultimate development of hierarchical social structures and threat @-@ based systems . " They all work under the implicit assumption that some people matter much less than others , and that all people are of interest only as long as they are needed to support the system or to justify it . " She notes that many prominent advocates for women 's rights such as Jane Addams and Sylvia Pankhurst were pacifists . " To me , the struggle for women 's rights and the opposition to militarism in all its forms are two sides of the same coin . " 
 When a CBC Radio interviewer suggested to Franklin that her ideas about peace and justice were not connected with what was actually happening in the aftermath of 9 / 11 , she readily agreed . " Yes , you are quite right . They are totally unconnected . I have spent the best part of my life trying to put these thoughts into the stream that makes decisions , and I 've been spectacularly unsuccessful . That , I think , is a reflection on my ability in the climate of the time , not on the value of the thoughts . " 
 = = Technological society = = 
 For Ursula Franklin , technology is a set of practices in the " here and now " rather than an array of machines or gadgets . It is also a comprehensive system . " Technology involves organization , procedures , symbols , new words , equations , and , most of all , a mindset . " Her definition is similar to the French thinker Jacques Ellul 's concept of technique . Like Ellul , Franklin asserts that technological methods dominate the modern world . " Technology has built the house in which we all live , " she writes , " today there is hardly any human activity that does not occur within this house . " As such , technology is a central element of the here and now . " In the broadest sense of the term , the here and now is our environment , that is , all that is around us — the ever @-@ changing overlay of nature , the built environment , the institutional and social structures within which human activities take place , as well as the activities themselves — ' the way things are done around here . ' " Franklin sees her studies of technology as an attempt to understand how technological practices affect the advancement of justice and peace . 
 = = = Holistic and prescriptive technologies = = = 
 According to Ursula Franklin , technology is not a set of neutral tools , methods or practices . She asserts that various categories of technology have markedly different social and political effects . She distinguishes for example , between work @-@ related and control @-@ related technologies . Work @-@ related technologies , such as electric typewriters , are designed to make tasks easier . Computerized word processing makes typing easier still . But when computers are linked into work stations — part of a system — word processing becomes a control @-@ related technology . " Now workers can be timed , " Franklin writes , " assignments can be broken up , and the interaction between the operators can be monitored . " 
 Franklin extends the distinction between work and control @-@ related technologies to the larger concept of holistic and prescriptive ones . This enables her to consider the social implications of how work is performed . She writes that holistic technologies are usually associated with craft work . " Artisans , be they potters , weavers , metal @-@ smiths , or cooks , control the process of their own work from beginning to finish . " Artisans may specialize in a particular kind of product , but they are always in total control of the process of production and each thing they make or create is unique . <unk> technologies , on the other hand , break work down into a series of discrete , standardized steps . " Each step is carried out by a separate worker , or group of workers , who need to be familiar only with the skills of performing that one step . " 
 Although the division of labour inherent in prescriptive technologies is usually associated with the industrial revolution , Franklin points out that such production methods have been used since ancient times . Chinese bronze casting before 1200 BC for example , required a tightly controlled and closely supervised production process as well as a strict division of labour . Franklin writes that when she studied Chinese bronze casting as a metallurgist , " the extraordinary social meaning of prescriptive technologies dawned on me . I began to understand what they meant , not just in terms of casting bronze but in terms of discipline and planning , of organization and command . " 
 = = = Technology 's culture of compliance = = = 
 Franklin argues that in modern society , control @-@ related and prescriptive technologies are dominant . " When work is organized as a sequence of separately executable steps , the control over the work moves to the organizer , the boss or manager , " she writes . " In political terms , prescriptive technologies are designs for compliance . " For Franklin , workers accustomed to following prescriptive rules become used to seeing external control and internal compliance as normal and necessary . They also come to believe that there is only one prescribed way of performing a wide variety of tasks . " While we should not forget that these prescriptive technologies are often exceedingly effective and efficient , they come with an enormous social mortgage . The mortgage means that we live in a culture of compliance , that we are ever more conditioned to accept orthodoxy as normal , and to accept that there is only one way of doing ' it ' . " 
 Franklin points out that prescriptive technologies have moved beyond materials production to the realms of administration , government and social services . She argues that tasks which require nurturing or caring for people , in health and education for example , are best done holistically . Yet such tasks are increasingly coming under the sway of prescriptive technologies based on what Franklin calls a production model . Professor Heather Menzies , an admirer of Franklin , describes for example , how nursing tasks are performed in keeping with preset , computerized check lists which leave little discretionary time for dealing with the unexpected or talking with patients who are lonely or distressed . Franklin herself notes that schools and universities test and promote students based on strict production schedules yet " if there ever was a holistic process , a process that cannot be divided into rigid predetermined steps , it is education . " 
 = = = Technology and power = = = 
 Ursula Franklin rejects the idea that powerful technologies automatically determine the ways in which people live and work . She maintains that the uses of technology are not preordained , but are the result of conscious choices . The dominant prescriptive technologies establish structures of power and control that follow what Franklin sees as male patterns of hierarchy , authoritarianism , competition and exclusion . Female workers are often victims of these patterns . Mechanical sewing machines were introduced in 1851 with the promise that they would liberate women from household drudgery . But when the machines ended up in factory sweatshops to produce cheap clothing , the new technology was used to exploit female workers . " A strictly prescriptive technology with the classic division of labour arose from the introduction of new , supposedly liberating ' domestic ' machines , " Franklin notes . " In the subsequent evolution of the garment industry , much of the designing , cutting , and assembling began to be automated , often to the complete exclusion of workers . " She points to similar examples in other industries . Female operators helped introduce the telephone only to be replaced by automated switchboards after the technology had been successfully established while secretaries struggled to make the early mechanical typewriters function properly , but ended up performing fragmented and increasingly meaningless tasks . 
 " Many technological systems , when examined for context and overall design , are basically anti @-@ people , " Franklin writes . " People are seen as sources of problems while technology is seen as a source of solutions . " As a result , people live and work under conditions structured for the well @-@ being of technology even though manufacturers and promoters always present new technologies as liberating . " The dreams of flight , of fast private transportation , of instant communication across continents , and of helpful machines , all stress liberation from hard physical labour at work or drudgery at home . " But once technologies are accepted and standardized , they often enslave or displace their users . Franklin argues that work could be made less prescriptive in workplaces that are less rigidly hierarchical if we adopted more holistic practices based on the way women traditionally work in running households for example , or in caring for children . 
 = = = Communications technologies = = = 
 Franklin asserts that powerful communications technologies have reshaped political and social realities distancing people from each other and their immediate environments . Radio and television for example , transmit messages instantaneously from afar — messages that are separated from people 's experiences in the vicinities where they live and work . Franklin calls such messages pseudorealities . She writes they are based on images that are constructed , staged and selected to create emotional effects and the illusion of " being there " as a participant , not just as an observer . She asserts however , that one @-@ way communications technologies reduce or eliminate reciprocity , the normal give and take of face @-@ to @-@ face communication . 
 According to Franklin , the selective fragments or pseudorealities that become news stories are produced to attract and hold people 's attention by focusing on the unusual over the usual . She acknowledges that no one is forced to watch television or listen to radio ; people can explore other channels of communication . But the pseudorealities created by the media are still there " and the world is structured to believe in them . " She argues that images from afar have taken over much of our everyday reality like an immensely powerful occupation force . " And somewhere , someone will have to ask , ' How come the right to change our mental environment — to change the constructs of our minds and the sounds around us — seems to have been given away without anybody 's consent ? ' " 
 = = = Silence and the commons = = = 
 " Silence , " Franklin writes , " possesses striking similarities [ to ] aspects of life and community , such as unpolluted water , air , or soil , that were once taken as normal and given , but have become special and precious in technologically mediated environments . " She argues that the technological ability to separate recorded sound from its source makes the sound as permanent as the Muzak that plays endlessly in public places without anyone 's consent . For Franklin , such canned music is a manipulative technology programmed to generate predictable emotional responses and to increase private profit . She compares this destruction of silence to the British enclosure laws which fenced off the commons for private farming . 
 Franklin maintains that the core of the strength of silence is its openness to unplanned events . Quakers , she writes , worship God in collective silence . " I think that if any one of you attended a Quaker meeting , particularly on a regular basis , " she told a 1993 conference on acoustic ecology , " you would find that suddenly , out of the silence , someone will speak about something that had just entered your mind . It 's an uncanny thing , but the strength of collective silence is probably one of the most powerful spiritual forces . " Franklin advocates defending the human right to public silence — negotiating one music @-@ free elevator for example , or lobbying for quiet rooms in public buildings . She also recommends starting and ending meetings with a few minutes of silence . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1952 , Ursula Franklin married Fred Franklin ( born 1921 ) , an engineer of German Jewish ancestry who had been exposed to Quakerism while living in England , where he had been sent to boarding school to escape the Nazis in 1936 and remained until emigrating to Canada in 1948 . They had no family in Canada and , after their two children were born , they searched for a spiritual home and joined the Society of Friends ( Quakers ) in 1964 . " We were pacifists before we were Quakers , " Franklin says , " but it was a very easy transition to Quakerism for us , and it has been a very good home and an extended family for us and our children . " Franklin spent her last years in a nursing home with Fred , who survived her . She died on July 22 , 2016 at the age of 94 . 
 = = Donation to Seneca College = = 
 In April 2013 , Franklin donated her extensive collection of writings devoted to Chinese culture and history to the Confucius Institute at Seneca College in Toronto . The collection included more than 220 texts , books , publications , and journals interpreting Chinese culture and history from the perspective of Western scholars . It also contained some of Franklin 's own working papers and files . 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 Franklin has received numerous awards and honours during her long career . In 1984 , she became the first woman at the University of Toronto to be named University Professor , a special title which is the highest honour given by the university . She was named Officer of the Order of Canada in 1981 and a Companion of the Order in 1992 . She was appointed to the Order of Ontario in 1990 . In 1982 , she was given the award of merit for the City of Toronto , mainly for her work in neighbourhood planning . She received an honorary membership in the Delta Kappa Gamma Society International for women educators in 1985 . Two years later , she was given the Elsie Gregory McGill memorial award for her contributions to education , science and technology . In 1989 , she received the Wiegand Award which recognizes Canadians who have made significant contributions to the understanding of the human dimensions of science and technology . In 1991 , she received a Governor General 's Award in Commemoration of the Person 's Case for advancing the equality of girls and women in Canada . The same year , she received the Sir John William Dawson Medal . She received the 2001 Pearson Medal of Peace for her work in human rights . She has a Toronto high school named after her , Ursula Franklin Academy . In 2004 , Franklin was awarded one of Massey College 's first Adrienne Clarkson <unk> , honoring outstanding achievement in public service . She was inducted into the Canadian Science and Engineering Hall of Fame in 2012 . She has received honorary degrees from more than a dozen Canadian universities including a Doctor of Science from Queen 's University and a Doctor of Humane Letters from Mount Saint Vincent University , both awarded in 1985 . 
 = Metzengerstein = 
 " Metzengerstein : A Tale in Imitation of the German " , was the first short story by American writer and poet Edgar Allan Poe to see print . It was first published in the pages of Philadelphia 's Saturday Courier magazine , in 1832 . The story follows the young Frederick , the last of the Metzengerstein family , who carries on a long @-@ standing feud with the Berlifitzing family . Suspected of causing a fire that kills the Berlifitzing family patriarch , Frederick becomes intrigued with a previously unnoticed and untamed horse . Metzengerstein is punished for his cruelty when his own home catches fire and the horse carries him into the flame . Part of a Latin hexameter by Martin Luther serves as the story 's epigraph : <unk> <unk> <unk> — <unk> tua <unk> ero ( " Living I have been your plague , dying I shall be your death " ) . 
 " Metzengerstein " follows many conventions of Gothic fiction and , to some , exaggerates those conventions . Consequently , critics and scholars debate if Poe intended the story to be taken seriously or considered a satire of Gothic stories . Regardless , many elements introduced in " Metzengerstein " would become common in Poe 's future writing , including the gloomy castle and the power of evil . Because the story follows an orphan raised in an aristocratic household , some critics suggest an autobiographical connection with its author . 
 The story was submitted as Poe 's entry to a writing contest at the Saturday Courier . Though it did not win , the newspaper published it in January 1832 . It was re @-@ published with Poe 's permission only twice during his lifetime ; its subtitle was dropped for its final publication . Poe intended to include it in his collection Tales of the Folio Club or another called Phantasy Pieces , though neither collection was ever produced . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The story , told from an unnamed third @-@ person narrator , takes place in Hungary at an unspecified date . The opening passages describe a centuries @-@ long rivalry between two wealthy families : the <unk> and the <unk> . The bitter enmity between the two families is so old that no one knows how far back it dates . The narrator states that its origin appears to rely on an " ancient " prophecy : " A lofty name shall have a fearful fall when , as the rider over his horse , the mortality of Metzengerstein shall triumph over the immortality of Berlifitzing . " 
 Young Frederick , Baron of Metzengerstein , was orphaned at a young age and , thus , inherited the family fortune at age 18 ( though the age changes throughout its many re @-@ publications ) . Equipped with enormous wealth and power , he begins to exhibit particularly cruel behavior . " The behavior of the heir out @-@ <unk> Herod " . Four days after he receives his inheritance , the stables of the rival family Berlifitzing catch fire . The neighborhood " instantaneously " attributed the act of arson to Frederick Metzengerstein ( the story , however , does not say expressly if he did it or not ) . 
 That day , Metzengerstein , in his home , sits staring intently at an old tapestry depicting " an enormous , and unnaturally colored horse " that belonged to the Berlifitzing clan . Just behind the horse , Frederick sees its rider who has just been killed by " the dagger of a Metzengerstein " . Soon , Frederick sees the horse move and assume " an energetic and human expression " . Immediately , Frederick opens the door to leave , and the action strikingly causes his shadow to fall exactly on the spot of the murderer in the tapestry . 
 Outside , he sees his men handling a horse that is " the counterpart " of the horse in the tapestry . The men tell Frederick that this new , remarkable " fiery @-@ colored " horse has been found in his stables with the letters " <unk> " branded on its forehead . The equerry says , " I supposed them , of course , to be the initials of William Von Berlifitzing , but all at the castle are positive in denying any knowledge of the horse . " Frederick takes ownership of the horse . In the next moment , a page appears and tells Frederick that " a small portion of the tapestry " is missing ( presumably the part containing the image of the horse ) . Frederick also hears , some time later , that old Wilhelm Berlifitzing died in the fire as he tried to save one of his horses in the burning stable . 
 Thenceforth , Frederick and the " ferocious and <unk> " horse , which no one else but Frederick has dared to touch since its arrival , become seemingly inseparable . Day after day , Metzengerstein rides the animal as if addicted , and he becomes less and less interested in the affairs of his house and of society . He eventually begins to live in seclusion to the extent that others in the neighborhood suspect that he is either mad , sick , or overwhelmingly conceited . 
 " One tempestuous night " , Frederick awakes and maniacally mounts the horse to ride into the forest . Some hours later , the Metzengerstein castle catches fire . A crowd gathers to watch the peculiarly " ungovernable " flames and , soon , see the horse , now carrying " an <unk> and disordered rider " who clearly has no control over the animal . The sight makes everyone present utter the word " horrible " . The animal leaps into the flames with its rider and " disappeared amid the whirlwind of chaotic fire " , thereby killing the last of the Metzengerstein clan . Immediately , the fire " died away " . In the calm , the horrified onlookers observe a cloud of smoke settle above the castle in the shape of " the distinct colossal figure of — a horse " . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Poe originally sent " Metzengerstein " to the Saturday Courier as his entry to a writing competition along with five other prose works , including " The Duke de l <unk> " and " A Decided Loss " . None of his entries won , though the judges apparently liked " Metzengerstein " enough to print it a few months later in their January 14 , 1832 edition . It was published without Poe 's name attached to it but it is acknowledged as the first tale published by Poe . Poe likely was not paid for its initial publication . The subtitle of " A Tale in Imitation of the German " was added when it was republished in the Southern Literary Messenger in January 1836 , likely to capitalize on the popular interest in German horror . It was removed for its publication as part of the collection Tales of the Grotesque and Arabesque in 1840 . 
 " Metzengerstein " was one of 11 tales Poe would have collected as Tales of the Folio Club , a tale collection Poe announced but never actually printed . The " Folio Club " would have been a fictitious literary society the author called a group of " dunderheads " out to " abolish literature " . At each monthly meeting , a member would present a story . In the case of " Metzengerstein " , the speaker was " Mr. Horrible <unk> , with white eyelashes , who had graduated at <unk> " according to an early draft . The Baltimore Saturday Visiter ran an advertisement calling for subscribers for the collection at $ 1 apiece . A week later , however , the newspaper announced that the author had withdrawn the pieces with the expectation they would be printed in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . Poe also considered publishing " Metzengerstein " in a collection of stories to be called Phantasy Pieces as " The Horse @-@ Shade " , though the edition was never printed . 
 In its first several publications , " <unk> " included a line about the mother 's death by consumption . The young baron says : " It is a path I have prayed to follow . I would wish all I love to perish of that gentle disease . " When Poe was still a child , his own mother , Eliza Poe , died , presumably of consumption . His wife Virginia also had tuberculosis and died in 1847 . After her death , Poe altered his personal view of fictional heroines who were sick and idealized sick women while wishing for their death . This more romantic view of death was not uncommon in writing , as in John Keats 's " Ode to a Nightingale " , which may have inspired Poe . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Though not explicitly stated , it is implied that the horse is really Berlifitzing . The first paragraph of the story references metempsychosis , the belief that the soul of a person is transferred to another living being upon death . Other evidence is the tapestry , the lack of a history or recognition in the horse and , certainly , the prophecy referencing the immortality of the <unk> . The story can be read as an allegory , a warning that a human soul can be overtaken by the evil it has created , though Poe himself doesn 't suggest such a moral . Such evil can be created by a person 's hatred and pride . 
 Poe imitates many traditional " Germanic " elements in this tale . The most obvious example is the gloomy old castle , typical of Gothic fiction . The story also includes typical Gothic themes , which scholar Dawn <unk> refers to as " hints at secret obsessions and sins , foreboding prophecies , family rivalry " . These Gothic conventions had been a staple of popular fiction in Europe and the United States for several decades by the time Poe utilized them . Considering the subtitle , " A Tale in Imitation of the German " , critics and scholars disagree if Poe may have , in fact , intended the story as a satire or burlesque of the genre , purposely exaggerating the elements of the Gothic to be humorous . Other evidence is that all of the other three stories Poe published in 1832 ( " The Duc de l <unk> " , " A Tale of Jerusalem " , and " Bon @-@ Bon " ) are comic tales written , as Poe said , " intended for half banter , half satire " . The story also uses irony as a form of humor : Despite the family 's prophecy that " the mortality of Metzengerstein shall triumph over the immortality of Berlifitzing " , the opposite occurs . The suggestion that " Metzengerstein " is purposefully written as a satire has been disputed , especially because of Poe 's revisions throughout its many <unk> where he removed some of the more exaggerated material . 
 The German or , more generally , European overtones give the story a medieval setting , though the time and place of the plot is left indistinct . The atmosphere of the story combines both realistic and supernatural worlds while depicting pathological emotional states , likely influenced by the works of Ludwig Tieck and E. T. A. Hoffmann . It has been called a precursor to " The Fall of the House of Usher " and other later works . Among the elements Poe first uses in " Metzengerstein " which will become typical in his later works are the decaying and gloomy building with oddly shaped rooms , the remote , secluded property , vivid colors , and underground vaults as well as themes of vengeance and the overwhelming power of evil . Future works will also depict characters of extreme wealth ; besides Metzengerstein , other examples are Roderick Usher , the narrator in " Ligeia " and Legrand 's restored fortune in " The Gold @-@ Bug " . Poe also uses teeth as a symbol for the first time in " Metzengerstein " . The horse 's teeth are described as " sepulchral and disgusting " . Poe would later use teeth as a sign of mortality , as in lips writhing about the teeth of the mesmerized man in " The Facts in the Case of M. Valdemar " , the sound of grating teeth in " Hop @-@ Frog " , and the obsession over teeth in " Berenice " . Death by fire would later be reused in Poe 's story " Hop @-@ Frog " as another punishment . Though Poe was emulating popular horror fiction of the time , " Metzengerstein " shows what made Poe 's horror tales stand out : rather than focusing on blood and gore , he explored the minds of the characters to better understand them . 
 The story has some autobiographical overtones as well , with the castle representing Moldavia , the Richmond home of Poe 's foster @-@ father John Allan . The Count , in this reading , would represent John Allan , and Poe the young Metzengerstein . Both Poe and Metzengerstein are orphaned at a young age . Poe may have found writing the story therapeutic ; in it , he destroys " John Allan " , though he is also destroyed in return . In focusing on the final fire scene , Poe may have been recalling the fatal Richmond Theatre fire of December 1811 which occurred three weeks after his mother , the actress Eliza Poe , had died . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The German nature of " Metzengerstein " and other stories in the collection Tales of the Grotesque and Arabesque was mentioned in a review by Joseph C. Neal in the Pennsylvanian on December 6 , 1839 : " These grotesque and arabesque delineations are full of variety , now irresistibly quaint and droll , and again marked with all the deep and painful interest of the German school " . Rudyard Kipling was an admirer of Poe and once wrote , " My own personal debt to Poe is a heavy one " . " Metzengerstein " was an inspiration to his story " The Phantom Rickshaw " , where the main character is punished by the horse of someone he has murdered . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 " Metzengerstein " was adapted into one component of Roger Vadim 's Histoires <unk> in 1968 . The segment starred Jane Fonda and Peter Fonda . Romanian composer Joan Balan wrote a musical score for piano in 1934 based on the story called Das <unk> . 
 Italian singer Lord Vampyr , famous for his work with Theatres des Vampires , has a song named " Metzengerstein " , present in his 2010 album Horror Masterpiece . Its lyrics heavily allude to the tale . 
 = Ace ( video game ) = 
 Ace ( stylized as ACE as acronym for Air Combat Emulator ) is a flight simulator video game developed by Cascade Games for various home computers released in 1985 . In @-@ game , the player takes the role a fighter jet pilot defending an English coastland against an enemy invasion , having to fight off aerial , ground and naval forces while Allied bases evacuate . The display shows the plane 's instrumentation and cockpit view . 
 The game was well @-@ received and , despite various issues , it was lauded by critics as one of the best air combat simulators of the time and particularly praised for its accessible gameplay . The game was developed with low budget by the small UK @-@ based Cascade Games , who later produced two sequels to the game . 
 = = Narrative = = 
 The game is set on the Southern coastland of England during an enemy invasion against the remaining Allied forces . The player takes the role of a fighter plane pilot , who must defeat the invasion . To accomplish this , the player pilots one of the three available Mark 2 @.@ 1 <unk> ( All @-@ Weather All @-@ Terrain ) combat aircraft and is charged with defending the last three Allied airbases being evacuated in front of the enemy 's advance . Despite being the lone defender and greatly outnumbered , they must fight enemy forces on all fronts : aerial , ground and naval . The player progresses through the game engaging different contingents of the invaders . Initially , they must intercept enemy fighter planes , helicopters and landing ground forces , including tanks , land bases and SAM sites . Once the enemy is sufficiently driven back , the player can engage the naval fleet . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 At the start of the game , the player is presented with a range of options that determine the experience . The game offers nine selectable levels of difficulty , including a tutorial difficulty in which the enemy forces do not fire back . Among the options , the player can choose to play either in summer or winter time and either daytime or nighttime , altering the scenery . The player must choose from the range of weapons that will be mounted on their <unk> plane . These include air @-@ to @-@ air , air @-@ to @-@ ground , air @-@ to @-@ sea and multipurpose missiles , depending on what enemies the player chooses to engage . In addition , the plane is equipped with a machine gun and decoy flares against hostile missiles . 
 In @-@ game screen shows the cockpit view split between top half for plane 's front view and bottom half for plane 's instrumentation . The control panel shows planes crucial data , including speed , altitude , thrust , fuel , roll / pitch indicators and a compass . The panel also features a radar that provided an overview of important nearby objects . An onboard screen displays various flight information and warning messages , and features a speech synthesizer that occasionally announces dangers , such as approaching enemies or missile attacks . Finally , a small rear @-@ view camera allows the player to observe enemies and missiles on their tail . The game also features a two player mode , where one player flies the plane and the other aims and fires the guns . 
 At the start of the game , the player has to take off the runway at an Allied base . Afterwards they can fly around and look for enemies to engage . The player can open their Satellite Intelligence Map , which shows a live map of the immediate coastline with items of interest , such as , friendly bases , enemy positions , and refuelling locations . The player can perform various flight manoeuvres and stunts mid @-@ air , such are loops , rolls , or dummy stalls . Flying , especially at high altitudes , spends the plane 's fuel and the player must either return to their base or perform an aerial refueling . To refuel mid @-@ air , the player has to rendezvous with a refuelling plane at the specified coordinates and perform a boom and receptacle refuelling manoeuvre . 
 The game ends in defeat if the player crashes , runs out of fuel , or is shot down by taking too much damage . The player can also eject , but can only do so safely over Allied territory . The player is victorious if they defeat all enemy forces . During the game , points are awarded and displayed in the control panel for destroyed enemies and on game end tallied up in a high score table . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 The game was developed by Cascade Games founded in 1983 by Guy Wilhelmy and Nigel Stevens . Wilhelmy had a pilot 's license and had experience with aircraft control and responsiveness , while Stevens ' father had been in British Royal Air Force . Wilhelmy explained that he wanted to create a fast @-@ paced flying game with responsive graphics that other games of the time struggled with . Cascade hired programmer Ian Martin and graphics designer Damon Redmond to work on the project in 1985 . The first version known as <unk> : Air Combat Emulator was released in 1985 for the Commodore 16 and VIC @-@ 20 home computers . Martin describes that an advertisement erroneously promising a Plus / 4 version forced them to develop it under threat of action by Advertising Standards Agency . 
 Martin recalls that afterwards the team had creative freedom to pursue different ideas for the planned Commodore 64 version , and after several months of development and a small delay , the C64 version called simply ACE was released in September 1985 . ZX Spectrum version followed the next year . An Amstrad CPC version was announced and Cascade Games promised a quick delivery with " speed and smoothness exceeding previous simulators " . Having sold over half a million copies on 8 @-@ bit machines , the game 's port was announced for Amiga . <unk> was tasked with porting the game to Amstrad PCW and Amiga / DOS . The game was marketed to America , and the C64 and Amiga versions were released and published in US by <unk> in 1986 . 
 Before the release of Ace , Cascade Games was infamous for their Cassette 50 ( 1983 ) game compilation that featured simplistic and subpar games . Stevens points out that without the income from the compilation , the project would not have been possible . The developers estimate the production cost of Ace at £ 40k . Following the release of Ace , Cascade moved into mainstream AAA game development . Wilhelmy says that Cascade boasted over a million GBP in turnover over the following years . The company produced two sequels Ace 2 ( 1987 ) and ACE <unk> ( 1989 ) and various other games before closing down in 1990 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The first version for C16 and Plus / 4 received positive reviews . Commodore Horizons awarded 8 stars to gameplay , describing it is " as good as anything " within the C16 's limitations . Commodore User noted the C16 version for fast , but involved action . Their review of Plus / 4 described it similarly , and called it one of the best dedicated Plus / 4 games , only giving sound a lower score . Computer Gamer gave both the C16 and Plus / 4 version 5 out of 5 stars and described Ace as easy to use and understand . They later noted that Plus / 4 version was the best yet among the available platforms . Your Commodore criticized the Plus / 4 version for poor innovation , but scored it highly on gameplay and graphics , describing them as " realistic " . 
 The expanded C64 and Spectrum ZX versions received the highest critic attention and praise on release . Zzap ! 64 rated Ace 90 % and described it as the most exciting flight simulator on C64 to date . They noted good instruction , many available options , and easy controls . Computer and Video Games rated C64 version very positively , awarding gameplay 9 / 10 points calling it the new title for the best of flight simulators . They described it as very well presented with a clear layout . Commodore User lauded Ace for having found the right balance between simulation and action . Crash rated it 81 % , criticizing quite sound and calling out the graphics and overall quality as average for the genre . Sinclair User awarded the game 5 / 5 stars and praised the game 's intentionally accessible gameplay as the high point . They felt the environment graphics were not great , while important objects and effects stood out well . Your Sinclair gave the game 8 / 10 noting it as unrealistic for a simulator , however easy to get into and addictive . Your Computer gave Ace 4 / 5 points calling it a simulation that would appeal to arcade players . However , they gave the sound 1 / 5 points . ZX Computing review labeled it a " monster hit " and called it a quality flying experience praising good sound , excellent graphics with use of horizon line , and well @-@ defined objects . 
 Several reviewers regarded Ace as one of the best available flight simulators of the time . Overall , the critics agreed that the game 's arcade @-@ like gameplay was easy to get into and play , but ultimately difficult to master and challenging to finish . Reviewers also negatively remarked upon the inclusion of Lenslok copy protection system where the game would display a garbled image and the player would need to use the provided colored lens to view the two @-@ letter code . ZX Computing and Computer Gamer reviewers had trouble getting it to work and pass . Retro Gamer called it " notorious Lenslok " in retrospect . 
 Computer Gamer gave the Amstrad version 85 % , praising the gameplay and graphics . They noted that it was an approachable flight simulator that can be played without reading the manual . Amstrad Action rated this version at 54 % calling it challenging , but lacking in action . They described environmental detail and fighting as the high points , but criticized sound as poor and graphics as slow . 
 The game was later sold at bargain prices , bundled with Ace 2 and received several retrospect reviews . Commodore User rated the C64 bargain game 8 / 10 comparing it more to aerial combat simulator than just a flight simulator . They noted plenty of gameplay and some simulation to keep the player occupied . Computer and Video Games awarded the game 90 % for C64 and 87 % for Spectrum version praising the game and describing it as " essential purchase " . Zzap ! 64 gave Ace 67 % and felt that , while the original reviewer 's opinions held true , the game did not stand up to time , with graphics being tacky and sparse and having programming issues . Commodore Force later gave the game 57 % and noted that , although receiving praise during release , its lacking gameplay did not age well . On the other hand , Commodore Format gave the game 3 / 4 points and lauded the game even by 1991 's standards . While they noted simple start , they also noted good graphics , fast @-@ paced gameplay with superb dogfights and basic simulation . Commodore Format rated the Ace and Ace 2 bundle at 89 % calling it an " indisputable bargain " . They praised the fast and uncluttered gameplay with simple objectives , while remarked that the graphics were not the best . Your Commodore rated the bundle 87 / 100 describing the bundle as closer to arcade games rather than flight simulators , concluding that they were good games " with a few bugs " . 
 = 2015 United States Grand Prix = 
 The 2015 United States Grand Prix ( formally known as the 2015 Formula 1 United States Grand Prix ) was a Formula One motor race that took place on 25 October 2015 . The race was contested over fifty @-@ six laps and held at the Circuit of the Americas . It was the sixteenth round of the 2015 season and marked the thirty @-@ seventh time that the United States Grand Prix was run as a round of the World Championship since its inception in 1950 , and the fourth time that the event was hosted at this circuit . 
 Lewis Hamilton was the defending race winner and entered with a 66 @-@ point lead in the Drivers ' Championship over Sebastian Vettel of Ferrari , with Hamilton 's Mercedes teammate Nico Rosberg a further seven points behind . The three @-@ day event was run in torrential conditions ; as a result , the second practice session and the final qualifying session were cancelled , while the whole of qualifying was delayed until the morning of the race day . 
 Hamilton won the race , passing Nico Rosberg in the later stages , and thereby secured his third Drivers ' Championship , as Sebastian Vettel finished third . An incident @-@ packed race saw only twelve cars reach the finish line , with Max Verstappen repeating his best result of the season in fourth and Jenson Button finishing a season @-@ best sixth . After starting in damp conditions , both Red Bull drivers were initially able to challenge the Mercedes for the lead , but later dropped back as the track dried , with Daniil Kvyat retiring after a crash and Daniel Ricciardo eventually finishing tenth . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Alexander Rossi became the first American to drive in the United States Grand Prix at the Circuit of the Americas , returning to Manor Marussia after Roberto Merhi had raced for them in Russia . The Sauber team celebrated their 400th Grand Prix in Formula One . The weather was forecast to be wet all weekend , with especially treacherous conditions on Friday afternoon and Saturday , while the race day itself was expected to be slightly less wet . 
 Fernando Alonso ran a new power unit in his McLaren over the weekend , one that he had already used once during practice for the previous race in Russia , having taken the grid penalty for it there . Teammate Jenson Button hoped for Alonso to " annihilate " him , adding : " It 's unusual to say that , but in our situation it 's about getting it on the car . " McLaren also introduced new aerodynamic parts to their cars for the Grand Prix . Both Sebastian Vettel and Kimi Räikkönen of Ferrari needed to exchange their power units . Having already used the allowed four units for the season , both drivers received ten @-@ place grid penalties . Manor Marussia 's Will Stevens was placed back twenty grid spots for a change of his engine , turbocharger and MGU @-@ H unit . Renault used eleven of their twelve remaining token for changes to their power unit . However , both customer teams , Red Bull and Toro Rosso chose not to run with the update , saying its performance advantage was not worth taking the grid penalties . Both Red Bull and McLaren used new front wings , emulating a concept introduced by Mercedes supposed to create more downforce by directing the airflow towards the outside of the front tyres . Similar changes were made by Ferrari to their SF15 @-@ T. In preparation for the effects of the high altitude in Mexico , Mercedes added two " ears " at the top of the airbox in order to improve cooling to the Energy Recovery System of their power unit . 
 The race used the same two DRS zones as previous races at the track . The first was between turns eleven and twelve , and the second on the start / finish straight between turns twenty and one . Pirelli supplied teams with the white @-@ banded medium tyre as the prime compound and the yellow @-@ banded soft tyre as the option selection , with the manufacturer citing the characteristics of the circuit with " a wide range of corners and elevations " as the reason the two middle compounds were chosen . 
 Coming into the weekend , Mercedes had already secured the Constructors ' Championship , having done so at the previous race in Russia . Ferrari was in second place on 359 points , 139 points ahead of Williams . In the Drivers ' Championship , Lewis Hamilton led with 302 points , 66 ahead of Sebastian Vettel and 73 ahead of his teammate , Nico Rosberg . This meant that Hamilton would be able to win the title with three races to spare , as long as he gathered nine points more than Vettel and two more than Rosberg at the Grand Prix . 
 = = = Free practice = = = 
 Per the regulations for the 2015 season , three practice sessions were scheduled , two 1 @.@ 5 @-@ hour sessions on Friday and another one @-@ hour session before qualifying on Saturday . However , with treacherous weather conditions including flood warnings , the second practice session was cancelled due to heavy rain and a thunderstorm . The other two practice session were run in wet conditions . 
 Nico Rosberg topped the timesheets on Friday , ahead of the two Red Bull cars of Daniil Kvyat and Daniel Ricciardo . The session started on a very wet track , but with no more rain falling , it dried out as the practice progressed , with drivers soon switching to intermediate tyres . Lewis Hamilton was fifth fastest , behind Carlos Sainz , Jr .. Despite going off the track late in the session , Fernando Alonso was ninth fastest in the McLaren with the new power unit . A gearbox problem meant that Pastor Maldonado was unable to take to the track , while at Sauber , Raffaele Marciello replaced Felipe Nasr , ending the session three tenths of a second quicker than teammate Marcus Ericsson . 
 The practice session on Saturday was run without spectators to ensure their safety . On track , Lewis Hamilton was fastest , ahead of his closest championship rival Sebastian Vettel . With conditions worsening over the course of the session , Vettel spun out twice . Max Verstappen ended the session last , while Force India 's Nico Hülkenberg was third , ahead of Valtteri Bottas and Sainz . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Inclement weather continued to disrupt the Saturday 's proceedings as qualifying was delayed multiple times before being ultimately rescheduled for Sunday morning . Many drivers backed the decision , with Jenson Button saying : " It was the right thing to do [ ... ] . In one respect , maybe if we decided three hours earlier it would have been better for the fans . But we wanted to get out there and drive and put on a show . Delaying it every half an hour was the way it had to be . " During the waiting period on Saturday , many teams had engaged in tomfoolery in the paddock to entertain the crowds , such as bowling or ballroom dancing between Red Bull teammates Daniel Ricciardo and Daniil Kvyat . Ferrari later condemned the behaviour of their fellow teams , with team principal Maurizio Arrivabene saying : " We are a Formula One team , not the Cirque du Soleil . " Kimi Räikkönen backed him , stating : " I think this is F1 and not the circus . The people are obviously not happy when we 're not running but we cannot make them happy with whatever we do apart from running . " 
 Qualifying was scheduled to consist of three parts , 18 , 15 and 12 minutes in length respectively , with five drivers eliminated from competing after each of the first two sessions . The first part of qualifying ( Q1 ) was disrupted after a little more than five minutes , when Sainz crashed at turn four , bringing out red flags . Due to the prospect of worsening rain and the chance that qualifying could be brought to an end by the weather at any point , the teams fought for grid positions early on , with Lewis Hamilton , Nico Rosberg and Daniel Ricciardo setting the fastest times . Apart from Sainz , both Manor Marussia drivers were eliminated , along with the two Sauber cars of Marcus Ericsson and Felipe Nasr . Sebastian Vettel , after making contact with a barrier , finished Q1 in fifteenth place , barely making it into Q2 . 
 In Q2 , lap times improved and the two Mercedes drivers led the way , with Rosberg a little over a tenth of a second ahead of teammate Hamilton . Fernando Alonso went faster than Valtteri Bottas and looked to make it into Q3 , when Max Verstappen went faster and eliminated the McLaren driver . Also not in the top ten were both Lotus and the second McLaren of Jenson Button . Conditions soon worsened , preventing faster lap times . Many drivers spun out in the latter part of the session , complaining about aquaplaning . 
 With more rain falling , the decision was made to cancel the third part of qualifying and use the results of Q2 to determine the grid . Therefore , Nico Rosberg secured his third consecutive pole position , ahead of Hamilton , Ricciardo , and Daniil Kvyat . Fifth fastest was Sebastian Vettel for Ferrari , but his grid penalty meant that the third row on the grid was made up by the two Force India cars of Sergio Pérez and Nico Hülkenberg respectively . The penalties for both Ferraris saw Fernando Alonso move up to ninth on the grid , the highest grid position for McLaren at that point of the season . Following his third pole in a row , Rosberg said he wanted to win the race " really badly " , after being passed by Hamilton in Japan and retiring from the Russian Grand Prix whilst in the lead . Sainz required permission from the stewards to start the race , after failing to set a time within 107 % of Ricciardo 's fastest lap in Q1 . He was later allowed to start and did so after his team was able to repair his car in time for the start . Following a gearbox change , Valtteri Bottas received a five @-@ place grid penalty , moving him from eleventh to sixteenth on the grid . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 While the rain had stopped come race time , the track was still wet and slippery and all drivers opted to start on intermediate tyres . Hamilton got away better at the start , entering the first corner alongside pole @-@ sitter Rosberg and , by forcing the German wide , took the lead exiting turn one . Getting off track saw Rosberg lose additional positions , running fifth behind Hamilton , Kvyat , Ricciardo and Pérez . Further back , a collision involved Alonso , Massa , the two Saubers of Ericsson and Nasr as well as Bottas , who pitted after the first lap , as did Nasr , who was the first to fit slick tyres , as the track was starting to dry . Will Stevens was touched from behind by teammate Alexander Rossi , breaking his rear wing and forcing him to retire . Having started from the back of the grid , Carlos Sainz profited from the incidents and was up to tenth by the end of the first lap . While Rosberg soon took back fourth from Pérez , Hamilton in front came under pressure from Kvyat , with the Red Bulls running fast in the damp conditions . With Kvyat just half a second behind the championship leader , a virtual safety car period was declared on lap five to clear the debris from the first corner incident . On lap 7 , Valtteri Bottas retired with a damper failure caused by the turn one contact . When the virtual safety car ended on lap 8 , Rosberg made an immediate move on Ricciardo to move into third , overtaking Kvyat for second on the same lap . Romain Grosjean became another victim of the accident on lap one , when he came into the pits for a second time on lap 12 and retired . By the same time , Sebastian Vettel had moved up into sixth place from thirteenth on the grid . Up front , Kvyat went wide while trying to overtake Rosberg , allowing teammate Ricciardo through into third ; Ricciardo in turn made a successful manoeuvre on Rosberg to move up into second . 
 A battle for the lead developed between Hamilton and Ricciardo , until the Australian moved around Hamilton on lap 15 . With the grip of the intermediate tyres deteriorating , there were many overtaking manoeuvres on track . Rosberg unsuccessfully tried to overtake teammate Hamilton for second on lap 16 , while Verstappen took sixth place from Vettel one lap later , only to run wide and lose the position again . On lap 18 , Rosberg moved ahead of Hamilton , who was the first of the front runners to change tyres at the end of the lap , going for a dry compound . The other frontrunners followed suit over the next couple of laps . Following the pit stops , Ricciardo led from Rosberg , Kvyat and Hamilton . The two Mercedes drivers moved ahead of their respective Red Bull rivals on laps 22 and 23 , while Vettel , now in fifth , closed on the leading quartet . On lap 24 , he reached Kvyat and overtook him for fourth , while Nico Rosberg extended his lead to Ricciardo to nine seconds by lap 25 . Hamilton took second place from Ricciardo one lap later . At the same time , Kimi Räikkönen was forced to retire . So had Massa on lap 24 , suffering the same problem that had forced his teammate to stop . 
 On lap 27 , Marcus Ericsson 's Sauber came to a halt on track , bringing out the proper safety car . At this halfway point of the race , the order stood as : Rosberg , Hamilton , Ricciardo , Kvyat , Verstappen , as Vettel used the safety car period for a tyre change , moving him back into sixth . When the safety car pulled into pit lane at the end of lap 32 , Vettel was back in fifth after Verstappen had also pitted for new tyres . The German moved ahead into fourth at Kvyat 's expense into turn one at the restart and went on to overtake the other Red Bull of Ricciardo some turns later . However , Ricciardo fought back to regain the place in the next corner . Vettel was able to make the move stick going into turn one on the subsequent lap . Meanwhile , Kvyat was further demoted when Verstappen moved ahead into fifth , followed by Hülkenberg . On lap 35 , Verstappen overtook the second Red Bull of Ricciardo to move into fourth . When Nico Hülkenberg attempted to do the same one lap later , he and Ricciardo collided , forcing the German to retire . Ricciardo was able to continue , but was overtaken by his teammate , with Jenson Button behind in seventh place . When another virtual safety car period was declared to clear Hülkenberg 's car , Rosberg decided to pit , moving him back to fourth behind Hamilton , Vettel and Verstappen . By lap 40 , when the safety car period was over , Rosberg was up into third at the expense of Verstappen , while Alonso moved up several places into sixth , with teammate Button in fifth . Running on newer tyres , Rosberg was able to overtake Vettel on lap 42 . 
 One lap later , Daniil Kvyat suffered a heavy impact at the penultimate corner , causing another safety car period . Both Hamilton and Vettel used this to change tyres again , as did Button on lap 45 . The safety car came back in at the end of lap 46 , with the order being : Rosberg , Hamilton , Verstappen , Vettel , Alonso , Pérez , Button and Maldonado . At the restart , Verstappen tried to move past Hamilton but failed and was in turn overtaken by Vettel . On lap 48 , Nico Rosberg lost the lead to Hamilton after sliding off track due to wheelspin in his rear tyres . The German later declared that his mistake was caused by a strong gust of wind . Hamilton soon opened up a gap to his teammate , while Jenson Button moved up into sixth ahead of Alonso on lap 50 , but lost the position again to Sainz before the end of the race . His teammate Alonso had been running fifth , but a loss of power from his engine moved him down the order to eventually finish eleventh . In the closing laps , Vettel edged closer to Rosberg in second , but was unable to overtake . This meant that Hamilton , who crossed the line as race winner , also took his third career championship title , with both Vettel and Rosberg now too far behind . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 At the podium interviews , conducted by Elton John , Nico Rosberg expressed his disappointment at the outcome of the race . He had visibly vented his anger in the cool down room , when he was seen throwing his podium cap at Lewis Hamilton , an incident he later played down as " just our typical games " . Sebastian Vettel on the other hand was delighted with his performance , saying that the team had " exceeded all expectations " . Newly crowned world champion Hamilton called his third title " the greatest moment of my life " , thanking his father and his family for their support . Comparing the title win to his two previous ones , he said : " the last two times were really climactic in the last race . This one still feels just as special if not more special [ ... ] . It has kind of topped last year for me – it 's equalling Ayrton [ Senna ] " . He described equalling his idol 's title tally as " a very humbling experience " , saying that he felt " very blessed " . However , more friction appeared at Mercedes , when Nico Rosberg called Hamilton 's manoeuvre at the start " very , very aggressive " . Hamilton in turn said of the incident : " It was very close with Nico at the beginning . It wasn 't intentional . We both braked deep and there is no grip there and he was turning and I wasn 't turning . " The team 's executive director Toto Wolff said that the incident would need to be discussed , a notion dismissed by Hamilton , who said : " There is no need . Everyone has a right to an opinion but it doesn 't matter . I won the race . " 
 Manor Marussia 's Alexander Rossi was delighted with his result in twelfth , feeling that it could be " the start of great things " , after he had equalled the team 's best result of the season . Daniel Ricciardo called for the FIA to clear up the regulations of the virtual safety car , following him being overtaken easily at the first restart by Nico Rosberg , saying that he had not gotten a warning about the end of the period . Kimi Räikkönen was equally displeased , complaining about the rules concerning driving standards . Following his on @-@ track battle with Max Verstappen , he demanded clarification on whether Verstappen 's aggressive driving style was legal , saying : " I just wanted to ask if it 's OK when you are next to another car , at some point on the exit of the corner are you allowed to always push the other car up on the kerbs [ ... ] . Apparently it 's fine . As long as everybody has the same rules that 's OK . " Concerning the collision between Nico Hülkenberg and Ricciardo , Force India revealed that damage to Hülkenberg 's front wing had caused him to lose downforce and slide into the Red Bull . Following the turn one collision between their two drivers , Sauber 's team principal Monisha Kaltenborn announced that she intended to " have a word " with her drivers , saying : " The bottom line of this is that these kind of things simply must not happen . It is OK if you have decent and healthy competition which they do – both drivers are respectful to each other . [ ... ] I 'm upset . These mistakes shouldn 't happen . We are much better than this . " 
 Following the Grand Prix , Bobby Epstein , chairman of the Circuit of the Americas spoke of a " tough weekend " for the organisers . According to Epstein , the weekend had been " financially devastating [ ... ] for the company " that runs the track . This was caused in large parts by the weather conditions over the weekend , while the return of the Mexican Grand Prix also played a role . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ 1 – Due to heavy rain and aquaplaning on track during Q2 , Q3 was cancelled with all positions being taken from Q2 times . ^ 2 – Sebastian Vettel and Kimi Räikkönen both received ten @-@ place grid penalties for using an additional power unit . ^ 3 – Valtteri Bottas received a five @-@ place grid penalty for a gearbox change after qualifying . ^ 4 – Will Stevens received a twenty @-@ place grid penalty for various changes to his power unit , but was not placed back on the grid due to Sainz Jr. not setting a timed lap . ^ 5 – Carlos Sainz , Jr. failed to set a lap time within 107 % of the fastest time set in Q1 ; he was later permitted to race by the stewards . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ 1 – Carlos Sainz , Jr. finished sixth but had five seconds added to his race time for speeding in the pit lane . 
 = = = Championship standings after the race = = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 Bold text indicates 2015 World Champions 
 = Saskatchewan Highway 11 = 
 Highway 11 is a major north @-@ south highway in Saskatchewan , Canada that connects the province 's three largest cities : Regina , Saskatoon and Prince Albert . It is a structural pavement major arterial highway which is approximately 406 kilometres ( 252 mi ) long . It is also known as the Louis Riel Trail ( LRT ) after the 19th century Métis leader . It runs from Highway 6 north of Regina until Highway 2 south of Prince Albert . Historically the southern portion between Regina and Saskatoon was Provincial Highway 11 , and followed the Dominion Survey lines on the square , and the northern portion between Saskatoon and Prince Albert was Provincial Highway 12 . 
 From Regina to Saskatoon , Highway 11 is a four @-@ lane divided highway except in the village of Chamberlain , where the road narrows to two lanes through the community , including its intersection with Highway 2 south to Moose Jaw . All intersections in this segment are at @-@ grade except for the section from Regina to Lumsden and in Saskatoon . Highway 11 passes through Saskatoon , following the south leg of Circle Drive , the Idylwyld Freeway and Idylwyld Drive through the city , including its downtown . Motorists seeking to bypass downtown Saskatoon can follow the northeast Circle Drive bypass , although this is not officially part of Highway 11 . 
 North of Saskatoon , the road continues as a four @-@ lane highway past the communities of Warman , Osler , Hague , Rosthern and Duck Lake . Highway 11 then runs through the Nisbet Provincial Forest and past the hamlet of MacDowall before it reaches its northern terminus with Highway 2 approximately 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) south of Prince Albert . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Regina and Sherwood No. 159 = = = 
 The route starts off in Regina , the capital of the province . Hwy 11 begins at the junction with the Trans Canada Highway as a 7 km ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) concurrency with Hwy 6 . Besides being the provincial capital , Regina is a cultural and commercial metropole for both southern Saskatchewan and adjacent areas in the neighbouring American states of North Dakota and Montana . Hwy 11 begins in a moist mixed grassland region known as the Regina Plain ecoregion . <unk> Regina , a North American steel company formerly known as <unk> , is located in the Sherwood Industrial Park ( SIP ) north of Regina . The final chapter for the namesake of the Louis Riel Trail occurred in Regina . It was here that Métis leader Louis Riel was tried and hung on September 18 , 1885 for treason . In the spring of 2008 , Tourism , Parks , Culture and Sport Minister Christine Tell proclaimed in Duck Lake , that " the 125th commemoration , in 2010 , of the 1885 Northwest Resistance is an excellent opportunity to tell the story of the prairie Métis and First Nations peoples ' struggle with Government forces and how it has shaped Canada today . " The length of the route is an asphalt concrete primary weight highway which is part of the national highway system ( NHS ) The Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure ( SHS ) South Central Planning Committee manages the construction and maintenance of the highway near Regina which handles approximately 11 @,@ 000 vehicles per day ( VPD ) in the Average Annual Daily Traffic ( AADT ) count . 
 = = = Lumsden No. 189 = = = 
 Hwy 11 branches to the northwest from Hwy 6 ( Albert Street ) at Regina 's north end and intersects Pasqua Street before reaching the city limits . Once out of Regina , it then passes the junction of Hwy 734 . A steep decline begins into the Qu 'Appelle Valley meeting Hwy 20 and Lumsden at the lowest depression the bridge over the Qu 'appelle River . The village of Lumsden was created in 1890 in conjunction with the coming of the CNR . When Saskatchewan became a province the Local Improvement District was formed , becoming the Rural Municipality of Lumsden No. 189 in 1912 . One of the many administrative concerns of the RM was road construction and maintenance . The Qu 'Appelle Valley provides a scenic route as the LRT traverses the Qu 'Appelle River . Lumsden Historical Museum , The town of Lumsden , located on the Qu 'Appelle River is at the bottom of the valley . The AADT within the valley declines to over 7 @,@ 000 VPD after Lumsden . The northern hill out of the Qu 'appelle Valley meets the intersection of Hwy 54 , which provides access to Regina Beach on Long Lake . ( Last Mountain Lake ) . The Arm River Plain is well @-@ suited to agricultural venture and <unk> , red fox , and jack rabbit may be spotted . There are archaeological sites along the Arm River Valley including a bison kill site and also in this area <unk> Buffalo ( <unk> <unk> ) along with varieties of sedge are flora of special concern . The SHS Central Planning Transportation Committee manages the route from here to just south of Saskatoon . 
 = = = Dufferin No. 190 = = = 
 The LRT continues west for another 11 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 9 mi ) before turning north west . The Hwy 642 intersection features the small hamlet of Bethune , Saskatchewan to the north and Hwy 354 . There is a picnic area north of Bethune . In the Allan Hills is the village of Findlater with 49 residents on the south side of the LRT , and picnic site on the north . In 2 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) is the northbound turnoff for Hwy 2 to Prince Albert . This commences the 11 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 2 mi ) concurrency with Hwy 2 into the town of Chamberlain . 
 = = = Sarnia No. 221 = = = 
 Chamberlain , a village of 108 residents is at the intersection of the LRT , Hwy 2 south to Moose Jaw , and Hwy 733 . A Surveyor and Ox Cart created by Davidson welder , farmer and sculptor Don Wilkins was erected in <unk> are two sculptures A large sculpture of the prairie flower Prairie Lilies is also erected at Chamberlain . 
 North of Chamberlain is a picnic stop area on the west side of the highway and in another 14 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 9 mi ) is an unincorporated area of Aylesbury . This hamlet commemorates the LRT history with an Ox and Red River Cart sculpture by Don Wilkins located southwest of the LRT near the town entrance . The <unk> Community Coalition erected this statue in 1999 . Near the highway turn off at Aylesbury is a cemetery located on a hill near Lake Alexander . The Piping Plover ( Charadrius <unk> <unk> ) is an endangered species of this area . Residents are also enumerated in census Division No. 6 . 
 = = = Craik No. 222 = = = 
 Another 13 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 5 mi ) is the intersection of the LRT with Hwy 732 . Hwy 732 is a paved road which travels through the <unk> Creek Valley . In 3 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 1 mi ) is the intersection with Hwy 643 where Craik is nestled within the triangle made by these three highways , Hwy 643 , Hwy 732 and Hwy 11 . Craik & District Regional Park are located 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) north east of Craik . 
 The buffalo hunter with buffalo gun and Red River cart sculptures made by Don Wilkins , President of the LRT Association , are erected at Craik . " Red River Cart First used in the Red River area to bring in meat from the buffalo hunt , the Red River Cart was later used in freighting . Constructed entirely of wood and tied together with leather , these carts were extremely stable and would be drawn through mud and marsh , floated and carried loads of 500 to 1000 pounds . " The Craik Sustainable Living Project ( <unk> ) Eco @-@ Centre and “ dugout house ” a typical 19th century living quarters can be toured with Pelican Eco @-@ Tours . The park features Arm Lake which is the reservoir created from damming the Squaw Valley Creek which used to run from the Qu 'Appelle River in the Eyebrow Hills north east just south of Davidson . The Arm River Valley is visible north of Chamberlain and continues to run parallel to the LRT from Bethune to Craik . Craik and District Golf Course is a 9 hole green golf course 1 / 2 mile east of the LRT . Craik has been sponsoring development and education about “ ecovillages ” , sustainable housing development . 
 = = = Arm River No. 252 = = = 
 In a distance of 12 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 6 mi ) is the small village of <unk> at the Hwy 749 which features The Buffalo ( and Red River Cart ) sculpture , the first piece made by Don Wilkins and features the buffalo a vital part of the fur trading and Métis life in the 18th and 19th centuries . " Spirit of the Plain This work is intended as a symbolic tribute to those peoples , native and non @-@ native , past and present , who have found harmony under the prairie sky and achieved a calm rhythm with the natural forces of this great land ... " 
 Davidson , a town of over 950 residents is the halfway point between Saskatoon and Regina . Ditto the giant coffee pot and coffee cup in Davidson were erected in 1996 offering hospitality and a cup of coffee at the halfway rest stop . 
 The Métis Fiddler and Oxcart statue were erected at Davidson in tribute to the LRT designation and the history of the métis . The <unk> Creek begins at Davidson and winds south to the Qu 'Appelle Valley west of <unk> and Craik . A large white house erected in 1904 by Wells family north of Davidson and can be seen from the LRT . Davidson Golf & Country Club is 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of the town of Davidson on the LRT and provides 9 @-@ hole grass greens . Davidson Campground and Swimming Pool is located near the golf course . This area is a part of the 
 Saskatoon — Biggar Economic Region and the Mid Sask Rural Economic Development Authority ( REDA ) . Between the Qu 'appelle Valley and the town of Dundurn on either side of Davidson , the AADT is approximately 5 @,@ 000 VPD . 
 = = = Willner No. 253 = = = 
 Traveling another 14 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 1 mi ) northwest is the junction with Allen Road , and following that is the intersection of Knob Hill Road . Townline Road which is south of Bladworth which is a village of 70 residents near the intersecting line between Willner and <unk> rural municipalities . Just 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) north of Bladworth are the Black & Silver Lakes waterfowl nesting areas . The distance between Bladworth and Kenaston is 19 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 12 @.@ 1 mi ) . 
 = = = <unk> No. 282 = = = 
 Bonnington Springs Campground is located at Kenaston . Kenaston was originally named Bonnington Springs and is located at the intersection with Hwy 15 . Kenaston , with the logo Blizzard Capital of Saskatchewan , features a large sculpture of a Snowman built in 1983 , but not visible from the highway . Between Kenaston and Hwy 764 intersection is a length of 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) and the locality of Strong , now just a ghost town . Residents belong to SARM Division No. 5 and are enumerated in Census Division No. 11 which resulted in a population of about 250 Kenaston residents . 
 = = = Rosedale No. 283 = = = 
 Hanley , a town of over 450 , is located at the intersection of Hwy 764 . Hanley erected in 2000 , a stone monument honoring its historic Opera House . At the intersection with Indi Road is a marker in commemoration of Indi Siding . To the west of the road is Indi Lake , and to the east , <unk> Lake which has now become a portion of Blackstrap Lake . It is 8 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 2 mi ) between Indi siding and the intersection of Hwy 211 . 
 = = = Dundurn No. 314 = = = 
 Blackstrap Provincial Park , Blackstrap Lake and Mountain are two man made features to the east of Route 11 near Dundurn , Saskatchewan . The 1971 Canada Winter Games were hosted at this venue which sported ski run and ski jump . Blackstrap Provincial Park can be accessed by turning west onto Hwy 211 . Wilson Museum can be seen on the outskirts of the town of Dundurn from the LRT . Dundurn is a town of approximately 650 which is located at the intersection of Hwy 211 and the AADT is around 6 @,@ 000 VPD . The Bone Gatherer and horse and cart statues are visible from the LRT at Dundurn . Vast quantities of buffalo bones were gathered across the prairie in the last years of the 19th century . The bones were shipped by rail to be made into fertilizer . The huge herds of buffalo roaming the prairie were a thing of the past . " Dundurn . Honoring the Past Striving for a bright future . Dundurn , located in the heartland of the great Northern Bison range was known to buffalo hunters as Round Prairie . Cree , Métis and Dakota Sioux chose the wooded hills of this historic land as a good place to stay . Cattle ranching was [ sic ] established here in 1886 and since then the growth and prosperity of our community has been , to a great extent , dependent on the agricultural sector . The horse drawn Red River car and Bone Picker are reminiscent of an era ending when the skeletal remains of approximately 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 buffalo were gathered in the vicinity of Dundurn and Hanley . The influx of homesteaders , beginning in 1903 , marked a new chapter in our story of progress and continuity . " The Strehlow Road intersection marks the old access road to the locality of Strehlow as well Haultain Road which is the next junction marks the old access road to the locality of Haultain . The former Haultain one room school house site is now located on the Canadian Forces Base Dundurn grounds . 
 Saskatchewan International Raceway is a drag racing venue located along the LRT , 13 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 1 mi ) south of Saskatoon . Another 2 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) along the LRT is the intersection with Floral Road to the east marking the birthplace town of Gordie Howe , and Grasswood Road on the west is at a small commercial area . Between Grasswood and Saskatoon the AADT increases to over 8 @,@ 000 VPD , and the remainder of the route is within the jurisdiction of the SHS North Central Transportation Planning Committee . The Saskatoon Plain section of the moist mixed grassland of dark brown soils is suitable for cereal grains , feed grains and forage crops . 
 = = = Corman Park No. 344 = = = 
 Traveling through Saskatoon from Grasswood Road to the Hwy 16 turn off encompasses 22 @.@ 9 kilometres ( 14 @.@ 2 mi ) and entails going around Saskatoon on Circle Drive . Numerous attractions in Saskatoon , the largest city of Saskatchewan , include the Forestry Farm park and zoo , Mendel Art Gallery , and the <unk> National Heritage Park . The cloverleaf interchange at Circle Drive in Saskatoon was one of the first two SK interchanges which opened in 1967 . " Future site of the Idylwyld Drive and Circle Drive South interchange . This project is funded by the Federal Asia @-@ Pacific Gateway and corridor initiative program and the Province of Saskatchewan . " is the quotation on a sign erected at the future site of the next Circle Drive interchange . After crossing the South Saskatchewan River on the Senator Sid <unk> Bridge ( freeway bridge ) are the end points at Idylwyld Drive North of both Hwy 14 and Hwy 7 along 22nd Street . At 23 Street East , is the end point of Hwy 5 also at the Idylwyld Drive North , LRT concurrency . The 2 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 7 mi ) concurrency with the Yellowhead Highway begins at the intersection with Circle Drive in the north industrial . The end of this concurrency marks the beginning of the next 3 @.@ 0 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) concurrency with Hwy 12 , before the LRT branches off from due north to a north @-@ east direction of travel . 
 At the intersection of Hwy 784 is the city of Warman with over 7 @,@ 000 residents and the AADT is about 10 @,@ 000 VPD . Turning west on Hwy 784 is the <unk> ferry route across the South Saskatchewan River . 
 The town of Osler has 926 residents and is located at the intersection with Hwy 393 . The AADT on the stretch of highway between Osler and Warman declines to about 7 @,@ 700 VPD . A Vintage Car on a Pole is a large roadside attraction which can be seen at Osler . Another 1 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 99 mi ) of travel along the LRT is the intersection with Hwy 394 at the north end of Osler . 
 = = = Rosthern No. 403 = = = 
 The town of Hague with approximately 700 residents , is 1 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 68 mi ) south of the intersection with Hwy 785 . The intersection Hwy 312 is north of Hague by 17 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 10 @.@ 9 mi ) and Rosthern is nestled just south of this intersection . Traffic has again declined with the greater distance from Saskatoon and Rosthern , with an average of 5 @,@ 000 VPD between Warman and Hague , and about 4 @,@ 500 VPD between Hague and Rosthern . Rosthern , a town of over 1300 people is located in the " valley of the converging branches of the North and South Saskatchewan Rivers . " The South Saskatchewan and North Saskatchewan River provide two important fish habitats for the province of Saskatchewan . There are 32 species of fish in the South Saskatchewan , and 25 species in the North Saskatchewan . 
 The large roadside attraction of a wheat sheaf is located to the east of town at the tourism office and is visible from the LRT . The Station Arts center has converted the historic CN Station into an art gallery and summer theater center and is located at Rosthern . This section of the LRT travels through the Waldheim Plain of the Aspen parkland prairie ecoregion which features fescue grasslands dotted with Aspen tree bluffs . Black loamy soil types are excellent for specialty crops as well as grain and cereals which makes agriculture the predominant economic industry . Seager Wheeler 's Maple Grove Farm , a National Historic Site , is located 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) east of Rosthern by taking Hwy 312 from the LRT . Seager Wheeler ( 1868 – 1961 ) was a famous farmer developing hardy wheat varieties for the Saskatchewan short growing season . 
 Hwy 312 provides access to the Batoche National Historic Site which features the Caron house , St. Antoine de <unk> church and rectory . Batoche is where Louis Riel fought his final battles in the North @-@ West Rebellion of 1885 . The Métis adopted a river lot system for settlement near Batoche along the South Saskatchewan River . The coming of the surveyor marking the plains into square quarter sections disrupted the established way of life . The Métis were offered scrip between 1886 and 1902 as compensation for their loss of land . <unk> land entitlement comprised 240 acres ( 0 @.@ 97 km2 ) . The available lands were not along the original river valley , or near the original settlement , so many Métis sold their scrip for money . Fish Creek near Batoche was originally named <unk> 's Coulee , Northwest Territories ( NWT ) . The Battle of Fish Creek memorial is near Batoche , and St. Laurent de Grandin features the St. Laurent Shrine . The intersection of Hwy 312 is north of Hague by 18 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 11 @.@ 2 mi ) . 
 = = = Duck Lake No. 463 = = = 
 Duck Lake is just south of the Hwy 212 intersection and Fort Carlton Provincial Historic Park is west of the LRT on Hwy 212 . This historic fur trade center was also an integral part of the North West Resistance . Duck Lake along route 11 also re @-@ tells the story of the North @-@ West Rebellion in murals on town buildings . Duck Lake Regional Interpretive Center relates the history of first nations , Métis and an immigrant pioneer Society to the area . As well , Glen Scrimshaw Art Gallery provides a showing of local artist Glen Scrimshaw . After Duck Lake the average VPD again declines to just above 3 @,@ 000 AADT . Traveling 26 @.@ 9 kilometres ( 16 @.@ 7 mi ) along the LRT is MacDowall which is west of the LRT . Noah 's Ark Family Fun Park is 5 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) north of MacDowall and provides a petting zoo and 18 @-@ hole miniature golf course . Nisbet Plain ecoregion , a part of the Boreal transition of the Boreal Plain is evident as the landscape changes to a mix of agricultural activities and forested areas . The black and dark gray soils are very fertile for a wide variety of crops . Along with aspen , white spruce , tamarack and jack pine are evident . Deer , moose , elk along with the occasional black bear can be seen along the route in this area . 
 = = = Prince Albert No. 461 = = = 
 It is another 22 kilometres ( 14 mi ) of travel in a north east direction to arrive at the terminus of the LRT , the intersection with Saskatchewan Highway 2 where the approximate AADT increases near the city of Prince Albert to 6 @,@ 000 VPD . The final stretches of the LRT is in the boreal Nisbet Forest . Trails through the forest are enjoyed by snowmobilers , cross @-@ country skiers , horseback riders , hikers , and campers 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 The Qu ’ <unk> , Long Lake and Saskatchewan Railway came through between Regina and Prince Albert through Saskatoon as early as 1890 providing an early method of travel following the red river cart and trail days . Chamberlain and Aylesbury were first linked via a highway in 1929 , before this date transportation between the two was by a variety of trails . The summer of 1929 also started another road leaving the Qu 'Appelle River valley east . Construction required building up low spots with elevating graders and dump wagons operated by horses . The elevating grader was to till unbroken soil and turn it towards a conveyor which lifted the dirt into the dump wagons . This process used 8 horses pulling in the front , and another eight at the rear pushing . The <unk> crew constructed the level areas . Ditches were constructed on a 7 % grade and filled with field rock to help prevent erosion . One of the main problems constructing the highway was the heavy field stone knolls . This highway served until 1949 when it was upgraded . 
 " The upland collection area for the underground streams comes together on top of the valley near Chamberlain . Highway construction surveyors had to curve the right @-@ of @-@ way to avoid this area . Another interesting diversion that the highway surveyors had to make , at the insistence of local residents , was to go around a large stone that had a metal marker spike in it , likely set up and recorded by early explorers . This site is now marked on the LRT with a large silhouette buffalo statue made by Don Wilkins . " 
 A large white house erected in 1904 by Wells family north of Davidson and can be seen from the LRT . The Wells family came north from Chicago and started The Wells Land & Cattle Co. becoming land agents for settlers from the agents . The Wells Land & Cattle Co. purchased land around Davidson , Arm River and Qu 'Appelle River for homestead settlement . 
 In 1971 , the Department of Highways was moved from Hawarden to Kenaston closer to the main Highway , which was Hwy 11 . Hanley erected in 2000 , a stone monument honoring its historic Opera House . The 1924 Hanley Opera House was a center of cultural activity in the area . The Opera House featured Mary Pickford , Harry Lauder , Boris Karloff and the <unk> performers to name a few between its inception and 1967 when the new Centennial Hall was used for performances . The original Opera House was demolished in the 1980s as it was unsafe . 
 Roads were provided and maintained through a committee formed in 1907 by Local Improvement District <unk> around Hanley . The early challenges were the hilly area and creek to the east . Early prairie roads were trails which became so rutted that they could barely be crossed over . To make roads out of these trails horse drawn blade graders were used to level out hummocks and fill badger holes . Horse drawn slush scrapers filled in sloughs . More advanced <unk> scrapers replaced the slush scrapers as they could make longer and wider swaths across the sloughs . By ploughing the prairie soil at the road allowance , and then using road graders to pull in the dirt roads could be made wide enough for the first cars of the area . The rural municipality of Rosedale No. 283 was incorporated December 13 , 1909 . 
 Winter trails in the horse and buggy days would have two tracks across the prairie several feet higher than the prairie sod due to the snow built up on them . Summer raised roads were built up by using two horse scrapers digging an area alongside the highway , then using the loose dirt to widen the highway . Sixteen and twenty four horses were often needed to pull the graders , and several drivers were required . Any work done by a farmer would reduce his payment in taxes . 
 The 1926 highway map of Saskatchewan marks the route of Provincial Highway 11 following along the CNR line using township and range roads , so travel is in lines straight north , changing direction to west travel at 90 degree angles from Regina through to Saskatoon . Only Provincial Highway 12 is marked in the same fashion between Saskatoon and Prince Albert on the 1926 highway map of Saskatchewan , which has formed the base of the northern section of the LRT . ( The current Saskatchewan Highway 12 travels between Saskatoon and Shell Lake . ) 
 As tractors replaced horses in the field and motorized vehicles replaced horses on the road , an increasing need arose to replace the early dirt trails with graded gravel highways . In the early 1930s , the gravel highway constructed between Chamberlain and Aylesbury in 1929 was further extended to Dundurn to meet this need . Shortly thereafter , the graveled highway extended between Saskatoon and Regina . 
 = = = Later History = = = 
 As the Annual Average Daily Traffic ( AADT ) increased , the need for wider , all @-@ weather , paved roads became increasingly apparent . As early as the 1930s , various Saskatchewan cities , towns , and rural municipalities lobbied the provincial government to develop hard surfaced roads , including Highway 11 , to connect its major centers , particularly Regina , Saskatoon , Prince Albert and Moose Jaw . Saskatoon mayor R.M. Pinder argued that Highway 11 should receive priority because " it serves the greatest number of people for the longest period of time " and its hard surfacing would facilitate the travel of American tourists to Prince Albert National Park and support transport operations to and from the Dundurn Military Camp . A dispute flared up between Saskatoon and Prince Albert community organizations over whether Highway 11 or Highway 2 should be paved first . Prince Albert advocated prioritizing Highway 2 as a more direct route between the northern and southern parts of the province and a more attractive route for American tourists driving to Prince Albert National Park . Saskatoon preferred Highway 11 because the alternative would bypass it and not provide as many Saskatchewan residents the transportation benefits of direct access to a paved highway . In 1950 , the provincial government indicated that it would prioritize the paving of Highway 11 between Saskatoon and Regina ; by October 1952 this section was completely paved . The improved highway was also rerouted in some places , including the section between Bladworth and Dundurn which was completely rebuilt , and bypasses were built around some towns and villages through which it had formerly passed . Although the highway 's route had not entirely reached its present contours , it was made straighter ; the distance traversed between Saskatoon and Regina was reduced by 27 miles . It more closely followed the CNR tracks and contained fewer right angle corners than it had in 1926 . The highway between Saskatoon and Prince Albert received less attention during this period ; a 1956 highway map shows that it was still almost entirely gravel . 
 Following the completion of the Trans Canada Highway , federal funds became available for provincial highway projects . Highway 11 was considered an important transportation route from a national perspective , and therefore received funding under the National Highways Project . The highway between Saskatoon and Rosthern was partially paved and the remainder was oiled to create a dust @-@ free all @-@ weather surface , and in 1964 , the last remaining gravel section of the highway , between Rosthern and its junction with Highway 2 , was oiled . In the latter half of the 1960s , many sections of the highway between Regina and Saskatoon were reconstructed and given wide shoulders ; previously some segments had no shoulders . During the same period , the Saskatoon to Prince Albert portion was rebuilt to " Trans @-@ Canada standards " and extensively re @-@ routed to follow the same course as the CNR tracks which shortened the travel distance between the two cities by 13 miles . A new route was constructed to connect Saskatoon and Rosthern via Warman and Hague . Once this phase of construction was complete , the Rosthern to Prince Albert segment was upgraded and fully paved , and the segment between MacDowall and Prince Albert was re @-@ routed along a straighter course . 
 In 1960 , the section between Regina and Lumsden was the first to be converted to a four lane twinned highway . Twinning the rest of highway between Saskatoon and Regina commenced in 1968 with the conversion of the segment between Saskatoon and Dundurn . Work gradually progressed until the final section between Craik to a point just north of Davidson was twinned in late 1978 . With the exception of a three @-@ kilometre , two @-@ lane segment through Chamberlain , the newly constructed four lane sections of the highway bypassed all the towns and villages between Saskatoon and Regina . An initiative to twin the highway between Saskatoon and Prince Albert was launched in the first decade of the 21st century . In 2006 , Provincial Highways and Transportation Minister Eldon <unk> stated that " twinning will improve the province 's busiest highways to support tourism and economic development , and move our export goods to market efficiently across inter @-@ provincial borders . " Sections of highway nearest to Saskatoon were twinned first ; with the paving of newly constructed lanes along a 13 @-@ kilometre stretch between Prince Albert and MacDowall , the project was completed on 25 October 2013 . 
 On June 20 , 2001 the entire length of Hwy 11 was re @-@ named the Louis Riel Trail ( LRT ) at a ceremony which took place at the Duck Lake Regional Interpretive Centre . The LRT connects major sites of the 1885 North @-@ West Rebellion . Mid @-@ Lakes Community coalition , Saskatchewan Highway 11 communities and municipalities , the Saskatchewan Métis Nation , and the Saskatchewan History and Folk Lore Society approached Highways and Transportation Minister Pat Atkinson about the designation . Saskatchewan Highway 11 is the actual course followed by the RCMP and Louis Riel to arrive at Regina for the trial of Louis Riel . The LRT sign features a red river cart featured in yellow on a blue background . 
 = = = Maintenance = = = 
 Tenders for construction work on Highway 11 in 2008 amounted to $ 63 @.@ 3 million of which $ 30 million saw 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) twinned between Prince Albert and Saskatoon . Among the upcoming projects which have received approval were the " paving of two sections of Highway 11 including 12 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) of highway north of Osler to south of Hague , and 11 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 0 mi ) of highway north of Macdowall to the Junction of Highway 2 . " The first project was scheduled for completion by October 2008 . 
 In 2002 a resurfacing project of 8 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 2 mi ) of Highway 11 was undertaken on a section 2 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) north of Macdowall . The approval for the $ 680 @,@ 000 tender was awarded by Highways and Transportation Minister Mark Wartman . 
 Earlier maintenance included $ 897 @,@ 000 for paving of 12 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 6 mi ) near Hanley for a project cost of $ 897 @,@ 000 . Highways and Transportation Minister Judy Bradley awarded contracts for work in 1999 . 
 The first asphalt rubber project occurred July 2007 on Saskatchewan Highway 11 . Close to 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) near Davidson show the rubberized asphalt road surface on the right lane at a cost of $ 126 @,@ 800 . The next rubberized asphalt project in the summer of 2007 , was 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) through the town of Chamberlain . The $ 1 @.@ 4 million spent here included the rubberized asphalt pavement surface , curbs and catch basins . 
 " The mining , exploration , and oil and gas sectors across northern Saskatchewan funnel thousands of heavy trucks through Prince Albert on a daily basis . Improving this vital gateway will not only make travel safer and far more efficient for commercial traffic , but it will enhance the drive for thousand of visitors who head north each year to take advantage of our northern lakes " 
 = = Plans = = 
 Pinkie Road is a proposed 4 lane twinned highway connector road linking two National Highway System routes as a part of the Asia @-@ Pacific Gateway and Corridor Initiative ( <unk> ) . Hwy 1 , the Trans Canada Highway and Hwy 11 will be linked by this new route west of Regina . 
 = = Intersections from south to north = = 
 = History of Mumbai = 
 The history of Mumbai deals with the growth of a collection of seven islands on the west coast of India to become the commercial capital of the nation , and one of the most populous cities in the world . Although human habitation existed since the Stone Age , the Kolis , a Marathi fishing community , were the earliest known settlers of the islands . The Maurya Empire gained control of the islands during the 3rd century BCE , and transformed it into a centre of Hindu and Buddhist culture and religion . Later , between the 2nd century BCE and 9th century CE , the islands came under the control of successive indigenous dynasties : Satavahanas , Abhiras , Vakatakas , Kalachuris , Konkan Mauryas , Chalukyas and Rashtrakutas , before being ruled by the Silharas from 810 to 1260 . 
 King Bhimdev established his kingdom in the region in the late 13th century , and brought many settlers to the islands . The Muslim rulers of Gujarat captured the islands in 1348 , and they were later governed by the Gujarat Sultanate from 1391 to 1534 . The Treaty of Bassein between the Portuguese viceroy Nuno da Cunha and Bahadur Shah of the Gujarat Sultanate placed the islands into Portuguese possession in 1534 . 
 The islands suffered incursions from Mughals towards the end of the 17th century . During the mid @-@ 18th century , the city emerged as an important trading town , with maritime trade contacts with Mecca and Basra . Economic and educational development characterised the city during the 19th century with the first @-@ ever Indian railway line beginning operations between Mumbai and neighbouring Thane in 1853 . The city became a strong base for the Indian independence movement during the early 20th century and was the epicentre of the Rowlatt Satyagraha of 1919 and Royal Indian Navy Mutiny of 1946 . After India 's independence in 1947 , the territory of Mumbai Presidency retained by India was restructured into Mumbai State . The area of Mumbai State increased , after several erstwhile princely states that joined the Indian union were integrated into Mumbai State . 
 In 1960 , following protests from the Samyukta Maharashtra movement , the city was incorporated into the dominion of the newly created Maharashtra State from Mumbai State . The city 's secular fabric was torn apart in the communal riots of 1992 – 93 , while the bombings of 1993 caused extensive loss of life and property . The city was renamed Mumbai on 6 March 1996 . 
 = = Early history = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ historic period = = = 
 Geologists believe that coast of western India came into being around 100 to 80 mya after it broke away from Madagascar . Soon after its detachment , the peninsular region of the Indian plate drifted over the Réunion hotspot , a volcanic hotspot in the Earth 's lithosphere near the island of Réunion . An eruption here some 66 mya is thought to have laid down the Deccan Traps , a vast bed of basalt lava that covers parts of central India . This volcanic activity resulted in the formation of basaltic outcrops , such as the Gilbert Hill , that are seen at various locations in the city . Further tectonic activity in the region led to the formation of hilly islands separated by a shallow sea . Pleistocene sediments found near Kandivali in northern Mumbai by British archaeologist Todd in 1939 indicate habitation since the Stone Age . The present day city was built on what was originally an archipelago of seven islands of Bombay Island , Parel , Mazagaon , Mahim , Colaba , Worli , and Old Woman 's Island ( also known as Little Colaba ) . The islands were coalesced into a single landmass by the Hornby Vellard engineering project in 1784 . By 1000 BCE , the region was heavily involved in seaborne commerce with Egypt and Persia . The Koli fishing community had long inhabited the islands . They were Dravidian in origin and included a large number of scattered tribes along the Vindhya Plateau , Gujarat , and Konkan . In Mumbai , there were three or four of these tribes . Their religious practices could be summed up as animism . 
 = = = Age of indigenous empires = = = 
 The islands were incorporated into the Maurya Empire under Emperor Ashoka of Magadha in the third century BCE . The empire 's patronage made the islands a centre of Hindu and Buddhist religion and culture . Buddhist monks , scholars , and artists created the artwork , inscriptions , and sculpture of the Kanheri Caves in the mid third century BCE and Mahakali Caves . After the decline of the Maurya Empire around 185 BCE , these islands fell to the Satavahanas . The port of <unk> ( present @-@ day Nala <unk> ) was an important trading centre during the first century BCE , with trade contacts with Rome . The islands were known as <unk> ( Ancient Greek : A Cluster of Seven Islands ) to the Greek geographer Ptolemy in 150 CE . After the end of the <unk> rule in 250 CE , the Abhiras of Western Maharashtra and Vakatakas of Vidarbha held dominion over the islands . The Abhiras ruled for 167 years , till around 417 CE . The Kalachuris of Central India ruled the islands during the fifth century , which were then acquired by the Mauryas of Konkan in the sixth and early part of the seventh century . The Mauryas were feudatories of Kalachuris , and the Jogeshwari Caves were constructed during their regime between 520 and 525 . The Greek merchant Cosmas Indicopleustes visited Kalyan ( near Mumbai ) during 530 – 550 . The Elephanta Caves also dates back to the sixth century . Christianity arrived in the islands during the sixth century , when the Nestorian Church made its presence in India . The Mauryan presence ended when the Chalukyas of Badami in Karnataka under Pulakeshin II invaded the islands in 610 . Dantidurga of the Rashtrakuta Dynasty of Karnataka conquered the islands during 749 – 750 . 
 The Silhara dynasty of Konkan ruled the region between 810 and 1260 . The Walkeshwar Temple was constructed during the 10th century and the Banganga Tank during the 12th century under the patronage of the Silhara rulers . The Italian traveler Marco Polo 's fleet of thirteen Chinese ships passed through Mumbai Harbour during May — September 1292 . King Bhimdev founded his kingdom in the region in the late 13th century and established his capital in Mahikawati ( present day Mahim ) . He belonged to either the Yadava dynasty of Devagiri in Maharashtra or the <unk> dynasty of Gujarat . He built the first <unk> temple in the region and introduced many fruit @-@ bearing trees , including coconut palms to the islands . The Pathare Prabhus , one of the earliest settlers of the city , were brought to Mahim from Patan and other parts of Saurashtra in Gujarat around 1298 by Bhimdev during his reign . He is also supposed to have brought <unk> , <unk> , Bhandaris , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Brahmins to these islands . After his death in 1303 , he was succeeded by his son Pratapbimba , who built his capital at <unk> in Salsette , which he named <unk> . The islands were wrested from Pratapbimba 's control by Mubarak Khan , a self @-@ proclaimed regent of the Khilji dynasty , who occupied Mahim and Salsette in 1318 . Pratapbimba later reconquered the islands which he ruled till 1331 . Later , his brother @-@ in @-@ law <unk> for 17 years till 1348 . The islands came under the control of the Muslim rulers of Gujarat in 1348 , ending the sovereignty of Hindu rulers over the islands . 
 = = = Islamic period = = = 
 The islands were under Muslim rule from 1348 to 1391 . After the establishment of the Gujarat Sultanate in 1391 , Muzaffar Shah I was appointed viceroy of north Konkan . For the administration of the islands , he appointed a governor for Mahim . During the reign of Ahmad Shah I ( 1411 – 1443 ) , Malik @-@ us @-@ Sharq was appointed governor of Mahim , and in addition to instituting a proper survey of the islands , he improved the existing revenue system of the islands . During the early 15th century , the Bhandaris seized the island of Mahim from the Sultanate and ruled it for eight years . It was reconquered by Rai Qutb of the Gujarat Sultanate . <unk> , a Persian historian , recorded that by 1429 the seat of government of the Gujarat Sultanate in north Konkan had transferred from Thane to Mahim . On Rai Qutb 's death in 1429 – 1430 , Ahmad Shah I Wali of the Bahmani Sultanate of Deccan captured Salsette and Mahim . 
 Ahmad Shah I retaliated by sending his son Jafar Khan to recapture the lost territory . Jafar emerged victorious in the battle fought with Ahmad Shah I Wali . In 1431 , Mahim was recaptured by the Sultanate of Gujarat . The Sultanate 's patronage led to the construction of many mosques , prominent being the Haji Ali Dargah in Mahim , built in honour the Muslim saint Haji Ali in 1431 . After the death of <unk> Khan , the Gujarat commandant of Mahim , Ahmad Shah I Wali again despatched a large army to capture Mahim . Ahmad Shah I responded with a large army and navy under Jafar Khan leading to the defeat of Ahmad Shah I Wali . During 1491 – 1494 , the islands suffered sea <unk> from Bahadur Khan Gilani , a nobleman of the Bahamani Sultanate . After the end of the Bahamani Sultanate , Bahadur Khan Gilani and Mahmud Gavan ( 1482 – 1518 ) broke out in rebellion at the port of Dabhol and conquered the islands along with the whole of Konkan . Portuguese explorer Francisco de Almeida 's ship sailed into the deep natural harbour of the island in 1508 , and he called it Bom <unk> ( Good Bay ) . However , the Portuguese paid their first visit to the islands on 21 January 1509 , when they landed at Mahim after capturing a Gujarat barge in the Mahim creek . After a series of attacks by the Gujarat Sultanate , the islands were recaptured by Sultan Bahadur Shah . 
 In 1526 , the Portuguese established their factory at Bassein . During 1528 – 29 , Lopo Vaz de Sampaio seized the fort of Mahim from the Gujarat Sultanate , when the King was at war with Nizam @-@ ul @-@ mulk , the emperor of Chaul , a town south of the islands . Bahadur Shah had grown apprehensive of the power of the Mughal emperor Humayun and he was obliged to sign the Treaty of Bassein with the Portuguese on 23 December 1534 . According to the treaty , the islands of Mumbai and Bassein were offered to the Portuguese . Bassein and the seven islands were surrendered later by a treaty of peace and commerce between Bahadur Shah and Nuno da Cunha , Viceroy of Portuguese India , on 25 October 1535 , ending the Islamic rule in Mumbai . 
 = = Portuguese period = = 
 The Portuguese were actively involved in the foundation and growth of their religious orders in Bombay . The islands were leased to Mestre Diogo in 1534 . The San Miguel ( St. Michael Church ) in Mahim , one of the oldest churches in Bombay , was built by the Portuguese in 1540 . Parel , Wadala , Sion , and Worli were granted to Manuel Serrão between 1545 and 1548 , during the viceroyalty of João de Castro . Mazagaon was granted to Antonio Pessoa in 1547 . Salsette was granted for three years to João Rodrigues Dantas , Cosme Corres , and Manuel Corres . Trombay and Chembur were granted to Dom Roque Tello de Menezes , and the Island of Pory ( Elephanta Island ) to João <unk> in 1548 . Garcia de Orta , a Portuguese physician and botanist , was granted the possession of Bombay in 1554 by viceroy Pedro Mascarenhas . 
 The Portuguese encouraged intermarriage with the local population , and strongly supported the Roman Catholic Church . In 1560 , they started proselytising the local Koli , <unk> , <unk> population in Mahim , Worli , and Bassein . These Christians were referred to by the British as Portuguese Christians , though they were Nestorian Christians who had only recently established ties with the Roman Catholic Church . During this time , Bombay 's main trade was coconuts and coir . After Antonio Pessoa 's death in 1571 , a patent was issued which granted Mazagaon in perpetuity to the Sousa e Lima family . The St. Andrew Church at Bandra was built in 1575 . 
 The annexation of Portugal by Spain in 1580 opened the way for other European powers to follow the spice routes to India . The Dutch arrived first , closely followed by the British . The first English merchants arrived in Bombay in November 1583 , and travelled through Bassein , Thane , and Chaul . The Portuguese Franciscans had obtained practical control of Salsette and Mahim by 1585 , and built Nossa Senhora de Bom <unk> ( Our Lady of Good Counsel ) at Sion and Nossa Senhora de <unk> ( Our Lady of Salvation ) at Dadar in 1596 . The Battle of <unk> was fought between the British and the Portuguese at Surat in 1612 for the possession of Bombay . Dorabji Nanabhoy , a trader , was the first Parsi to settle in Bombay in 1640 . Castella de Aguada ( Fort of the <unk> ) was built by the Portuguese at Bandra in 1640 as a watchtower overlooking the Mahim Bay , the Arabian Sea and the southern island of Mahim . The growing power of the Dutch by the middle of the seventeenth century forced the Surat Council of the British Empire to acquire Bombay from King John IV of Portugal in 1659 . The marriage treaty of Charles II of England and Catherine of Portugal on 8 May 1661 placed Bombay in British possession as a part of Catherine 's dowry to Charles . 
 = = British period = = 
 = = = Struggle with native powers = = = 
 On 19 March 1662 , Abraham Shipman was appointed the first Governor and General of the city , and his fleet arrived in Bombay in September and October 1662 . On being asked to hand over Bombay and Salsette to the English , the Portuguese Governor contended that the island of Bombay alone had been ceded , and alleging irregularity in the patent , he refused to give up even Bombay . The Portuguese Viceroy declined to interfere and Shipman was prevented from landing in Bombay . He was forced to retire to the island of Anjediva in North Canara and died there in October 1664 . In November 1664 , Shipman 's successor Humphrey Cooke agreed to accept Bombay without its dependencies . However , Salsette , Mazagaon , Parel , Worli , Sion , Dharavi , and Wadala still remained under Portuguese possession . Later , Cooke managed to acquire Mahim , Sion , Dharavi , and Wadala for the English . On 21 September 1668 , the Royal Charter of 27 March 1668 , led to the transfer of Bombay from Charles II to the English East India Company for an annual rent of £ 10 ( equivalent retail price index of £ 1 @,@ 226 in 2007 ) . The Company immediately set about the task of opening up the islands by constructing a quay and warehouses . A customs house was also built . Fortifications were built around Bombay Castle . A Judge @-@ Advocate was appointed for the purpose of civil administration . George Oxenden became the first Governor of Bombay under the English East India Company on 23 September 1668 . Gerald Aungier , who was appointed Governor of Bombay in July 1669 , established the first mint in Bombay in 1670 . He offered various business incentives , which attracted Parsis , <unk> , Jews , Dawoodi Bohras , Gujarati Banias from Surat and Diu , and Brahmins from Salsette . He also planned extensive fortifications in the city from Dongri in the north to Mendham 's Point ( near present @-@ day Lion Gate ) in the south . The harbour was also developed during his governorship , with space for the berthing of 20 ships . In 1670 , the Parsi businessman <unk> <unk> imported the first printing press into Bombay . Between 1661 and 1675 there was a sixfold increase in population from 10 @,@ 000 to 60 @,@ 000 . Yakut Khan , the Siddi admiral of the Mughal Empire , landed at Bombay in October 1672 and ravaged the local inhabitants there . On 20 February 1673 , <unk> van Goen , the Governor @-@ General of Dutch India attacked Bombay , but the attack was resisted by Aungier . On 10 October 1673 , the Siddi admiral Sambal entered Bombay and destroyed the Pen and <unk> rivers , which were very important for the English and the Maratha King Shivaji . The Treaty of Westminster concluded between England and the Netherlands in 1674 , relieved the British settlements in Bombay of further apprehension from the Dutch . In 1686 , the Company shifted its main holdings from Surat to Bombay , which had become the administrative centre of all the west coast settlements then . Bombay was placed at the head of all the Company 's establishments in India . 
 Yakut Khan landed at <unk> on 14 February 1689 , and razed the Mazagon Fort in June 1690 . After a payment made by the British to Aurangzeb , the ruler of the Mughal Empire , Yakut evacuated Bombay on 8 June 1690 . The arrival of many Indian and British merchants led to the development of Bombay 's trade by the end of the seventeenth century . Soon it was trading in salt , rice , ivory , cloth , lead and sword blades with many Indian ports as well as with the Arabian cities of Mecca and Basra . By 1710 , the construction of Bombay Castle was finished , which fortified the islands from sea attacks by European pirates and the Marathas . By 26 December 1715 , Charles Boone assumed the Governorship of Bombay . He implemented Aungier 's plans for the fortification of the island , and had walls built from Dongri in the north to Mendham 's point in the south . He established the Marine force , and constructed the St. Thomas Cathedral in 1718 , which was the first Anglican Church in Bombay . In 1728 , a Mayor 's court was established in Bombay and the first reclamation was started which was a temporary work in Mahalaxmi , on the creek separating Bombay from Worli . The shipbuilding industry started in Bombay in 1735 and soon the Naval Dockyard was established in the same year . 
 In 1737 , Salsette was captured from the Portuguese by Maratha Baji Rao I and the province of Bassein was ceded in 1739 . The Maratha victory forced the British to push settlements within the fort walls of the city . Under new building rules set up in 1748 , many houses were demolished and the population was redistributed , partially on newly reclaimed land . <unk> <unk> Wadia , a member of the Wadia family of shipwrights and naval architects from Surat , built the Bombay Dock in 1750 , which was the first dry dock to be commissioned in Asia . By the middle of the eighteenth century , Bombay began to grow into a major trading town and soon Bhandaris from Chaul in Maharashtra , <unk> from the Western Ghat mountain ranges of Maharashtra , Africans from Madagascar , <unk> from Rajasthan , Vaishya <unk> , Goud Saraswat Brahmins , <unk> from <unk> , <unk> and weavers from Gujarat migrated to the islands . In 1769 , Fort George was built on the site of the Dongri Fort and in 1770 , the Mazagaon docks were built . The British occupied Salsette , Elephanta , Hog Island , and <unk> on 28 December 1774 . Salsette , Elephanta , Hog Island , and <unk> were formally ceded to the British East India Company by the Treaty of <unk> signed in 1782 , while Bassein and its dependencies were restored to Raghunathrao of the Maratha Empire . Although Salsette was under the British , but the introduction of contraband goods from Salsette to other parts of Bombay was prevented . The goods were subjected to Maratha regulations with respect to taxes and a 30 % toll was levied on all goods into the city from Salsette . 
 In 1782 , William Hornby assumed the office of Governor of Bombay , and initiated the Hornby Vellard engineering project of uniting the seven islands into a single landmass . The purpose of this project was to block the Worli creek and prevent the low @-@ lying areas of Bombay from being flooded at high tide . However , the project was rejected by the British East India Company in 1783 . In 1784 , the Hornby Vellard project was completed and soon reclamations at Worli and Mahalaxmi followed . The history of journalism in Bombay commenced with publication of the Bombay Herald in 1789 and the Bombay Courier in 1790 . In 1795 , the Maratha army defeated the Nizam of Hyderabad . Following this , many artisans and construction workers from Andhra Pradesh migrated to Bombay and settled into the flats which were constructed by the Hornby Vellard . These workers where called <unk> , and their enclave was called <unk> . The construction of the Sion Causeway ( Duncan Causeway ) commenced in 1798 . The construction of the Sion Causeway was completed in 1802 by Governor Jonathan Duncan . It connected Bombay Island to Kurla in Salsette . On 17 February 1803 , a fire raged through the town , razing many localities around the Old Fort , subsequently the British had to plan a new town with wider roads . In May 1804 , Bombay was hit by a severe famine , which led to a large @-@ scale emigration . On 5 November 1817 , the British East India Company under Mountstuart Elphinstone defeated Bajirao II , the Peshwa of the Maratha Empire , in the Battle of <unk> which took place on the Deccan Plateau . The success of the British campaign in the Deccan witnessed the freedom of Bombay from all attacks by native powers . 
 = = = City development = = = 
 The educational and economic progress of the city began with the Company 's military successes in the Deccan . The Wellington Pier ( Apollo Bunder ) in the north of Colaba was opened for passenger traffic in 1819 and the Elphinstone High School was established in 1822 . Bombay was hit by a water famine in 1824 . The construction of the new mint commenced in 1825 . With the construction of a good carriage road up the <unk> Ghat during the regimes of Mountstuart Elphinstone and Sir John Malcolm gave better access from Bombay to the Deccan . This road , which was opened on 10 November 1830 , facilitated trade in a large measure . By 1830 , regular communication with England started by steamers navigating the Red and Mediterranean Sea . In July 1832 , the Parsi riots took place in consequence of a Government order for the destruction of pariah dogs which infested the city . The Asiatic Society of Bombay ( Town Hall ) was completed in 1833 , and the Elphinstone College was built in 1835 . In 1836 , the Chamber of Commerce was established . 
 In 1838 , the islands of Colaba and Little Colaba were connected to Bombay by the Colaba Causeway . In the same year , monthly communication was established between Bombay and London . The Bank of Bombay , the oldest bank in the city , was established in 1840 , and the Bank of Western India in 1842 . The Cotton Exchange was established in Cotton Green in 1844 . <unk> <unk> <unk> funded the construction of the Mahim Causeway , to connect Mahim to Bandra and the work was completed in 1845 . The Commercial Bank of India , established in 1845 , issued exotic notes with an <unk> of Western and Eastern Motifs . On 3 November 1845 , the Grant Medical College and hospital , the third in the country , was founded by Governor Robert Grant . The earliest riots occurred at Mahim in 1850 , in consequence of a dispute between two rival factions of <unk> . Riots broke out between Muslims and Parsis in October 1851 , in consequence of an ill @-@ advised article on Prophet Muhammad which appeared in the Chitra <unk> Darpan newspaper . The first political organization of the Bombay Presidency , the Bombay Association , was started on 26 August 1852 , to vent public grievances to the British . The first @-@ ever Indian railway line began operations between Bombay and neighbouring Thane over a distance of 21 miles on 16 April 1853 . The Bombay Spinning and Weaving Company was the first cotton mill to be established in the city on 7 July 1854 at <unk> in Central Bombay . The Bombay , Baroda , and Central India Railway ( BB & CI ) was incorporated in 1855 . 
 The University of Bombay was the first modern institution of higher education to be established in India in 1857 . The Commercial Bank , the Chartered Mercantile , the Agra and United Service , the Chartered and the Central Bank of Western India were established in Bombay attracting a considerable industrial population . The outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 increased the demand for cotton in the West , and led to an enormous increase in cotton @-@ trade . The Victoria Gardens was opened to the public in 1862 . The Bombay Shipping and Iron Shipping Companies were started in 1863 to make Bombay merchants independent of the English . The Bombay Coast and River Steam Navigation Company was established in 1866 for the maintenance of steam ferries between Bombay and the nearby islands ; while the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 revolutionized the marine trade of Bombay . The Bombay Municipal Corporation was established in 1872 , providing a modern framework of governance for the rapidly growing city . The Bombay Port Trust was promulgated in 1870 for the development and administration of the port . Tramway communication was instituted in 1873 . The Bombay Electric Supply and Transport ( BEST ) , originally set up as a tramway company : Bombay Tramway Company Limited , was established in 1873 . Violent Parsi @-@ Muslim riots again broke out in February 1874 , which were caused by an article on Prophet Muhammad published by a Parsi resident . The Bombay Gymkhana was formed in 1875 . The Bombay Stock Exchange , the oldest stock exchange in Asia , was established in 1875 . Electricity arrived in Bombay in 1882 and Crawford Market was the first establishment to be lit up by electricity . The Bombay Natural History Society was founded in 1883 . Bombay Time , one of the two official time zones in British India , was established in 1884 during the International Meridian Conference held at Washington , D.C in the United States . Bombay time was set at 4 hours and 51 minutes ahead of Greenwich Mean Time ( GMT ) using the 75th east meridian . The Princess Dock was built in 1885 as part of a scheme for improving the whole foreshore of the Bombay harbour . The first institute in <unk> to provide Veterinary Education , the Bombay Veterinary College , was established in Parel in Bombay in the year 1886 . 
 = = = Indian freedom movement = = = 
 The growth of political consciousness started after the establishment of the Bombay Presidency Association on 31 January 1885 . The Bombay <unk> ' Association was formed in February 1875 by Dinshaw Maneckji Petit in order to <unk> central school protect interests of workers threatened by possible factory and tariff legislation by the British . The first session of the Indian National Congress was held in Bombay from 28 – 31 December 1885 . The Bombay Municipal Act was enacted in 1888 which gave the British Government wide powers of interference in civic matters . The Victoria Terminus of the Great Indian Peninsular Railway , one of the finest stations in the world , was completed in May 1888 . The concept of <unk> ( lunch box delivery man ) originated in the 1890s when British people who came to Bombay did not like the local food . So the <unk> service was set up to bring lunch to these people in their workplace straight from their home . On 11 August 1893 , a serious communal riot took place between the Hindus and Muslims , when a Shiva temple was attacked by Muslims in Bombay . 75 people were killed and 350 were injured . In September 1896 , Bombay was hit by a bubonic plague epidemic where the death toll was estimated at 1 @,@ 900 people per week . Around 850 @,@ 000 , amounting to half of the population , fled Bombay during this time . On 9 March 1898 , there was a serious riot which started with a sudden outbreak of hostility against the measures adopted by Government for suppression of plague . The riot led to a strike of dock and railway workers which paralysed the city for a few days . The significant results of the plague was the creation of the Bombay City Improvement Trust on 9 December 1898 and the <unk> Institute on 10 January 1899 by Waldemar <unk> . The Dadar @-@ <unk> @-@ Wadala @-@ Sion scheme , the first planned suburban scheme in Bombay , was formulated in 1899 – 1900 by the Bombay City Improvement Trust to relieve congestion in the centre of the town , following the plague epidemics . The cotton mill industry was adversely affected during 1900 and 1901 due to the flight of workers because of the plague . 
 The Partition of Bengal in 1905 initiated the Swadeshi movement , which led to the boycotting of British goods in India . On 22 July 1908 , Lokmanya Tilak , the principal advocate of the Swadeshi movement in Bombay , was sentenced to six years rigorous imprisonment , on the charge of writing inflammatory articles against the Government in his newspaper <unk> . The arrest led to huge scale protests across the city . The Bombay Chronicle started by Pherozeshah Mehta , the leader of the Indian National Congress , in 1910 , played an important role in the national movement until India 's Independence . Lord Willingdon convened the Provincial War Conference at Bombay on 10 June 1918 , whose objective was to seek the co @-@ operation of the people in the World War I measures which the British Government thought it necessary to take in the Bombay Presidency . The conference was followed by huge rallies across the city . The worldwide influenza epidemic raged through Bombay from September to December 1918 , causing hundreds of deaths per day . The Lord Willingdon Memorial incident of December 1918 saw the handicap of Home Rulers in Bombay . The first important strike in the textile industry in Bombay began in January 1919 . Bombay was the main centre of the Rowlatt Satyagraha movement started by Mahatma Gandhi from February — April 1919 . The movement was started as a result of the Rowlatt Act , which indefinitely extended emergency measures during World War I in order to control public unrest . 
 Following World War I , which saw large movement of India troops , supplies , arms and industrial goods to and from Bombay , the city life was shut down many times during the Non @-@ cooperation movement from 1920 to 1922 . In 1926 , the Back Bay scandal occurred , when the Bombay Development Department under the British reclaimed the Back Bay area in Bombay after the financial crisis incidental to the post @-@ war slump in the city . The first electric locomotives in India were put into service from Victoria Terminus to Kurla in 1925 . In the late 1920s , many Persians migrated to Bombay from Yazd to escape the drought in Iran . In the early 1930s , the nationwide Civil disobedience movement against the British Salt tax spread to Bombay . Vile Parle was the headquarters of the movement in Bombay under Jamnalal Bajaj . On 15 October 1932 industrialist and aviator <unk> Tata pioneered civil aviation in Bombay by flying a plane from Karachi to Bombay . Bombay was affected by the Great Depression of 1929 , which saw a stagnation of mill industry and economy from 1933 to 1939 . With World War II , the movements of thousands of troops , military and industrial goods and the fleet of the Royal Indian Navy made Bombay an important military base for the battles being fought in West Asia and South East Asia . The climatic Quit India rebellion was promulgated on 7 August 1942 by the Congress in a public meeting at <unk> Tank . The Royal Indian Navy Mutiny of 18 February 1946 in Bombay marked the first and most serious revolt by the Indian sailors of the Royal Indian Navy against British rule . On 15 August 1947 , finally India was declared independent . The last British troops to leave India , the First Battalion of the Somerset Light Infantry , passed through the arcade of the Gateway of India in Bombay on 28 February 1948 , ending the 282 @-@ year @-@ long period of the British in Bombay . 
 = = Independent India = = 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 After the Partition of India on 15 August 1947 , over 100 @,@ 000 Sindhi refugees from the newly created Pakistan were relocated in the military camps five kilometres from Kalyan in the <unk> Region . It was converted into a township in 1949 , and named <unk> by the then Governor @-@ General of India , C. Rajagopalachari . In April 1950 , Greater Bombay District came into existence with the merger of Bombay Suburbs and Bombay City . It spanned an area of 235 @.@ 1 km2 ( 90 @.@ 77 sq mi ) and inhabited 2 @,@ 339 @,@ 000 of people in 1951 . The Municipal Corporation limits were extended up to Jogeshwari along the Western Railway and Bhandup along the Central Railway . This limit was further extended in February 1957 up to Dahisar along the Western Railway and Mulund on the Central Railway . In the 1955 Lok Sabha discussions , when Bombay State was being re @-@ organised along linguistic lines into the states of Maharashtra and Gujarat . But the States Reorganisation Committee recommended a bi @-@ lingual state for Maharashtra @-@ Gujarat , with Bombay as its capital . However , the Samyukta Maharashtra movement opposed this , and insisted that Bombay native of Marathi be declared the capital of Maharashtra . The Indian Institute of Technology Bombay was established in 1958 at Powai , a northern suburb of Bombay . Following protests by the Samyukta Maharashtra movement in which 105 people were killed by police firing , Maharashtra State was formed with Bombay as its capital on 1 May 1960 . Flora Fountain was renamed <unk> Chowk ( " Martyr 's Square " ) as a memorial to the Samyukta Maharashtra movement . 
 In the early 1960s , the Parsi and Marwaris Migrant communities owned majority of the industry and trade enterprises in the city , while the white @-@ collar jobs were mainly sought by the South Indian migrants to the city . The Shiv Sena party was established on 19 June 1966 by Bombay cartoonist Bal Thackeray , out of a feeling of resentment about the relative marginalization of the native Marathi people in their native state Maharashtra . In the 1960s and 1970s , Shiv Sena <unk> for rights of native Marathis . In the late 1960s , Nariman Point and Cuffe Parade were reclaimed and developed . During the 1970 there were Bombay @-@ <unk> riots . During the 1970s , coastal communication increased between Bombay and south western coast of India , after introduction of ships by the London @-@ based trade firm Shepherd . These ships facilitated the entry of Goan and Mangalorean Catholics to Bombay . 
 Nehru Centre was established in 1972 at Worli in Bombay . The Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority ( <unk> ) was set up on 26 January 1975 by the Government of Maharashtra as an apex body for planning and co @-@ ordination of development activities in the Mumbai metropolitan region . Nehru Science Centre , India 's largest interactive science centre , was established in 1972 at Worli in Bombay . In August 1979 , a sister township of Navi Mumbai was founded by City and Industrial Development Corporation ( <unk> ) across Thane and Raigad districts of Maharashtra to help the dispersal and control of Mumbai 's population . The Great Bombay Textile Strike was called on 18 January 1982 by trade union leader Dutta <unk> , where nearly 250 @,@ 000 workers and more than 50 textile mills in Bombay went on strike . On 17 May 1984 , riots broke out in Bombay , Thane , and <unk> after a saffron flag was placed at the top of a mosque . 278 were killed and 1 @,@ 118 were wounded . The Jawaharlal Nehru Port was commissioned on 26 May 1989 at <unk> Sheva with a view to de @-@ congest Bombay Harbour and to serve as a hub port for the city . In December 1992 – January 93 , over 1 @,@ 000 people were killed and the city paralyzed by communal riots between the Hindus and the Muslims caused by the destruction of the Babri Mosque in Ayodhya . A series of 13 co @-@ ordinated bomb explosions took place in Bombay on 12 March 1993 , which resulted in 257 deaths and 700 injuries . The attacks were believed to be orchestrated by mafia don Dawood Ibrahim in retaliation for the Babri Mosque demolition . In 1996 , the newly elected Shiv Sena @-@ led government renamed the city of Bombay to the native name Mumbai , after the Koli native Marathi people Goddess Mumbadevi . Soon colonial British names were shed to assert or reassert local names , such as Victoria Terminus being renamed to Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus on 4 March 1996 , after the 17th century Marathi King Shivaji . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 During the 21st century , the city suffered several bombings . On 6 December 2002 , a bomb placed under a seat of an empty BEST ( Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport ) bus exploded near Ghatkopar station in Mumbai . Around 2 people were killed and 28 were injured . The bombing occurred on the tenth anniversary of the demolition of the Babri Mosque in Ayodhya . On 27 January 2003 , a bomb placed on a bicycle exploded near the Vile Parle station in Mumbai . The bomb killed 1 and injured 25 . The blast occurred a day ahead of the visit of Atal Bihari Vajpayee , the then Prime Minister of India to the city . On 13 March 2003 , a bomb exploded in a train compartment , as the train was entering the Mulund station in Mumbai . 10 people were killed and 70 were injured . The blast occurred a day after the tenth anniversary of the 1993 Bombay bombings . On 28 July 2003 , a bomb placed under a seat of a BEST bus exploded in Ghatkopar . The bomb killed 4 people and injured 32 . On 25 August 2003 , two blasts in South Mumbai – one near the Gateway of India and the other at Zaveri Bazaar in <unk> occurred . At least 44 people were killed and 150 injured . No group claimed responsibility for the attack , but it had been hinted that the Pakistan @-@ based Lashkar @-@ e @-@ Toiba was behind the attacks . 
 Mumbai was lashed by torrential rains on 26 – 27 July 2005 , during which the city was brought to a complete standstill . The city received 37 inches ( 940 millimeters ) of rain in 24 hours — the most any Indian city has ever received in a single day . Around 83 people were killed . On 11 July 2006 , a series of seven bomb blasts took place over a period of 11 minutes on the Suburban Railway in Mumbai at Khar , Mahim , <unk> , Jogeshwari , Borivali , and one between Khar and Santa Cruz . 209 people were killed and over 700 were injured . According to Mumbai Police , the bombings were carried out by Lashkar @-@ e @-@ Toiba and Students Islamic Movement of India ( <unk> ) . In 2008 , the city experienced xenophobic attacks by the activists of the Maharashtra Navnirman Sena ( MNS ) under Raj Thackeray on the North Indian migrants in Mumbai . Attacks included assault on North Indian taxi drivers and damage of their vehicles . There were a series of ten coordinated terrorist attacks by 10 armed Pakistani men using automatic weapons and grenades which began on 26 November 2008 and ended on 29 November 2008 . The attacks resulted in 164 deaths , 308 injuries , and severe damage to several important buildings . The city again saw a series of three coordinated bomb explosions at different locations on 13 July 2011 between 18 : 54 and 19 : 06 IST . The blasts occurred at the Opera House , Zaveri Bazaar , and Dadar , which left 26 killed , and 130 injured . The city 's Wankhede Stadium was the venue for 2011 Cricket World Cup final , where India emerged as a champion for the second time after the 1983 Cricket World Cup . 
 = Bart Gets an Elephant = 
 " Bart Gets an Elephant " is the seventeenth episode of The Simpsons ' fifth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 31 , 1994 . In this episode , Bart wins a radio contest and is awarded a full @-@ grown African elephant that he names Stampy . After Stampy wrecks the Simpsons ' house and eats all the food , Homer decides to sell Stampy to an ivory dealer . Bart runs away with Stampy to save his pet , but the family finds the two at a museum exhibit , where Homer falls into a tar pit . Homer is saved by Stampy , and so gives the elephant away to an animal refuge instead . 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder , and directed by Jim Reardon . It introduced the fictional elephant Stampy , and marks the first appearance of the recurring character Cletus Spuckler . The episode features cultural references to the songs " Sixteen Tons " and " Do @-@ Re @-@ Mi " , and the La Brea Tar Pits cluster of tar pits located in Hancock Park in Los Angeles , California . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 7 , and was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During a cleaning day at the Simpsons ' house , Bart wins a KBBL radio contest after the station 's DJs , Bill and Marty , call him . They give Bart the choice of two prizes : $ 10 @,@ 000 in cash or the " gag " prize – a full @-@ grown African elephant – and Bart chooses the elephant . This surprises Bill and Marty , who ( understandably ) believed that no one would ever actually take the gag prize , and thus have no elephant to give away . They instead offer Bart the money and a variety of other prizes , all of which he refuses , saying that he only wants the elephant - this leads to Bart being thrown out of the recording studios . Word spreads throughout town about Bill and Marty 's refusal to give Bart an elephant , prompting their boss to give them a choice : either arrange for the delivery of an elephant , or lose their jobs to a DJ machine . They decide on the former option . 
 Bart names his new elephant Stampy and ties him to a post in the backyard . Lisa complains that it 's cruel to keep an animal like an elephant as a pet , while Homer is concerned that Stampy will eat him out of house and home . In an effort to offset food costs , Bart and Homer exhibit Stampy by charging customers to see and ride him , but fail to earn enough to cover even one day 's food bill . After raising the prices for customers to see and ride the elephant fails , Homer declares they can 't afford the elephant and must sell him , much to Bart 's dismay . The family is visited by a representative of a game reserve , who says their acres of open land similar to the African savannah would be a good habitat for the elephant to live in . However , Homer dismisses this as he learns that he won 't receive any money for it since the reserve is a nonprofit organization . 
 A wildlife poacher named Mr. Blackheart then offers to buy Stampy . Homer wants to take the money , but Bart and Lisa are against the idea , especially after Mr. Blackheart openly admits to being an ivory dealer . Homer and Mr. Blackheart reach a deal , but Bart and Stampy run off in the night , wreaking havoc throughout Springfield , and are soon nowhere to be found . The family begins searching and eventually finds them at the Springfield Tar Pits , where Homer still plans to sell Stampy to the ivory dealer for the money . Bart and Lisa then angrily ask if Homer would like to be sold to an ivory dealer himself , to which Homer responds positively , before finding out that he 's stuck in one of the tar pits . Bart orders Stampy to free Homer , to which he does ( after first pulling out Barney Gumble ) . A grateful Homer finally agrees to donate the elephant to the wildlife reserve . 
 While at the reserve , Bart tearfully says goodbye to Stampy . After that , Stampy starts head @-@ butting some of the other elephants , cheered on by Bart. Marge is surprised by this , and the representative explains that , in many ways , animals are a lot like humans : some act badly because they 've had a hard life or they 've been mistreated ; but , like humans , some animals are just jerks ( which he says as Homer himself is head @-@ butting him ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder , and directed by Jim Reardon . The Simpsons ' creator Matt Groening thought it was a " quintessential " Swartzwelder episode , and executive producer / show runner David Mirkin said it was a " fantastic job by one of the most prolific writers of the show " . The most important thing to Mirkin while making the episode was to make sure that the elephant would be a " bastard " and behave rudely , unlike other animals on the show . For example , instead of putting people on his back , Stampy would put them in his mouth . Mirkin said the elephant " never quite bonds because it 's a very cantankerous animal , a concept that was very important to this episode " . Stampy has since been used several times in jokes later on in the series . For example , Stampy made an appearance in the season nine episode " Miracle on Evergreen Terrace " in one of Bart 's dreams , and in the season fourteen episode " Large Marge " , where he is used by Bart in a stunt to help Krusty the Clown win back his popularity . Stampy appeared briefly in The Simpsons Movie , where he tries to break down the giant glass dome lowered over Springfield . The episode also introduces the character Cletus Spuckler . He is shown as one of the " slack @-@ jawed yokels " <unk> at Stampy in the Simpson family 's backyard . Cletus is not named in the episode , so the staff simply referred to him as the Slack @-@ Jawed Yokel . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The Springfield Tar Pits are inspired by the La Brea Tar Pits located in Hancock Park in Los Angeles , California . The museum in the background of the scene where Homer sinks into one of the tar pits resembles the George C. Page Museum of the La Brea Discoveries . When Stampy runs away , he passes the Republican National Convention , with people cheering , and then he passes the Democratic National Convention , with people booing . This is a reference to the fact that an elephant is the symbol of the Republican Party . Homer uses Mr. <unk> , a parody of the detergent brand Mr. Clean , to clean the basement . While waiting for Bill and Marty to call , Bart eats the chocolate part of a Neapolitan ice cream . As Bart cleans , he accidentally scrubs the paint off an American Gothic painting hanging on the wall . Under the paint is a message signed by the painter , Grant Wood , reading : " If you can read this , you scrubbed too hard . " 
 The scene in which Stampy 's eye is seen through a window of the Simpson family 's house is similar to a scene with a Tyrannosaurus rex in the film Jurassic Park . While cleaning the house , Marge turns on the radio and the song " Sixteen Tons " by Merle Travis is heard . The scene in which Homer crashes his car into a deer statue at the Springfield Tar Pits parodies the lyrics to the Sound of Music song " Do @-@ Re @-@ Mi " as Homer shouts : " D 'oh ! " followed by Lisa : " A deer ! " and Marge : " A female deer ! " Homer reads an old TV Guide in which the synopsis of an episode of Gomer Pyle , U.S.M.C. reads " Gomer upsets Sgt. Carter " , a possible synopsis for every episode of that series . He also imagines the episode with a thought of both Carter and Pyle standing next to each other . Carter yells , " Pyle ! " and Pyle responds , " Shazam ! " . As Stampy wreaks havoc throughout Springfield , Patty and Selma are sucked up by a tornado and fly through the air in rocking chairs , similar to a scene in the 1939 film The Wizard of Oz . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Bart Gets an Elephant " finished forty @-@ second in the ratings for the week of March 28 to April 20 , 1994 , with a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 7 , equivalent to 10 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . The episode won an Environmental Media Award in the Best Television Episodic Comedy category , which has been awarded every year since 1991 to the best television episode with an environmental message . The episode has also received a Genesis Award in the Best Television Comedy Series category . The Genesis Awards are given out annually by the Humane Society of the United States " to the news and entertainment media for shining that spotlight into the darkest corners of animal abuse and exploitation . " 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote : " Another favourite . It 's hard to explain the special appeal of this episode . Perhaps it 's because Homer is so exceptionally dumb . Or perhaps because it contains the ' D 'oh ! ' ' A deer ! ' ' A female deer ! ' gag . " This gag was also praised by BBC News 's Mark Milne , who said : " [ It ] just cracks me up every time . Brilliant ! " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson thought the fifth season included " plenty of programs with potentially cheesy concepts " , such as " Deep Space Homer " and " Bart Gets an Elephant " . However , he thought the episode managed to " easily overcome its possible flaws " to turn into a " very fine program " . Homer 's line " Marge , I agree with you in theory . In theory , communism works — In theory " was Jacobson 's favorite of the episode . Patrick Bromley of DVD Verdict gave the episode a grade of A , and Bill Gibron of DVD Talk gave it a score of 4 out of 5 . 
 = Greater Germanic Reich = 
 The Greater Germanic Reich ( German : <unk> Reich ) , fully styled the Greater Germanic Reich of the German Nation ( German : <unk> Reich Deutscher Nation ) is the official state name of the political entity that Nazi Germany tried to establish in Europe during World War II . Albert Speer stated in his memoirs that Hitler also referred to the envisioned state as the Teutonic Reich of the German Nation , although it is unclear whether Speer was using the now seldom used " Teutonic " as an English synonym for " Germanic " . Hitler also mentions a future Germanic State of the German Nation ( German : <unk> Staat Deutscher Nation ) in Mein Kampf . 
 The territorial claims for the Greater Germanic Reich vacillated over time . As early as the autumn of 1933 , Hitler envisioned annexing such territories as Bohemia , Western Poland and Austria to Germany and creation of satellite or puppet states without economies or policies of their own . 
 Between gaining power and February 1939 , Hitler tried to conceal his true intentions towards Poland and revealed them only to his closest associates ; the signing of a non @-@ aggression pact with Poland in 1934 was a political maneuver to conceal his true intentions towards Poland . From 1934 to early 1939 , Nazi Germany secretly prepared for war against Poland and mass murder and ethnic cleansing of its population , while officially claiming to the Polish government that it would continue to guarantee Poland 's existence ( though still maintaining its claims on the Polish Corridor ) and offer Poland the right to annex the entirety of Ukraine from the Soviet Union , should Poland support Germany in a war with the Soviet Union , while Germany would annex the Baltic states and Soviet territories . Amidst and for a short time after German – Soviet negotiations for the partition of Poland between Germany and the Soviet Union took place , Hitler did not include territorial designs on the Soviet Union within the Greater Germanic Reich from 1939 to 1941 , and instead was focusing on uniting the Germanic peoples of Scandinavia and the Low Countries into the Reich . 
 This pan @-@ Germanic Empire was expected to assimilate practically all of Germanic Europe into an enormously expanded Reich . <unk> speaking , this encompassed the already @-@ enlarged German Reich itself ( consisting of pre @-@ 1938 Germany proper , Austria , Bohemia , Moravia , Alsace @-@ Lorraine , Eupen @-@ Malmedy , Memel , Lower Styria , Upper Carniola , Southern Carinthia and German @-@ occupied Poland ) , the Netherlands , the Flemish part of Belgium , Luxembourg , Denmark , Norway , Sweden , Iceland , at least the German @-@ speaking parts of Switzerland , and Liechtenstein . 
 The most notable exception was the United Kingdom , which was not projected as having to be reduced to a German province but to instead become an allied seafaring partner of the Germans . Another exception was German @-@ populated territory in South Tyrol that was part of allied Italy . Aside from Germanic Europe , the Reich 's western frontiers with France were to be reverted to those of the earlier Holy Roman Empire , which would have meant the complete annexation of all of Wallonia , French Switzerland , and large areas of northern and eastern France . Additionally , the policy of Lebensraum planned mass expansion of Germany eastwards to the Ural Mountains . Hitler planned for the " surplus " Russian population living west of the Urals to be deported to the east of the Urals . 
 = = Ideological background = = 
 = = = Racial theories = = = 
 Nazi racial ideology regarded the Germanic peoples of Europe as belonging to a racially superior Nordic subset of the larger Aryan race , who were regarded as the only true culture @-@ bearers of civilized society . These peoples were viewed as either " true Germanic peoples " that had " lost their sense of racial pride " , or as close racial relatives of the Germans . German Chancellor Adolf Hitler also believed that the Ancient Greeks and Romans were the racial ancestors of the Germans , and the first torchbearers of " Nordic – Greek " art and culture . He particularly expressed his admiration for Ancient Sparta , declaring it to have been the purest racial state : 
 " The subjugation of 350 @,@ 000 <unk> by 6 @,@ 000 Spartans was only possible because of the racial superiority of the Spartans . " The Spartans had created " the first racialist state . " 
 Furthermore , Hitler 's concept of " Germanic " did not simply refer to an ethnic , cultural , or linguistic group , but also to a distinctly biological one , the superior " Germanic blood " that he wanted to salvage from the control of the enemies of the Aryan race . He stated that Germany possessed more of these " Germanic elements " than any other country in the world , which he estimated as " four fifths of our people " . 
 Wherever Germanic blood is to be found anywhere in the world , we will take what is good for ourselves . With what the others have left , they will be unable to oppose the Germanic Empire . 
 According to the Nazis , in addition to the Germanic peoples , individuals of seemingly non @-@ Germanic nationality such as French , Polish , Walloon , Czech and so on might actually possess valuable Germanic blood , especially if they were of aristocratic or peasant stock . In order to " recover " these " missing " Germanic elements , they had to be made conscious of their Germanic ancestry through the process of Germanization ( the term used by the Nazis for this process was <unk> , " restoration to the race " ) . If the " recovery " was impossible , these individuals had to be destroyed to deny the enemy of using their superior blood against the Aryan race . An example of this type of Nazi Germanization is the kidnapping of " racially valuable " Eastern European children . 
 On the very first page of Mein Kampf , Hitler openly declared his belief that " common blood belongs in a common Reich " , elucidating the notion that the innate quality of race ( as the Nazi movement perceived it ) should hold precedence over " artificial " concepts such as national identity ( including regional German identities such as Prussian and Bavarian ) as the deciding factor for which people were " worthy " of being assimilated into a Greater German racial state ( Ein Volk , Ein Reich , Ein Führer ) . Part of the strategic methods which Hitler chose to ensure the present and future supremacy of the Aryan race ( which was , according to Hitler , " gradually approaching extinction " ) was to do away with what he described as the " small state rubbish " ( <unk> , compare <unk> ) in Europe in order to unite all these Nordic countries into one unified racial community . From 1921 onward he advocated the creation of a " Germanic Reich of the German Nation " . 
 It was the continent which brought civilization to Great Britain and in turn enabled her to colonize large areas in the rest of the world . America is unthinkable without Europe . Why would we not have the necessary power to become one of the world ’ s centres of attraction ? A hundred @-@ and @-@ twenty million people of Germanic origin – if they have consolidated their position this will be a power against which no @-@ one in the world could stand up to . The countries which form the Germanic world have only to gain from this . I can see that in my own case . My birth country is one of the most beautiful regions in the Reich , but what could it do if were left to its own devices ? There is no possibility to develop one ’ s talents in countries like Austria or Saxony , Denmark or Switzerland . There is no foundation . That is why it is fortunate that potential new spaces are again opened for the Germanic peoples . 
 = = = Name = = = 
 The chosen name for the projected empire was a deliberate reference to the Holy Roman Empire ( of the German Nation ) that existed in medieval times , known as the First Reich in Nazi historiography . Different aspects of the legacy of this medieval empire in German history were both celebrated and derided by the Nazi government . Hitler admired the Frankish Emperor Charlemagne for his " cultural creativity " , his powers of organization , and his renunciation of the rights of the individual . He criticized the Holy Roman Emperors however for not pursuing an Ostpolitik ( Eastern Policy ) resembling his own , while being politically focused exclusively on the south . After the Anschluss , Hitler ordered the old imperial regalia ( the Imperial Crown , Imperial Sword , Cross of Lothair , the Holy Lance and other items ) residing in Vienna to be transferred to Nuremberg , where they were kept between 1424 and 1796 . Nuremberg , in addition of being the former unofficial capital of the Holy Roman Empire , was also the place of the Nazi party rallies . The transfer of the regalia was thus done to both legitimize Hitler 's Germany as the successor of the " Old Reich " , but also weaken Vienna , the former imperial residence . 
 After the 1939 German occupation of Bohemia , Hitler declared that the HRE had been " resurrected " , although he secretly maintained his own empire to be better than the old " Roman " one . Unlike the " uncomfortably internationalist Catholic empire of Barbarossa " , the Germanic Reich of the German Nation would be racist and nationalist . Rather than a return to the values of the Middle Ages , its establishment was to be " a push forward to a new golden age , in which the best aspects of the past would be combined with modern racist and nationalist thinking " . 
 The historical borders of the Holy Empire were also used as grounds for territorial revisionism by the Nazis , laying claim to modern territories and states that were once part of it . Even before the war , Hitler had dreamed of reversing the Peace of Westphalia , which had given the territories of the Empire almost complete sovereignty . On November 17 , 1939 , Reich Minister of Propaganda Joseph Goebbels wrote in his diary that the " total liquidation " of this historic treaty was the " great goal " of the Nazi regime , and that since it had been signed in Münster , it would also be officially repealed in the same city . 
 = = = Pan @-@ Germanism versus Pan @-@ <unk> = = = 
 Despite intending to accord the other " Germanics " of Europe a racially superior status alongside the Germans themselves in an anticipated post @-@ war <unk> @-@ political order , the Nazis did not however consider granting the subject populations of these countries any national rights of their own . The other Germanic countries were seen as mere extensions of Germany rather than individual units in any way , and the Germans were unequivocally intended to remain the empire 's " most powerful source of strength , from both an ideological as well as military standpoint " . Even Heinrich Himmler , who among the senior Nazis most staunchly supported the concept , could not shake off the idea of a hierarchical distinction between German Volk and Germanic Völker . The SS 's official newspaper , Das Schwarze Korps , never succeeded in reconciling the contradiction between Germanic ' brotherhood ' and German superiority . Members of Nazi @-@ type parties in Germanic countries were also forbidden to attend public meetings of the Nazi Party when they visited Germany . After the Battle of Stalingrad this ban was lifted , but only if the attendees made prior notice of their arrival so that the events ' speakers could be warned in advance not to make disparaging remarks about their country of origin . 
 Although Hitler himself and Himmler 's SS advocated for a pan @-@ Germanic Empire , the objective was not universally held in the Nazi regime . Goebbels and the Reich Foreign Ministry under Joachim von Ribbentrop inclined more towards an idea of a continental bloc under German rule , as represented by the Anti @-@ Comintern Pact , Ribbentrop 's " European Confederation " project and the earlier Mitteleuropa concept . 
 = = = Germanic mysticism = = = 
 There were also disagreements within the Nazi leadership on the spiritual implications of cultivating a ' Germanic history ' in their ideological program . Hitler was highly critical of Himmler 's esoteric völkisch interpretation of the ' Germanic mission ' . When Himmler denounced Charlemagne in a speech as " the butcher of the Saxons " , Hitler stated that this was not a ' historical crime ' but in fact a good thing , for the subjugation of Widukind had brought Western culture into what eventually became Germany . He also disapproved of the <unk> projects which Himmler organized through his Ahnenerbe organization , such as excavations of pre @-@ historic Germanic sites : 
 Why do we call the whole world 's attention to the fact that we have no past ? It isn 't enough that the Romans were erecting great buildings when our forefathers were still living in mud huts ; now Himmler is starting to dig up these villages of mud huts and enthusing over every potsherd and stone axe he finds . All we prove by that is that we were still throwing stone hatchets and crouching around open fires when Greece and Rome had already reached the highest stage of culture . We really should do our best to keep quiet about this past . Instead Himmler makes a great fuss about it all . The present @-@ day Romans must be having a laugh at these relegations . 
 In an attempt to eventually supplant Christianity with a ' new @-@ old ' religion more amenable to Nazi ideology Himmler , together with Alfred Rosenberg , sought to replace it with Asatru ( the indigenous traditional religion or <unk> of the Teutonic peoples ) , of which the Japanese Shinto was seen as an almost perfect East @-@ Asian counterpart . For this purpose they had ordered the construction of sites for the worship of Germanic cults in order to exchange Christian rituals for ' Nordic @-@ Germanic ' consecration ceremonies , which included different marriage and burial rites . In Heinrich <unk> ' Adolf Hitler , <unk> im <unk> 1941 @-@ 1944 ( several editions , here Orbis Verlag , 2000 ) , Hitler is quoted as having said on 14 October 1941 : " It seems to be inexpressibly stupid to allow a revival of the cult of Odin / Wotan . Our old mythology of the gods was defunct , and incapable of revival , when Christianity came ... the whole world of antiquity either followed philosophical systems on the one hand , or worshipped the gods . But in modern times it is undesirable that all humanity should make such a fool of itself . " 
 = = Establishment strategy = = 
 The goal was first proclaimed publicly in the 1937 Nuremberg Rallies . Hitler 's last speech at this event ended with the words " The German nation has after all acquired its Germanic Reich " , which elicited speculation in political circles of a ' new era ' in Germany 's foreign policy . Several days before the event Hitler took Albert Speer aside when both were on their way to the former 's Munich apartment with an entourage , and declared to him that " We will create a great empire . All the Germanic peoples will be included in it . It will begin in Norway and extend to northern Italy . I myself must carry this out . If only I keep my health ! " On April 9 , 1940 , as Germany invaded Denmark and Norway in Operation Weserübung , Hitler announced the establishment of the Germanic Reich : 
 Just as the Bismarck Empire arose from the year 1866 , so too will the Greater Germanic Empire arise from this day . 
 The establishment of the empire was to follow the model of the Austrian Anschluss of 1938 , just carried out on a greater scale . Goebbels emphasized in April 1940 that the annexed Germanic countries would have to undergo a similar " national revolution " as Germany herself did after the Machtergreifung , with an enforced rapid social and political " co @-@ ordination " in accordance with Nazi principles and ideology ( Gleichschaltung ) . 
 The ultimate goal of the Gleichschaltung policy pursued in these parts of occupied Europe was to destroy the very concepts of individual states and nationalities , just as the concept of a separate Austrian state and national identity was repressed after the Anschluss through the establishment of new state and party districts . The new empire was to no longer be a nation @-@ state of the type that had emerged in the 19th century , but instead a " racially pure community " . It is for this reason that the Nazi occupiers had no interest in transferring real power to the various far @-@ right nationalistic movements present in the occupied countries ( such as Nasjonal Samling , the NSB , etc . ) except for temporary reasons of Realpolitik , and instead actively supported radical collaborators who favored pan @-@ Germanic unity ( i.e. total integration to Germany ) over provincial nationalism ( for example DeVlag ) . Unlike Austria and the Sudetenland however , the process was to take considerably longer . Eventually these nationalities were to be merged with the Germans into a single ruling race , but Hitler stated that this prospect lay " a hundred or so years " in the future . During this interim period it was intended that the ' New Europe ' would by run by Germans alone . According to Speer , while Himmler intended to eventually Germanize these peoples completely , Hitler intended not to " infringe on their individuality " ( that is , their native languages ) , so that in the future they would " add to the diversity and dynamism " of his empire . The German language would be its lingua franca however , likening it to the status of English in the British Commonwealth . 
 A primary agent used in stifling the local extreme nationalist elements was the Germanic SS , which initially merely consisted of local respective branches of the Allgemeine @-@ SS in Belgium , Netherlands and Norway . These groups were at first under the authority of their respective pro @-@ Nazi national commanders ( De Clercq , Mussert and Quisling ) , and were intended to function within their own national territories only . During the course of 1942 , however , the Germanic SS was further transformed into a tool used by Himmler against the influence of the less extreme collaborating parties and their SA @-@ style organizations , such as the Hird in Norway and the <unk> in the Netherlands . In the post @-@ war Germanic Empire , these men were to form the new leadership cadre of their respective national territories . To emphasize their pan @-@ Germanic ideology , the Norges SS was now renamed the <unk> SS Norge , the Nederlandsche SS the <unk> SS in Nederland and the Algemeene @-@ SS Vlaanderen the <unk> SS in Vlaanderen . The men of these groups no longer swore allegiance to their respective national leaders , but to the <unk> Führer ( " Germanic Führer " ) , Adolf Hitler : 
 I swear to you , Adolf Hitler , as Germanic Führer loyalty and bravery . I pledge you and the superiors which you appointed obedience until death . So help me God . 
 This title was assumed by Hitler on 23 June 1941 , at the suggestion of Himmler . On 12 December 1941 the Dutch fascist Anton Mussert also addressed him in this fashion when he proclaimed his allegiance to Hitler during a visit to the Reich Chancellery in Berlin . He had wanted to address Hitler as Führer aller Germanen ( " Führer of all Germanics " ) , but Hitler personally decreed the former style . Historian Loe de Jong speculates on the difference between the two : Führer aller Germanen implied a position separate from Hitler 's role as Führer und Reichskanzler des <unk> <unk> ( " Führer and Reich Chancellor of the Greater German Reich " ) , while <unk> Führer served more as an attribute of that main function . As late as 1944 occasional propaganda publications continued to refer to him by this unofficial title as well however . Mussert held that Hitler was predestined to become the Führer of Germanics because of his congruous personal history : Hitler originally was an Austrian national , who enlisted in the Bavarian army and lost his Austrian citizenship . He thus remained stateless for seven years , during which , according to Mussert , he was " the Germanic leader and nothing else " . 
 The Swastika Flag was to be used as a symbol to represent not only the National Socialist movement , but also the unity of the Nordic @-@ Germanic peoples into a single state . Using the Unification of Germany as an analogy , it was held that since the flag of the Kingdom of Prussia could not have been imposed on the other German states that would together form the new German Empire of 1871 , so too could the German national flag ( referring to the Imperial tricolour , as the Nazis had banned the black @-@ red @-@ gold version ) not be imposed on the other Germanic countries of Europe . 
 Hitler had long intended to architecturally reconstruct the German capital Berlin into a new imperial metropolis , which he decided in 1942 to rename Germania upon its scheduled completion in 1950 . The name was specifically chosen to make it the clear central point of the envisioned Germanic empire , and to re @-@ enforce the notion of a united Germanic @-@ Nordic state upon the Germanic peoples of Europe . 
 Just as the Bavarians and the Prussians had to be impressed by Bismarck of the German idea , so too must the Germanic peoples of continental Europe be programmatically steered towards the Germanic concept . He [ Hitler ] even considers it good that by renaming the Reich capital Berlin into ' Germania ' , we 'll have given considerable driving force to this task . The name Germania for the Reich capital would be very appropriate , for in spite of how far removed those belonging to the Germanic racial core will be , this capital will instill a sense of unity . 
 = = Policies undertaken in the countries = = 
 = = = Low countries = = = 
 The German plans of annexation were more advanced for the Low Countries than for the Nordic states , due in part because of their closer geographical proximity as well as cultural and ethnic ties to Germany . Luxembourg and Belgium were both formally annexed into the Nazi state during World War II , in 1942 and 1944 respectively , the latter as the new <unk> of Flandern and Wallonien ( the proposed third one , Brabant , was not implemented in this arrangement ) and a Brussels District . On April 5 , 1942 , while having dinner with an entourage including Heinrich Himmler , Hitler declared his intention that the Low Countries would be included whole into the Reich , at which point the Greater German Reich would be reformed into the Germanic Reich ( simply " the Reich " in common parlance ) to signify this change . 
 In October 1940 Hitler disclosed to Benito Mussolini that he intended to leave the Netherlands semi @-@ independent because he wanted that country to retain its overseas colonial empire after the war . This factor was removed after the Japanese took over the Netherlands East Indies , the primary component of that domain . The resulting German plans for the Netherlands suggested its transformation into a Gau Westland , which would eventually be further broken @-@ up into five new Gaue or <unk> ( historical Dutch term for a type of sub @-@ national polity ) . Fritz Schmidt , a high Nazi official in the occupied Netherlands who hoped to become the Gauleiter of this new province on Germany 's western periphery stated that it could even be called Gau Holland , as long as the <unk> ( the Dutch national anthem ) and similar patriotic symbols were to be forbidden . Rotterdam , which had actually been largely destroyed in the course of the 1940 invasion was to be rebuilt as the most important port @-@ city in the " Germanic area " due to its situation at the mouth of the Rhine river . 
 Himmler 's personal masseur Felix Kersten claimed that the former even contemplated resettling the entire Dutch population , some 8 million people in total at the time , to agricultural lands in the Vistula and Bug River valleys of German @-@ occupied Poland as the most efficient way of facilitating their immediate Germanization . In this eventuality he is alleged to have further hoped to establish an SS Province of Holland in vacated Dutch territory , and to distribute all confiscated Dutch property and real estate among reliable SS @-@ men . However this claim was shown to be a myth by Loe de Jong in his book Two Legends of the Third Reich . 
 The position in the future empire of the Frisians , another Germanic people , was discussed on 5 April 1942 in one of Hitler ’ s many wartime dinner @-@ conversations . Himmler commented that there was ostensibly no real sense of community between the different indigenous ethnic groups in the Netherlands . He then stated that the Dutch Frisians in particular seemed to hold no affection for being part of a nation @-@ state based on the Dutch national identity , and felt a much greater sense of kinship with their German Frisian brethren across the Ems River in East Frisia , an observation Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel agreed with based on his own experiences . Hitler determined that the best course of action in that case would be to unite the two Frisian regions on both sides of the border into a single province , and would at a later point in time further discuss the topic with Arthur Seyss @-@ Inquart , the governor of the German regime in the Netherlands . By late May of that year these discussions were apparently concluded , as on the 29th he pledged that he would not allow the West @-@ Frisians to remain part of Holland , and that since they were " part of the exact same race as the people of East Frisia " had to be joined into one province . 
 Hitler considered Wallonia to be " in reality German lands " which were gradually detached from the Germanic territories by the French Romanization of the Walloons , and that Germany thus had " every right " to take these back . Before the decision was made to include Wallonia in its entirety , several smaller areas straddling the traditional Germanic @-@ Romance language border in Western Europe were already considered for inclusion . These included the small <unk> @-@ speaking area centred on Arlon , as well as the Low <unk> @-@ speaking region west of Eupen ( the so @-@ called <unk> <unk> ) around the city of Limbourg , historical capital of the Duchy of Limburg . 
 = = = Scandinavia = = = 
 After their invasion in Operation Weserübung , Hitler vowed that he would never again leave Norway , and favored annexing Denmark as a German province even more due to its small size and relative closeness to Germany . Himmler 's hopes were an expansion of the project so that Iceland would also be included among the group of Germanic countries which would have to be gradually incorporated into the Reich . He was also among the group of more esoteric Nazis who believed either Iceland or Greenland to be the mystical land of Thule , a purported original homeland of the ancient Aryan race . From a military point of view , the Kriegsmarine command hoped to see the Spitsbergen , Iceland , Greenland , the Faroe Isles and possibly the Shetland Isles ( which were also claimed by the Quisling regime ) under its domination to guarantee German naval access to the mid @-@ Atlantic . 
 There was preparation for the construction of a new German metropolis of 300 @.@ 000 inhabitants called <unk> ( " North Star " ) next to the Norwegian city of Trondheim . It would be accompanied by a new naval base that was intended to be the Germany 's largest . This city was to be connected to Germany proper by an Autobahn across the Little and Great Belts . It would also house an art museum for the northern part of the Germanic empire , housing " only works of German artists . " 
 Sweden 's future subordination into the Nazis ' ' New Order ' was considered by the regime . Himmler stated that the Swedes were the " epitome of the Nordic spirit and the Nordic man " , and looked forward to incorporating central and southern Sweden to the Germanic Empire . Himmler offered northern Sweden , with its Finnish minority , to Finland , along with the Norwegian port of Kirkenes , although this suggestion was rejected by Finnish Foreign Minister Witting . Felix Kersten , claimed that Himmler had expressed regret that Germany had not occupied Sweden during Operation Weserübung , but was certain that this error was to be rectified after the war . In April 1942 , Goebbels expressed similar views in his diary , writing that Germany should have occupied the country during its campaign in the north , as " this state has no right to national existence anyway " . In 1940 , Hermann Göring suggested that Sweden 's future position in the Reich was similar to that of Bavaria in the German Empire . The ethnically Swedish Åland Islands , which were awarded to Finland by the League of Nations in 1921 , were likely to join Sweden in the Germanic Empire . In the spring of 1941 , the German military attaché in Helsinki reported to his Swedish counterpart that Germany would need transit rights through Sweden for the imminent invasion of the Soviet Union , and in the case of finding her cooperative would permit the Swedish annexation of the islands . Hitler did veto the idea of a complete union between the two states of Sweden and Finland , however . 
 Despite the majority of its people being of Finno @-@ Ugric origin , Finland was given the status of being an " honorary Nordic nation " ( from a Nazi racial perspective , not a national one ) by Hitler as reward for its military importance in the ongoing conflict against the Soviet Union . The Swedish @-@ speaking minority of the country , who in 1941 comprised 9 @.@ 6 % of the total population , were considered Nordic and were initially preferred over Finnish speakers in recruitment for the Finnish Volunteer Battalion of the Waffen @-@ SS . Finland 's Nordic status did not mean however that it was intended to be absorbed into the Germanic Empire , but instead expected to become the guardian of Germany ’ s northern flank against the hostile remnants of a conquered USSR by attaining control over Karelian territory , occupied by the Finns in 1941 . Hitler also considered the Finnish and Karelian climates unsuitable for German colonization . Even so , the possibility of Finland 's eventual inclusion as a federated state in the empire as a long @-@ term objective was mulled over by Hitler in 1941 , but by 1942 he seems to have abandoned this line of thinking . According to Kersten , as Finland signed an armistice with the Soviet Union and broke off diplomatic relations with her former brother @-@ in @-@ arms Germany in September 1944 , Himmler felt remorse for not eliminating the Finnish state , government and its " masonic " leadership sooner , and transforming the country into a " National Socialist Finland with a Germanic outlook " . 
 = = = Switzerland = = = 
 The same implicit hostility toward neutral nations such as Sweden was also held towards Switzerland . Goebbels noted in his diary on December 18 , 1941 , that " It would be a veritable insult to God if they [ the neutrals ] would not only survive this war unscathed while the major powers make such great sacrifices , but also profit from it . We will certainly make sure that this will not happen . " 
 The Swiss people were seen by Nazi <unk> as a mere offshoot of the German nation , although one led astray by decadent Western ideals of democracy and materialism . Hitler decried the Swiss as " a misbegotten branch of our Volk " and the Swiss state as " a pimple on the face of Europe " deeming them unsuitable for settling the territories that the Nazis expected to colonize in Eastern Europe . 
 Himmler discussed plans with his subordinates to integrate at least the German @-@ speaking parts of Switzerland completely with the rest of Germany , and had several persons in mind for the post of a Reichskommissar for the ' re @-@ union ' of Switzerland with the German Reich ( in analogy to the office that Josef Bürckel held after Austria 's absorption into Germany during the Anschluss ) . Later this official was to subsequently become the new <unk> of the area after completing its total assimilation . In August 1940 , Gauleiter of Westfalen @-@ South Josef Wagner and the Minister President of Baden Walter Köhler spoke in favor of the amalgamation of Switzerland to Reichsgau <unk> ( see below ) and suggested that the seat of government for this new administrative territory should be the dormant Palais des Nations in Geneva . 
 Operation Tannenbaum , a military offensive intended to occupy all of Switzerland , most likely in co @-@ operation with Italy ( which itself desired the Italian @-@ speaking areas of Switzerland ) , was in the planning stages during 1940 @-@ 1941 . Its implementation was seriously considered by the German military after the armistice with France , but it was definitively shelved after the start of Operation Barbarossa had directed the attention of the Wehrmacht elsewhere . 
 = = = Eastern France = = = 
 In the aftermath of the Munich Agreement , Hitler and French Prime Minister Édouard Daladier in December 1938 made an agreement that officially declared that Germany was relinquishing its previous territorial claims on Alsace @-@ Lorraine in the interest of maintaining peaceful relations between France and Germany and both pledged to be involved in mutual consultation on matters involving the interests of both countries . However at the same time Hitler in private advised the High Command of the Wehrmacht to prepare operational plans for a joint German – Italian war against France . 
 Under the auspices of State Secretary Wilhelm <unk> the Reich Interior Ministry produced an initial memo for the planned annexation of a strip of eastern France in June 1940 , stretching from the mouth of the Somme to Lake Geneva , and on July 10 , 1940 , Himmler toured the region to inspect its Germanization potential . According to documents produced in December 1940 , the annexed territory would consist of nine French departments , and the Germanization action would require the settlement of a million Germans from " peasant families " . Himmler decided that South Tyrolean emigrants ( see South Tyrol Option Agreement ) would be used as settlers , and the towns of the region would receive South Tyrolean place @-@ names such as <unk> , Brixen , <unk> , and so on . By 1942 Hitler had , however , decided that the South Tyroleans would be instead used to settle the Crimea , and Himmler regretfully noted " For Burgundy , we will just have to find another [ Germanic ] ethnic group . " 
 Hitler claimed French territory even beyond the historical border of the Holy Roman Empire . He stated that in order to ensure German hegemony on the continent , Germany must " also retain military strong points on what was formerly the French Atlantic coast " and emphasized that " nothing on earth would persuade us to abandon such safe positions as those on the Channel coast , captured during the campaign in France and consolidated by the Organisation Todt . " Several major French cities along the coast were given the designation Festung ( " fortress " ; " stronghold " ) by Hitler , such as Le Havre , Brest and St. Nazaire , suggesting that they were to remain under permanent post @-@ war German administration . 
 However the war ends , France will have to pay dearly , for she caused and started it . She is now being thrown back to her borders of AD 1500 . This means that Burgundy will again become part of the Reich . We shall thereby win a province that so far as beauty and wealth are concerned compares more than favorably with any other German province . 
 = = = Atlantic islands = = = 
 During the summer of 1940 , Hitler considered the possibility of occupying the Portuguese Azores , Cape Verde and Madeira and the Spanish Canary islands to deny the British a staging ground for military actions against Nazi @-@ controlled Europe . In September 1940 , Hitler further raised the issue in a discussion with the Spanish Foreign Minister Serrano <unk> , offering now Spain to transfer one of the Canary islands to German usage for the price of French Morocco . Although Hitler 's interest in the Atlantic islands must be understood from a framework imposed by the military situation of 1940 , he ultimately had no plans of ever releasing these important naval bases from German control . 
 It had been alleged by Canadian historian Holger Herwig that both in November 1940 and May 1941 , leading into and through to the period in which Japan began planning the naval attack that would bring the United States into the war , that Hitler had stated that he had a desire to " deploy long @-@ range bombers against American cities from the Azores . " Due to their location , Hitler seemed to think that a Luftwaffe airbase located on the Portuguese Azores islands were Germany 's " only possibility of carrying out aerial attacks from a land base against the United States " , in a period about a year before the May 1942 emergence of the Amerika Bomber trans @-@ oceanic range strategic bomber design competition . 
 = = = Poland = = = 
 Relations between Germany and Poland altered from the early to the late 1930s . While Hitler and Nazi party before taking power openly talked about destroying Poland and were hostile to Poles , after gaining power until February 1939 Hitler tried to conceal his true intentions towards Poland and revealed them only to his closest associates ; the signing of non @-@ aggression pact with Poland in 1934 was a political maneuver to conceal his true intentions towards Poland . Nazi Germany publicly claimed to seek <unk> with Poland to avoid Poland entering the Soviet sphere of influence , and appealed to anti @-@ Soviet sentiment in Poland . The Soviet Union in turn at this time competed with Germany for influence in Poland . In 1934 Poland reached several agreements with Germany . One was an agreement on the treatment of minorities in both countries . The other was a non @-@ aggression pact in which both countries agreed to peaceful settlement of disputes , including that over territory ; the agreement however still regarded the two countries as not having settled their borders . At this time , Germany sought to convince Poland that it would allow for Polish existence should Germany invade the Soviet Union resulting in Germany taking <unk> from the Soviet Union , by offering Poland the right to annex the entirety of Ukraine from the Soviet Union while Germany would annex other Soviet territories . In 1937 , Germany condemned Poland for violating the minorities agreement , but publicly proposed that it would accept a resolution whereby Germany would reciprocally accept the Polish demand for Germany abandon assimilation of Polish minorities if Poland upheld its agreement to abandon assimilation of Germans . 
 Germany 's proposal was met with resistance in Poland , particularly by the Polish Western Union ( <unk> ) and the opposition party National Democratic party , with Poland only agreeing to a watered down version of the Joint Declaration on Minorities , on 5 November 1937 . Hitler welcomed this agreement and meet with representatives of Polish government and representatives of Polish minority in Germany , but in secret was frustrated and held a meeting where he declared to prepare Germany for a war to destroy Poland . However , later in December 1938 , Hitler indicated to his confidants that he was still interested in utilizing Poland in a war against the Soviet Union , claiming that Polish soldiers fighting alongside Germany against the Soviet Union would be beneficial in that it would reduce the need for German manpower in the fighting . At the same time Nazi Germany has been secretly preparing German minority in Poland for war and since 1935 weapons were being smuggled and gathered in frontier Polish regions by Nazi intelligence , and spying networks established . In November 1938 , Nazi Germany organized German paramilitary units in Polish Pomerania that were to engage in diversion , sabotage as well as murder and ethnic cleansing upon German invasion of Poland . At the end of 1938 one of the first editions of Sonderfahndungsbuch Polen was printed by the Nazis , containing several thousand names of Poles targeted for execution and imprisonment after invasion of Poland . In January 1939 , Ribbentrop held negotiations with Józef Beck , the Polish minister of foreign affairs ; and Edward Rydz @-@ Śmigły , the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Polish Army ; in which Ribbentrop urged them to have Poland enter the Anti @-@ Comintern Pact under German hegemony for expansion eastward , whereby Germany offered Poland territories in Slovakia and Ukraine . 
 Ribbentrop in private discussion with German officials stated that he hoped that by offering Poland territories in the Soviet Union , that Germany would gain not only from Polish cooperation in a war with the Soviet Union , but also that Poland would surrender Polish Corridor to Germany in exchange for these gains , because though it would lose access to the Baltic Sea , it would gain access to the Black Sea via Ukraine . However Beck refused German demands to annex territory inhabited by majority of Poles and connecting majority of Polish exports and imports with the outside world and was shocked at the idea of a war with the Soviet Union . Polish administration saw the plan as a threat to Polish sovereignty , practically subordinating Poland to the Axis and the Anti @-@ Comintern Bloc while reducing the country to a state of near @-@ servitude as its entire trade would be dependent on Germany . With the aftermath of the German occupation of Czechoslovakia and creation of a German client state of Slovakia , the German government believed that Poland would yield to German demands , however it did not . In private , Hitler revealed in May that Danzig was not the real issue to him , but pursuit of Lebensraum for Germany . 
 = = Role of Britain = = 
 = = = United Kingdom = = = 
 The one Germanic @-@ language speaking country that was not included in the Pan @-@ Germanic unification aim was the United Kingdom , in spite of its near @-@ universal acceptance by the Nazi government as being part of the Germanic world . Leading Nordic ideologist Hans F. K. Günther theorized that the Anglo @-@ Saxons had been more successful than the Germans in maintaining racial purity and that the coastal and island areas of Scotland , Ireland , Cornwall and Wales had received additional Nordic blood through Norse raids and colonization during the Viking Age , and the Anglo @-@ Saxons of East Anglia and Northern England had been under Danish rule in the 9th and 10th centuries . Günther referred to this historical process as <unk> ( " additional <unk> " ) , which finally culminated in the Norman conquest of England in 1066 . Britain was thus a nation created by struggle and the survival of the fittest among the various Aryan peoples of the isles , and was able to pursue global conquest and empire @-@ building because of its superior racial heredity born through this development . 
 Hitler professed an admiration for the imperial might of the British Empire in <unk> Buch as proof of the racial superiority of the Aryan race , hoping that Germany would emulate British " ruthlessness " and " absence of moral scruples " in establishing its own colonial empire in Eastern Europe . One of his primary foreign policy aims throughout the 1930s was to establish a military alliance with both the English ( Hitler conflated England with Britain and the United Kingdom in his writings and speeches ) as well as the Italians to neutralize France as a strategic threat to German security for eastward expansion . 
 When it became apparent to the Nazi leadership that the United Kingdom was not interested in a military alliance , anti @-@ British policies were adopted to ensure the attainment of Germany ’ s war aims . Even during the war however , hope remained that Britain would in time yet become a reliable German ally . Hitler preferred to see the British Empire preserved as a world power , because its break @-@ up would benefit other countries far more than it would Germany , particularly the United States and Japan . In fact , Hitler 's strategy during 1935 @-@ 1937 for winning Britain over was based on a German guarantee of defence of the British Empire . After the war , Ribbentrop testified that in 1935 Hitler had promised to deliver twelve German divisions to the disposal of Britain for maintaining the integrity of her colonial possessions . 
 The continued military actions against Britain after the fall of France had the strategic goal of making Britain ' see the light ' and conduct an armistice with the Axis powers , with July 1 , 1940 , being named by the Germans as the " probable date " for the cessation of hostilities . On May 21 , 1940 , Franz Halder , the head of the Army General Staff , after a consultation with Hitler concerning the aims envisaged by the Führer during the present war , wrote in his diary : " We are seeking contact with Britain on the basis of partitioning the world " . 
 One of Hitler 's sub @-@ goals for the invasion of Russia was to win over Britain to the German side . He believed that after the military collapse of the USSR , " within a few weeks " Britain would be forced either into a surrender or else come to join Germany as a " junior partner " in the Axis . Britain 's role in this alliance was reserved to support German naval and aerial military actions against the USA in a fight for world supremacy conducted from the Axis power bases of Europe , Africa and the Atlantic . On August 8 , 1941 , Hitler stated that he looked forward to the eventual day when " England and Germany [ march ] together against America " and on January 7 , 1942 , he <unk> that it was " not impossible " for Britain to quit the war and join the Axis side , leading to a situation where " it will be a German @-@ British army that will chase the Americans from Iceland " . Nazi ideologist Alfred Rosenberg hoped that after the victorious conclusion of the war against the USSR , Englishmen , along with other Germanic nationalities , would join the German settlers in colonizing the conquered eastern territories . 
 From a historical perspective Britain ’ s situation was likened to that which the Austrian Empire found itself in after it was defeated by the Kingdom of Prussia in the Battle of Königgrätz in 1866 . As Austria was thereafter formally excluded from German affairs , so too would Britain be excluded from continental affairs in the event of a German victory . Yet afterwards , Austria @-@ Hungary became a loyal ally of the German Empire in the pre @-@ World War I power alignments in Europe , and it was hoped that Britain would come to fulfill this same role . 
 = = = Channel Islands = = = 
 The British Channel Islands were to be permanently integrated into the Germanic Empire . On July 22 , 1940 , Hitler stated that after the war , the islands were to be given to the control of Robert Ley 's German Labour Front , and transferred into Strength Through Joy holiday resorts . Nazi scholar Karl Heinz Pfeffer toured the islands in 1941 , and recommended that the German occupiers should appeal to the islanders ' Norman heritage and treat the islands as " Germanic micro @-@ states " , whose union with Britain was only an accident of history . He likened the preferred policy concerning the islands similar to the one pursued by the British in Malta , where the Maltese language had been " artificially " supported against the Italian language . 
 = = = Ireland = = = 
 A military operation plan for the invasion of Ireland in support of Operation Sea Lion was drawn up by the Germans in August 1940 . Occupied Ireland was to be ruled along with Britain in a temporary administrative system divided into six military @-@ economic commands , with one of the headquarters being situated in Dublin . Ireland 's future position in the New Order is unclear , but it is known that Hitler would have united Ulster with the Irish state . 
 = = Role of Northern Italy = = 
 Hitler regarded northern Italians to be strongly Aryan but not southern Italians . The Ahnenerbe , an archaeological organization associated with the SS , asserted that archaeological evidence proved the presence of Nordic @-@ Germanic peoples in the region of South Tyrol in the Neolithic era that it claimed proved the significance of ancient Nordic @-@ Germanic influence on northern Italy . The Nazis regarded the ancient Romans to have been largely a people of the Mediterranean race however they claimed that the Roman ruling classes were Nordic , descended from Aryan conquerors from the North ; and that this Nordic Aryan minority was responsible for the rise of Roman civilization . The Nazis viewed the downfall of the Roman Empire as being the result of the deterioration of the purity of the Nordic Aryan ruling class through its intermixing with the inferior Mediterranean types that led to the empire 's decay . In addition racial intermixing in the population in general was also blamed for Rome 's downfall , claiming that Italians were a hybrid of races , including black African races . Due to the darker complexion of Mediterranean peoples , Hitler regarded them as having traces of Negroid blood and therefore did not have strong Nordic Aryan heritage and were thus inferior to those that had stronger Nordic heritage . Hitler held immense admiration for the Roman Empire and its legacy . Hitler praised post @-@ Roman era achievements of northern Italians such as Sandro Botticelli , Michelangelo , Dante Alighieri , and Benito Mussolini . The Nazis ascribed the great achievements of post @-@ Roman era northern Italians to the presence of Nordic racial heritage in such people who via their Nordic heritage had Germanic ancestors , such as Nazi ideologist Alfred Rosenberg recognizing Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci as exemplary Nordic men of history . Nazi official Hermann Hartmann wrote that Italian scientist Galileo Galilei was clearly Nordic with deep Germanic roots because of his blonde hair , blue eyes , and long face . The Nazis claimed that aside from biologically Nordic people that a Nordic soul could inhabit a non @-@ Nordic body . Hitler emphasized the role of Germanic influence in Northern Italy , such as stating that the art of Northern Italy was " nothing but pure German " , and Nazi scholars viewed that the Ladin and <unk> minorities of Northern Italy were racially , historically and culturally a part of the Germanic world . Plans to incorporate northern Italy into the Greater Germanic Reich were influenced by the collapse of the Nazi regime 's ally Fascist regime in Italy . 
 Hitler praised Roman civilization and Roman military discipline , and emphasized the connection of the advancement of Germans as being indebted to the Romans . In particular Hitler praised the Romans for civilizing the early tribal Germans and noted that Arminius , the Germanic hero who defeated a Roman army at the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest , had been honoured by being given the rank of eques by the Romans , and that what Arminius had learned from the Romans gave Germans the opportunity to become disciplined soldiers . Whereas fellow Nazi ideologist Alfred Rosenberg regarded the fall of the Roman Empire as the fault of Roman Emperor Caracalla 's " indiscriminate " grant of citizenship , Hitler blamed its fall on the Jewish influence upon Christianity as imposed by Paul the Apostle who Hitler claims twisted an Aryan faith opposed to Jewry into a faith that promoted the equality of all men ; and that the spread of Christianity in this form is what ruined Rome . 
 The Nazi regime 's stances in regards to northern Italy was influenced by the regime 's relations with the Italian government , and particularly Mussolini 's Fascist regime . Hitler deeply admired and emulated Mussolini . Hitler emphasized the racial closeness of his ally Mussolini to Germans of Alpine racial heritage . Hitler regarded Mussolini to not be seriously contaminated by the blood of the Mediterranean race . Other Nazis had negative views of Mussolini and the Fascist regime . The Nazi Party 's first leader , Anton Drexler was one of the most extreme in his negative views of Mussolini - claiming that Mussolini was " probably " a Jew and that Fascism was a Jewish movement . In addition there was a perception in Germany of Italians being racially weak , feckless , corrupt and corrupting , bad soldiers as perceived as demonstrated at the Battle of Caporetto in World War I , for being part of the powers that established the Treaty of Versailles , and for being a treacherous people given Italy 's abandonment of the Triple Alliance with Germany and Austria @-@ Hungary in World War I to join the Entente . Hitler responded to the review of Italy betraying Germany and Austria @-@ Hungary in World War I by saying that this was a consequence of Imperial Germany 's decision to focus its attention on upholding the moribund Austro @-@ Hungarian empire while ignoring and disregarding the more promising Italy . 
 The region of South Tyrol had been a place of contending claims and conflict between German nationalism and Italian nationalism . One of the leading founders of Italian nationalism , Giuseppe Mazzini , along with Ettore <unk> , claimed that the German @-@ speaking South Tyrolian population were in fact mostly a <unk> population of Roman origin who needed to be " liberated and returned to their rightful culture " . With the defeat of Austria @-@ Hungary in World War I , the peace treaty designated to Italy the South Tyrol , with its border with Austria along the Brenner Pass . The Italian Fascist regime pursued <unk> of South Tyrol , by restricting use of the German language while promoting the Italian language ; promoting mass migration of Italians into the region , encouraged mainly through industrialization ; and resettlement of the German @-@ speaking population . 
 After Mussolini had made clear in 1922 that he would never give up the region of South Tyrol from being in Italy , Hitler adopted this position . Hitler in Mein Kampf had declared that concerns over the rights of Germans in South Tyrol under Italian sovereignty was a non @-@ issue considering the advantages that would be gained from a German @-@ Italian alliance with Mussolini 's Fascist regime . In Mein Kampf Hitler also made clear that he was opposed to having a war with Italy for the sake of obtaining South Tyrol . This position by Hitler of abandoning German land claims to South Tyrol produced aggravation amongst some Nazi members who up to the late 1920s found it difficult to accept the position . 
 On 7 May 1938 , Hitler during a public visit to Rome declared his commitment to the existing border between Germany ( that included Austria upon the Anschluss ) and Italy at the Brenner Pass . 
 In 1939 , Hitler and Mussolini resolved the problem of self @-@ determination of Germans and maintaining the Brenner Pass frontier by an agreement in which German South Tyroleans were given the choice of either assimilation into Italian culture , or leave South Tyrol for Germany ; most opted to leave for Germany . 
 After King Victor Emmanuel III of the Kingdom of Italy removed Mussolini from power , Hitler on 28 July 1943 was preparing for the expected abandonment of the Axis for the Allies by the Kingdom of Italy 's new government , and was preparing to exact retribution for the expected betrayal by planning to partition Italy . In particular Hitler was considering the creation of a " Lombard State " in northern Italy that would be incorporated into the Greater Germanic Reich , while South Tyrol and Venice would be annexed directly into Germany . 
 In the aftermath of the Kingdom of Italy 's abandonment of the Axis on 8 September 1943 , Germany seized and de facto incorporated Italian territories into its direct control . 
 After the Kingdom of Italy capitulated to the Allies in September 1943 , according to Goebbels in his personal diary on 29 September 1943 , wrote that Hitler had expressed that the Italian @-@ German border should extend to those of the region of Veneto . Veneto was to be included into the Reich in an " autonomous form " , and to benefit from the post @-@ war influx of German tourists . At the time when Italy was on the verge of declaring an armistice with the Allies , Himmler declared to Felix Kersten that Northern Italy , along with the Italian @-@ speaking part of Switzerland , was " bound to eventually be included in Greater Germany anyway " . 
 Whatever was once an Austrian possession we must get back into our own hands . The Italians by their infidelity and treachery have lost any claim to a national state of the modern type . 
 After the rescue of Mussolini and the establishment of the Italian Social Republic ( RSI ) , in spite of urging by local German officials , Hitler refused to officially annex South Tyrol , instead he decided that the RSI should hold official sovereignty over these territories , and forbade all measures that would give the impression of official annexation of South Tyrol . However , in practice the territory of South Tyrol within the boundaries defined by Germany as Operationszone <unk> that included Trent , Bolzano , and Belluno , were de facto incorporated into Germany 's Reichsgau Tirol @-@ Vorarlberg and administered by its Gauleiter Franz Hofer . While the region identified by Germany as Operationszone <unk> Küstenland that included Udine , Gorizia , Trieste , Pola , Fiume ( Rijeka ) , and Ljubljana were de facto incorporated into Reichsgau Kärnten and administered by its Gauleiter Friedrich Rainer . 
 In a supplementary OKW order dated 10 September 1943 , Hitler decrees on the establishment of further Operational Zones in Northern Italy , which were the stretch all the way to the French border . Unlike <unk> and Küstenland , these zones did not immediately receive high commissioners ( <unk> <unk> ) as civilian advisors , but were military regions where the commander was to exercise power on behalf of Army Group B. Operation zone Nordwest @-@ <unk> or Schweizer Grenze was located between the Stelvio Pass and Monte Rosa and was to contain wholly the Italian provinces of <unk> and Como and parts of the provinces of Brescia , Varese , Novara and Vercelli . The zone of <unk> Grenze was to encompass areas west of Monte Rosa and was to incorporate the province of Aosta and a part of the province of Turin , and presumably also the provinces of Cuneo and Imperia . 
 From Autumn 1943 onward , members of the Ahnenerbe , associated with the SS , asserted that archaeological evidence of ancient farmsteads and architecture proved the presence of Nordic @-@ Germanic peoples in the region of South Tyrol in the Neolithic era including prototypical Lombard style architecture , the significance of ancient Nordic @-@ Germanic influence on Italy , and most importantly that South Tyrol by its past and present and historic racial and cultural circumstances , was " Nordic @-@ Germanic national soil " . 
 = = Expected participation in the colonization of Eastern Europe = = 
 Despite the pursued aim of pan @-@ Germanic unification , the primary goal of Nazi Germany ’ s territorial expansionism was to acquire sufficient Lebensraum ( living space ) in Eastern Europe for the Germanic <unk> ( superhumans ) Aryan master race . The primary objective of this aim was to transform Germany into a complete economic <unk> , the end @-@ result of which would be a state of continent @-@ wide German hegemony over Europe . This was to be accomplished through the enlargement of the territorial base of the German state and the expansion of the German population , and the wholesale extermination of the indigenous Slavic inhabitants and the Germanisation of Baltic inhabitants . 
 [ on German colonization of Russia ] As for the two or three million men whom we need to accomplish this task , we will find them more quickly than we think . They will come from Germany , Scandinavia , the western countries , and America . I shall no longer be here to see all that , but in twenty years the Ukraine will already be a home for twenty million inhabitants besides the natives . 
 Because of their perceived racial worth , the Nazi leadership was enthusiastic at the prospect of " recruiting " people from the Germanic countries to also settle these territories after the Slavic inhabitants would have been exterminated or otherwise driven out . The racial planners were partly motivated in this because studies indicated that Germany would likely not be able to recruit enough colonial settlers for the eastern territories from its own country and other Germanic groups would therefore be required . Hitler insisted however that German settlers would have to dominate the newly colonized areas . Himmler 's original plan for the <unk> settlement was to settle Dutch and Scandinavians there in addition to Germans , which was unsuccessful . 
 = = Later development = = 
 After the German invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941 , Hitler 's preoccupation with the Pan @-@ Germanic plan began to fade , although the idea was never abandoned . As the foreign volunteers of the Waffen @-@ SS were increasingly of non @-@ Germanic origin , especially after the Battle of Stalingrad , among the organization 's leadership ( e.g. Felix Steiner ) the proposition for a Greater Germanic Empire gave way to a concept of a European union of self @-@ governing states , unified by German hegemony and the common enemy of Bolshevism . The Waffen @-@ SS was to be the eventual nucleus of a common European army , where each state would be represented by a national contingent . Himmler himself , however , gave no concession to these views , and held on to his Pan @-@ Germanic vision in a speech given on April 1943 to the officers of SS divisions <unk> , Das Reich and Totenkopf : 
 We do not expect you to renounce your nation . ... We do not expect you to become German out of opportunism . We do expect you to subordinate your national ideal to a greater racial and historical ideal , to the Germanic Reich . 
 = SummerSlam ( 1990 ) = 
 SummerSlam ( 1990 ) was the third annual SummerSlam professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view produced by the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . It took place on August 27 , 1990 , at The Spectrum in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . The card featured ten televised matches , including two main events . The Ultimate Warrior successfully defended his WWF World Heavyweight Championship against Rick Rude in a steel cage match , and Hulk Hogan defeated Earthquake by countout . 
 The pay @-@ per @-@ view also included two other title matches . Mr. Perfect lost his WWF Intercontinental Championship to the Texas Tornado , who was a substitute for Brutus Beefcake , who had been injured in a real @-@ life accident . The Hart Foundation won the WWF Tag Team Championship from Demolition in a two out of three falls match . Each of the matches was built up through feuds scripted by the WWF 's writers , and the matches that took place at the event had pre @-@ determined outcomes that had been decided by the WWF . 
 = = Background = = 
 Paul Roma began feuding with The Rockers ( Shawn Michaels and Marty Jannetty ) during the July 21 , 1990 , episode of WWF Superstars . Roma was attacked after a match by Dino Bravo ; when The Rockers came to the ring for the following match , Roma accused them of attacking him . The argument turned physical , and Roma was backed up by Hercules . One week later , Roma and Hercules appeared on the Brother Love Show , an interview segment , and announced that they had formed a tag team known as Power and Glory . A match between the two teams was later scheduled for SummerSlam . 
 The feud between Mr. Perfect and Brutus Beefcake began at the 1990 Royal Rumble . Beefcake , whose gimmick included cutting his opponents ' hair , was wrestling The Genius , Perfect 's manager . When he began giving The Genius a haircut when Perfect interfered and caused a double disqualification . Perfect and Beefcake wrestled each other at WrestleMania VI , and Beefcake won the match . Perfect won the Intercontinental Championship on April 23 , 1990 in a tournament final . He had caused Beefcake to be eliminated from the tournament by interfering in his match . Beefcake and Perfect had a series of matches at house shows leading up to their planned SummerSlam match . Shortly before SummerSlam , Beefcake was injured while he was standing on a beach and a female friend 's knees hit him in the face while she was parasailing . Several bones in his face were legitimately broken , including his jaw and nose . As a result , the Texas Tornado replaced Beefcake in the SummerSlam match . 
 At the 1990 Royal Rumble , Sensational Sherri , Randy Savage 's valet , appeared on the Brother Love show . Brother Love discussed the definition of a " lady " , using Sherri as an example . He then discussed " peasants " , bringing out Sapphire , Dusty Rhodes 's valet , as an example . Sherri and Sapphire fought , which led to Savage and Rhodes fighting to defend their valets . Rhodes and Sapphire faced Savage and Sherri in a mixed tag team match at WrestleMania VI . Rhodes and Sapphire won the match with assistance from Miss Elizabeth , Savage 's former valet . For SummerSlam , individual matches were scheduled , with Sapphire facing Sherri and Savage wrestling Rhodes . Meanwhile , Sapphire had been receiving gifts from an anonymous benefactor . 
 Tito Santana and Rick Martel formed a tag team named Strike Force in 1987 . They won the WWF Tag Team Championship together before Martel abandoned Santana during a match against the Brain Busters at WrestleMania V. This led to a lengthy feud between the two , The team split up as a result and the former partners had a lengthy <unk> and a blow off match was scheduled for SummerSlam . Martel was injured prior to the SummerSlam match , so the WWF created a storyline that he was unable to compete because he was participating in a modeling competition in Paris . He was replaced in the match with The Warlord , who had been competing against Santana on house shows since April . 
 Demolition and The Hart Foundation had faced each other two years earlier at SummerSlam 1988 , where Demolition had successfully defended the WWF Tag Team Championship . The Hart Foundation duo of Jim Neidhart and Bret Hart later focused on singles wrestling but soon reunited as a team . They announced on the March 31 episode of WWF Superstars that they wanted to challenge for the WWF Tag Team Championship after the WrestleMania match between The Colossal Connection and Demolition . After Demolition won the match , The Hart Foundation faced The Rockers on the April 28 episode of Saturday Night 's Main Event . Demolition interfered , causing a double disqualification . On the July 14 episode of WWF Superstars , Demolition and The Hart Foundation brawled after The Hart Foundation claimed that Demolition having three members was evidence of cowardice . The following week , a match between the teams was announced for SummerSlam . The stipulations stated that it would be a two out of three falls match and that only two members of Demolition would be allowed at ringside . 
 The feud between Bad News Brown and Jake Roberts began when Roberts sent Brown a birthday present on the April 22 episode of Wrestling Challenge . Upon opening the package , Brown found a rubber snake ; it was revealed that Brown was afraid of snakes . On the May 5 episode of WWF Superstars , the two men agreed to a match ; Brown later claimed that his fear of snakes was cured , although he was quickly proven wrong . On the July 28 episode of WWF Superstars , it was announced that Brown and Roberts face each other at SummerSlam with the Big Boss Man as a special referee . Brown also announced that he would bring 200 pounds of Harlem sewer rats to counteract Roberts 's boa constrictor , Damien . 
 Nikolai Volkoff began the year partnered with Boris Zhukov in a pro @-@ Soviet tag team known as The Bolsheviks . After Lithuania , Volkoff 's homeland , declared its independence from the Soviet Union on March 11 , 1990 , The Bolsheviks split up . Volkoff became pro @-@ Western and was presented with an American flag by Jim Duggan . They were then booked to face a Japanese team known as The Orient Express at SummerSlam . 
 As Hulk Hogan was being interviewed on The Brother Love Show during the May 26 episode of WWF Superstars , he was attacked by Earthquake . Earthquake hit Hogan with a chair and jumped on his stomach with an Earthquake splash . Hogan was taken from the stage on a stretcher . Hogan did not appear on WWF programming for almost two months , as the company teased his possible retirement . On the July 14 episode of WWF Superstars , Hogan announced that he was returning to action and would be facing Earthquake at SummerSlam . Hogan also stated that his friend Tugboat would be in his corner during the match . Earthquake and his ally Dino Bravo attacked Tugboat during a match on the August 18 episode of WWF Superstars . Tugboat was carried offstage on a stretcher after Earthquake performed two Earthquake splashes on him . Tugboat was rescued by the Big Bossman , but the injuries he sustained were said to be severe enough to prevent him from appearing at SummerSlam . Hogan later announced that the Big Bossman would be in his corner instead . 
 The Ultimate Warrior and Rick Rude had been feuding since the 1989 Royal Rumble . The competed against each other in a " <unk> " to show off their muscles , after which Rude attacked the Warrior . They faced each other at WrestleMania V in a match for the Warrior 's Intercontinental Championship . Rude won the title , but the Warrior regained the title belt at SummerSlam 1989 . The Ultimate Warrior defeated Hulk Hogan for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship at WrestleMania VI ; he was forced to give up the Intercontinental Championship , and Rick Rude was named the top challenger for SummerSlam . It was later announced that the bout would be a steel cage match . 
 To build anticipation for the pay @-@ per @-@ view event , the WWF broadcast SummerSlam Fever on the USA Network . The show aired on August 19 and included several interviews as well as an appearance by Hulk Hogan and manager Jimmy Hart on the Brother Love show . It also featured nine matches that included wrestlers who would be competing at SummerSlam . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the pay @-@ per @-@ view began , Shane Douglas defeated Buddy Rose in a dark match . Hercules attacked Shawn Michaels prior to the first televised bout , hitting him in the knee with a chain . Although his partner was unable to compete , Jannetty controlled the beginning of the match , using hip tosses to throw Roma and Hercules . Power and Glory then attacked Jannetty while their manager , Slick , distracted the referee . Although Jannetty was able to mount a brief comeback , Roma and Hercules wore him down and got the victory after performing a <unk> — a superplex from Hercules followed by a diving splash from Roma . 
 The Texas Tornado got an early advantage in his match with Mr. Perfect , controlling the bout with several power moves . Mr. Perfect recovered and used a neckbreaker and sleeper hold to wear down the Tornado . As Perfect was showing off for the crowd , the Tornado attacked him from behind . He wore Perfect down with a <unk> before hitting him with a discus punch to win the match and the Intercontinental Championship . 
 Sensational Sherri came to the ring for her match against Sapphire , but Sapphire did not come to the ring when she was announced . As a result , Sherri was awarded the victory by forfeit . 
 Tito Santana began his match with The Warlord by locking his opponent in a headlock and dropkicking him out of the ring . The Warlord took control of the match when he returned to the ring , using his strength to control the match . Slick , The Warlord 's manager , interfered , but Santana regained a brief advantage . The Warlord gained the victory by pinning Santana after performing a running powerslam . 
 In the two out of three falls tag team match , Crush and Smash represented Demolition against the team of Bret Hart and Jim Neidhart . Both teams relied on brawling tactics during the first fall , which was awarded to Demolition when they pinned Hart after performing the Demolition Decapitation . They continued to wear down Hart until Neidhart tagged back into the match . He and Hart took turns attacking Smash before performing the Hart Attack . Before they could pin him , however , Crush prevented the referee from making a pinfall count , which resulted in a disqualification . During the third fall , Demolition distracted the referee , enabling Ax , their third member , to come to hide at ringside . When Smash was knocked out of the ring , Ax took his place while Smash hid . Well rested , Ax used his power to control the match against Hart . Ax and Smash traded places again , but the Legion of Doom appeared and pulled Ax out from under the ring . With Smash distracted , Hart and Neidhart were able to tackle Crush and pin him to win the match and the WWF Tag Team Championship . 
 During the following match , a covered cage sat at ringside , supposedly containing 200 pounds of Harlem sewer rats , although the contents of the cage were not revealed . Bad News Brown controlled most of the early stages of his match against Jake Roberts . Roberts attempted to perform the DDT twice , including once when Brown was arguing with special referee Big Bossman , but Brown blocked the move both times . Outside the ring , Brown hit Roberts with a chair while the Big Bossman was not looking . Roberts gained the advantage by punching Brown repeatedly but was kicked to the outside after Brown reversed a DDT attempt into a back <unk> . Brown hit Roberts with a chair again but was disqualified when the Bossman saw him . Brown tried to gain revenge after the match by attacking Roberts 's boa constrictor , Damien , but the Bossman attacked Brown to save the snake . 
 Sgt. Slaughter was a guest on The Brother Love Show . He presented Brother Love the " Greatest American Award " and claimed that the United States had become soft and weak . He also declared war on Nikolai Volkoff . Prior to the next match , Duggan and Volkoff sang " God Bless America " . They were attacked by The Orient Express ( Akio Sato and Pat Tanaka ) , and all four men fought in the ring . Sato and Tanaka attacked Volkoff while preventing him from tagging Duggan into the match ; Mr. Fuji , the manager of The Orient Express , also hit Volkoff with his cane . When Tanaka missed a big splash , Volkoff tagged in Duggan , who performed several <unk> on Tanaka and Sato . Volkoff and Duggan then Irish whipped their opponents into each other ; Duggan clotheslined Tanaka from a three @-@ point stance and pinned him to win the match . 
 As the match between Dusty Rhodes and Randy Savage was about to begin , Ted DiBiase appeared and announced that he had purchased Sapphire . Rhodes walked down the aisle toward DiBiase and Sapphire but was attacked from behind by Savage . Savage controlled most of the match , and Sherri interfered to help him while the referee was distracted . Rhodes made a brief comeback , but Savage was able to pin him after hitting him with Sherri 's purse , which was said to be loaded with a heavy object . After the match , Rhodes chased after DiBiase and Sapphire but was unable to catch up to their departing limousine . 
 Control went back and forth at the beginning of the match between Hulk Hogan and Earthquake . When Earthquake rolled out of the ring , both wrestlers ' corner @-@ men got involved , as Hogan and the Big Boss Man fought against Earthquake and Dino Bravo . Bravo and Earthquake powerslammed Hogan while the referee was distracted , which allowed Earthquake to lock Hogan in a Boston crab hold . After being powerslammed outside of the ring by Earthquake , Hogan tried to lift his opponent but was unsuccessful . Earthquake powerslammed Hogan and performed two Earthquake splashes but was unable to get the pinfall . Hogan recovered and bodyslammed Earthquake . He performed a legdrop on Earthquake before Earthquake 's manager , Jimmy Hart interfered . Hogan threw him out of the ring and then bodyslammed Earthquake onto a table at ringside . Hogan got back into the ring and won the match via countout . Earthquake attacked Hogan after the match , but the Big Boss Man saved Hogan by hitting Earthquake with a chair . 
 The Ultimate Warrior gained the early advantage in his steel cage match with Rick Rude . After the Warrior missed a splash attempt , Rude attempted to win the match by escaping the cage . The Warrior stopped him , and both wrestlers unsuccessfully attempted to perform their finishing moves . Rude was then able to perform a Rude Awakening neckbreaker but chose to continue attacking the Warrior rather than escape the cage . Rude performed a <unk> and tried to leave through the cage door . The Warrior held him back while Bobby Heenan , Rude 's manager , tried to pull Rude out . The Warrior pulled both Rude and Heenan into the cage . He punched Heenan and then threw him out of the cage with an atomic drop . Warrior then knocked Rude down three times with clotheslines and threw him onto the ring floor with a gorilla press drop . Warrior climbed over the cage and dropped to the arena floor to win the match and retain the WWF World Heavyweight Championship . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Rockers continued to feud with Power and Glory , and the teams faced each other during an elimination match at the 1990 Survivor Series . Power and Glory 's team won the match , during which Roma eliminated Michaels after performing a <unk> with Hercules . 
 The Texas Tornado held the Intercontinental Championship for almost three months before dropping it back to Perfect on November 19 . The match was aired on the December 15 edition of WWF Superstars . The two men were also on opposite sides for an elimination match at Survivor Series . Perfect eliminated the Tornado with a PerfectPlex , but the Tornado 's team won the match . Brutus Beefcake did not wrestle again until 1993 . 
 Dusty Rhodes continued to feud with Randy Savage after SummerSlam . During their match on the October 22 episode of Prime Time Wrestling , Ted DiBiase interfered and attacked Rhodes 's son , Dustin . DiBiase and Dusty Rhodes faced each other as part of an elimination match at Survivor Series 1990 ; DiBiase won the match for his team . The continued rivalry led to a tag team match at the 1991 Royal Rumble that pitted Dusty and Dustin Rhodes against DiBiase and his bodyguard , Virgil . DiBiase and Virgil won the match and then began feuding with each other . Sapphire left the WWF soon after SummerSlam , and Savage stopped feuding with Rhodes in favor of challenging the Ultimate Warrior for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship . 
 After Martel returned from his injury , he was placed in a storyline in which he blinded Jake Roberts by spraying him in the face with cologne on the Brother Love Show . Martel and Santana faced each other on the November 11 episode of Wrestling Challenge , and Roberts interfered . Unable to see clearly , he accidentally attacked Santana but vowed revenge against Martel . Bad News Brown left the WWF after SummerSlam , citing broken promises as his reason . 
 The Hart Foundation held the WWF Tag Team Championship for almost seven months before dropping the title belts to The Nasty Boys on March 24 , 1991 . Demolition feuded with the Legion of Doom , including several six @-@ man matches in which the Ultimate Warrior sided with the Legion of Doom . They also faced each other at Survivor Series 1990 as part of an elimination match . During the match , Smash , Crush , and both members of the Legion of Doom were disqualified for fighting outside the ring . Demolition was disbanded altogether shortly thereafter , although Smash and Crush continued to wrestle under different gimmicks . 
 Nikolai Volkoff competed at Survivor Series 1990 in a match that pitted him and his partners against Sgt. Slaughter , Boris Zhukov , and The Orient Express . He was eliminated by Slaughter , who was later disqualified when his manager , General Adnan hit Tito Santana with an Iraqi flag . Slaughter and Volkoff also faced each other on many house shows throughout the second half of 1990 . Slaughter won the majority of these contests before setting his sights on the WWF World Heavyweight Championship . 
 At the 1990 Survivor Series , Hogan and Tugboat were members of the <unk> team in a match against the Natural Disasters team , which included Earthquake and Bravo . Hogan eliminated Bravo , and Tugboat and Earthquake were both counted out while fighting each other . The <unk> won the match , with Hogan as the only wrestler remaining at the end . During the 1991 Royal Rumble match , Hogan eliminated his friend Tugboat . Hogan and Earthquake were the final two wrestlers at the end ; Hogan eliminated Earthquake to win the match . Tugboat later turned heel and changed his name to Typhoon ; he and Earthquake formed a tag team known as The Natural Disasters . 
 Rude left the WWF in late 1990 due to a dispute with the company about money . As a result , Bobby Heenan took his place in matches that had already been booked against the Big Boss Man . The Ultimate Warrior held the WWF World Heavyweight Championship until dropping it to Sgt. Slaughter at the 1991 Royal Rumble . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Writing for Online Onslaught , Adam Gutschmidt felt that the event had some humorous moments but did not offer a solid card of wrestling . He enjoyed the match between The Hart Foundation and Demolition , but he rated the Bad News Brown vs. Jake Roberts and Orient Express vs. Jim Duggan and Nikolai Volkoff matches as duds . He gave the Randy Savage vs. Dusty Rhodes match negative one star . Julian <unk> of Bleacher Report enjoyed the event , particularly the tag team title match . He felt that the Ultimate Warrior vs. Rick Rude match was not as good as their previous encounter , but he stated that the event was " well worth viewing " . The columnists reviewed the event for 411mania . Stuart <unk> felt that the match for the WWF Tag Team Championship was the highlight ; he enjoyed the show at the time but saw nothing particularly special looking back at the event . Arnold Furious felt that the storyline for the tag team title match was too complicated and that the main event match was " really poor " . He thought that the show had too many matches , some of which served little purpose , and that the show is not worth recommending . Sydney Brown felt that the match for the Intercontinental Championship was " nothing " but that the tag team title match was good ; Brown felt that both main events were the best of any SummerSlam to that point and gave the event a B @-@ minus . 
 The attendance for the event was 19 @,@ 304 , which was the lowest attendance of the first seven <unk> . The WWF collected $ 338 @,@ 452 from ticket revenue . The pay @-@ per @-@ view buyrate was 3 @.@ 8 , which was down from the previous year 's 4 @.@ 8 but higher than the following year 's 2 @.@ 7 buyrate . 
 SummerSlam 1990 was released on VHS by Coliseum Video on September 27 , 1990 , in the United States . The VHS edition was released in the United Kingdom on April 6 , 1992 . It was first released on DVD as part of Silver Vision 's WWE Tagged Classics series on August 1 , 2005 . The event is also included as part of WWE 's SummerSlam Anthology boxed DVD set . The anthology was released on August 5 , 2008 in North America and was released on October 6 , 2008 in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Elderly Instruments = 
 Elderly Instruments is a musical instrument retailer in Lansing , Michigan , United States , with a reputation as a " megastore " , a repair shop and a locus for folk music including bluegrass and " twang " . Specializing in fretted instruments , including acoustic and electric guitars , banjos , mandolins , and ukuleles . Elderly maintains a selection of odd or rare instruments . Elderly is known as the premier repair shop for fretted instruments , as one of the larger vintage instrument dealers in the United States , and as a major dealer of Martin guitars in particular . 
 Industry publications , music retail trade , and bluegrass music journals have featured articles about the Elderly repair staff . The company also provides consignment services for rare and vintage instruments . Since its founding in 1972 , Elderly has undergone two major expansions : into mail order in 1975 and then into Internet sales in the 1990s . In 2005 it was the subject of a lawsuit by Gibson Guitar Corporation concerning trademark infringement . Today it is recognized internationally for its services and products ; its mail order and Internet business account for 65 – 70 percent of its total revenue . Elderly grossed $ 12 million in 1999 , and by 2007 was grossing $ 17 million annually . 
 In addition to retail and repair services , Elderly Instruments is noted as a center of local music culture for bluegrass and " twang " music . Elderly Instruments operates a wholesale record distribution business , <unk> Distributing , in the lower level of its complex , serving more than 300 small retail businesses . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1969 , New York City native Stan Werbin moved to Ann Arbor , Michigan to attend graduate school . He took his banjo and guitar with him and immediately developed his interest in folk music . Werbin participated in a lively local music scene that included collaborations and " open mic nights " at local venues . It was through those experiences that Werbin developed his appreciation for the variety of instruments the musicians were playing , as well as the various types of music that fall under the folk music genre . 
 When Werbin finished graduate school , he looked for business opportunities and decided to use his knowledge of used guitars . He searched for vintage instruments to buy at low prices , particularly those made before World War II ; Werbin then sold the instruments after repairing and restoring them . Although he initially tried to open his business in Ann Arbor , Werbin eventually decided to avoid operating there due to the high number of other musical instrument dealers . In 1972 , Werbin and Sharon McInturff , his college friend and business partner , leased retail space in East Lansing , Michigan for $ 60 a month in a building that also housed the Michigan Youth Politics Institute , a non @-@ profit organization dedicated to encouraging young adults to vote . With $ 500 of capital , the two began advertising locally . Werbin and McInturff took the " Elderly " name from a 1971 classified ad they saw , in which the seller marketed his Gibson Les Paul as a " nice , elderly instrument " . 
 Elderly Instruments expanded during the following years . Shortly after the 1972 United States Presidential election , the Michigan Youth Politics Institute moved out of the space across the hall , and Elderly took over the entire basement of the building . In 1975 , it expanded into the mail order business . By 1982 , Elderly Instruments had about 25 employees but little available space , and so in the following year the owners bought an Independent Order of Odd Fellows building in Lansing , Michigan . After it was renovated for retail use , the company moved into it in January 1984 , and in 1986 Werbin bought out McInturff to become the sole owner . In 1994 , Elderly expanded again by buying adjacent building space that had once been a post office and a National Cash Register Company building . Around the same time , it began taking merchandise orders over its new web site . The company does not , however , sell merchandise through online auction sites such as eBay , unlike many other independent musical instrument retailers . Werbin notes that entering the Internet business was not much of a challenge for Elderly , as the staff was already experienced at taking and shipping orders for customers throughout the world . He also notes that , with its mail order and Internet business accounting for 65 – 70 percent of its total revenue , Elderly would have experienced limited growth in Lansing had it not expanded into those markets . The company operates in around 35 @,@ 000 ft ² ( 3 @,@ 300 m ² ) of space , and is one of the largest vintage instruments dealers in the United States . 
 Elderly Instruments has become known due to its attention to folk music niche markets ( Eddie Collins of Bluegrass Now remarked " The roots of what today has become perhaps the world 's most well known music store for acoustic instruments can be traced directly to the folk music boom of the 1960s . " ) , its reputation as a repair shop , its selection of vintage instruments , and its position as a major Martin guitar dealer . 
 In May 2010 , an Elderly manager told the publication <unk> that economic recession had affected the business and forced layoffs of part @-@ time employees , and that Elderly 's being in Michigan worsened the effects . He noted that as the consumer electronics business began to recover , the musical instrument business followed . 
 = = Gibson Guitar Corporation lawsuit = = 
 In June 2005 , Gibson Guitar Corporation filed a cease and desist order and an accompanying lawsuit against Elderly Instruments . The complaint alleged that Elderly was selling a banjo on its web site marketed as a " Gibson copy " and that the phrase constituted a trademark infringement . Despite Elderly 's claim of having addressed the issue by changing the phrase first to " Famous Maker Copy " and then to " Classic Bluegrass Banjo Copy , " Gibson persisted with the complaint and asked for unspecified damages . Gibson later issued a press release stating that the lawsuit had been settled . 
 In the same year , Gibson severed its contract with Elderly as a retailer of Gibson products , citing a contract stipulation that retailers should not carry any competing brands of banjos and mandolins . Elderly had been one of nine retailers selling the specialized Gibson Bluegrass line of banjos and mandolins , although it also carried other brands . Werbin attempted to rectify the situation by offering a dedicated area of the store for Gibson products , but Gibson proceeded with the action . As a result , Elderly does not offer new Gibson products for sale . The incident was well @-@ publicized in the media and discussed at length in consumer forums . 
 = = Instrument sales = = 
 In 2007 , Elderly sold more than 16 @,@ 000 instruments . The company is a dealer of Martin guitars , as well as other mainstream brands such as Guild and Fender . It sells used Gibson instruments , but not new models as a result of the Gibson lawsuit . Although the bulk of its business comes from guitar sales , the company carries a range of other instruments , such as banjos , ukuleles , mandolins , accordions , <unk> , <unk> , sitars , musical saws , and African thumb pianos . Some of the rarer instruments are purchased as collectibles . Elderly is an exclusive retailer of " <unk> @-@ A @-@ <unk> " , ukuleles made from various tin lunch box designs . The journal Bluegrass Unlimited has noted Elderly Instruments for carrying " elite " brands of instruments , such as Paul Duff mandolins , Huss & Dalton acoustic guitars , Stelling banjos , and Nash electric guitars . Elderly was once one of only two American retailers for <unk> <unk> , now only sold directly . As part of its consignment business , Elderly sells " collections " of instruments that sometimes have rich histories . In September 2006 , it placed the <unk> family 's personal collection of resonator instruments up for sale , including some of the Dobro and National brands . The <unk> family was responsible for founding those companies and innovating the resonator instrument trade . 
 Elderly Instruments carries a number of Martin guitars , including valuable vintage models . In interviews , Werbin frequently mentions Martins made before World War II as especially desirable and " memorable " pieces of the Elderly Instruments inventory . The guitars are sought after by musicians from the bluegrass and other genres . Werbin purchases some of the more valuable or interesting instruments for his personal collection , and has lent them to museums as temporary exhibits . 
 Periodicals for the bluegrass genre such as Bluegrass Canada and Bluegrass Now have featured stories about Elderly and its selection of bluegrass instruments and repair services . Elderly employees maintain connections with the bluegrass industry by attending trade shows such as the International Bluegrass Association Trade Show in Louisville , Kentucky . At these shows , Elderly showcases typical bluegrass instruments , such as banjos , guitars , mandolins , fiddles and <unk> guitars , to musicians and businesspeople . Elderly Instruments staff members have set up organizations such as the " Friends of Bluegrass " to support local bluegrass musicians . 
 Michigan Living magazine noted Elderly 's liberal policy regarding the handling of instruments , something Werbin attributes to his difficulty shopping for Martin guitars in New York City in the 1960s . The magazine also notes that customers are encouraged to pick up and play any instrument , an unusual policy for a high @-@ end instrument retailer . Impromptu " jam sessions " are frequent in the store , as customers try out guitars . 
 = = Repair and appraisals = = 
 The repair shop occupies about 3 @,@ 000 ft ² ( 280 m ² ) of space in the Elderly building . A number of notable guitarists have sent their instruments to Elderly for complete restoration or other major work such as refinishing and <unk> . Elderly 's repair department services other fretted instruments such as banjos , ukuleles , and <unk> . 
 In February 1996 , a feature article in Guitar Shop Magazine documented the company 's restoration of a severely damaged Martin <unk> @-@ M acoustic guitar . The Martin had been in the trunk of an automobile when a semi @-@ trailer truck struck the automobile . Almost every part of the guitar was damaged : the top , back , sides , fingerboard , and neck block . The worst damage , and the most challenging to repair , was caused by the neck block having punched through the back of the guitar . The owner brought the Martin to Elderly after other repair shops had rejected it as being beyond repair . The technicians at Elderly successfully restored the Martin after a labor @-@ intensive process that included a new Adirondack spruce top . 
 Elderly provides an appraisal service for vintage instruments . It employs five full @-@ time appraisers who use a detailed scale to rate the quality of instruments . Their appraisal services have been noted in media , such as The Music and Sound Retailer , as being among the best in the industry . Customers may either bring instruments directly into the store or send them by mail . Elderly owner Werbin attributes some of the company 's success and reputation to the quality of the appraisals . 
 = = Marketing and business model = = 
 In addition to a printed catalog , Elderly sends lists of available vintage instruments to subscribers in the U.S. and several other countries by mail and e @-@ mail . Elderly purchases some of its used instruments from customers and then offers them for sale , while others are offered on consignment . Although larger retailers dominate the Internet market share ( Elderly grossed $ 12 million in 1999 , larger retail outlets such as Guitar Center grossed $ 297 million ) , Elderly attempts to serve vertical markets by offering specialized or rare items on its web site , such as left @-@ handed guitars and instrument @-@ specific books . 
 Werbin notes that while discounting products by 40 percent set his business apart from the local competition in the 1970s , outlets such as Guitar Center now also offer discounts . In response to questions about his strategy for competing with larger retailers such as Guitar Center and American Musical Supply , which also operate mail order and Internet businesses , Werbin states that he has learned to operate on small margins to stay competitive : " The mom @-@ and @-@ pop businesses that have survived have learned to operate on narrow margins . " 
 = = Other enterprises = = 
 After opening its first retail space , Elderly began selling records supplied by Rounder Records , a small distributor that later grew into an independent record label specializing in roots music . After trying other distributors , Werbin started his own distribution company in 1979 , named Old <unk> Distributing . By 1987 , Old <unk> was servicing about 300 small retail operations , operating from the basement of Elderly 's Lansing showroom . In 1997 , the operation was renamed <unk> Distributing . 
 Elderly dedicates a section of its retail space to record sales . A full @-@ time purchasing manager maintains a comprehensive selection of both mainstream and rare music , much of it in the folk and bluegrass genres ; this is due to the belief that customers will become more interested in the music after making an audio purchase and then in turn buy a musical instrument . Elderly also sells instructional books and other material , much of which focuses on folk music and bluegrass genres . 
 The store also offers a music school focused on folk music and related instruments . 
 = = <unk> and other folk music = = 
 Noise , a periodical published by the local newspaper Lansing State Journal , has written that Elderly Instruments is the focus of an emerging form of American folk music , named " twang " , sometimes referred to as " alternative country " . Several twang bands perform and record in Lansing , many including at least one Elderly employee . Current and former Elderly employees attribute the twang influence at the store to the proliferation of associated instruments , educational materials , and musicians . East Lansing radio station <unk> has been hosting a twang music show since 1995 . 
 Lawrence B. Johnson , music critic for The Detroit News , called Elderly a " folk music mecca " and a megastore that is a haven for folk musicians . In the past it has been one of the chief sponsors of the annual National Folk Festival . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 2008 - Best Guitar Store - Player 's Choice Awards , Acoustic Guitar magazine 
 = 68th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment = 
 The 68th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment served in the Union Army during the American Civil War . Also known as the Cameron Rifles or the Second German Rifle Regiment , the men were mostly German immigrants . Organized in July 1861 , three months after the outbreak of war , the 68th saw service in the Eastern and Western theaters . 
 As a part of the Army of the Potomac , it was initially assigned to the defenses of Washington , D.C. Later , the 68th was transferred to the Shenandoah Valley and fought at the Battle of Cross Keys . The men of the 68th were then reassigned to central Virginia and found themselves in the thick of the fighting at Second Bull Run . After returning to the nation 's capital , the regiment fought in Chancellorsville and was routed by Confederate forces . At Gettysburg , they saw battle on two of the three days and took heavy losses . 
 The regiment was then transferred to the west and participated in the Chattanooga Campaign . The 68th fought in the battles of Wauhatchie and Missionary Ridge , assisting in the Union victories there . The regiment marched to relieve the siege of Knoxville , and then spent the last year of the war on occupation duty in Tennessee and Georgia , before being disbanded in November 1865 . 
 = = Raising the regiment = = 
 On July 22 , 1861 , the United States War Department authorized Robert J. Betge to raise a volunteer infantry regiment in New York . Recruited to serve for three years , the men came mostly from Manhattan ( New York City ) , and also from New Jersey , Maryland , and Pennsylvania . The mostly German immigrants were also called the " Second German Rifles " ( the First German Rifles , raised several months earlier , were the 8th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment ) , but Betge called the regiment the " Cameron Rifles " , after Secretary of War Simon Cameron . The officers were also German , and many had served in the armies of Austria , Prussia , and other German states . In all , 1 @,@ 020 men filled the ranks when the regiment had finished recruiting . 
 Accepted into service on August 19 , the 68th left New York the next day , traveling by train from Perth Amboy , New Jersey , to Washington , D.C. , to join the brigade of Brigadier General Louis Blenker in the Army of the Potomac . Blenker was a German immigrant himself , a refugee of the Revolutions of 1848 , and many of the units under his command were heavily German @-@ American . <unk> at Roach 's Mills , Virginia , the 68th participated in the defense of Washington , losing three men in their first combat , a minor skirmish with a Confederate patrol . 
 In November , the Army was reorganized ; the 68th was shifted to Colonel Adolph von Steinwehr 's brigade and Blenker moved up to command the division . They encamped at Hunter 's Chapel , Virginia , for the remainder of the winter . There , Betge was brought before a court @-@ martial , accused of " conduct unbecoming an officer and gentleman " : confiscating two horses and other property from " loyal " Virginia citizens , and taking a bribe to hire the 68th 's regimental sutler . He was not convicted , and was permitted to return to the regiment . 
 = = Shenandoah Valley = = 
 In March 1862 , the Army was again reorganized and Blenker 's brigade was merged into the II Corps , led by Maj. Gen. Edwin Vose Sumner . That month the 68th moved to Warrenton , Virginia , where it came into contact with Confederate cavalry ; three of the officers were captured . The following month , Blenker 's brigade was moved into Maj. Gen. John C. Frémont 's Mountain Department , necessitating a march to Winchester , Virginia , where the 68th and the rest of Frémont 's army guarded the western part of the Shenandoah Valley against incursions by Confederate forces under Lt. Gen. Stonewall Jackson . Their long march had left the 68th bereft of supplies and low on rations . Colonel Betge protested against the mistreatment of his regiment , and was placed under arrest , surrendering command to Lt. Col. , John H. Kleefish . 
 The initial action in Jackson 's Valley Campaign took place to their east , but in June Frémont 's force of 15 @,@ 000 joined the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ man division of Brig. Gen. James Shields to converge on Jackson south of Massanutten Mountain . Jackson was determined to attack the two Union columns separately and arranged half of his troops to block Shields on the right side of the mountain , while the other half , commanded by Maj. Gen. Richard S. Ewell , blocked the left side . Jackson 's wish was realized when , on June 8 , Frémont 's army attacked . Frémont , believing he was striking Jackson 's rear , instead attacked Ewell head @-@ on , and Jackson soon brought his whole force to bear on the Union troops in the Battle of Cross Keys . The men of the 68th came under concentrated fire for the first time but were not heavily involved in the battle , although two men were killed . The battle was a defeat for the Union , and Frémont 's force did not attack again , being blocked instead by a small holding force from Ewell 's wing . The rest of Jackson 's force then turned to attack Shields 's army the next day at Port Republic , but Frémont 's infantry did not figure in the battle , another Confederate victory , though his artillery shelled the enemy from long range . 
 After the battle , the 68th marched to Cedar Creek and the army was placed under the overall command of Maj. Gen. John Pope ; Frémont 's force was designated the First Corps of the Army of Virginia . Frémont , who outranked Pope , resigned in protest , and President Lincoln accepted the resignation . Lincoln replaced him with Maj. Gen. Franz Sigel , who had been commanding troops in the Western theater . Sigel was , like many in the First Corps , a German immigrant , and the 68th and the other German regiments in the First Corps were happy for the change in commanders . Sigel ordered the 68th to Luray for picket duty . When they arrived , Betge resigned his commission and Kleefish continued to command the regiment until a new colonel could be assigned . 
 = = Second Bull Run = = 
 The regiment remained in the Shenandoah Valley until August 1862 when they joined Pope 's army and moved south to engage Robert E. Lee 's Army of Northern Virginia . They arrived the day after the Battle of Cedar Mountain , and joined Pope 's army in its retreat from that Confederate victory . After a series of minor actions along the Rappahannock , Pope 's forces met Jackson 's half of Lee 's army near Manassas Station . Lee had divided his army into wings led by Jackson and Lt. Gen. James Longstreet and sent Jackson 's force to raid Pope 's rear to cut his supply line . Pope believed he had a chance to destroy the Army of Northern Virginia one half at a time , and made the decision to attack . Jackson 's men struck the first blow , however , and drove off a portion of the Union force . The next day , having taken up a strong defensive position along an unfinished railroad , Jackson awaited Pope 's advance . Pope obliged him , sending the Army forward against Jackson 's lines . The 68th and the rest of Sigel 's corps occupied the middle of the advancing line . They were unable to break Jackson 's lines , and withdrew . The Cameron Rifles had seen some action at Cross Keys , but this was their first experience of fierce fighting and they acquitted themselves well , despite the failure of the attack . 
 By the afternoon , Longstreet joined Jackson with the other half of Lee 's army and attacked the Union left . Longstreet believed it was too late for an attack , and did not attack that day , other than in a minor clash where his lines met some federal units at dusk . The next day , August 30 , Pope attacked Jackson again at 3 : 00 p.m. in the afternoon . Again , the attacking forces could not overcome their enemies ' positions , and this time Longstreet counterattacked and forced them back toward their original positions . Sigel 's forces , which did not take part in the initial Union assault , held firm against the Confederate counterattack , but after heavy casualties the army retreated . Among the casualties were 22 killed from the 68th ( including Kleefish ) and 59 wounded , making Second Bull Run one of the unit 's bloodiest engagements . 
 The Army of Virginia retreated nearly all the way back to Washington . Pope was relieved and Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan placed in charge of the army once more . After burying Kleefish in Washington , the 68th redeployed to Fairfax , Virginia . With Kleefish dead and Betge having resigned , command of the regiment fell temporarily to Major Carl von <unk> . The officers then petitioned the Governor Horatio Seymour to commission Gotthilf von Bourry d <unk> as their new colonel , which he did . Von Bourry , a veteran of the Austrian army , had served on Blenker 's staff as a captain and had impressed the officers of the 68th with his tales of heroism in the Second Italian War of Independence . 
 = = Army of the Potomac = = 
 = = = Chancellorsville = = = 
 The 68th spent September and October 1862 defending Washington where they were attached to Alexander Schimmelfennig 's 1st Brigade of the XI Corps in the Army of the Potomac ( the re @-@ numbered I Corps formerly of the Army of Virginia ) still commanded by Sigel . In November , they advanced to Centreville with the rest of the Army , now under the command of Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside . Burnside , who had taken over the Army when McClellan was relieved of command earlier that month , was determined to bring battle to the enemy , and he ordered the Army to advance once more to the Rappahannock . The 68th , however , remained in reserve with the rest of the XI Corps , and so was spared any part in the defeat that befell the Union Army at the Battle of Fredericksburg . The Army retreated once again , and the 68th joined them in winter quarters at Stafford , Virginia . 
 Morale was low in the Army after Fredericksburg and the retreat that followed , and Burnside was replaced in command by Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker . Several corps commanders were also replaced , including Sigel , whose XI Corps passed to Maj. Gen. Oliver O. Howard on April 2 , 1863 , when he resigned in protest because he believed he deserved a larger corps . In a corps of mostly German regiments , Howard was immediately unpopular and his distribution of religious tracts to the troops did not improve the relationship . The regiment was smaller , too , than it had been : just 259 present for duty . Their new commander in the XI Corps 's 3rd Brigade was another German , Brig. Gen. Carl Schurz . 
 Hooker brought the Army to the Rappahannock for a third time , but rather than crossing directly into the defenses of the Confederates , he divided his much larger force to attack Lee 's army from two sides simultaneously . This time , the 68th and the other regiments of the XI Corps were part of the action , crossing the river with Hooker 's main force on May 1 , 1863 , to attack Lee 's left . Despite Hooker 's careful planning , the Battle of Chancellorsville was another Union defeat . After crossing the Rappahannock , Hooker had ordered the wing including the XI Corps to halt and await the Confederate attack . Faced with attacks on two sides , Lee daringly divided his smaller force to engage both : the pause allowed Lee to send Jackson with the bulk of the army to meet the Union advance and outflank their right wing the next day , May 2 . Although he was warned of the impending attack , Howard did not order the units under his command to entrench , and when Jackson 's men arrived the XI Corps was caught unprepared . At about 5 : 15 p.m. , Jackson 's force of 21 @,@ 500 men caught the XI Corps in the flank and by surprise as the men were preparing their dinner . Schurz ordered his brigade to shift to meet the assault , and the 68th jumped to action , but they were still overwhelmed by the force of numbers and began a disorganized retreat an hour into the attack . After falling back , the 68th and the other retreating units rallied to avoid a complete rout and held off the Confederates until nightfall . The XI Corps suffered nearly 2 @,@ 500 casualties , including 5 dead , 16 wounded , and 32 missing from the 68th . The next day , the XI Corps held the left of the Union line and was again attacked , but unlike the previous day , they were not at the focus of the Confederate attack . The entire army retreated across the Rappahannock the next day , defeated once more . 
 = = = Gettysburg = = = 
 In the wake of Chancellorsville , newspapers heaped scorn on the German regiments , blaming the 68th and the others for the defeat . The XI Corps suffered from low morale , and several officers resigned their commissions , including Lt. Col. Carl Vogel and five others from the 68th . The Army of the Potomac pulled back from the Rappahannock , and was soon on the move as the Army of Northern Virginia slipped past and marched north toward Pennsylvania . Led by still another new commander , Maj. Gen. George Meade , the Union army followed the Confederates north . The 68th , now with 267 present for duty , had been shifted to the XI Corps 's 1st Brigade under Brig. Gen. Leopold von Gilsa when the Army of the Potomac prepared to meet the rebels at the Battle of Gettysburg . The XI Corps was among the first to arrive on the scene on July 1 , 1863 . Schurz 's brigade arrived first , and he ordered them to take up defensive positions north of the town . The other two divisions arrived next , and Howard arrayed them to resist the rebel onslaught he knew was coming soon . The landscape was mostly devoid of features that would aid in defense , but Gilsa 's men were able to entrench on one low rise , Blocher 's Knoll . The 68th was sent forward to skirmish , along with the 54th New York and part of the 153rd New York , and were the first to be attacked and ousted from their positions when Lt. Gen. Jubal Early 's Confederate division came on in numbers and outflanked them . The army retreated south of the town , but Howard , after arguing with Maj. Gen. Winfield Scott Hancock over who was in command in Meade 's absence , rallied the troops there and ordered them to entrench . 
 The 68th began the second day in a more defensible position on Cemetery Hill . This placed them at the center of the Union line , and most of the day 's early action was on the flanks . In the evening , however , Early 's forces attacked again ; the charging Confederates quickly reached the top of the hill and some hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat broke out , but losses were light because the growing darkness made it difficult for soldiers on both sides to shoot accurately . Reinforcements from the II Corps arrived and helped the XI Corps hold the position . On the third day , the 68th remained in that position , but the major attack of the day , Pickett 's Charge , was to their left . The 68th performed better than they had at Chancellorsville , participating in their first Union victory . They paid the price with much higher casualties , 8 killed and 63 wounded ; 67 were made prisoners of war , many on the first day during the retreat to Cemetery Hill . In the thick of the action for two out of three days , the 68th lost more men at Gettysburg than in any other battle . 
 = = Chattanooga campaign = = 
 Lee 's army retreated into Virginia and , after some delay , the Army of the Potomac followed . After a skirmish in Hagerstown , Maryland , on July 12 , the 68th crossed the Potomac into Virginia on July 16 and took up guard duty along the Orange and Alexandria Railroad near Warrenton . The regiment remained there until September , when it and the rest of the XI Corps were detached from the Army of the Potomac and sent to Tennessee . The XI and XII Corps , under Hooker 's command , made up an independent force added to the Armies of the Tennessee , the Cumberland , and the Ohio , which were all operating in that theater . Maj. Gen. William Rosecrans , having just lost the Battle of Chickamauga , was besieged in Chattanooga , and the other armies were gathering to lift the siege and attack the Confederate army there , led by Lt. Gen. Braxton Bragg . Traveling for seven days by rail , the 68th arrived in Tennessee on September 30 . 
 The regiment spent the first month guarding railroads again , this time west of Chattanooga . Rosecrans soon found himself relieved of duty , and Maj. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant was placed in overall command of the three armies plus Hooker 's two corps . The 68th , too , saw a change in its leadership when Col. von Bourry was cashiered for drunkenness and command passed to Lt. Col. Albert von Steinhausen . By this time , losses from Gettysburg and illness had reduced the regiment to 127 men present for duty , just over a tenth of their numbers from the start of the war . 
 Grant 's armies converged on Chattanooga and planned to attack Bragg 's army . Getting into place required the XI and XII Corps to cross the Tennessee River at Bridgeport , Alabama , and march rapidly for Lookout Valley , opening the supply line to Chattanooga . They did so , to the surprise of the Confederate forces there , which had not expected an attack from that quarter . On October 28 , Hooker 's two corps were attacked by a part of Bragg 's army , which had by now been joined by Longstreet and some units from the Army of Northern Virginia . Bragg ordered Longstreet to drive the federals back and he attacked . In the ensuing Battle of Wauhatchie , the XII Corps took the brunt of the initial assault . Hooker bypassed Howard and ordered Schurz to bring up the XI Corps to join the fight . The engagement was confused on both sides , but the Union forces were victorious , driving off the rebels and inflicting twice the casualties they received . With the supply lines now reopened to Chattanooga , Grant planned to dislodge Bragg 's army . At the Battle of Lookout Mountain , the 68th was held in reserve on the first day , November 24 . The battle continued the next day and a part of Howard 's XI Corps , including the 68th , was shifted to the far left of the Union lines to reinforce Sherman 's attack on Missionary Ridge . There , the 68th skirmished with the enemy , but was unable to advance . The Confederates were forced to retreat , however , as Maj. Gen. George Thomas 's troops ' assault on their center sent Bragg 's army into retreat from the ridge . 
 Four days later , on November 28 , the 68th , still attached to Sherman 's army , marched north to relieve Burnside 's army , which was besieged in Knoxville , Tennessee . Before they arrived , however , Burnside managed to defeat the enemy , and the regiment returned south . It spent the winter guarding railroads near their winter quarters in Bridgeport . In April , the enlistments of many three @-@ year men were due to expire , including the men of the 68th . The men were sent to Louisville , Kentucky , and then by rail back to New York City for four weeks ' leave of absence . With the war not yet over , the government encouraged re @-@ enlisting , and many of the 68th did so . The three @-@ year men of the 8th and 29th Infantry , two other German @-@ American units reduced by casualties and expiring enlistment terms , were consolidated into the 68th . Drafted men and substitutes brought the ranks up to 400 present for duty . 
 = = Re @-@ enlistment and the end of the war = = 
 Among those continuing in the army was the colonel of the 8th New York , Prince Felix Salm @-@ Salm . As the 68th had been without a colonel since von Bourry had been cashiered , Governor Seymour appointed Salm @-@ Salm to the post on June 8 , 1864 . The youngest son of a minor German prince , Salm @-@ Salm had served in the Prussian and Austrian armies before coming to America and joining the Union Army in 1861 . His appointment to lead the 68th caused consternation among the officers , who had hoped for the promotion of one of their own . They protested to the governor unsuccessfully , but accepted that Salm @-@ Salm was to be their leader . After the commissions and re @-@ enlistments were sorted out , the 68th returned to Tennessee . They were again serving under Hooker in the XX Corps , which was consolidated from the XI and XII Corps and had now been attached permanently to Thomas 's Army of the Cumberland . The 68th was assigned to Maj. Gen. James B. Steedman 's 4th Brigade of the new corps and spent the next few months patrolling the Nashville and Chattanooga Railway in Tennessee . By that time , Confederate resistance in the area was weakened , and the rails and bridges were not damaged . Salm @-@ Salm 's wife , Agnes , joined him during the winter of 1864 – 1865 , and the officers spent much of their time entertaining . 
 The 68th was not involved in the Battle of Nashville that December , in which Lt. Gen. John Bell Hood 's Confederate army was nearly destroyed , but Salm @-@ Salm did get permission to join the battle himself while the 68th stayed at their patrol stations . After Thomas 's victory at Nashville , the 68th was ordered to prepare to pursue what remained of Hood 's army . They redeployed to Decatur , Alabama , where Salm @-@ Salm rejoined the regiment . They skirmished with Hood 's rear guard , but the rainy weather aided the Confederates ' escape . Salm @-@ Salm led the regiment in the minor engagements following in January and February 1865 at Elrod 's Tan Yard , Hog Jaw Valley , and Johnson 's Crook . As Maj. Gen. William T. Sherman 's Army of the Tennessee advanced farther into Georgia , the 68th did as well , making Atlanta their headquarters in March 1865 . They continued to serve in northern Georgia through the spring and summer of 1865 , and were stationed there when news came that the major Confederate armies had surrendered to Grant and Sherman . While there , they were ordered to facilitate the transition from a slave @-@ based economy to a sharecropper system by encouraging plantation owners and their former slaves to sign farming contracts . 
 The 68th moved to Fort Pulaski , outside Savannah , Georgia , in October 1865 . The men remained there until November 30 , 1865 , when , with the war finally ended , the 68th New York was mustered out of federal service . They boarded a steamship for New York and received their final pay at Hart 's Island on December 14 , where they disbanded . The regiment had served for more than four years , and had suffered casualties of 47 killed , 133 wounded , and 116 captured . 
 = Scottish castles = 
 Scottish castles are buildings that combine fortifications and residence , built within the borders of modern Scotland . Castles arrived in Scotland with the introduction of feudalism in the twelfth century . Initially these were wooden motte @-@ and @-@ bailey constructions , but many were replaced by stone castles with a high curtain wall . During the Wars of Independence , Robert the Bruce pursued a policy of castle slighting . In the late Middle Ages new castles were built , some on a grander scale as " livery and maintenance " castles that could support a large garrison . Gunpowder weaponry led to the use of gun ports , platforms to mount guns and walls adapted to resist bombardment . 
 Many of the late Medieval castles built in the borders were in the form of tower houses , smaller pele towers or simpler bastle houses . From the fifteenth century there was a phase of Renaissance palace building , which restructured them as castle @-@ type palaces , beginning at Linlithgow . Elements of Medieval castles , royal palaces and tower houses were used in the construction of Scots baronial estate houses , which were built largely for comfort , but with a castle @-@ like appearance . In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the military significance of castles declined , but they increasingly became tourist attractions . Elements of the Scots Baronial style would be revived from the late eighteenth century and the trend would be confirmed in popularity by the rebuilding of Balmoral Castle in the nineteenth century and its adoption as a retreat by Queen Victoria . In the twentieth century there were only isolated examples of new castle @-@ influenced houses . Many tower houses were renovated , and many castles were taken over by the National Trust for Scotland or Historic Scotland and are open to the public . 
 = = Middle Ages = = 
 Castles , in the sense of a fortified residence of a lord or noble , arrived in Scotland as a consequence of the centralising of royal authority in the twelfth century . Prior to the 1120s there is very little evidence of castles having existed in Scotland , which had remained less politically centralised than in England with the north still ruled by the kings of Norway . David I of Scotland ( r . 1124 – 53 ) spent time at the court of Henry I of England , becoming Earl of Huntingdon , and returned to Scotland with the intention of extending royal power across the country and modernising Scotland 's military technology , including the introduction of castles . The Scottish king encouraged Norman and French nobles to settle in Scotland , introducing a feudal mode of landholding and the use of castles as a way of controlling the contested Scottish Lowlands . Historian Lise Hull has suggested that the creation of castles in Scotland was " less to do with conquest " and more to do with " establishing a governing system " . 
 These were primarily wooden motte @-@ and @-@ bailey constructions , of a raised mount or motte , surmounted by a wooden tower and a larger adjacent enclosure or bailey , both usually surrounded by a fosse ( a ditch ) and palisade , and connected by a wooden bridge . They varied in size from the very large , such as the Bass of Inverurie , to more modest designs like Balmaclellan . In England many of these constructions were converted into stone " keep @-@ and @-@ bailey " castles in the twelfth century , but in Scotland most of those that were in continued occupation became stone castles of " enceinte " from the thirteenth century , with a high embattled curtain wall . The need for thick and high walls for defence forced the use of economic building methods , often continuing the Scottish tradition of dry @-@ stone rubble building , which were then covered with a lime render , or harled for weatherproofing and a uniform appearance . In addition to the baronial castles there were royal castles , often larger and providing defence , lodging for the itinerant Scottish court and a local administrative centre . By 1200 these included fortifications at Ayr and Berwick . In Scotland Alexander II ( r . 1198 – 1249 ) and Alexander III ( 1241 – 86 ) undertook a number of castle building projects in the modern style . Alexander III 's early death sparked conflict in Scotland and English intervention under Edward I in 1296 . The resulting Wars of Independence brought this phase of castle building to an end and began a new phase of siege warfare . 
 The first recorded siege in Scotland was the 1230 siege of Rothesay Castle where the besieging Norwegians were able to break down the relatively weak stone walls with axes after only three days . When Edward I invaded Scotland he brought with him the siege capabilities that had evolved south of the border , resulting in the rapid fall of major castles . Edinburgh Castle fell within three days , and Roxburgh , Jedburgh , Dunbar , Stirling , Lanark and Dumbarton castles all surrendered to the English king . Subsequent English sieges , such as the attacks on Bothwell and Stirling , again used considerable resources including giant siege engines and extensive teams of miners and masons . As a result , Robert the Bruce ( r . 1306 – 29 ) adopted a policy of castle destruction , rather than allow fortresses to be easily retaken and then held by the English , beginning with his own castles at Ayr and Dumfries , and including Roxburgh and Edinburgh . After the Wars of Independence , new castles began to be built , often on a grander scale as " livery and maintenance " castles , to house retained troops , like Tantallon , Lothian and Doune near Stirling , rebuilt for Robert Stewart , Duke of Albany in the fourteenth century . 
 Early gunpowder weapons were introduced to Scotland by the 1330s . The new technology began to be installed in Scottish castles by the 1380s , beginning with Edinburgh . In the fifteenth century , gunpowder weaponry fundamentally altered the nature of castle architecture . Existing castles were adapted to allow the use of the new weapons by the incorporation of " keyhole " gun ports , platforms to mount guns and walls that were adapted to resist bombardment . Ravenscraig , Kirkcaldy , begun about 1460 , is probably the first castle in the British Isles to be built as an artillery fort , incorporating " D @-@ shape " bastions that would better resist cannon fire and on which artillery could be mounted . It also used " letter box " gun @-@ ports , common in mainland Europe , although rarer in England , they rapidly spread across the kingdom . Scotland also led the way in adopting the new caponier design for castle ditches , as constructed at Craignethan Castle . 
 = = Tower houses = = 
 The largest number of late Medieval fortifications in Scotland built by nobles , about 800 , were of the tower house design . Smaller versions of tower houses in southern Scotland were known as peel towers , or pele houses . The defences of tower houses were primarily aimed to provide protection against smaller raiding parties and were not intended to put up significant opposition to an organised military assault . This has led historian Stuart Reid to characterise them as " defensible rather than defensive " . They were typically a tall , square , stone @-@ built , crenelated building . They were often also surrounded by a barmkyn or bawn , a walled courtyard designed to hold valuable animals securely , but not necessarily intended for serious defence . They were built extensively on both sides of the border with England from the fourteenth century . James IV 's ( 1488 – 1513 ) forfeiture of the Lordship of the Isles in 1494 led to an additional burst of tower building across the region . A number were also built in Scottish towns . 
 An option for small landholders and farmers was the bastle house , a form of fortified house that combined the functions of a tower house and a barmkyn . They were usually two @-@ storey houses with the ground floor acting as a byre into which animals could be driven , while the living space on the upper floor could only be reached by a removable ladder . Most are within 30 miles ( 48 km ) of the border and were built around the turn of the sixteenth century . 
 = = Renaissance palaces = = 
 An extensive building and rebuilding of royal palaces probably began under James III ( r . 1460 – 88 ) and accelerated under James IV , reaching its peak under James V ( r . 1513 – 42 ) . They used exceptional one @-@ off revenues , such as the forfeiture of key lands , to establish their power across their kingdom in various ways including constructing grander castles by extending and modifying existing fortifications . These works have been seen as directly reflecting the influence of Renaissance styles . Linlithgow was first constructed under James I , under the direction of master of work John de Waltoun and was referred to as a palace , apparently the first use of this term in the country , from 1429 . This was extended under James III and began to correspond to a fashionable quadrangular , corner @-@ towered Italian signorial palace of a palatium ad moden castri ( a castle @-@ style palace ) , combining classical symmetry with neo @-@ chivalric imagery and using harling to give them a clean , Italian appearance . There is evidence of Italian masons working for James IV , in whose reign Linlithgow was completed and other palaces were rebuilt with Italianate proportions . According to architectural historian John Dunbar , the results were the " earliest examples of coherent Renaissance design in Britain " . 
 The shift in architectural focus reflected changing political alliances , as James V had formed a close alliance with France during his reign . He encountered the French version of Renaissance building while visiting for his marriage to Madeleine of Valois in 1536 and his second marriage to Mary of Guise may have resulted in longer term connections and influences . Work from his reign largely disregarded the insular style adopted in England under Henry VIII and adopted forms that were recognisably European , beginning with the extensive work at Linlithgow . This was followed by re @-@ buildings at Holyrood , Falkland , Stirling and Edinburgh , described by Roger Maison as " some of the finest examples of Renaissance architecture in Britain " . 
 Much of this castle rebuilding was planned and financed by James Hamilton of Finnart ( c . 1495 – 1540 ) , in addition to his work at Blackness Castle , Rothesay Castle , the house at Crawfordjohn , the " New Inn " in the St Andrews Cathedral Priory and the lodging at Balmerino Abbey for the ailing Queen Madeleine . Rather than slavishly copying continental forms , most Scottish architecture incorporated elements of these styles into traditional local patterns , adapting them to Scottish idioms and materials ( particularly stone and harl ) . Similar themes can be seen in the private houses of aristocrats , as in Mar 's Wark , Stirling ( c . 1570 ) and Crichton Castle , built for the Earl of Bothwell in 1580s . 
 = = Sixteenth and seventeenth centuries = = 
 In the period of French intervention in the 1540s and 1550s , at the end of the Rough Wooing , Scotland was given a defended border of a series of earthwork forts and additions to existing castles . These included the erection of single bastions at Edinburgh , Stirling and Dunbar . 
 The unique style of great private houses in Scotland , later known as Scots baronial , has been located in origin to the period of the 1560s . It kept many of the features of the high walled Medieval castles that had been largely made obsolete by gunpowder weapons and may have been influenced by the French masons brought to Scotland to work on royal palaces . It drew on the tower houses and peel towers , with their parapets , corbels , and bartizans . The new estate houses built from the late sixteenth century by nobles and lairds were primarily built for comfort , not for defence , although they were often called castles . They retained many of these external features which had become associated with nobility , but with a larger ground plan . This was classically a " Z @-@ plan " of a rectangular block with towers , as at Colliston Castle ( 1583 ) and Claypotts Castle ( 1569 – 88 ) . 
 Particularly influential was the work of William Wallace , the king 's master mason from 1617 until his death in 1631 . He worked on the rebuilding of the collapsed North Range of Linlithgow from 1618 , Winton House for George Seton , 3rd Earl of Winton and began work on Heriot 's Hospital , Edinburgh . He adopted a distinctive style that applied elements of Scottish fortification and Flemish influences to a Renaissance plan like that used at Château d 'Ancy @-@ le @-@ Franc . This style can be seen in lord 's houses built at Caerlaverlock ( 1620 ) , Moray House , Edinburgh ( 1628 ) and Drumlanrig Castle ( 1675 – 89 ) , and was highly influential until the baronial style gave way to the grander English forms associated with Inigo Jones in the later seventeenth century , which were used to produce classically inspired and comfortable country houses . 
 = = Decline = = 
 In 1603 James VI of Scotland inherited the crown of England , bringing a period of peace between the two countries . The royal court left for London , and as a result – with the exceptions of occasional visits – building work on royal castles north of the border largely ceased . Some castles continued to have modest military utility into the eighteenth century . The royal castles of Edinburgh , Dumbarton and Stirling , along with Dunstaffnage , <unk> , Blackness and Ruthven Castle , continued in use as practical fortifications . Tower houses were being built up until the 1640s . After the Restoration the fortified tower house fell out of fashion , but the weak state of the Scottish economy was such that , while many larger properties were simply abandoned , the more modest castles continued to be used and adapted as houses , rather than rebuilt . 
 In the Bishop 's Wars castles that held out for the king against the Covenanters , including Caerlaverock and Threave in 1640 , were slighted , with their roofs removed and walls breached to make them uninhabitable . Tantallon was used as a base for Scottish attacks on Oliver Cromwell 's advancing army in 1651 . As a result , it was pounded into submission by the New Model Army 's siege train , losing its end towers and ceasing to be a residence from that point . The sequence of Jacobite risings from 1689 threatened the Crown in Scotland , culminating in the rebellion in 1745 . Stirling was able to withstand the Jacobite attack in 1745 and the siege of Blair Castle , at the end of the rebellion in 1746 , was the final castle siege to occur in the British Isles . In the aftermath of the conflict <unk> and many others castles were used as barracks for the forces sent to garrison the Highlands . Kildrummy , Huntly and Doune were destroyed as a result of their part in the rebellion . 
 From the late eighteenth century , castles became tourist attractions . Blair Castle was a popular location on account of its landscaped gardens , and Stirling Castle because of its romantic historic connections . Tours became increasingly popular during the nineteenth century , usually starting at Edinburgh and then spending up to two weeks further north , taking advantage of the expanding rail and steamer network . Blair Castle remained popular , but additional castles joined the circuit , with Cawdor Castle becoming popular once the railway line reached north to Fort William . Scottish castle guidebooks became well known for providing long historical accounts of their sites , often drawing on the plots of Romantic novels for the details . Sir Walter Scott 's novels set in Scotland popularised several northern castles , including Tantallon , which was featured in the poem Marmion ( 1808 ) . 
 = = Gothic revival = = 
 In Scotland there was a revival of the castle in the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries as part of the wider Gothic Revival movement , as new houses were built and existing buildings remodeled in the Gothic and Scots Baronial styles . Inveraray Castle , constructed from 1746 with design input from William Adam , displays the incorporation of turrets and is among the first houses in the revived style . His son Robert Adam 's houses in this style included Mellerstain and Wedderburn in Berwickshire and Seton House in East Lothian , but it is most clearly seen at Culzean Castle , Ayrshire , remodelled by Adam from 1777 . These were largely conventional Palladian style houses that incorporated some external features of the Scots baronial style . 
 Important for the adoption of the revival in the early nineteenth century was Abbotsford House , the residence of Walter Scott . Re @-@ built for him from 1816 , it became a model for the modern revival of the baronial style . Common features borrowed from sixteenth- and seventeenth @-@ century houses included battlemented gateways , crow @-@ stepped gables , pointed turrets and machicolations . The style was popular across Scotland and was applied to many relatively modest dwellings by architects such as William Burn ( 1789 – 1870 ) , David Bryce ( 1803 – 76 ) , Edward Blore ( 1787 – 1879 ) , Edward Calvert ( c . 1847 – 1914 ) and Robert Stodart Lorimer ( 1864 – 1929 ) and in urban contexts , including the building of Cockburn Street in Edinburgh ( from the 1850s ) as well as the National Wallace Monument at Stirling ( 1859 – 69 ) . The rebuilding of Balmoral Castle as a baronial palace and its adoption as a royal retreat from 1855 – 58 confirmed the popularity of the style . Scots Baronial architects frequently " improved " existing castles : Floors Castle was transformed in 1838 by William Playfair who added grand turrets and cupolas . The style spread south and the architect Edward Blore added a Scots Baronial touch to his work at Windsor . 
 = = Twentieth century to the present = = 
 The Baronial style peaked towards the end of the nineteenth century , and the building of large houses declined in importance in the twentieth century . It continued to influence the construction of some estate houses , including Skibo Castle , which was rebuilt for industrialist Andrew Carnegie ( 1899 – 1903 ) by Ross and Macbeth . There was a lull in building after the First World War , and social change undermined the construction of rural country houses . Isolated examples of " castles " include houses that combine modern and traditional elements , such as Basil Spence 's Broughton Place ( 1936 ) and <unk> Castle , Stirlingshire ( 2007 ) . 
 Restoration of castles began in the early twentieth century , with projects including the renovation of Duart Castle on Mull , and the complete reconstruction of Eilean Donan from a few fragments of masonry . The restoration movement grew after World War II with a fashion for renovating tower houses , including Oliver Hill 's restoration of Inchdrewer Castle , near Banff in Aberdeenshire , in 1965 . The restoration of tower houses and smaller castles continues , with recent examples including Fenton Tower in Lothian and <unk> Castle near Portmahomack . Historic Scotland have launched a " Scottish Castle Initiative " aimed at encouraging private investment in the restoration of Scotland 's castles , including a register of potential restoration candidates . Despite these efforts , a number of castles remain on Scotland 's Buildings at Risk Register . 
 Most of Scotland 's castles , whether ruined or occupied , remain in private ownership , though many are open to the public at least occasionally . During the twentieth century a number of older castles were transferred into the care of the state , and these are now the responsibility of Historic Scotland , which was created as an agency in 1991 . Historic Scotland cares for over 300 properties – all of which are publicly accessible – including around 65 castles . These include some of Scotland 's most famous castles including Edinburgh and Stirling , as well as numerous tower houses and ruined castles . The National Trust for Scotland ( founded 1931 ) cares for several post @-@ Medieval castles and estate houses , including Culzean and Craigievar that were still in occupation until the twentieth century . The Landmark Trust restores and operates historic buildings as holiday homes , including Saddell Castle and Roslin Castle . Several other castles are in the hands of local government , for example <unk> Castle in Dundee , and some are maintained by building preservation trusts and other charitable bodies , for example <unk> Tower , Clackmannanshire . 
 = Space ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Space " is the ninth episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on November 12 , 1993 . It was written by series creator Chris Carter , directed by William Graham , and featured guest appearances by Ed Lauter and Susanna Thompson . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Space " earned a Nielsen household rating of 6 @.@ 5 , being watched by 6 @.@ 1 million households in its initial broadcast , and received negative reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . When investigating possible sabotage in NASA 's shuttle program , Mulder and Scully find that an astronaut who had been Mulder 's childhood hero may be possessed by an extraterrestrial spirit . 
 Series creator Chris Carter was inspired to write " Space " after reading about news of the " face on Mars " — an instance of pareidolia wherein a mound in the Cydonia region of Mars was taken to resemble a human face . The episode was conceived as a low @-@ budget bottle episode , due to several earlier episodes having exceeded their budgets . Although the episode made use of a significant amount of inexpensive stock footage from NASA , the construction of the command center set was subject to cost overruns , eventually leading the episode to become the most expensive of the first season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens with news footage from 1977 , showing the discovery of water on Mars and a face sculpted into the planet 's landscape . Lt. Col. Marcus Aurelius Belt ( Ed Lauter ) , the commander of the mission , is plagued by flashbacks of an encounter with the disembodied face during a spacewalk . 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) are approached by Michelle Generoo ( Susanna Thompson ) , a communications commander for NASA 's Mission Control . Generoo believes that someone within NASA is sabotaging launch attempts . A recent space shuttle liftoff was aborted seconds before commencement , and Generoo fears the next launch will be similarly compromised . She also has a personal interest , as her fiancé will be aboard the next mission . 
 Mulder and Scully travel to NASA and meet Belt , a childhood hero of Mulder 's . Belt , who now manages the shuttle program , dismisses the agents ' concerns and states that nothing can possibly go wrong with the mission . He allows the agents to watch the launch from Mission Control . The launch is successful . As the agents are leaving however , Generoo informs them that contact is lost with the shuttle in orbit . While driving back to Mission Control , Generoo sees the face come at her through her windshield , causing her to crash her car . 
 The shuttle has moved into direct sunlight and Mission Control is unable to rotate it into a safe position , putting the astronauts ' lives in danger . Generoo believes that the uplink is being sabotaged . Belt orders the uplink to be cut , allowing the astronauts to rotate the craft manually . Over the objections of Generoo and the agents , Belt orders the mission to proceed and lies to the press about its progress . Belt tells Mulder that the shuttle program may be cancelled if the mission is not completed successfully . 
 Belt returns home and has another flashback , as he lies in bed in some agony an astral presence leaves his body and flies out the window , heading into the sky . The astronauts then report hearing a thump outside the shuttle and begin to experience an oxygen leak . Belt fixes the situation , but orders the mission to proceed . The payload is successfully deployed , but a crew member reports seeing a ghostlike entity outside the ship . Meanwhile the agents examine NASA records and find evidence that Belt played a role in other failed missions , including the Challenger disaster . 
 Belt begins to act irrationally then collapses screaming as he hears mention of the ghostlike entity from the astronauts . Paramedics are called to attend to him , and find him cowering under his desk whimpering and begging for help . Before Belt it taken away , he tells the agents that the shuttle will not survive reentry due to sabotage by ' the face ' , which had lived inside his body and possessed him since his time in orbit . At his urging , they alert the shuttle to change its trajectory and are just able to land it successfully . In the hospital , Belt continues to wrestle with the presence , telling Mulder he wasn 't responsible but also couldn 't stop it , as " it came to me , it lives in me " . Eventually , in a last wrestle with the re @-@ possessing entity , he shouts " no more " as he leaps from the window to his death - experiencing a lengthy flashback to his last space mission as he falls . Mulder theorizes that , while Belt was compelled to sabotage the launches by the entity possessing him , he was also the one who sent Generoo the evidence of what was taking place . He lauds Belt 's final sacrifice , stating that in the end he gave his life for the mission , as befits a true astronaut . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Space " was conceived as a low @-@ budget bottle episode , due to several earlier episodes having exceeded their budgets . Series creator Chris Carter was inspired to write the episode after reading about news of the " face on Mars " — an instance of pareidolia wherein a mound in the Cydonia region of Mars was taken to resemble a human face . Although the episode made use of a significant amount of inexpensive stock footage from NASA , the construction of the command center set was subject to cost overruns , eventually leading the episode to become the most expensive of the first season . Carter blames this on the infeasibility of showing the astronauts in the stricken shuttle , requiring additional exposition to explain their situation — something he found he could not manage " on an eight @-@ day television budget " . Carter also claims that the episode suffered from being filmed shortly after the pilot episode was broadcast , with the crew overwhelmed by the input , noting that " everything was happening at once " . 
 Several scenes in the episode were filmed at a Canadian Airlines operations center in Richmond , British Columbia . The crew were given permission by the airline to use their flight simulators , leading to the production being delayed while everyone had a turn simulating flights over Canada . The problematic command center set was constructed and filmed at an amphitheater in Vancouver , whose sloping surfaces helped to suggest computer terminals without needing much construction , although false computer monitors were added for shots when they would be in view . 
 Guest star Ed Lauter had previously worked with the episode 's director , William A. Graham , on the film Guyana Tragedy : The Story of Jim Jones . On his role in the episode , Lauter has stated " I don ’ t really have a lot to say about that , except I thought I did a nice job , and that it was nice working up there in Vancouver with David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Space " premiered on the Fox network on November 12 , 1993 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on November 17 , 1994 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 6 @.@ 5 with an 11 share , meaning that roughly 6 @.@ 5 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 11 percent of households watching TV , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 6 @.@ 1 million households watched this episode during its original airing . 
 The episode — reportedly Carter 's least favorite — was very poorly received . Frank Lovece , in his books The X @-@ Files Declassified , called it " perhaps the series ' dullest , least suspenseful episode " , citing the spectral antagonist 's " highly unclear motivations " . Keith Phipps , writing for The A.V. Club , reviewed the episode negatively , rating it a D + . He felt that the episode 's special effects were " pretty decidedly unscary " , and that the episode 's premise was confusing and " a little tasteless " in its treatment of the Challenger disaster . In a retrospective of the first season in Entertainment Weekly the episode was similarly derided , being rated a D- and described as " one dead hour " . Matt Haigh , writing for Den of Geek , reviewed the episode negatively , feeling that it was " nothing much to write home about " , and that the episode 's antagonist was " distinctly unimpressive , lacking any true sense of menace or intrigue " . 
 = Calcium chloride = 
 Calcium chloride are inorganic compounds with the chemical formula CaCl2 ( H2O ) x , where x = 0 , 1 , 2 , 4 , and 6 . All of these salts are a highly soluble in water . They are mainly used for deicing and dust control . Because the anhydrous salt is hygroscopic , it is used as a desiccant . 
 = = Properties = = 
 Calcium chloride dissolves in water to afford chloride and the aquo complex [ Ca ( H2O ) 6 ] 2 + . In this way , these solutions are sources of " free " calcium and free chloride ions . This description is illustrated by the fact that these solutions react with phosphate sources to give solid precipitate of calcium phosphate : 
 3 CaCl2 + 2 <unk> → <unk> ( PO4 ) 2 + 6 <unk> 
 Calcium chloride has a very high enthalpy change of solution , indicated by considerable temperature rise accompanying dissolution of the anhydrous salt in water . This property is the basis for its largest scale application . 
 Molten calcium chloride can be <unk> to give calcium metal and chlorine gas . 
 CaCl2 → Ca + Cl2 
 = = Preparation = = 
 In much of the world , calcium chloride is derived from limestone as a by @-@ product of the Solvay process : North American consumption in 2002 was 1 @,@ 687 @,@ 000 tons ( 3 @.@ 7 billion pounds ) . 
 2 NaCl + CaCO3 → Na2CO3 + CaCl2 
 In the US , most of calcium chloride is obtained by purification from brine . A Dow Chemical Company manufacturing facility in Michigan houses about 35 % of the total U.S. production capacity for calcium chloride . 
 = = = Occurrence = = = 
 Calcium chloride occurs as the rare evaporite minerals <unk> ( dihydrate ) and <unk> ( hexahydrate ) . The related minerals <unk> ( potassium calcium chloride , <unk> ) and <unk> ( calcium magnesium chloride , <unk> · 12H2O ) are also very rare . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Deicing and freezing point depression = = = 
 By depressing the freezing point of water , calcium chloride is used to prevent ice formation and to deice . This application consumes the greatest amount of calcium chloride . Calcium chloride is relatively harmless to plants and soil . As a deicing agent , it is more effective at lower temperatures than sodium chloride . When distributed for this use , it usually takes the form of small , white spheres a few millimeters in diameter , called <unk> . Solutions of calcium chloride can prevent freezing at temperature as low as − 52 ° C ( − 62 ° F ) , making it ideal for filling agricultural implement tires as a liquid ballast , aiding traction in cold climates . 
