 Also used in salt / chemical @-@ based dehumidifiers in domestic and other environments to adsorb dampness / moisture from the air . 
 = = = Road surfacing = = = 
 The second largest application of calcium chloride exploits its hygroscopic properties and the tackiness of its hydrates . A concentrated solution keep a liquid layer on the surface of dirt roads , which suppresses formation of dust . It keeps the finer dust particles on the road , providing a cushioning layer . If these are allowed to blow away , the larger aggregate begins to shift around and the road breaks down . Using calcium chloride reduces the need for grading by as much as 50 % and the need for fill @-@ in materials as much as 80 % 
 = = = Water treatment = = = 
 Calcium chloride is used to increase the water hardness in swimming pools . This process reduces the erosion of the concrete in the pool . By Le Chatelier 's principle and the common ion effect , increasing the concentration of calcium in the water will reduce the dissolution of calcium compounds essential to the structure of concrete . 
 = = = Food = = = 
 As an ingredient , it is listed as a permitted food additive in the European Union for use as a <unk> and firming agent with the E number <unk> . It is considered as generally recognized as safe ( GRAS ) by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration . Its use in organic crop production is generally prohibited under US National Organic Program 's National List of Allowed and Prohibited Substances . The average intake of calcium chloride as food additives has been estimated to be 160 – 345 mg / day for individuals . In marine aquariums , calcium chloride is added to introduce bioavailable calcium for calcium carbonate @-@ shelled animals such as mollusks and some cnidarians . Calcium hydroxide ( <unk> mix ) or a calcium reactor can also be used to introduce calcium ; however , calcium chloride addition is the fastest method and has minimal impact on pH . 
 As a firming agent , calcium chloride is used in canned vegetables , in firming soybean curds into tofu and in producing a caviar substitute from vegetable or fruit juices . It is commonly used as an electrolyte in sports drinks and other beverages , including bottled water . The extremely salty taste of calcium chloride is used to flavor pickles while not increasing the food 's sodium content . Calcium chloride 's freezing @-@ point depression properties are used to slow the freezing of the caramel in caramel @-@ filled chocolate bars . 
 In brewing beer , calcium chloride is sometimes used to correct mineral deficiencies in the brewing water . It affects flavor and chemical reactions during the brewing process , and can also affect yeast function during fermentation . 
 In <unk> , calcium chloride is sometimes added to processed ( pasteurized / homogenized ) milk to restore the natural balance between calcium and protein in casein for the purposes of making cheeses , such as brie , <unk> and Stilton . By adding calcium chloride to the milk before adding the coagulant , calcium levels are restored . Also , it is frequently added to sliced apples to maintain texture . 
 = = = Laboratory and related drying operations = = = 
 Drying tubes are frequently packed with calcium chloride . Kelp is dried with calcium chloride for use in producing sodium carbonate . Anhydrous calcium chloride has been approved by the FDA as a packaging aid to ensure dryness ( CPG <unk> @.@ 02 ) . 
 = = = Medicine = = = 
 It is injected to treat internal hydrofluoric acid burns . It can be used to treat magnesium intoxication . Calcium chloride injection may antagonize cardiac toxicity as measured by electrocardiogram . It can help to protect the <unk> from dangerously high levels of serum potassium in hyperkalemia . Calcium chloride can be used to quickly treat calcium channel blocker toxicity , from the side effects of drugs such as <unk> ( <unk> ) — helping avoid potential heart attacks . 
 Aqueous calcium chloride is used in genetic transformation of cells by increasing the cell membrane permeability , inducing competence for DNA uptake ( allowing DNA fragments to enter the cell more readily ) . 
 = = = Miscellaneous applications = = = 
 Calcium chloride is used in concrete mixes to accelerate ( speed up ) the initial setting , but chloride ions lead to corrosion of steel rebar , so it should not be used in reinforced concrete . The anhydrous form of calcium chloride may also be used for this purpose and can provide a measure of the moisture in concrete . 
 Calcium chloride is included as an additive in plastics and in fire extinguishers , in wastewater treatment as a drainage aid , in blast furnaces as an additive to control scaffolding ( clumping and adhesion of materials that prevent the furnace charge from descending ) , and in fabric softener as a thinner . 
 The exothermic dissolution of calcium chloride is used in self @-@ heating cans and heating pads . 
 In the oil industry , calcium chloride is used to increase the density of solids @-@ free brines . It is also used to provide inhibition of swelling clays in the water phase of invert emulsion drilling fluids . 
 CaCl2 acts as flux material ( decreasing melting point ) in the Davy process for the industrial production of sodium metal , through the electrolysis of molten NaCl . 
 Calcium chloride is also an ingredient used in ceramic <unk> . It suspends clay particles so that they float within the solution making it easier to use in a variety of <unk> techniques . 
 = = = = Animal sterilization = = = = 
 Calcium chloride dihydrate ( 20 % by weight ) dissolved in ethanol ( 95 % ABV ) has been used as a <unk> for male animals . The non surgical procedure consists of the injection of the solution into the testes of the animal . Within 1 month , necrosis of testicular tissue results in sterilization . 
 = = Hazards = = 
 Calcium chloride can act as an irritant by desiccating moist skin . Solid calcium chloride dissolves <unk> , and burns can result in the mouth and esophagus if it is ingested . Ingestion of concentrated solutions or solid products may cause gastrointestinal irritation or ulceration . 
 Consumption of calcium chloride can lead to hypercalcemia . 
 = Abortion – breast cancer hypothesis = 
 The abortion – breast cancer hypothesis posits that having an induced abortion can increase the risk of getting breast cancer . This hypothesis is at odds with mainstream scientific opinion and is contradicted by major medical professional organizations . In early pregnancy , hormone levels increase , leading to breast growth . The hypothesis proposes that if this process is interrupted by an abortion then more immature cells could be left behind , resulting in a greater potential risk of breast cancer over time . 
 The abortion – breast cancer hypothesis has been the subject of extensive scientific inquiry , and the scientific community has concluded that abortion does not cause breast cancer and that breast cancer should not be a concern for women who are considering having an abortion . This consensus is supported by major medical bodies , including the World Health Organization , the U.S. National Cancer Institute , the American Cancer Society , the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists , the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists , the German Cancer Research Center , and the Canadian Cancer Society . 
 Some anti @-@ abortion activists have continued to advance a discredited causal link between abortion and breast cancer . In the United States , they have sought legal action to present abortion as a cause of breast cancer when counseling women who are seeking abortion . This political intervention culminated when the George W. Bush Administration altered the National Cancer Institute website to suggest that abortion might cause breast cancer . In response to public concern over this intervention , the NCI convened a 2003 workshop bringing together over 100 experts on the issue . This workshop concluded that while some studies reported a statistical correlation between breast cancer and abortion , the strongest scientific evidence from large prospective cohort studies demonstrates that abortion is not associated with an increase in breast cancer risk , and that the positive findings were likely due to response bias . 
 The ongoing promotion of a link between abortion and breast cancer is seen by others as part of the anti @-@ abortion " woman @-@ centered " strategy against abortion . Anti @-@ abortion groups maintain they are providing information necessary for legally required informed consent , a concern shared by some politically conservative politicians . The abortion – breast cancer issue remains the subject of political controversy . 
 = = Views of medical organizations = = 
 Major medical organizations which have analyzed data on abortion and breast cancer have uniformly concluded that abortion does not cause breast cancer . These organizations include the World Health Organization , the U.S. National Cancer Institute , the American Cancer Society , the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists , the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists , the German Cancer Research Center , and the Canadian Cancer Society . 
 The World Health Organization concluded in 2012 that " sound epidemiological data show no increased risk of breast cancer for women following spontaneous or induced abortion " , updating their earlier finding that " induced abortion does not increase breast cancer risk " . 
 The American Cancer Society concluded : " At this time , the scientific evidence does not support the notion that abortion of any kind raises the risk of breast cancer or any other type of cancer . " 
 The U.S. National Cancer Institute , which is part of the National Institutes of Health , found that " induced abortion is not associated with an increase in breast cancer risk " , assigning this conclusion the strongest possible evidence rating . 
 The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists found that " early studies of the relationship between prior induced abortion and breast cancer risk were methodologically flawed . More rigorous recent studies demonstrate no causal relationship between induced abortion and a subsequent increase in breast cancer risk . " 
 The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists reviewed the medical literature and concluded that " there is no established link between induced abortion or miscarriage and development of breast cancer . " The College recommended in its official clinical practice guidelines that " Women should be informed that induced abortion is not associated with an increase in breast cancer risk . " 
 The German Cancer Research Center concluded in 2013 that abortion and miscarriage pose no risk of breast cancer . 
 The Canadian Cancer Society stated in 2013 : " The body of scientific evidence does not support an association between abortion and increased breast cancer risk . " 
 = = Proponents = = 
 Joel Brind , a faculty member at Baruch College in the Department of Natural Sciences , is the primary advocate of an abortion – breast cancer ( " ABC " ) link . Brind is strongly anti @-@ abortion and began lobbying politicians with the claim that abortion caused breast cancer in the early 1990s . Brind found that his lobbying efforts were not taken seriously because he had not published his findings in the peer @-@ reviewed medical literature . He therefore collaborated with two anti @-@ abortion physicians and a statistician to publish a 1996 article in the Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health , arguing that induced abortion was a risk factor for breast cancer . The statistician who collaborated with Brind later stated of their findings : " I have some doubts . I don 't think the issue has been resolved . When we were talking about the conclusions , he [ Brind ] wanted to make the strongest statements . I tried to temper them a little bit , but Dr. Brind is very adamant about his opinion . " 
 Brind 's paper was criticized in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute for ignoring the role of response bias and for a " blurring of association with causation . " The amount of attention the study received prompted a cautionary editorial by a <unk> editor . With the appearance of larger studies contradicting Brind 's finding , Brind failed to convince the scientific community that abortion caused breast cancer . In 2003 , Brind was invited to the NCI workshop on abortion and breast cancer , where he was the only one to formally dissent from the workshop 's finding that there is no link between the two . Brind blames the lack of support for his findings on a conspiracy , arguing that the NCI and other major medical organizations are engaged in a " cover @-@ up " for the purpose of " protecting the abortion industry " . 
 = = Proposed mechanism = = 
 In early pregnancy , levels of estrogen , progesterone , estradiol increase , leading to breast growth in preparation for lactation . It has been hypothesized that if this process is interrupted by an abortion — before full maturity ( differentiation ) in the third trimester — then more immature cells could be left than there were prior to the pregnancy . These immature cells could then be exposed to carcinogens and hormones over time , resulting in a greater potential risk of breast cancer . This mechanism was first proposed and explored in rat studies conducted in the 1980s . 
 Breast tissue contains many lobes ( segments ) and these contain lobules which are groups of breast cells . There are four types of lobules : 
 Type 1 has 11 ductules ( immature ) 
 Type 2 has 47 ductules ( immature ) 
 Type 3 has 80 ductules ( mature , fewer hormone receptors ) 
 Type 4 are fully matured ( cancer resistant ) and contain breast milk 
 During early pregnancy , type 1 lobules quickly become type 2 lobules because of changes in estrogen and progesterone levels . <unk> into type 3 and then reaching full differentiation as type 4 lobules requires an increase of human placental <unk> ( <unk> ) which occurs in the last few months of pregnancy . According to the abortion – breast cancer hypothesis , if an abortion were to interrupt this sequence then it could leave a higher ratio of type 2 lobules than existed prior to the pregnancy . Russo and Russo have shown that mature breast cells have more time for DNA repair with longer cell cycles , accounting for the slightly reduced risk of breast cancer for parous women against the baseline risk for women who have never conceived and those who have conceived and terminated their pregnancies . 
 Later on , Russo et al. found that placental human chorionic gonadotropin ( hCG ) induces the synthesis of <unk> by the mammary epithelium . Bernstein et al. independently observed a reduced breast cancer risk when women were injected with hCG for weight loss or infertility treatment . Contrary to the ABC hypothesis , Michaels et al. hypothesize since hCG plays a role in cellular differentiation and may activate apoptosis , as levels of hCG increase early on in human pregnancy , " an incomplete pregnancy of short duration might impart the benefits of a full @-@ term pregnancy and thus reduce the risk of breast cancer . " 
 = = History = = 
 The first study involving statistics on abortion and breast cancer was a broad study in 1957 examining common cancers in Japan . The researchers were cautious about drawing any conclusions from their unreliable methodologies . During the 1960s several studies by Brian MacMahon et al. in Europe and Asia touched on a correlation between abortion and breast cancer . Their 1973 paper published in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute inaccurately concluded that " where a relationship was observed , abortion was associated with increased , not decreased , risk . " Research relevant to the current ABC discussion focuses on more recent large cohort studies , a few meta @-@ analyses , many case @-@ control studies , and several early experiments with rats . 
 = = = Rat models = = = 
 Russo & Russo from the Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia conducted a study in 1980 examining the proposed correlation between abortion and breast cancer . While analysing the effects of the carcinogen 7 @,@ 12 @-@ <unk> ( a ) <unk> ( <unk> ) on the DNA labeling index ( DNA @-@ LI ) in terminal end buds ( <unk> ) , terminal ducts ( TDs ) and alveolar buds ( <unk> ) of Sprague @-@ Dawley rats in various stages of reproductive development , they found that rats who had interrupted pregnancies had no noticeable increase in risk for cancer . However , they did find that pregnancy and lactation provided a protective measure against various forms of benign lesions , such as hyperplastic alveolar nodules and cysts . While results did suggest that rats who had interrupted pregnancies might be subject to " similar or even higher incidence of benign lesions " than virgin rats , there was no evidence to suggest that abortion would result in a higher incidence of carcinogenesis . A more thorough examination of the phenomenon was conducted in 1982 , confirming the results . A later study in 1987 further explained their previous findings . After differentiation of the mammary gland resulting from a full @-@ term pregnancy of the rat , the rate of cell division decreases and the cell cycle length increases , allowing more time for DNA repair . 
 Despite the fact that the Russos ' studies found similar risk rates between virgin and pregnancy interrupted rats , their research would be used to support the contention that abortion created a greater risk of breast cancer for the next twenty years . However , because rats do not exhibit naturally occurring breast cancer , the extrapolation of these results to human abortion and breast cancer is viewed as dubious . 
 = = Politicization = = 
 By the late 1980s , national politicians recognized that a focus on reducing access to abortion was not a winning political strategy . Some anti @-@ abortion activists grew more aggressive and violent in the face of political abandonment , culminating with the murder of David Gunn in 1993 and the passage of the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act in 1994 . With direct action discredited , anti @-@ abortion organizations , including the National Right to Life Committee , came to the forefront of the movement . These focused on legal tactics , including lobbying against late @-@ term abortions and access to mifepristone and demanding legislation based on the purported ABC link . More recently , anti @-@ abortion organizations have turned to lobbying to increase obstacles to abortion , such as mandated counseling , waiting periods , and parental notification , and some feel that anti @-@ abortion advocates treat ABC as simply another tactic in their campaign against abortion . There have been ongoing and incremental legal challenges to abortion in the United States by anti @-@ abortion groups . In 2005 , a Canadian anti @-@ abortion organization put up billboards in Alberta with large pink ribbons and the statement : " Stop the Cover @-@ Up , " in reference to the ABC hypothesis . The Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation was concerned by the misrepresentation of the state of scientific knowledge on the subject . 
 The continued focus on the ABC hypothesis by anti @-@ abortion groups has fostered a confrontational political environment . Anti @-@ abortion advocates and scientists alike have responded with criticisms . The claims by anti @-@ abortion advocates are sometimes referred to as pseudoscience . 
 During the late 1990s , several United States <unk> became involved in the ABC issue . In a 1998 hearing on cancer research , <unk> Tom Coburn accused the National Cancer Institute of misleading the public by selectively releasing data . In 1999 , shortly after the House debated FDA approval of the abortion drug mifepristone , Congressperson Dave Weldon wrote a " Dear Colleague " letter , enclosing an article from John Kindley . In it , Weldon expressed concern that the majority of studies indicated a possible ABC link and that politicization was " preventing vital information from being given to women . " 
 As of 2006 , abortion counseling materials in Alaska , Mississippi , Texas , West Virginia , and Kansas state that the data relationship between abortion and breast cancer are inconclusive , while Minnesota materials report no link . Similar legislation requiring notification has also been introduced in 14 other states . An editor for the American Journal of Public Health expressed concern that these bills propose warnings that do not agree with established scientific findings . 
 <unk> Jacob M. Appel argues that the mandatory disclosure statutes might be unconstitutional on " rational basis " grounds . <unk> is significantly more dangerous than abortion , data that is not required in any disclosure law but which is necessary for a meaningful understanding of risks . According to Appel , " [ i ] f the roughly fifty million abortions that have occurred in the United States since Roe v. Wade had all ended in full @-@ term deliveries , approximately five hundred additional women would have died during childbirth . " 
 = = = National Cancer Institute = = = 
 The National Cancer Institute ( NCI ) has been a target of the anti @-@ abortion movement for the conclusions presented on its website . A report from the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform found that in November 2002 the Bush administration had altered the NCI website . The previous NCI analysis had concluded that , while some question regarding an association between abortion and breast cancer existed prior to the mid @-@ 1990s , a number of large and well @-@ regarded studies had resolved the issue in the negative . The Bush administration removed this analysis and replaced it with the following : 
 This alteration , which suggested that there was scientific uncertainty on the ABC issue , prompted an editorial in the New York Times describing it as an " egregious distortion " and a letter to the Secretary of Health and Human Services from members of Congress . In response to the alteration the NCI convened a three @-@ day consensus workshop entitled Early Reproductive Events and Breast Cancer on 24 – 26 February 2003 . The workshop concluded that induced abortion does not increase a woman 's risk of breast cancer , and that the evidence for this had been well established . Afterwards , the director of epidemiology research for the American Cancer Society stated , " [ t ] his issue has been resolved scientifically … This is essentially a political debate . " 
 Brind was the only attendee at the workshop to file a dissenting opinion as a minority report criticizing the conclusions . He contends the workshop evidence and findings were overly controlled by its organizers and that the time allotted was too short for a thorough review of the literature . 
 = = = North Dakota lawsuit = = = 
 In January 2000 , Amy Jo Kjolsrud ( née Mattson ) , an anti @-@ abortion counselor , sued the Red River Women 's Clinic in Fargo , North Dakota , alleging false advertising . The suit , Kjolsrud v. MKB Management Corporation , alleged that the clinic was misleading women by distributing a brochure quoting a National Cancer Institute fact sheet on the ABC hypothesis . The brochure stated : 
 The case was originally scheduled for 11 September 2001 , but was delayed as a result of the terrorist attacks . On 25 March 2002 , the trial began . After four days of testimony , Judge Michael McGuire ruled in favor of the clinic . 
 Linda Rosenthal , an attorney from the Center for Reproductive Rights characterized the decision thus : " [ t ] he judge rejected the abortion – breast cancer scare tactic . This ruling should put to rest the unethical , anti @-@ choice scare tactic of using pseudo @-@ science to harass abortion clinics and scare women . " John Kindley , one of the lawyers representing Kjolsrud stated : " I think most citizens , whether they are pro @-@ choice or anti @-@ abortion , believe in an individual 's right to self @-@ determination . They believe people shouldn 't be misled and should be told about [ procedural ] risks , even if there is controversy over those risks . " Kindley also wrote a 1998 Wisconsin Law Review article outlining the viability of medical malpractice lawsuits based upon not informing patients considering abortion about the ABC hypothesis . 
 The decision was appealed and on 23 September 2003 the North Dakota Supreme Court ruled that Kjolsrud did not have standing and affirmed the lower court ruling dismissing the action . The appeal noted that Kjolsrud " concedes she had not read the brochures before filing her action . " The appeal also noted that after the lawsuit was filed , the abortion clinic updated their brochure to the following : 
 = Circuit City Stores , Inc. v. Adams = 
 Circuit City Stores , Inc. v. Adams , 532 U.S. 105 ( 2001 ) , was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001 . The case concerned whether the " section one exemption " of the Federal Arbitration Act applied to an employment contract of an employee at Circuit City Stores . The Court held that the exemption was limited to the specific listing of professions contained in the text . This decision meant that general employment contracts , like the one Adams sued under , would have to be arbitrated in accordance with the federal statute . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1995 , Saint Clair Adams , who was hired as a sales counselor , signed an employment application with Circuit City . A provision in Adams ' application required all employment disputes to be settled by arbitration . Specifically , it stated : 
 " I agree that I will settle any and all previously <unk> claims , disputes or controversies arising out of or relating to my application or candidacy for employment , employment and / or cessation of employment with Circuit City , exclusively by final and binding arbitration before a neutral <unk> ... " 
 In 1997 , Adams filed an employment discrimination lawsuit against Circuit City in California state court , alleging violations of state employment law . Circuit City then filed suit in Federal District Court , seeking to enjoin the state @-@ court action and to compel arbitration of Adams ' claims under the Federal Arbitration Act . The District Court entered an order to that effect because it decided that Adams was obligated by the arbitration agreement . In reversing , the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals found that the arbitration agreement between Adams and Circuit City was contained in a " contract of employment , " and thus not subject to the Act under section 1 of the Act . Section 1 of the FAA excludes " contracts of employment of seamen , railroad employees , or any other class of workers engaged in foreign or interstate commerce " from the Act 's coverage . Circuit City appealed to the Supreme Court which agreed to hear the case . 
 = = Opinion of the Court = = 
 Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote the majority opinion , reversing the Ninth Circuit and holding that the exception did not apply to this case . The main reason for this finding was the decision that section one 's exemption would only be confined to " transportation workers " . " The wording of [ section one ] calls for the application of the maxim <unk> generis , the statutory canon that ' where general words follow specific words in a statutory enumeration , the general words are construed to embrace only objects similar in nature to those objects enumerated by the preceding specific words ... ' " . Under this method of reading the statute , he would be able to reach an understanding of what the exemption meant . He wrote , " Under this rule of construction the residual clause should be read to give effect to the terms ' seamen ' and ' railroad employees , ' and should itself be controlled and defined by reference to the enumerated categories of workers which are recited just before it ; the interpretation of the clause pressed by respondent fails to produce these results " . Therefore , section one " exempts from the FAA only contracts of employment of transportation workers " . Kennedy 's decision was joined by four other Justices to create a 5 @-@ justice majority . 
 = = = Dissenting opinions = = = 
 Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a dissent , with which Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer joined . Justice David Souter joined all sections of Stevens ' dissent besides a critique of previous decision of the Supreme Court in arbitration case law . Stevens examined the history of arbitration and the purpose of it throughout the century . The Federal Arbitration Act was designed , he explained , to maintain the <unk> of contractual agreements . But private arbitration is a whole other situation . Stevens wrote , " As the history of the legislation indicates , the potential disparity in bargaining power between individual employees and large employers was the source of organized labor ’ s opposition to the Act , which it feared would require courts to enforce unfair employment contracts " . He went on to quote the former Chief Justice of the Israeli Supreme Court , Aharon Barak in supporting the idea that the Court should look at the purpose of the act rather than its pure statutory language . 
 Justice Souter wrote a separate dissent which was joined by the other three Justices who signed onto Stevens ' dissent as listed above . He mainly attacked the method of the majority 's statutory reading and its failure to look at the statute " as a whole " . He wrote , " It is imputing something very odd to the working of the congressional brain to say that Congress took care to bar application of the Act to the class of employment contracts it most obviously had authority to legislate about in 1925 ... " With that understanding of the Act , he would have affirmed the decision and holding of the Ninth Circuit . 
 = = Subsequent history = = 
 The case was remanded to the Ninth Circuit , which declared the arbitration agreement unconscionable under California law . That precluded arbitration proceedings and allowed Adams to pursue a regular lawsuit in California courts . Adams was then able to pursue the original claims notwithstanding the decision by Justice Kennedy . In the aftermath of the case , legal analysts said that this case would be important for future arbitration case law . 
 = Maman a tort = 
 " Maman a tort " is a 1984 song recorded by French artist Mylène Farmer . It was the debut single from Farmer 's first studio album <unk> de Lune , and marked the beginning of her collaboration with her long @-@ time composer , Laurent Boutonnat . With lyrics by Jérôme Dahan , who also helped compose the song with Boutonnat , the song was first released in March 1984 . An English @-@ language version , titled " My Mum Is Wrong " and produced by F. R. David , was released in September 1984 . " Maman a tort " was deemed as provocative at the time , as its ambiguous lyrics seem to deal with a lesbian love ; similarly , the video , which shows Farmer lightly dressed , was often censored on television when it was released . Generally well received by critics , the original French version of the song achieved modest success in comparison with the singer 's next singles , while the English @-@ language version was a commercial failure . The song did , however , allow Farmer to launch her singing career and establish her particular artistic style . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 In December 1983 , <unk> Dahan and Laurent Boutonnat , two friends , composed a song called " Maman a tort " , about lesbian love between a girl committed to a mental hospital and her nurse . To find a performer , they held a casting . A girl aged 15 – 16 was initially chosen to perform the song , before being rejected because she was too young to sing its sexually ambiguous lyrics . Boutonnat then decided to ask one of his friends , Mylène Gautier , to sing the track . Both composers have said that they thought Gautier seemed psychotic and thus was the ideal person to record the track . Boutonnat said : " As soon as I saw her , with her triangular face , I realized that this would be her and nobody else . She looked crazy , it was perfect . " After they decided to work with her , Gautier took the pseudonym of Farmer , as a tribute to actress Frances Farmer . 
 According to Jean @-@ Claude <unk> , Farmer showed limited enthusiasm during the demo recordings and declared : " The voice was surprisingly present and she laughed after each take when listening " . Dahan was satisfied , because Farmer had a clear and deep voice and could easily reach high notes . Initial rehearsals were held at Dahan 's home . Dahan has said of these rehearsals : " There was a large room with a piano and there we repeated the staging of the song . Mylène had a hard time understanding all this , we had to teach her everything , starting with the choreography [ ... ] This probably did not look very professional . " 
 Recording of the French version of " Maman a tort " took place in Paris in January 1984 , with Farmer stating that the sessions were a " magic " moment . Later , the English @-@ language version of the song was recorded in an afternoon at the Dany <unk> studio in <unk> . Farmer had no difficulty in singing in English because she spoke the language very well , having lived in Canada . 
 Initially Boutonnat and Dahan found it difficult to find a record company who would release the track , either because labels were worried about the song being censored due to the sexual nature of its lyrics or because they did not see any commercial potential in the track . In order to get a second appointment with RCA records the pair claimed they had remixed the song , even though they had not . Only after a third appointment with RCA did the label 's Francis <unk> give them a contract . 
 According to France Dimanche , the song saved the singer from entering into a loveless marriage . Farmer had become disillusioned with showbusiness after struggling to get even tiny roles in commercials and had resolved to wed a childhood friend , a student of the École nationale d <unk> , before she was selected to sing " Maman a tort " . 
 = = Release = = 
 The single was first released in France in March 1984 , but was not commercially successful . Several months later , it gained more success under the management of Bertrand Le Page , a famous artistic director . The song was heavily played on French radio . In view of the song 's success , Frédérick Leibovitz suggested that Farmer record an English @-@ language version of the single named " My Mum Is Wrong " , in an effort to win over a wider audience . This version was produced by F. R. David who also translated the lyrics , being motivated by affection for Le Page . The song was released in September in France and Canada . The English version was released in Germany , Italy and Scandinavia and was scheduled to be released in England and the United States . Extended versions of " Maman a tort " and " My Mum Is Wrong " were produced by Laurent Boutonnat and issued as 7 " maxi singles . 
 There were two covers for " Maman a tort " : the first release was produced in black and white and shows the singer looking sad and wearing a nightgown , the second release , in colour , shows her laughing . The second cover was based on an idea by Bertrand Le Page who thought that it would be better to give the public an image it wanted . The single 's Canadian release did not have a cover . A different cover was used for " My Mum Is Wrong " ' s vinyl , with the image used being similar to the second French release of " Maman a tort " . The B @-@ side of the song was an instrumental version of the track , as Farmer 's musical team had no budget to record another song . In 2003 , a remix version was produced by DJ Joaquim Garraud for the compilation album <unk> but was not released . 
 = = Lyrics and music = = 
 The song is constructed like a nursery rhyme in which a young girl , while numbering facts between 1 and 8 , confesses her love for a female nurse . As written on the cover , the song is dedicated to the actress Frances Farmer , as well as King Ludwig II of Bavaria . Farmer explained at the time that the song was not autobiographical . 
 " Maman a tort " lays the foundation of Farmer 's musical universe , including many themes dealt with by the singer in subsequent releases . Among the topics discussed are transgression , love , the world of childhood , violence and death , mortality and suffering , sexuality , and social demands . The song also deals with psychoanalysis . The rhythm is catchy , and the lyrics , " dark and symbolic " , describe the conflicts between a daughter and her mother , as the title suggests . According to an analysis published by Sophie <unk> , the lyrics could also refer to incest . They seem to be " innocent " and are sung " in the most ingenuous way " . Biographer Bernard Violet considers the song " a nursery rhyme with enigmatic but quite spicy lyrics which place it rather far from Sabine <unk> and her innocent song " Les <unk> " " . Journalist Caroline Bee deemed the song as " a small efficient UFO , with a catchy and binary melody and a disconcerting video " . 
 In a 1984 interview Farmer discussed the song 's lyrics , stating : " It can happen to many children who are in hospital [ ... ] the nurses feed these children , tuck them into bed , kiss them before they sleep and therefore take the place of their mothers . So it is a little girl who tells her mother : I love the nurse " . She said in another interview : " But if people prefer to give this song a perverse sense , it is their problem " . Thus , she does not confirm the lesbian allusions that seem to emerge from the chorus ( the French verb " aimer " can mean either " to love " or " to like " ) . However , the song has been listed in several books dealing with homosexuality and explains the fact that many gay people were immediately attracted to Farmer 's world . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Production and plot = = = 
 The music video was directed by Laurent Boutonnat who also wrote the screenplay , and produced by RCA , and was shot for one day and cost about 5 @,@ 000 francs ( 750 – 760 euro ) . Boutonnat wanted that the video would be filmed in <unk> , but this was unusual at the time and the idea was finally withdrawn . 
 The video begins with a portrait of Sigmund Freud in close @-@ up , then shows a picture of Farmer 's mother . The song 's lyrics are subtitled . Still images of Farmer are then shown in silhouette wearing a white and transparent nightgown . With each line of the song , an image of Farmer appears . When the chorus begins , Farmer turns blue and begins to dance in front of a backdrop featuring stars and the moon . Three children are shown looking at Farmer . After another verse , which again features still images of Farmer , shots of the singer jumping are intercut with shots of her singing along with the track with her arms clutched to her breast . Afterwards Farmer and the three children are shown holding placards with the words " Maman a tort " . Following another verse the singer 's decapitated head is pictured on a plate on a table in front of the children who are holding knives and forks . The singer is again shown in blue and cries before being slapped in the face . A low @-@ angle shot of Farmer shows her readjusting the strap of her nightgown and is intercut with images of her in silhouette . The video ends with a portrait of Freud . 
 Another more ambitious and dramatic video had originally been planned by Boutonnat . Farmer would have been shown in a wheelchair pushed by a nun nurse , who she had feeling for . As the singer cannot understand this relationship , and faces the disapproval of her mother because of it , Farmer decides to commit suicide by throwing herself from the top of a cliff . The story board was even presented in the media , but Farmer 's recording company RCA did not agree with to the project , especially since this video would have cost 70 @,@ 000 euro to make . There was no video for " My Mum Is Wrong " . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The video caused " a veritable stir in the music world " because " Boutonnat cast [ Farmer ] as a kind of provocative Lolita figure " . As she wears a transparent nightgown in the music video , some French television channels censored it . It was first aired on the French television programme Clip Clap in a shortened version . In an interview , Farmer deplored the censorship , saying : " [ it ] has shocked many people . I find it pretty stupid . Jacques <unk> said " <unk> in France " and everyone went into raptures . As for me , I simply say that I enjoyed the controversy " . 
 Despite the low cost of the video , it was described in the press as " beautiful " by Chanson and " one of the best music videos of the year " by Télé Star . In contrast , the French newspaper Le Provençal called the video " useless : static , unimaginative " and claimed that it was low @-@ budget . For his part , Violet described the video as being " half way between <unk> and shadow play " and said that it provides " a blend of ethereal and childish sensuality , of measured provocation and of obsessive victimization " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song was generally very well received by the press at the time . Boys and Girls considered it " undoubtedly one of the hits of the summer of 1984 " , OK called it " a very promising first 7 " " , and Chanson 84 stated that it was " great : rhythmic , spicy , original ; the orchestration , based on a synth and drums , is enriched over the couplets " . Le Matin de Paris said it was " a funny perverse little song " , and Les Grands de la <unk> stated : " The tone is original , the music is subtle : it 's a good surprise " . 
 " Maman a tort " did not appear in the French Top 50 Singles Chart because the chart had not been created at the time . The sales of the single were about 100 @,@ 000 ( 220 @,@ 000 , according to French magazine Elle ) , which was deemed as a " decent performance " and a " first success , not a triumphant one " . " My Mum Is Wrong " was not successful and its sales are unknown . In March 2014 " Maman a Tort " entered the French Singles Chart at number 104 due to digital downloads by Farmer 's fans as a tribute to her thirty @-@ year singing career . 
 = = Promotion and live performances = = 
 Bertrand Le Page provided many opportunities for Farmer to perform the song on television . French host Michel Drucker was the first to allow the singer to perform on his show , Champs Élysées . From that moment , the song was widely played on radio and aroused the curiosity of the public . 
 Throughout 1984 , Farmer actively promoted " Maman a tort " and performed it in on many French television programs broadcast on TF1 , <unk> 2 , <unk> and TMC . From February 1985 to December 1986 , when her next three singles — " On est tous des <unk> " , " Plus <unk> " and " Libertine " — were released , Farmer promoted them on many television shows , but she also sang " Maman a tort " on these occasions . In total , the song has been performed over twenty times on television . Her performance on Salut les Mickey was censored because of the song 's ambiguous lyrics . According to author Erwan Chuberre , Farmer 's performances on television were generally deemed as unconvincing , because she had never taken dance lessons at the time , and her colored dresses were not very tasteful . In spite of these performances , Farmer had difficulty achieving notoriety and , on an advice of Le Page , she extended the promotion of the song to include interviews in magazines for teenagers . 
 The song was included in the set list of Farmer 's 1989 tour and was performed as a duet . Carole Fredericks , one of Farmer 's vocalists , portrayed the nurse , and in a long monologue , she complained about one of her female patients , who was difficult to bear . Farmer , hidden beneath Frederick 's long dress , suddenly appeared , wearing pyjamas , and performed the song by waddling like a little child . The song was also performed during the <unk> Tour but included in a medley composed of her 1980s greatest hits . A snippet of the song was performed on the opening night of the Timeless Tour on 7 September 2013 in Paris . As for " My Mum Is Wrong " , it does not appear on any of Farmer 's albums and has not been performed on stage . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 The song has been covered five times . First , in the late 1990s , by French singer Lio for a 1984 hits compilation , then in 2000 , by Beyond the Nightmare , but this version was not released as a single . In 2003 the song was released twice : first by <unk> and Gabrielle , two contestants of À la Recherche de la Nouvelle Star , on the album <unk> Tubes on which it appears as 13th track , and then by <unk> ; his version , released in the United Kingdom as a 7 " maxi single , included an instrumental version named " My Mum Is Dub " as a B @-@ side , was unsuccessful and failed to chart . In 2010 Momus recorded an English translation of this song titled ' The Orderly ' . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of single releases of " Maman a tort " and " My Mum Is Wrong " : 
 " Maman a tort " 
 7 " single – First and second releases 
 7 " maxi 
 Digital download ( since 2005 ) 
 " My Mum Is Wrong " 
 7 " single 
 7 " maxi – Promo 
 = = Official versions = = 
 = = Personnel and credits = = 
 These are the credits and the personnel as they appear on the back of the single : 
 Jérôme Dahan – lyrics , music 
 Laurent Boutonnat – music 
 Jean @-@ Claude <unk> – recording , at " Le <unk> <unk> " studio 
 Philippe <unk> – mixing , at Davout studio 
 Bertrand Le Page – editions 
 RCA – recording company 
 John Frost – photo 
 = = Release history = = 
 = St Cwyllog 's Church , Llangwyllog = 
 St Cwyllog 's Church , Llangwyllog is a medieval church near Llangwyllog , in Anglesey , north Wales . St Cwyllog founded a church here in the 6th century , although the exact date is unknown . The existence of a church here was recorded in 1254 and parts of the present building may date from around 1200 . Other parts are from the 15th century , with an unusual annexe ( possibly intended for use as a schoolroom ) added in the 16th century . The church contains some 18th @-@ century fittings , including a rare Georgian three @-@ decker pulpit and reading desk . 
 The church is still in use for worship by the Church in Wales , as one of seven churches in a combined group of parishes . It is a Grade II * listed building , a national designation given to " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " , because it is regarded as a " good rural medieval church " with some features from the 15th century , as well as the 18th @-@ century fittings . 
 = = History and location = = 
 St Cwyllog 's Church is in a rural location in the middle of Anglesey , about 3 miles ( 5 km ) north @-@ west of Llangefni , the county town , and a short distance from the small village of Llangwyllog . The village takes its name from the church : the Welsh word llan originally meant " enclosure " and then " church " , and " – <unk> " is a modified form of the saint 's name . 
 The first church on this site was established by Cwyllog , a female saint , in the 6th century , although the exact date is unknown . She was one of the daughters of St Caw , a king in northern Britain who lost his lands and sought safety with his family in Anglesey , where the ruler Maelgwn Gwynedd gave him land . There was a church here at the time of the Norwich Taxation in 1254 , and the present walls may date from around 1200 . In the 13th century , the church was under the control of the Augustinian canons of the priory at Penmon , on the east of Anglesey , with the priory gaining the income from the tithes paid to the church . The priory gradually diminished in size and importance , and in 1522 the prior and two canons ( the entire community , at that stage ) affixed their signature to the lease of <unk> church to Richard Bulkeley ( a member of a prominent family from the Anglesey town of Beaumaris ) for the period of 100 years at an annual rent of £ 1 . 
 The north doorway and the east window are from the late 15th century . An annexe was added at the west end in the latter half of the 16th century . Some restoration work was carried out in 1812 , funded by Thomas Bulkeley , 7th Viscount Bulkeley , with further work in 1854 . 
 St Cwyllog 's , now part of the Church in Wales , is still used for services , although in 2011 a service was only scheduled on the third Sunday of each month in the afternoon . The church is one of three in the parish of Llannerch @-@ y @-@ medd , which is part of a combined benefice with four other parishes ( Llandrygarn , Bodwrog , Heneglwys and <unk> ) which have seven churches in total . The parish is in the deanery of Malltraeth and the archdeaconry of Bangor , within the Diocese of Bangor . As of 2013 , the position of vicar is vacant . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 The church is built from rubble masonry with very large boulder quoins ; the roof is made from slate with stone copings . The main part of the church is 45 feet 6 inches long by 15 feet 3 inches wide ( 13 @.@ 87 by 4 @.@ 65 m ) ; the annexe at the west end measures 20 feet 6 inches by 15 feet 6 inches ( 6 @.@ 25 by 4 @.@ 72 m ) . At the west end of the roof of the nave , there is a bellcote with a single bell decorated with three bull heads , dated 1661 ; at the east end , there is a cross . There is no structural division between the nave and the chancel . The annexe at the west end is smaller and lower in height than the main building , and was built in line with it . It may have been built for use as a schoolroom . It has a 16th @-@ century doorway at the west end , converted into a window in the 19th century , and a modern door at the east end , as well as an 18th @-@ century fireplace . The main entrance into the church is on the north side of the nave , dating from the late 15th century . The doorway is pointed , in a square frame . 
 The east window in the chancel is from the 15th century . There are three lights , headed with trefoils , in a pointed arch . Stained glass by the Pre @-@ Raphaelite artist Henry Holiday was added in 1882 . The windows in the north wall are from the late 16th century , and have square heads . The south wall has one similar window , and two copies from the 19th century . 
 The church has a cylindrical stone font dating from the 13th century , carved with decorations , particularly an elaborate leaf design and a knotwork pattern . The decoration , however , is incomplete and about one @-@ third of it was left unfinished . Other fittings date on the whole from the late 18th century , as St <unk> 's was refurbished in 1769 . They include a triple @-@ decker pulpit combined with a reading desk , with panelling to the front and sides and further panelling at the back of the pulpit . It bears an inscription " M T I I <unk> 1769 " . The altar has communion rails on three sides , which are probably of similar date to the pulpit , and seats nearby in the chancel on the north and south <unk> . There are various 18th @-@ century memorials . To the east of the pulpit , one box pew dates from the 18th century , another from the 19th ; to the west , there are open benches . The church 's chest is dated 1804 , and there are hat pegs on the walls . 
 St Cwyllog 's has three chalices , made from silver , from the 16th century . The lid of one of them ( dated 1578 ) was returned to the church in 2010 by an antiques dealer who had purchased it several years before , thinking it to be a Tudor sugar lid . Further investigations showed that it had once belonged to a nearby closed church that had transferred its silver to St Cwyllog 's . A chance conversation between the antiques dealer and a local clergyman at an archeology group led to the discovery that the lid had the same silversmith 's mark and fitted one of the chalices , and the dealer thereafter decided that she ought to return it to the church . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The church has national recognition and statutory protection from alteration as it has been designated as a Grade II * listed building – the second @-@ highest ( of three ) grade of listing , designating " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " . It was given this status on 12 May 1970 , and has been listed as " a good rural medieval church which retains some C15 features and the original simple medieval plan " . Cadw ( the Welsh Assembly Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales and the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists ) also notes the 18th @-@ century fittings and memorials , and adds that the addition of a west annexe is unusual for Anglesey . 
 The 19th @-@ century antiquarian Angharad Llwyd described the church as " small , but remarkably well built " , and mentioned the " ancient and curious chapel at the west end of the nave . " Writing in 1859 , the clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones said that St Cwyllog 's had " rather better architectural features about it than most of the small churches in Anglesey . " A 2009 guide to the buildings of the region describes the 1854 restoration as " tactful " , and notes the " rare surviving Georgian fittings " , including the pulpit . A 2011 guide to the religious buildings of Wales says that St Cwyllog 's has " the earliest and finest of several pre @-@ ecclesiological church interiors in Anglesey " . 
 = The Fighting Irish = 
 " The Fighting Irish " is the seventeenth episode of NBC 's first season of 30 Rock . It was written by one of the season 's co @-@ executive producers , Jack Burditt and it was directed by Dennie Gordon . It aired on March 8 , 2007 in the United States . Guest stars who appeared in this episode were Dan Bakkedahl , Katrina Bowden , Henry Boyle , Anna Chlumsky , Siobhan Fallon Hogan , Chris Hoch , Alice Kremelberg , Nathan Lane , Boris McGiver , John F Mooney , Brian Murray , Maulik Pancholy , Lonny Ross , Molly Shannon , Jason Sudeikis and Kristen Sudeikis . 
 The episode features the appearance of Jack Donaghy 's ( played by Alec Baldwin ) brother , Eddie Donaghy ( Nathan Lane ) , who visits Jack claiming that their father ( Brian Murray ) is dead . Jack also tells Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) that she has to fire ten percent of her staff . Liz struggles with this task until she meets Floyd 's ( Jason Sudeikis ) girlfriend , Liz <unk> ( Anna Chlumsky ) , who works in the accounting department at TGS with Tracy Jordan , a fictional sketch comedy series for which Liz is the head writer . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack 's down @-@ and @-@ out brother , Eddie , pays him a visit claiming that their father is dead . Jack and Eddie , after feuding , later bond and they even decide to invite their sisters ( Molly Shannon and Siobhan Fallon Hogan ) and brother @-@ in @-@ law ( Boris McGiver ) to 30 Rock for an impromptu family reunion . As his family are about to watch a taping of TGS , Jack 's supposedly dead father visits Jack in his office , claiming that Eddie is dead . This eventually leads to an argument on the TGS stage and Liz getting beaten up by one of Jack 's sisters , Katherine Catherine . 
 Meanwhile , Liz has been told by Jack that she has to fire ten percent of her staff . While the staff try their best to keep their jobs , Liz struggles with making a decision of whom to fire . Liz 's problem is solved when Floyd , for whom Liz has romantic feelings , tells her that his girlfriend works in accounting at TGS . After Liz fires Floyd 's girlfriend , she goes on a rampage around 30 Rock firing people , including her producer Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) , who disagrees with her decision to fire Floyd 's girlfriend for her own personal gain . Jack later tells her that he hired all the fired people back , but he is transferring Floyd 's girlfriend to General Electric headquarters in Fairfield , Connecticut . 
 Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) has been told by his lawyer that he should join a religion . He asks advice of people including Liz and Jack , going as far as attending church with Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) . When Eddie explains Irish Catholicism to Tracy , he decides that this is the religion he was looking for and joins . 
 = = Production = = 
 Jason Sudeikis , Molly Shannon and Siobhan Fallon Hogan , who played Floyd , Katherine Catherine and Patrica in this episode , have all appeared in the main cast of Saturday Night Live , a weekly sketch comedy series which airs on NBC in the United States . 
 Kristen Sudeikis , the sister of Jason Sudeikis , appeared in this episode as an " advanced hip @-@ hop groove " gym class instructor . Kristen Sudeikis is a professional choreographer . 
 Judah Friedlander , who portrays Frank Rossitano in 30 Rock , is known for his trademark trucker hats which he wears in and out of the Frank character . The hats normally have short words or phrases glued onto them . Friedlander has stated that he makes the hats himself . He has also said that " some are in @-@ jokes , and some are just flat out jokes . " The idea came from Friedlander 's stand @-@ up persona in which his hats are all printed with " world champion " in different languages in different appearances . In this episode , Frank wears an " extra @-@ flashy ' Liz Rocks ' hat " to try and persuade Liz not to fire him . 
 This episode is the third episode written by Jack Burditt after " Jack Meets Dennis " and " The Baby Show " . Also , this is the first episode directed by Dennie Gordon . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In the U.S. , this episode was viewed by 5 @.@ 2 million viewers and received a rating of 2 @.@ 5 / 6 in the key adults 18 – 49 demographic according to the Nielsen ratings system . The 2 @.@ 5 refers to 2 @.@ 5 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and the 6 refers to 6 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . 
 Robert Canning of IGN wrote that " while the episode was fun , there just weren 't as many of the laugh @-@ out @-@ loud moments that have made recent episode so memorable . " Matt Webb Mitovich of TV Guide wrote that " something about this week 's episode , in which Liz claimed power , Jack found family and Tracy sought religion ( a subplot deserving of far greater screen time ) , just wasn 't clicking for [ him ] . " Julia Ward of AOL 's TV Squad thought that " this episode didn 't reach the farcical highs of ' Black Tie ' . It was more standard sitcom fare than goofy bliss , but it wasn 't bad . " 
 = Hydra the Revenge = 
 Hydra the Revenge ( simply known as Hydra ) is a steel Floorless Coaster at Dorney Park & Wildwater Kingdom in Allentown , Pennsylvania ( USA ) . It is the only Floorless Coaster in Pennsylvania and was built where the former wooden roller coaster Hercules once stood , which was closed and demolished at the end of the park 's 2003 season . Its name comes from the Greek Mythology story where Hercules battled the Hydra . 
 = = History = = 
 Hercules was a wooden roller coaster that sat in the current location of Hydra the Revenge . In 2003 , the coaster was closed and demolished . On September 14 , 2004 , the $ 13 million Hydra the Revenge was announced . Construction began in the spring of 2004 and continued through the winter . Hydra the Revenge was topped off ( highest piece of the lift hill ) on August 20 , 2004 and the entire track layout was completed on December 4 , 2004 . The first cars for the coaster arrived at Dorney Park on December 10 , 2004 and the first ride with people on a train took place on March 24 , 2005 . The roller coaster officially opened to the public on May 7 , 2005 . 
 = = = Backstory = = = 
 The name of the roller coaster comes from the story of Hercules in Greek Mythology . According to the story , Hercules had to perform twelve labours . After defeating the Nemean lion for the first labour , the second was to defeat the Hydra , a nine @-@ headed creature with eight serpentine heads that would regrow each time they were cut off , including one that was immortal . Dorney Park altered the remainder of the <unk> after Hercules managed to defeat the Hydra initially , he buried the immortal head stuck under a stone , with the intention of sealing it for all time . Years later however , the head slowly grew back , resurrecting the Hydra and taking its revenge on Hercules by killing him ; hence why the Hydra roller coaster sits where Hercules once did . 
 = = Experience = = 
 Once the floor drops and the front gate opens , the train is dispatched leading straight into the first element , a heartline roll . Upon exiting the roll , the train makes a 180 degree right turn and begins to climb the 95 @-@ foot ( 29 m ) lift hill . Once at the top , the train drops down 105 feet ( 32 m ) at a 68 degree angle . Then , the train makes a slight right turn into a 62 @-@ foot ( 19 m ) inclined diving loop before going through a zero @-@ gravity roll . Next , immediately after the roll , the train enters the first of two corkscrews . After exiting the corkscrew , the train then goes through a cobra roll . After an upward left turn , followed by a <unk> right turn , the train goes over an airtime hill before entering the second corkscrew . The train then makes a banked right turn , then a left turn which leads into the brake run . Once back at the station , after the floors come back up and the front gate closes , the riders unload and the next ones load . 
 One cycle of the ride lasts about 2 minutes and 35 seconds . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Hydra the Revenge operates with two steel and fiberglass trains . Each train has eight cars that can seat four riders in a single row for a total of 32 riders per train . Each train has two shades of green and pink on the bottom section while the seats and over @-@ the @-@ shoulder restraints are also pink . Each seat has an over @-@ the @-@ shoulder harness with an interlocking seatbelt . The trains have no floor as the riders ' legs can dangle throughout the ride . 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The steel track of Hydra the Revenge is approximately 3 @,@ 198 feet ( 975 m ) long , the height of the lift is approximately 95 feet ( 29 m ) high , and the entire track weighs about 1 @,@ 368 @,@ 000 pounds ( 621 @,@ 000 kg ) . It was manufactured by Clermont Steel Fabricators located in Batavia , Ohio . The track has two shades of green while the supports are turquoise . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Jeremy Thompson from Roller Coaster Philosophy said that " the ride itself is okay , but I ’ m not sure if I really loved the whole experience . " , but that " still , it ’ s got a more interesting layout . " A group of roller coaster enthusiasts also came to the conclusion that the ride wasn 't the best but still good , " The general consensus is that it 's a good , but not quite great , ride that 's perfect for family @-@ oriented Dorney . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = Texas Tech University = 
 Texas Tech University , often referred to as Texas Tech , Tech , or <unk> , is a public research university in Lubbock , Texas , and the flagship institution of the Texas Tech University System . Established on February 10 , 1923 , and originally known as Texas Technological College , it is the leading institution of the four @-@ institution Texas Tech University System . The university 's student enrollment is the sixth @-@ largest in the state of Texas , as of the Fall 2014 semester . The university shares its campus with Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center , making it the only campus in Texas to house an undergraduate university , law school , and medical school at the same location . 
 The university offers degrees in more than 150 courses of study through 13 colleges and hosts 60 research centers and institutes . Texas Tech University has awarded over 200 @,@ 000 degrees since 1927 , including over 40 @,@ 000 graduate and professional degrees . The Carnegie Foundation classifies Texas Tech as having " highest research activity " . Research projects in the areas of epidemiology , pulsed power , grid computing , <unk> , atmospheric sciences , and wind energy are among the most prominent at the university . The Spanish Renaissance @-@ themed campus , described by author James Michener as " the most beautiful west of the Mississippi until you get to Stanford " , has been awarded the Grand Award for excellence in grounds @-@ keeping , and has been noted for possessing a public art collection among the ten best in the United States . 
 The Texas Tech Red Raiders are charter members of the Big 12 Conference and compete in Division I for all varsity sports . The Red Raiders football team has made 36 bowl appearances , which is 17th most of any university . The Red Raiders basketball team has made 14 appearances in the NCAA Division I Tournament . Bob Knight has coached the second most wins in men 's NCAA Division I basketball history and served as the team 's head coach from 2001 to 2008 . The Lady Raiders basketball team won the 1993 NCAA Division I Tournament . In 1999 , Texas Tech 's Goin ' Band from <unk> received the Sudler Trophy , which is awarded to " recognize collegiate marching bands of particular excellence " . 
 Though the majority of the university 's students originate in the southwestern United States , the school has served students from all 50 states and more than 100 countries . Texas Tech University alumni and former students have gone on to prominent careers in government , business , science , medicine , education , sports , and entertainment . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 The call to open a college in West Texas began shortly after the arrival of settlers in the area in the 1880s . In 1917 , the Texas legislature passed a bill creating a branch of Texas A & M to be located in Abilene . However , the bill was repealed two years later during the next session after it was discovered that Governor James E. Ferguson had falsely reported the site committee 's choice of location . After new legislation passed in the state house and senate in 1921 , Governor Pat Neff vetoed it , citing hard financial times in West Texas . Furious about Neff 's veto , some in West Texas went so far as to recommend that West Texas secede from the state . 
 In 1923 , the legislature decided , rather than a branch campus , an entirely new university would better serve the needs of the region under legislation co @-@ authored by State Senator William H. Bledsoe of Lubbock and State Representative Roy Alvin Baldwin of Slaton in southern Lubbock County . On February 10 , 1923 , Neff signed the legislation creating Texas Technological College , and in July of that year , a committee began searching for a site . When the members of the committee visited Lubbock , they were overwhelmed to find residents lining the streets to show support for the idea of hosting the institution . That August , Lubbock was chosen on the first ballot over other area towns , including <unk> , Plainview , Big Spring , and Sweetwater . 
 Construction of the college campus began on November 1 , 1924 . Ten days later , the cornerstone of the Administration Building was laid in front of a crowd of 20 @,@ 000 people . Governor Pat Neff , Amon G. Carter , Reverend E. E. Robinson , Colonel Ernest O. Thompson , and Representative Richard M. Chitwood , the chairman of the House Education Committee , who became the first Texas Tech business manager , spoke at the event . Chitwood served in the position only fifteen months ; he died in November 1926 . With an enrollment of 914 students — both men and women — Texas Technological College opened for classes on October 1 , 1925 . It was originally composed of four schools — Agriculture , Engineering , Home Economics , and Liberal Arts . 
 Texas Tech grew slowly in the early years . During the 1930s , Bradford Knapp , the university 's second president , proceeded with an expansion program , which included new dormitories , the first library ( now the mathematics building ) , a golf course , a swimming pool , paved streets and alleys , and landscaping . A proposed $ 80 @,@ 000 allocation for a football stadium was shelved . The library won the approval of Governor James V. Allred . Because the state cut appropriations by 30 % at the start of the Great Depression , President Knapp applied for assistance from the major New Deal agencies to expand Texas Tech , including the Works Progress Administration , Public Works Administration ( PWA ) , Civil Works Administration , and the National Youth Administration . Wyatt C. Hedrick , son @-@ in @-@ law of Governor Ross S. Sterling , was the architect of all campus PWA projects . 
 Military training was conducted at the college as early as 1925 , but formal Reserve Officers ' Training Corps training did not commence until 1936 . By 1939 , the school 's enrollment had grown to 3 @,@ 890 . Though enrollment declined during World War II , Texas Tech trained 4 @,@ 747 men in its armed forces training detachments . Following the war , in 1946 , the college saw its enrollment leap to 5 @,@ 366 from a low of 1 @,@ 696 in 1943 . 
 = = = Expansion and growth = = = 
 By the 1960s , the school had expanded its offerings to more than just technical subjects . The Faculty Advisory Committee suggested changing the name to " Texas State University " , feeling the phrase " Technological College " was insufficient to define the scope of the institution . While most students supported this change , the Board of Directors and many alumni , wanting to preserve the Double T , opposed it . Other names — University of the Southwest , Texas Technological College and State University , and The Texas University of Art , Science and Technology — were considered , but the Board of Directors chose Texas Tech University , submitting it to the state legislature in 1964 . A failed move by Governor John Connally to have the school placed into the Texas A & M University System , as well as continued disagreement and heated debate regarding the school 's new name , kept the name change from being approved . In spite of objections by many students and faculty , the Board of Directors again submitted the change in 1969 . It finally received the legislature 's approval on June 6 and the name Texas Tech University went into effect that September . All of the institution 's schools , except Law , became colleges . 
 Texas Tech was integrated in 1961 when three African @-@ American students were admitted . After its initial rejection of the students ' enrollment and the threat of a subsequent lawsuit , the university enacted a policy to admit " all qualified applicants regardless of color " . The university offered its first athletic scholarship to a black student in 1967 , when Danny Hardaway was recruited to play for the Red Raiders football team . In 1970 , Hortense W. Dixon became the first African American student to earn a doctorate from the university . 
 In the 1960s and 1970s , the university invested US $ 150 million in the campus to construct buildings for the library , foreign languages , social sciences , communications , philosophy , electrical and petroleum engineering , art , and architecture . Some other buildings were significantly expanded . On May 29 , 1969 , the 61st Texas Legislature created the Texas Tech University School of Medicine . The Texas Legislature expanded the medical school charter in 1979 , creating the Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center . TTUHSC , which is now part of the Texas Tech University System , includes Schools of Allied Health Sciences , Medicine , Nursing , Pharmacy , and the Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences . It has locations in four Texas cities in addition to the main campus in Lubbock . In 2011 , the combined enrollment in the Texas Tech University System was greater than 42 @,@ 000 students — a 48 % increase since 2000 . Chancellor Kent Hance reiterated plans for Texas Tech 's main campus to reach enrollment of 40 @,@ 000 students by 2020 , with additional 5 @,@ 000 students at Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center and 10 @,@ 000 students at Angelo State University . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 In 1996 , the Board of Regents of Texas Tech University created the Texas Tech University System . Former State Senator John T. Montford , later of San Antonio , was selected as the first chancellor to lead the combined academic enterprise . Regents Chair Edward Whitacre Jr. stated the move was made due to the size and complexity of the institution . " It 's time " , he said , " to take the university into the 21st century " . The Texas Tech University system originally included Texas Tech University and Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center . On November 6 , 2007 , the voters of Texas approved an amendment to the Texas Constitution realigning Angelo State University with the Texas Tech University System . Kent Hance , a Texas Tech graduate who had served as United States Representative and as one of the three elected members of the Texas Board which regulates the oil @-@ and @-@ gas industry , assumed the duties of chancellor on December 1 , 2006 . 
 Though growth continued at Texas Tech , the university was not immune to controversy . In 2003 , a third @-@ year student at the Texas Tech School of Law filed suit against the university over its policy on free speech zones , which restricted student speech to a single " free speech gazebo " . The following year , a federal judge declared the policy unconstitutional . 
 To meet the demands of its increased enrollment and expanding research , the university has invested more than $ 548 million in new construction since 2000 . It has also received more than $ 65 @.@ 9 million in private donations . In April 2009 , the Texas House of Representatives passed a bill to increase state funding for seven public universities . Texas Tech University is classified by the state as an " Emerging Research University " , and is among the universities that will receive additional state funding for advancement toward " Tier 1 " status . Three funds — the Research University Development Fund , the Texas Research Incentive Program , and the National Research University Benchmark Fund — have been established and will provide $ 500 million in grants and matching funds during fiscal years 2010 and 2011 . On September 2 , 2009 , the university announced it had received private gifts totaling $ 24 @.@ 3 million . Of these , $ 21 @.@ 5 million are eligible for match under the Texas Research Incentive Program . In January 2016 , Duane Nellis resigned from the position of President and was replaced by interim President John Opperman . 
 In late 2011 and throughout 2012 @-@ 13 , construction began on a several new buildings on campus . The construction included a new $ 20 million Petroleum Engineering and Research building , a new building to house the Rawls College of Business , two new residence halls , a $ 3 @.@ 5 million chapel , and extensive remodeling of the building that previously housed the Rawls College of Business . 
 The school 's endowment surpassed the $ 1 billion barrier for the first time in March 2014 at $ 1 @,@ 043 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Academic profile = = 
 By enrollment , Texas Tech is the sixth @-@ largest university in Texas and the largest institution of higher education in the western two @-@ thirds of the state . In the Fall 2014 semester , Texas Tech set a record enrollment with 35 @,@ 134 students . For the 2014 enrollment year , most students came from Texas ( 95 @.@ 17 % ) , followed by New Mexico , California , Colorado , Oklahoma , and Florida . Altogether , the university has educated students from all 50 US states and over 100 foreign countries . Enrollment has continued to increase in recent years , and growth is on track with a plan to have 40 @,@ 000 students by the year 2020 . From 1927 to 2011 , the university awarded 173 @,@ 551 bachelor 's , 34 @,@ 541 master 's , 5 @,@ 906 doctoral , and 7 @,@ 092 law degrees . 
 The Princeton Review ranked Texas Tech among the 125 best colleges in the Western United States in its 2015 edition . The 2016 U.S. News & World Report rankings listed the university at 168th nationally and 91st amongst public schools . The 2013 Shanghai Jiao Tong Rankings placed Texas Tech University at 401 worldwide , which tied it with fellow Big 12 schools , Oklahoma and Kansas State , among others . In 2010 , the Wall Street Journal ranked the university 18th in its ranking of graduate desirability for job recruiters . Three of the University 's undergraduate programs are ranked by PayScale as in the top 20 nationally in mid @-@ career salary : Art , Physical and Life Sciences , and Education . In its 2015 edition , U.S. News & World Report noted the university has a " selective " admissions policy . As a state public university , Texas Tech is subject to Texas House Bill 588 , which guarantees Texas high school seniors in the top 10 % of their graduating class admission to any public Texas university . In 2012 , 20 @.@ 3 % of incoming freshmen were admitted in this manner . About half of incoming freshmen finished in the top quarter of their graduating classes . In 2016 , the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education listed Texas Tech among 115 most prominent research schools , commonly known as " Carnegie Tier One " . 
 Texas Tech University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools . The university offers 150 bachelor 's , 104 master 's , and 59 doctoral degree programs . Texas Tech has five satellite campuses located in Texas — in Abilene , Amarillo , Fredericksburg , Highland Lakes , and Junction . Texas Tech also has a satellite campus in Europe , located in Seville , Spain . Additional study @-@ abroad programs are offered in various countries , such as Denmark , England , France , and Italy . 
 The Office of International Affairs supports and facilitates the international mission of Texas Tech University . It provides services for faculty and students , offers international educational and cultural experiences for the school and community , and contributes to the university 's globalization process and its effort to grow as an international educational and research center . The International Cultural Center provides a continual series of conferences , lectures , art exhibitions , and performances . 
 = = = Colleges and schools = = = 
 Texas Tech has expanded from its original four schools to comprise ten colleges and two schools . In 2008 , the College of Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources ranked among the 30 largest schools of agriculture in the country by enrollment . 
 In the 2015 U.S. News & World Report report on higher education , the Whitacre College of Engineering was ranked 94th in the nation . In 2009 , the college 's Petroleum Engineering Department was ranked 10th best in the nation . The college offers 11 engineering programs accredited by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology . On November 12 , 2008 , following a $ 25 million gift from AT & T in honor of alumnus Edward Whitacre Jr . , the college was formally renamed the Edward E. Whitacre Jr . College of Engineering . 
 The largest academic division on campus , the College of Arts and Sciences offers bachelor 's , master 's , and doctoral degrees in a wide range of subjects from philosophy to mathematics . In 2004 , the College of Mass Communications and the College of Visual and Performing Arts was created from programs that had belonged to the College of Arts and Sciences . The College of Mass Communications officially changed its name to the College of Media and Communication in 2012 and offers degrees in several areas , including advertising , journalism and electronic media , and public relations . Programs offered through the College of Visual and Performing Arts are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Art and Design , the National Association of Schools of Music , and the National Association of Schools of Theatre . 
 Once the Division of Home Economics , the College of Human Sciences now offers degrees in applied and professional studies , design , human development , nutrition , hospitality , and retailing . The College of Human Sciences ' Department of Personal Financial Planning was ranked in 2011 as the top program out of ten standout programs by the industry newsletter , Financial Planning . The College of Architecture , founded in 1927 , offers programs accredited by the National Architectural Accrediting Board . 
 The Rawls College of Business , which is accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business , is the university 's business school . The college offers bachelor 's , master 's , and doctoral degrees in business disciplines . In its 2016 " Best Grad Schools " rankings , U.S. News & World Report ranked the graduate business program 91st in the United States . The college 's health organization management degree program was ranked 41st . From its origin in 1942 , the business school was known as the Division of Commerce , until it was renamed the College of Business Administration in 1956 . In 2000 , following a $ 25 million gift from alumnus Jerry S. Rawls , the college was formally renamed the Jerry S. Rawls College of Business Administration . 
 In 1967 , both the College of Education and the Texas Tech University School of Law were founded . The College of Education instructs future teachers and is accredited by the National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education . The School of Law is an American Bar Association @-@ accredited law school on the main campus in Lubbock , and came in 2nd statewide in the 2013 Bar Examination pass rate with 95 @.@ 45 percent . The school offers Juris Doctor degrees which can be earned in conjunction with Master of Business Administration or Master of Science degrees through the adjacent Rawls College of Business . 
 All graduate programs offered at Texas Tech University are overseen by the Graduate School , which was officially established in 1954 . The university 's Honors College allows select students to design a customized curriculum that incorporates a broad range of disciplines , and offers students the opportunity for early admission into Texas Tech University ’ s medical and law schools . 
 In September 2008 , the University College was established . Formerly known as the College of Outreach and Distance Education , the college was created by bringing together the Division of Off @-@ Campus Sites and the Division of Outreach and Distance Education . Texas Tech 's six in @-@ state satellite campuses are under the auspices of the college . Additionally , it oversees the Texas Tech University Independent School District . 
 The Texas Tech University System also operates a medical school , the Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center . It offers Schools of Allied Health Sciences , Biomedical Sciences , Medicine , Nursing , and Pharmacy . While it is a discrete entity , separate from Texas Tech University , it offers joint degrees ( such as MD / MBA ) through coordination with the university . Further , the Health Sciences Center is located on the university 's main campus in Lubbock . In addition to the Lubbock campus , TTUHSC has campuses located in Abilene , Amarillo , El Paso , and Odessa . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 Classified by the Carnegie Foundation in 2016 as one of only 115 research universities with " highest activity " , Texas Tech University hosts 71 research centers and institutes . In 2008 , a team of researchers from Texas Tech University and Harvard University announced the development of an siRNA @-@ based treatment that may ultimately counteract the human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) . Human cells infected with HIV , injected into rats , have been cured by the experimental treatment . Clinical trials on humans are expected to begin by 2010 . Texas Tech researchers also hold the exclusive license for <unk> , a human blood substitute composed of bovine hemoglobin . <unk> , the company marketing the technology , believes <unk> will diminish the intrinsic toxicities that have stifled previous attempts to develop a human blood substitute . On January 14 , 2008 , Texas Tech University announced the creation of the West Texas Influenza Research Center . The university has concluded human clinical testing of oral interferon in a five @-@ year study of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and continues its study of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease . 
 Following the May 11 , 1970 , Lubbock Tornado that caused 26 fatalities and over $ 609 million ( 2013 dollars ) in damage in Lubbock , the National Wind Institute ( formerly the Wind Science and Engineering Research Center or WISE ) was established . The National Wind Institute Center , which includes 56 @,@ 000 square feet ( 5 @,@ 200 m2 ) of indoor laboratory space , is focused on research , education , and information outreach . The interdisciplinary research program studies methods to exploit the beneficial qualities of wind and to mitigate its detrimental effects . The center offers education in wind science and engineering to develop professionals who are experts in creating designs which deal effectively with problems caused by high winds . The Center instituted the nation 's first Ph.D program in Wind Science and Engineering in 2003 . National Wind Institute researchers contributed significantly to the development of the Enhanced Fujita Scale for rating the strength of tornadoes . 
 Texas Tech has made numerous contributions to NASA projects . Daniel Cooke , Computer Science Department Chair , and his colleagues are working to develop the technical content of the Intelligent Systems Program , and have been awarded a five @-@ year budget valued at $ 350 million . University scientists have also teamed with NASA 's guidance , navigation , and control engineers to develop the Onboard Abort Executive ( <unk> ) , software capable of quickly deciding the best course of action during an ascent failure . The Texas Tech Space Research Initiative has also partnered with NASA to perfect methods for growing fresh vegetables in space and to determine the most efficient ways to recycle wastewater . In November 1996 , the university dedicated the Charles A. Bassett II Pulse Laboratory to honor engineering alumnus and Gemini @-@ era astronaut Charles A. Bassett II . In total , Texas Tech has helped to produce three astronauts : Bassett , Paul Lockhart , and Rick Husband ; Husband was commander of STS @-@ 107 , the final flight of Space Shuttle Columbia . 
 In 2008 , the pulsed power electronics laboratory received $ 4 million in federal funding . Among other things , the money will be used to create compact generators for weapon systems designed to destroy improvised explosive devices ( IEDs ) . The College of Engineering ’ s Nano Tech Center has received approximately $ 20 million in grants toward its work in applied <unk> , the creation and manipulation of advanced materials at the nanoscale that can produce and sense light . Texas Tech 's Center for Advanced Analytics and Business Intelligence performs grid computing research through collaboration with the SAS Institute that seeks to improve the speed with which large quantities of data ( such as those present in genomics and global economics ) can be processed . 
 Texas Tech 's College of Agricultural Science and Natural Resources has received state and federal grants for research projects including the fiber properties of cotton , the antibacterial properties of cotton fabric , and the development of chemical @-@ warfare protective fabrics . The college has also created two grass variants , Shadow Turf , a drought @-@ tolerant turf grass that thrives in shade , and Tech Turf ( marketed as <unk> ) , a turf grass with the rich color and texture of Bermuda and the resilience of buffalo grass . 
 = = = Online and Regional Learning Programs = = = 
 Texas Tech offers online and regional programs in addition to programs offered on the main campus . There are programs that are fully online , hybrid / blended , and located at regional sites . The university offers bachelor ’ s , master ’ s , and doctoral degrees , as well as a graduate certification preparation program , at the regional sites of El Paso , Fredericksburg , Highland Lakes , Center at Junction , and Waco . 
 Texas Tech ’ s <unk> Program earned national recognition on January 10 , 2013 , when it ranked 11th overall among online colleges on Guide to Online Schools ’ 2013 Online College Rankings . In addition , it tied for first place among non @-@ profit schools for its high student retention rate ( 82 % ) , and ranked first among the four research universities listed among the top 25 in the rankings . The online engineering program also gained recognition from US News and World Report , ranking 20th on their list of the best graduate online engineering programs . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The Lubbock campus is home to the main academic university , law school , and medical school ( Health Sciences Center ) . This arrangement makes it the only institution in Texas to have all three units ( undergraduate institution , law school , and medical school ) on the same campus . The campus , which boasts Spanish Renaissance architecture , was described by American author James A. Michener as the " most beautiful west of the Mississippi until you get to Stanford " and by Stewart Mandel of Sports Illustrated as " easily one of the ten most beautiful campuses " he had seen . Many buildings on campus borrow architectural elements from those found at University de Alcalá in Alcalá de Henares , Spain , and Mission San José in San Antonio . A large section of the campus built between 1924 and 1951 is listed on the National Register of Historic Places as the Texas Technological College Historic District . This area is roughly bounded by 6th Street on the north , University Avenue on the east , 19th Street on the south , and Flint Street on the west . In 2008 , the Professional Grounds Management Society awarded Texas Tech the Grand Award for excellence in grounds @-@ keeping , and merit awards in 2007 , 2010 , and 2014 . 
 In 1998 , the Board of Regents of the Texas Tech University System created the Texas Tech University Public Art Collection to enliven the campus environment and extend the educational mission of the university . It is funded by using one percent of the estimated total cost of each new building on campus . The collection features pieces from artists such as Tom <unk> and Glenna Goodacre . The Texas Tech University Public Art Collection is ranked among the ten best university public art collections in the United States by Public Art Review . 
 The university also hosts the Museum of Texas Tech University , which was founded in 1929 and is accredited by the American Alliance of Museums . The museum is home to over three million objects and specimens and houses the Moody Planetarium , art galleries , a sculpture court , and a natural science research laboratory . The museum also operates the Val Verde County research site and the Lubbock Lake Landmark , an archaeological site and natural history preserve in the city of Lubbock . The site has evidence of 12 @,@ 000 years of use by ancient cultures on the Llano Estacado ( Southern High Plains ) , and allows visitors to watch active archaeological digs . Visiting scientists and tourists may also participate in the discovery process . Lubbock Lake Landmark is a National Historic Landmark , which lists it on the National Register of Historic Places , and is a designated State Archaeological Landmark . Texas Tech is also the location of the Southwest Collection of historical archives and the sponsoring institution of the West Texas Historical Association . Located on the northern edge of the campus is the National Ranching Heritage Center , a museum of ranching history . The site spans 27 @.@ 5 acres ( 0 @.@ 111 km2 ) and is home to 38 historic structures that have been restored to their original condition . Structures represented at the center include : a <unk> , a dugout , a bunkhouse , a blacksmith shop , a <unk> house , a schoolhouse , corrals , shipping pens , windmills , chuckwagons , and a coal @-@ burning locomotive . 
 The university maintains a number of libraries , some general @-@ purpose and some dedicated to specific topics such as architecture and law . Among the most notable of these are the Southwest Collection / Special Collections Library and the Vietnam Center and Archive , the nation 's largest and most comprehensive collections of information on the Vietnam War . On August 17 , 2007 , the Vietnam Center and Archive became the first US institution to sign a formalized exchange agreement with the State Records and Archives Department of Vietnam . This opens the door for a two @-@ way exchange between the entities . 
 = = Student life = = 
 There are over 516 student clubs and organizations at Texas Tech . Many students participate in Greek Life . Texas Tech Greek Life includes 11 Panhellenic Sororities and 24 <unk> Council Fraternities , as well as groups in the NPHC and Multicultural Greek Council . The Student Union Building , located centrally on campus , is the hub of daily student activity . It houses restaurants , coffee shops , a book store , meeting rooms , lecture halls , movie rooms , and study areas , as well as the offices and meeting rooms of several student organizations and the Student Government Association . Directly adjacent to the Student Union Building is the School of Music , home of the Texas Tech Goin ' Band from <unk> . The 450 @-@ member band , which was awarded the Sudler Trophy in 1999 , performs at all home football games and at various other events . 
 Approximately 20 % of students live on campus , and most students live on campus for at least a portion of their academic <unk> students with fewer than 30 hours of academic credit are required to live in university housing unless they receive an exemption . Specific residence halls and communities exist for graduate students , athletes , and various specific interests and academic disciplines . Every resident on campus is a member of the Texas Tech Residence Hall Association which provides various on campus programming and leadership opportunities . RHA is led by an Executive Board and Senate with student representatives from each residence hall . The organization is also a member of the South West Affiliate of College and Universities Residence Halls . 
 International honor societies Phi Beta Kappa ( liberal arts and sciences ) , Delta Epsilon Psi , Beta Gamma Sigma ( business ) , and Tau Beta Pi ( engineering ) have chapters at the university . Professional , service , and social fraternities and sororities on campus include Alpha Phi Omega ( service ) , Alpha Kappa Psi ( business ) , Delta Sigma Pi ( business ) , Alpha Omega Epsilon ( engineering ) , Phi Alpha Delta ( law ) , Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia ( music ) , Kappa Kappa Psi ( band ) , and Tau Beta Sigma ( band ) . Professional development and research organizations hosted by the university include the Howard Hughes Medical Institute Undergraduate Research Fellowship Program , the Center for the Integration of Science Education and Research , the Society of Engineering Technologists , Student Bar Association , and the Texas Tech Forensic Union . Spirit organizations representing Texas Tech include the High Riders , Saddle Tramps , and the Sabre Flight Drill Team . 
 The university maintains <unk> @-@ FM 88 @.@ 1 , formerly a student radio station focusing on alternative , indie rock , industrial , and hip hop music . After 47 years , the station went off the air on December 10 , 2008 . It returned in May 2009 with a different format and plans to eventually return to its former style . National Public Radio station <unk> @-@ FM 89 @.@ 1 , which features classical music and news , is also found on campus . Additionally , the university owns and operates Public Broadcasting Service television station <unk> @-@ TV . Students run a daily newspaper , The Daily Toreador , until 2005 known as The University Daily . The university also produces a yearbook , La Ventana . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Texas Tech 's athletic teams are known as the Red Raiders with the exception of the women 's basketball team , which is known as the Lady Raiders . Texas Tech competes in NCAA Division I FBS ( formerly Division I @-@ A ) and is a member of the Big 12 Conference . From 1932 until 1956 , the university belonged to the Border Intercollegiate Athletic Association . After being rejected eight times over a period of more than 20 years , Texas Tech was admitted to the Southwest Conference on May 12 , 1956 . When the Southwest Conference disbanded in 1995 , Texas Tech , along with the University of Texas at Austin , Texas A & M University , and Baylor University , merged with schools from the former Big Eight Conference to form the Big 12 . Athletic Director Kirby <unk> is a member of the College Football Playoff committee . 
 Of its varsity sports , Texas Tech 's women 's basketball team has been the only one to claim a national title . The Lady Raiders , led by player Sheryl Swoopes and head coach Marsha Sharp , won the 1993 NCAA Women 's Basketball Championship . The men 's basketball team has made 14 appearances in the NCAA Men 's Division I Tournament . Bob Knight served as men 's basketball coach from the beginning of the 2001 season until February 4 , 2008 . On January 1 , 2007 , he set the record for most coaching victories in men 's NCAA Division I basketball history , when the Red Raiders defeated the New Mexico Lobos , 70 – 68 . Upon Knight 's retirement , his son Pat Knight became the head coach of the team for several seasons before being replaced by Billy Gillispie . In 2013 , Gillispie was replaced by Tubby Smith . 
 Since 1999 , home basketball games have been played at United Spirit Arena , a 15 @,@ 020 @-@ seat multipurpose facility which cost $ 88 @.@ 1 million in 2016 dollars to build . In addition to serving as home to the men 's and women 's basketball teams , the arena is used by the Lady Raiders volleyball team . Texas Tech students broke the Big 12 Conference record for student attendance at the United Spirit Arena during a February 25 , 2014 loss to Kansas State . The record of 6 @,@ 086 students fell less than 2 @,@ 000 short of the national record . 
 The Red Raiders football team , is a member of the NCAA Football Bowl Subdivision ( formerly known as Division I @-@ A ) and is currently coached by former Red Raider quarterback Kliff Kingsbury . Throughout the 2000s , then head coach Mike Leach lead the team to national prominence . In 14 of its last 15 seasons , the Red Raiders have finished with a winning record , the fourth @-@ longest such streak in the nation at the time . The Red Raiders have made 36 bowl appearances , which is 17th most of any university . From 1932 to 1956 , as members of the Border Intercollegiate Athletic Association , the Red Raiders won eight conference championships and one co @-@ championship , the most held by a Border Conference member . After joining the Southwest Conference , the Red Raiders added conference co @-@ championships in 1976 and 1994 . 
 Jones AT & T Stadium serves as home to the Red Raiders football team . The stadium , named for Clifford B. and Audrey Jones , opened in 1947 . In 2000 , the stadium was renamed Jones SBC Stadium after SBC Communications made a $ 30 million contribution to the university . Following SBC Communications ' acquisition of AT & T Corporation in 2006 and its subsequent adoption of the AT & T name , the stadium was renamed Jones AT & T Stadium . The stadium 's original seating capacity was 27 @,@ 000 , but it was expanded in 1959 , 1972 , 2003 , 2009 , 2010 , and 2013 . On August 7 , 2008 , the Board of Regents of the Texas Tech University System announced a $ 25 million expansion project . The expansion added a Spanish Renaissance @-@ themed façade to the east side of the stadium . In addition to the improvements to the exterior of the facility , the expansion added 1 @,@ 000 general @-@ admission seats , 550 club seats , and 26 suites . Texas Tech allocated a total of $ 19 million to the expansion and added another $ 6 million through fund @-@ raising initiatives . On November 20 , 2008 , university officials announced the project 's fundraising goal had been exceeded . Groundbreaking ceremonies for the expansion took place on November 29 , 2008 , and construction was completed prior to the 2009 football season . 
 In January 2013 , construction began adding another 368 seats in the north endzone , in addition to two observation decks . The $ 11 million project also includes a significantly upgraded jumbotron with a new sound system , a Spanish Renaissance @-@ themed colonnade , and a new north end zone concourse connecting the two stadium halves . Along with the other additions , 157 feet of ribbon board will be added on the north end zone , more than 160 linear feet in the northeast and northwest corners of the stadium , and 94 lineal feet in the south end zone over the athletic offices . The construction was completed during the 2013 season . The current seating capacity of the stadium is 60 @,@ 862 , making it the third @-@ largest on @-@ campus stadium in Texas . 
 The Red Raiders baseball team played its first game in 1925 . The team has two conference championships , two conference tournament championships , and has made nine NCAA Division I Baseball Championship tournament appearances . Larry Hays coached the team from 1987 to 2008 and lead the team to a .639 winning percentage . Following Hays ’ retirement on June 2 , 2008 , Assistant Coach Dan Spencer was promoted to head coach . Dan Spencer was replaced by Tim <unk> following the 2012 season and made its first appearance in the College World Series in 2013 . At least 20 former Red Raiders baseball players have gone on to play in the Major Leagues . The team plays its home games at Dan Law Field at Rip Griffin Park . The field , renovated in 2012 and located on the main campus in Lubbock , has a seating capacity of 5 @,@ 050 . 
 Texas Tech 's track and field teams coached by Wes <unk> have produced six Olympic medalists , 16 national champions , over 200 All @-@ Americans and 119 Big 12 Champions including Michael Mathieu , Sally <unk> , Kennedy <unk> , <unk> Lloyd and others . 
 In addition to varsity sports , the university 's Sport Clubs Federation offers 30 recreational and competitive sport clubs , including polo , rugby union , lacrosse , fencing , and soccer . In 2006 , Texas Tech beat rival Texas A & M to win the United States Polo Association National Intercollegiate Championship . 
 = = = Mascots = = = 
 The Masked Rider is Texas Tech University 's oldest mascot . The tradition began in 1936 , when " ghost riders " were dared to circle the field prior to home football games . The Masked Rider became an official mascot in 1954 , when Joe Kirk Fulton led the team onto the field at the Gator Bowl . According to reports from those present at the game , the crowd sat in stunned silence as they watched Fulton and his horse Blackie rush onto the football field , followed by the team . After a few moments , the silent crowd burst into cheers . Ed Danforth , a writer for the Atlanta Journal who witnessed the event , later wrote , " No team in any bowl game ever made a more sensational entrance . " In 2000 , The Masked Rider tradition was commemorated with the unveiling of a statue outside of the university 's Frazier Alumni Pavilion . The sculpture , created by artist Grant Speed , is 25 % larger than life . 
 Today , the Masked Rider , with guns up , leads the team onto the field for all home games . This mascot , adorned in a distinctive gaucho hat like the ones worn by members of the marching band , is one of the most visible figures at Texas Tech . 
 Texas Tech 's other mascot , Raider Red , is a more recent creation . Beginning with the 1971 football season , the Southwest Conference forbade the inclusion of live animal mascots to away games unless the host school consented . For situations where the host school did not want to allow the Masked Rider 's horse , an alternate mascot was needed . Jim Gaspard , a member of the Saddle Tramps student spirit organization , created the original design for the Raider Red costume , basing it on a character created by cartoonist Dirk West , a Texas Tech alumnus and former Lubbock mayor . Though the Masked Rider 's identity is public knowledge , it has always been tradition that Raider Red 's student alter ego is kept secret until the end of his or her tenure . The student serving as Raider Red is a member of the Saddle Tramps or High Riders . 
 = = Traditions = = 
 = = = Carol of Lights = = = 
 The Carol of Lights is an annual event , sponsored by the Residence Halls Association , traditionally held the first Friday in December , to celebrate the holiday season at the university . The event begins with a carillon concert , from the 43 bells located in the west tower of the Administration Building followed a torch @-@ light processional by the Saddle Tramps and High Riders spirit organizations . The Texas Tech Trombone Choir and combined choirs lead the crowd in singing carols and the illumination ceremony culminates with a soloist performance of " O Holy Night " , in the Science Quadrangle . This is followed by the lighting ceremony , where 13 buildings within the Texas Technological College Historic District are illuminated with the over 25 @,@ 000 red , white , and orange lights . The lights remain on the campus buildings until the first week when students come back from the holiday break . 
 In 1959 , Texas Tech University Board of Directors member Harold Hinn planned and provided the funding to cover the Science Quadrangle and Administration Building with 5 @,@ 000 lights . However , students were away on Christmas break and did not see the display . The following year , the Residence Hall Association sponsored the event under the name " Christmas Sing " . In 1961 , the event was renamed Carol of Lights and the display increased to 16 @,@ 000 lights . The tradition has since grown to include decorations like the 38 @-@ foot lighted Christmas tree , 3 @,@ 000 luminaries lining the sidewalks of Memorial Circle , and a 21 @-@ foot fresh pine wreath hung on the Physics / Geosciences building . 
 = = = Double T = = = 
 The most readily identified symbol of Texas Tech is the Double T. The logo , generally attributed to Texas Tech 's first football coach , E. Y. Freeland , was first used as decoration on the sweaters for the football players . The Double T existed in its original form as an official logo from 1963 to 1999 and was updated in 2000 . The new logo maintains the original premise , but incorporates three @-@ dimensional <unk> effects coupled with white trim . 
 To recognize the importance of the Double T to Texas Tech , the class of 1931 donated the Double T bench . By tradition , freshmen are not allowed to sit on the bench , which is currently located in the courtyard of the Administration Building . The logo is further embodied in the Double T neon sign , donated by the class of 1938 and affixed to the east side of Jones AT & T Stadium . At the time of its purchase , this was reputedly the largest neon sign in existence . 
 = = = Will Rogers and Soapsuds = = = 
 One of the most well @-@ known landmarks on campus is the statue of Will Rogers on his horse Soapsuds . The statue , entitled " Riding Into the Sunset " , has resided at the center of the campus since it was dedicated on February 16 , 1950 , by Rogers ' longtime friend Amon G. Carter . Carter claimed that Texas Tech was the ideal setting for the statue , and that it would be an appropriate addition to the traditions and scenery of West Texas . The statue , estimated to cost $ 25 @,@ 000 ( $ 239 @,@ 000 in 2013 dollars ) when it was dedicated , stands 9 feet 11 inches ( 3 @.@ 02 m ) and weighs 3 @,@ 200 pounds ( 1 @,@ 500 kg ) . The inscription on the plaque at the base of the statue reads : " Lovable Old Will Rogers on his favorite horse , ' Soapsuds ' , riding into the Western sunset . " 
 The statue continues to be a part of school tradition . Before every home football game , the Saddle Tramps wrap it with red crêpe paper , a tradition dating back to 1969 and a loss to Texas A & M after which the statue was found covered in maroon paint in an apparent prank . In times of national tragedies , the statue has also been wrapped in black crêpe paper . 
 According to one campus legend taught to students during freshman orientation , the statue was originally to be positioned with Will Rogers facing due west , so it would appear he was riding into the sunset . However , that position would cause Soapsuds ' posterior end to face due east , a dubious greeting to visitors entering by the main eastern campus entrance where the statue is placed . The horse 's rear would also be facing downtown Lubbock , potentially insulting the Lubbock business community . The legend holds that this problem was solved by Tech 's Civil Engineering department , who calculated that a 23 ° turn of Soapsuds ' head to the north would line up Soapsuds ' rear end directly toward College Station , Texas , home of the rival Texas A & M Aggies . Modern surveys and satellite imagery have determined the statue 's posterior end actually points roughly equidistantly between College Station and Austin , home of another rival team , the Texas Longhorns . 
 = = = Texas Tech ring = = = 
 While the class ring had occasionally used a universal design , by the late 20th century , various styles were available . In 1999 , the university reverted to a single ring design for the university 's graduates . The new Official Texas Tech Alumni Association Class Ring symbolically captures the essence of Texas Tech with the prominent Double T logo surrounded by the school ’ s full name and date of foundation . By tradition , undergraduates wear the ring with the Double T logo facing themselves . Upon graduation , the ring is turned so the logo faces outward . 
 One shoulder of the ring displays an image of the Administration Building , with the bells which represent victory . The other shoulder contains the university seal : an American eagle perched above a book , representing the church ; a star , representing the State of Texas ; a key , representing home ; and , a lamp , representing knowledge . These elements are separated by a cross featuring ten cotton <unk> , one each for Lubbock and its nine surrounding cotton @-@ producing counties . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 The Texas Tech Alumni Association , with over 27 @,@ 000 members , operates more than 120 chapters in cities throughout the United States and the world . Throughout Texas Tech 's history , faculty , alumni , and former students have played prominent roles in many different fields . Among its Distinguished Alumni is Demetrio B. <unk> , President of the Republic of Panama from 1969 to 1978 . Three United States Governors , Daniel I. J. Thornton , Governor of Colorado from 1951 to 1955 , John Burroughs , Governor of New Mexico from 1959 to 1961 , and Preston Smith , Governor of Texas from 1968 to 1972 , are graduates of the university . 
 Three astronauts , including Rick Husband , the final commander of Space Shuttle Columbia and recipient of the Congressional Space Medal of Honor , graduated from the university . U.S. Marine Corps Major and Medal of Honor recipient George H. O 'Brien Jr. is a distinguished alumnus . Richard E. Cavazos is a two @-@ time Distinguished Service Cross recipient and the first Hispanic and Mexican American to advance to the rank of four @-@ star general in the U.S. Army . United States Air Force Major General Wendy <unk> Masiello , one of the highest @-@ ranking women in the United States Department of Defense , is a 1980 graduate of Texas Tech 's Rawls College of Business Administration . Alumna <unk> Prabhakar , the current head of DARPA , was the first woman to head the National Institute of Standards and Technology . Texas Tech 's influence on the business world is seen in such people as General Motors Chairman and CEO Edward Whitacre Jr . , <unk> CEO Jerry S. Rawls , Belo Corporation CEO Dunia A. Shive , and <unk> , Inc. president and CEO Angela <unk> , ranked by Fortune magazine as the most powerful woman in business . Scott Pelley , anchor and managing editor for CBS Evening News and correspondent for 60 Minutes , is a graduate of the recently renamed College of Media and Communication . Phil McGraw ( Dr. Phil ) attended Texas Tech in the 1970s , during his first marriage . 
 Texas Tech alumni have also made contributions to sports , music , and acting . Texas Tech Red Raiders have gone on to play in the NFL , NBA , WNBA , and MLB . Donny Anderson , World Champions Green Bay Packers , Super Bowl I & II . Current alumni standouts include Oakland Raiders wide receiver Michael Crabtree , NFL All @-@ Pros Zach Thomas of the Kansas City Chiefs , Danny Amendola of the New England Patriots , and Wes Welker of the . St. Louis Rams Others among the university 's alumni are folk rocker John Denver , country singer Pat Green , mezzo @-@ soprano Susan Graham , actor Barry Corbin , Friday Night Lights actor Brad Leland , and actor George Eads . John Hinckley Jr . , who attempted to assassinate U.S. President Ronald Reagan in 1981 , attended the university sporadically from 1973 to 1980 . 
 = La Strada = 
 La Strada ( The Road ) is a 1954 Italian drama film directed by Federico Fellini from his own screenplay co @-@ written with Tullio Pinelli and Ennio <unk> . The film portrays a brutish strongman ( Anthony Quinn ) and the naïve young woman ( Giulietta Masina ) whom he buys from her mother and takes with him on the road ; encounters with his rival the Fool ( Richard Basehart ) end with their destruction . 
 Fellini has called La Strada " a complete catalogue of my entire mythological world , a dangerous representation of my identity that was undertaken with no precedent whatsoever . " As a result , the film demanded more time , effort and suffering than any of his other films , before or since . The development process was long and tortuous ; it was extremely difficult to secure financial backing ; casting proved problematic ; injuries , personnel changes and inclement weather disrupted the production schedule more than once ; budget shortages constantly plagued the director and his production supervisor , forcing them to take extraordinary measures to keep going . Finally , just before shooting was completed , Fellini suffered a nervous breakdown that necessitated medical treatment in order to complete principal photography . Initial critical reaction was harsh , and the film 's screening at the Venice Film Festival was the occasion of a bitter controversy that escalated into a public brawl between Fellini 's supporters and detractors . 
 Subsequently , however , La Strada has become " one of the most influential films ever made " , according to the American Film Institute . It won the inaugural Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film in 1956 . It was placed fourth in the 1992 British Film Institute directors ' list of cinema 's top 10 films . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Gelsomina ( Giulietta Masina ) , a credulous young woman , learns that her sister Rosa has died since going on the road with the strongman Zampanò ( Anthony Quinn ) . Now the same man has returned a year later to ask her mother if Gelsomina will take Rosa 's place . The mother accepts 10 @,@ 000 lire , and her daughter departs the same day . 
 Zampanò makes his living as an itinerant street performer , entertaining crowds by breaking an iron chain bound tightly across his chest , then passing the hat for tips . In short order , Gelsomina 's naïve and antic nature emerges , with Zampanò 's brutish methods presenting a callous foil . He teaches her to play the snare drum and trumpet , dance a bit , and clown for the audience . Despite her willingness to please , he relies on intimidation and even cruelty at times to maintain his domination . 
 Finally , she rebels and leaves , making her way into town . There she watches the act of another street entertainer , Il Matto ( " The Fool " ) , a talented high wire artist and clown ( Richard Basehart ) . When Zampanò finds her there , he forcibly takes her back . They join a ragtag travelling circus where Il Matto already works . Il Matto teases the strongman at every opportunity , though he cannot explain what motivates him to do so . After Il Matto drenches Zampanò with a pail of water , Zampanò chases after his tormentor with his knife drawn . As a result , he is briefly jailed and both men are eventually fired from the travelling circus . 
 Gelsomina 's difficulties with her forced partnership are the subject of frequent soul searching . After Zampanò 's release from prison , Il Matto proposes that there are alternatives to Gelsomina 's servitude , and imparts his philosophy that everything and everyone has a purpose — even a pebble , even her . A nun suggests that Gelsomina 's purpose in life is comparable to her own . But , when Gelsomina offers Zampanò marriage , he brushes her off . 
 The separate paths of fool and strongman cross for the last time on an empty stretch of road , when Zampanò comes upon Il Matto fixing a flat tire . As Gelsomina watches in horror , the strongman strikes the clown on the head several times . Il Matto complains that his watch is broken , then collapses and dies . Zampanò hides the body and pushes the car off the road where it bursts into flames . 
 The killing breaks Gelsomina 's spirit . After ten days , her affect remains flat , and her eyes lifeless . Finally Zampanò abandons her while she is taking a nap , leaving some clothes , money , and his trumpet . 
 Some years later , he overhears a woman singing a tune Gelsomina often played . He learns that the woman 's father had found Gelsomina on the beach and kindly taken her in . However , she had wasted away and died . Zampanò gets drunk and wanders to the beach , where he breaks down in tears . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Anthony Quinn as Zampanò 
 Giulietta Masina as Gelsomina 
 Richard Basehart as Il Matto , the fool 
 Aldo Silvani as Il Signor Giraffa , the circus owner 
 Marcella Rovere as La <unk> , the widow 
 Livia Venturini as La <unk> , the nun 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Fellini 's creative process for La Strada started with vague feelings , " a kind of tone " , he said , " that lurked , which made me melancholy and gave me a diffused sense of guilt , like a shadow hanging over me . This feeling suggested two people who stay together , although it will be fatal , and they don 't know why " . These feelings evolved into certain images : snow silently falling on the ocean , various compositions of clouds , and a singing nightingale . At that point , Fellini started to draw and sketch these images , a habitual tendency that he claimed he had learned early in his career when he had worked in various provincial music halls and had to sketch out the various characters and sets . Finally , he reported that the idea first " became real " to him when he drew a circle on a piece of paper to depict Gelsomina 's head , and he decided to base the character on the actual character of Giulietta Masina , his wife of five years at the time : " I utilized the real Giulietta , but as I saw her . I was influenced by her childhood photographs , so elements of Gelsomina reflect a ten @-@ year @-@ old Giulietta . " 
 The idea for the character Zampanò came from Fellini 's youth in the coastal town of Rimini . A pig <unk> lived there who was known as a womanizer : according to Fellini , " This man took all the girls in town to bed with him ; once he left a poor idiot girl pregnant and everyone said the baby was the devil 's child . " In 1992 , Fellini told Canadian director Damian Pettigrew that he had conceived the film at the same time as co @-@ scenarist Tullio Pinelli in a kind of " orgiastic synchronicity " : 
 I was directing I <unk> , and Tullio had gone to see his family in Turin . At that time , there was no <unk> between Rome and the north and so you had to drive through the mountains . Along one of the tortuous winding roads , he saw a man pulling a <unk> , a sort of cart covered in tarpaulin ... A tiny woman was pushing the cart from behind . When he returned to Rome , he told me what he 'd seen and his desire to narrate their hard lives on the road . ' It would make the ideal scenario for your next film , ' he said . It was the same story I 'd imagined but with a crucial difference : mine focused on a little traveling circus with a slow @-@ witted young woman named Gelsomina . So we merged my flea @-@ bitten circus characters with his smoky campfire mountain vagabonds . We named Zampanò after the owners of two small circuses in Rome : Zamperla and <unk> . 
 Fellini wrote the script with collaborators Ennio <unk> and Tullio Pinelli and brought it first to Luigi Rovere , Fellini 's producer for The White Sheik ( 1952 ) . When Rovere read the script for La Strada , he began to weep , raising Fellini 's hopes , only to have them dashed when the producer announced that the screenplay was like great literature , but that " as a film this wouldn 't make a lira . It 's not cinema . " By the time it was fully complete , Fellini 's shooting script was nearly 600 pages long , with every shot and camera angle detailed and filled with notes reflecting intensive research . Producer Lorenzo <unk> was impressed enough to give Fellini a cash advance , but would not agree to Fellini 's demand that Giulietta Masina play Gelsomina . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Fellini secured financing through the producers Dino De Laurentiis and Carlo Ponti , who wanted to cast Silvana Mangano ( De Laurentiis ' wife ) as Gelsomina and Burt Lancaster as Zampanò , but Fellini refused these choices . Giulietta Masina had been the inspiration for the entire project , so Fellini was determined never to accept an alternative to her . For Zampanò , Fellini had hoped to cast a nonprofessional and , to that end , he tested a number of circus strongmen , to no avail . He also had trouble finding the right person for the role of Il Matto . His first choice was the actor <unk> Rossi , who was a member of Fellini 's social circle and had the right type of personality and athletic physique , but Rossi wanted to be the assistant director , not a performer . Alberto Sordi , the star of Fellini 's earlier films The White Sheik and I Vitelloni , was eager to take the role , and was bitterly disappointed when Fellini rejected him after a tryout in costume . 
 Ultimately , Fellini drew his three leading players from people associated with the 1954 film Donne <unk> ( Angels of Darkness ) , directed by Giuseppe Amato , in which Masina played the very different role of a madam . Anthony Quinn was also acting in the film , while Richard Basehart was often on the set visiting his wife , actress Valentina Cortese . When Masina introduced Quinn to her husband , the actor was disconcerted by Fellini 's insistence that the director had found his Zampanò , later remembering : " I thought he was a little bit crazy , and I told him I wasn 't interested in the picture , but he kept hounding me for days . " Not long afterwards , Quinn spent the evening with Roberto Rossellini and Ingrid Bergman , and after dinner they watched Fellini 's 1953 Italian comedy @-@ drama I Vitelloni . According to Quinn : " I was thunderstruck by it . I told them the film was a masterpiece , and that the same director was the man who had been chasing me for weeks . " 
 Fellini was particularly taken with Basehart , who reminded the director of Charlie Chaplin . Upon being introduced to Basehart by Cortese , Fellini invited the actor to lunch , at which he was offered the role of Il Matto . When asked why by the surprised Basehart , who had never before played the part of a clown , Fellini responded : " Because , if you did what you did in Fourteen Hours you can do anything . " A great success in Italy , the 1951 Hollywood drama starred Basehart as a would @-@ be suicide on a hotel balcony . Basehart , too , had been greatly impressed by I Vitelloni , and agreed to take the role for much less than his usual salary , in part because he was very attracted by Fellini 's personality , saying : " It was his zest for living , and his humor . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The film was shot in <unk> , Viterbo , Lazio , and <unk> , L 'Aquila , Abruzzo . On Sundays , Fellini and Basehart would drive around the countryside , scouting locations and looking for just the right place to eat , sometimes trying as many as six restaurants and venturing as far away as Rimini before Fellini could find the desired ambience and menu . 
 Production started in October , 1953 , but had to be halted within weeks when Masina dislocated her ankle during the convent scene with Quinn . With shooting suspended , De Laurentiis saw an opportunity to replace Masina , whom he had never wanted for the part and who had not yet been signed to a contract . This changed as soon as executives at Paramount viewed the rushes of the scene and lauded Masina 's performance , resulting in De Laurentiis announcing that he had her on an exclusive and ordering her to sign a hastily prepared contract , at approximately a third of Quinn 's salary . 
 The delay caused the entire production schedule to be revised , and cinematographer Carlo <unk> , who had a prior commitment , had to be replaced by Otello Martelli , a long @-@ time favorite of Fellini 's . When filming resumed in February , 1954 , it was winter . The temperature had dropped to -5 ° C , often resulting in no heat or hot water , necessitating more delays and forcing the cast and crew to sleep fully dressed and wear hats to keep warm . 
 The new schedule resulted in a conflict for Anthony Quinn , who was signed to play the title role in Attila , a 1954 epic , also produced by De Laurentiis and directed by Pietro Francisci . At first , Quinn considered withdrawing from La Strada , but Fellini convinced him to work on both films simultaneously , shooting La Strada in the morning and Attila in the afternoon and evening . The plan often required the actor to get up at 3 : 30 a.m. in order to capture the " bleak early light " on which Fellini insisted , and then leave at 10 : 30 to drive to Rome in his Zampanò outfit in order to be on the set in time to be transformed into Attila the Hun for afternoon shooting . Quinn recalled : " This schedule accounted for the haggard look I had in both films , a look that was perfect for Zampanò but scarcely OK for Attila the Hun . " 
 Despite an extremely tight budget , production supervisor Luigi Giacosi was able to rent a small circus run by a man named Savitri , a strongman and fire @-@ eater who coached Quinn on circus jargon and the technical aspects of chain @-@ breaking . Giacosi also secured the services of the Zamperla Circus , which supplied a number of stuntmen who could play themselves , including Basehart 's double , a high @-@ wire artist who refused to perform when firemen arrived with a safety net . 
 Funding shortages required Giacosi to improvise in response to Fellini 's demands . When filming continued into spring , Giacosi was able to re @-@ create the wintry scenes by piling thirty bags of plaster onto all the bedsheets he could find in order to simulate a snowscape . When a crowd scene was required , Giacosi convinced the local priest to move up the April 8 celebration of the town 's patron saint by a few days , thus securing the presence of some 4 @,@ 000 unpaid extras . In order to guarantee that the crowd would not dissipate as the hours passed by , Fellini instructed assistant director Rossi to shout out , " Get the rooms ready for Totò and Sophia Loren " , two of the most popular Italian entertainers of the period , and nobody left . 
 Fellini was a notorious perfectionist , and this could be trying for his cast . At an American Film Institute student seminar , Quinn spoke of Fellini 's intransigence over selecting a box in which Zampanò carries his cigarette butts , scrutinizing over 500 boxes before finding just the right one : " As for me , any of the boxes would have been satisfactory to carry the butts in , but not Federico " . Quinn also recalled being particularly proud of a certain scene in which his performance had earned applause from onlookers on the set , only to receive a phone call from Fellini late that night informing him that they would have to re @-@ do the entire sequence because Quinn had been too good : " You see , you 're supposed to be a bad , a terrible actor , but the people watching applauded you . They should have laughed at you . So in the morning we do it again . " As for Masina , Fellini insisted that she re @-@ create the thin @-@ lipped smile he had seen in her childhood photographs . He cut her hair by putting a bowl on her head and shearing off anything that wasn 't covered up , afterwards plastering what remained with soap to give it a " spiky , untidy look " , then " flicked talc into her face to give it the pallor of a kabuki performer . " He made her wear a WWI surplus cloak that was so frayed its collar cut into her neck . She complained : " You 're so nice and sweet to the others in the cast . Why are you so hard on me ? " 
 Under Fellini 's agreement with his producers , any budget overruns would have had to come out of his own pocket , cutting into any profit potential there might be . When it became clear that there would not be enough funding to finish the picture , Fellini stated that Ponti and De Laurentiis took him to lunch and assured him that they would not hold him to it : " Let 's pretend they were a joke . Buy us a coffee and we 'll forget about them . " According to Quinn , however , Fellini was able to obtain this indulgence only by agreeing to film some pickup shots for Attila that Francisci , the director of record , had neglected to complete . 
 While shooting the final scenes on the wharf of Fiumicino , Fellini suffered a severe bout of clinical depression , a condition that he and his associates tried to keep secret . He was able to complete the filming only upon receiving treatment by a prominent Freudian psychoanalyst . 
 = = = Sound = = = 
 As was the common practice for Italian films at the time , shooting was done without sound ; dialogue was added later along with music and sound effects . As a consequence , cast members generally spoke in their native language during filming : Quinn and Basehart in English , Masina and the others in Italian . Liliana Betti , Fellini 's long @-@ time assistant , has described the director 's typical procedure regarding dialogue during filming , a technique he called the " number system " or " numerological diction " : " Instead of lines , the actor has to count off numbers in their normal order . For instance , a line of fifteen words equals an enumeration of up to thirty . The actor merely counts til thirty : 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 @-@ 4 @-@ 5 @-@ 6 @-@ 7 @.@ etc . " Biographer John Baxter has commented on the usefulness of such a system : " It helps pinpoint an instant in the speech where he [ Fellini ] wants a different reaction . ' Go back to " 27 " , ' he 'll tell an actor , ' but this time , smile . ' " Since he didn 't need to worry about noise while shooting a scene , Fellini would keep up a running commentary during filming , a practice that scandalized more traditional filmmakers , like Elia Kazan : " He talked through each take , in fact yelled at the actors . ' No , there , stop , turn , look at her , look at her . See how sad she is , see her tears ? Oh , the poor wretch ! You want to comfort her ? Don 't turn away ; go to her . Ah , she doesn 't want you , does she ? What ? Go to her anyway ! ' ... That 's how he 's able ... to use performers from many countries . He does part of the acting for the actors . " 
 Since Quinn and Basehart did not speak Italian , both were dubbed in the original release . Unhappy with the actor who initially dubbed Zampanò , Fellini remembered being impressed by the work done by <unk> <unk> in dubbing the Toshiro Mifune character in the Italian version of Akira Kurosawa 's Rashomon , and was able to secure <unk> 's services at the very last moment . Composer Michel Chion has observed that Fellini particularly exploited the tendency of Italian films of the post @-@ war period to allow considerable freedom in the synching of voices to lip movements , especially in contrast to Hollywood 's perceived " obsessive fixation " with the matching of voices to mouths : " In <unk> extremes , when all those post @-@ synched voices float around bodies , we reach a point where <unk> if we continue to attribute them to the bodies they 're <unk> to acquire a sort of autonomy , in a baroque and <unk> fashion . " In the Italian version of La Strada , there are even instances when a character is heard to speak while the actor 's mouth is shut tight . 
 Fellini scholar Thomas Van Order has pointed out that Fellini is equally free in the treatment of ambient sound in his films , preferring to cultivate what Chion has called , " a subjective sense of point of audition " , in which what is heard on screen mirrors a particular character 's perceptions , as opposed to the visible reality of the scene . As an example , ducks and chickens appear on the screen throughout Gelsomina 's conversation with the nun , but , reflecting the girl 's growing sense of enlightenment concerning her place in the world , the quacking and clucking of barnyard fowl dissolves into the chirping of songbirds . 
 The visual track of the 1956 English @-@ language version of La Strada was identical to the original Italian version , but the audio track was completely re @-@ edited under the supervision of Carol and Peter <unk> at <unk> Sound Studios in New York , without any involvement by Fellini . Thomas Van Order has identified dozens of changes made in the English version , classifying the alterations into four categories : " 1 @.@ lower volume of music relative to dialogue in the English version ; 2 @.@ new musical selections and different editing of music in many scenes ; 3 @.@ different ambient sound in some scenes , as well as changes in the editing of ambient sound ; 4 @.@ elimination of some dialogue . " In the English version , Quinn and Basehart dubbed their own roles , but Masina was dubbed by another actress , a decision that has been criticised by Van Order and others , since , by trying to match the childlike movements of the character , the sound editors provided a voice that is " childishly high , squeaky and insecure " . It cost $ 25 @,@ 000 to dub La Strada into English , but after the film started to receive its many accolades , it was re @-@ released in the United States on the art @-@ house circuit in its Italian version , using subtitles . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The entire score for La Strada was written by Nino Rota after principal photography was completed . The main theme is a wistful tune that appears first as a melody played by the Fool on a kit violin and later by Gelsomina on her trumpet . Its last cue in the penultimate scene is sung by the woman who tells Zampanò the fate of Gelsomina after he abandoned her . This is one of three primary themes that are introduced during the titles at the beginning of La Strada and that recur regularly throughout the film . To these are added a fourth recurring theme that appears in the very first sequence , after Gelsomina meets Zampanò , and is often interrupted or silenced in his presence , occurring less and less frequently and at increasingly lower volumes as the film progresses . Claudia <unk> has commented on the use of these themes , which she deems true leitmotifs , each of which is not simply an illustrative or redundant identifying tag , but " a true signifier that accumulates and communicates meaning not explicit in the images or dialogue " . 
 In practice , Fellini shot his films while playing taped music because , as he explained in a 1972 interview , " it puts you in a strange dimension in which your fantasy stimulates you " . For La Strada , Fellini used a variation by Arcangelo Corelli that he planned to use on the sound track . Rota , unhappy with that plan , wrote an original motif ( with echoes of the " Larghetto " from Dvořák 's Opus 22 Serenade for Strings in E major ) with rhythmic lines matched to Corelli 's piece that synchronize with Gelsomina 's movements with the trumpet and Il Matto 's with the violin . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The film premiered at the 15th Venice International Film Festival on 6 September 1954 and won the Silver Lion . It was released in Italy on 22 September 1954 , and in the United States on 16 July 1956 . In 1994 a re @-@ mastered print was financed by filmmaker Martin Scorsese , who has acknowledged that since childhood he has related to the character of Zampanò , bringing elements of the self @-@ destructive brute into his films Taxi Driver and Raging Bull . Janus Films is the current distributor of the film on video . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Initial response = = = 
 Tullio <unk> of Il <unk> <unk> saw the film as " an unfinished poem , " left unfinished deliberately by the filmmaker for fear that " its essence be lost in the callousness of critical definition , or in the ambiguity of classification , " while Ermanno <unk> of Il <unk> XIX praised Fellini as " a master story @-@ teller " : 
 The narrative is light and harmonious , drawing its essence , resilience , uniformity and purpose from small details , subtle annotations and soft tones that slip naturally into the humble plot of a story apparently void of action . But how much meaning , how much ferment enrich this apparent simplicity . It is all there although not always clearly evident , not always interpreted with full poetical and human eloquence : it is suggested with considerable delicacy and sustained by a subtle emotive force . 
 Others saw it differently . When the 1954 Venice Film Festival jury awarded La Strada the Silver Lion while ignoring Luchino Visconti 's <unk> , a physical brawl broke out when Visconti 's assistant Franco Zeffirelli started blowing a whistle during Fellini 's acceptance speech , only to be attacked by <unk> Rossi . The disturbance left Fellini pale and shaken and Masina in tears . Marxist critics such as Guido <unk> rejected the film on ideological grounds , particularly objecting to what they considered Christian notions of conversion and redemption : " We don 't say , nor have we ever said , that La Strada is a badly directed and acted film . We have declared , and do declare , that it is wrong ; its perspective is wrong . " 
 The Venice premiere began " in an inexplicably chilly atmosphere , " according to Tino Ranieri , and " the audience , who rather disliked it as the screening began , seemed to change opinion slightly toward the end , yet the movie didn 't receive — in any sense of the word — the response that it deserved . " 
 Reviewing for Corriere della Sera , Arturo <unk> argued that the film " gives the impression of being a rough copy that merely hints at the main points of the story ... Fellini seems to have preferred shadow where marked contrast would have been more effective . " Nino <unk> of Bianco e Nero regretted that after " an excellent beginning , the style of the film remains harmonious for some time until the moment when the two main characters are separated , at which point the tone becomes increasingly artificial and literary , the pace increasingly fragmentary and incoherent . " 
 Fellini biographer Tullio <unk> observed that Italian critics " make every effort to find faults with [ Fellini 's ] movie after the opening in Venice . Some say that it starts out okay but then the story completely unravels . Others recognize the pathos in the end , but don 't like the first half . " 
 Its French release the next year found a warmer reception . Dominique <unk> of Cahiers du cinéma thought La Strada belonged to " the mythological class , a class intended to captivate the critics more perhaps than the general public . " <unk> concluded : 
 Fellini attains a summit rarely reached by other film directors : style at the service of the artist 's mythological universe . This example once more proves that the cinema has less need of technicians — there are too many already — than of creative intelligence . To create such a film , the author must have had not only a considerable gift for expression but also a deep understanding of certain spiritual problems . 
 In his March 1955 review for Arts magazine , Jean Aurel cited Giulietta Masina 's performance as " directly inspired by the best in Chaplin , but with a freshness and sense of timing that seem to have been invented for this film alone . " He found the film " bitter , yet full of hope . A lot like life . " Louis Chauvet of Le Figaro noted that " the atmosphere of the drama " was combined " with a visual strength that has rarely been equalled . " For André Bazin , influential film critic and theorist , Fellini 's approach was 
 the very opposite of psychological realism that maintains analysis followed by the description of feelings . In this quasi @-@ Shakespearean universe , however , anything can happen . Gelsomina and the Fool carry an aura of the marvellous around with them , which confuses and irritates Zampanò , but this quality is neither supernatural nor gratuitous , nor even poetic , it appears as a quality possible in nature . 
 For <unk> , 
 The film should be accepted for its strange fragility and its often too colourful , almost artificial moments , or else totally rejected . If we try to analyze Fellini 's film , its fragmentary quality becomes immediately evident and we are obliged to treat each fragment , each personal comment , each secret confession separately . 
 Critical reaction in the UK and the US was equally mixed , with disparaging reviews appearing in Films in Review ( " the quagmire of cheap melodrama " ) , Sight and Sound ( " a director striving to be a poet when he is not " ) and The Times of London ( " realism crowing on a dung @-@ hill . " ) , while more favorable assessments were provided by Newsweek ( " novel and arguable " ) and Saturday Review ( " With La Strada Fellini takes his place as the true successor to Rossellini and De Sica . " ) . In his 1956 New York Times review , A.H. Weiler was especially complimentary of Quinn : " Anthony Quinn is excellent as the growling , monosyllabic and apparently ruthless strong man , whose tastes are primitive and immediate . But his characterization is sensitively developed so that his innate loneliness shows through the chinks of his rough exterior . " 
 In a 1957 interview , Fellini reported that Masina had received over a thousand letters from abandoned women whose husbands had returned to them after seeing the film and that she had also heard from many people with disabilities who had gained a new sense of self @-@ worth after viewing the film : " Such letters come from all over the world " . 
 = = = Retrospective evaluation = = = 
 In later years , Fellini explained that from " a sentimental point of view , " he was " most attached " to La Strada : " Above all , because I feel that it is my most representative film , the one that is the most autobiographical ; for both personal and sentimental reasons , because it is the film that I had the greatest trouble in realizing and that gave me the most difficulty when it came time to find a producer . " Of all the imaginary beings he had brought to the screen , Fellini felt closest to the three principals of La Strada , " especially Zampanò . " Anthony Quinn found working for Fellini invaluable : " He drove me mercilessly , making me do scene after scene over and over again until he got what he wanted . I learned more about film acting in three months with Fellini than I 'd learned in all the movies I 'd made before then . " Long afterwards , in 1990 , Quinn sent a note to the director and his co @-@ star : " The two of you are the highest point in my life -- Antonio . " 
 Critic Roger Ebert , in his book The Great Movies , has described the current critical consensus as holding that La Strada was the high point of Fellini 's career and that , after this film , " his work ran wild through the jungles of Freudian , Christian , sexual and autobiographical excess " . ( Ebert , himself , disagrees , seeing La Strada as " part of a process of discovery that led to the masterpieces La Dolce Vita ( 1960 ) , 8 1 / 2 ( 1963 ) and <unk> ( 1974 ) " . ) 
 The years since its initial release have solidified the high estimation of La Strada . It holds a 97 % rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes from 31 reviewers who , on average , scored it 8 @.@ 7 on a scale of 10 . Its numerous appearances on lists of best films include the 1992 Directors ' poll of the British Film Institute ( 4th best ) , the New York Times " Best 1 @,@ 000 Movies Ever Made " , and the " Greatest Films " list of They Shoot Pictures , Don 't They ( # 67 ) - a website which statistically calculates the most well @-@ received movies . 
 In 1995 , the Catholic Church 's Pontifical Commission for Social Communications issued a list of 45 films representing a " cross section of outstanding films , chosen by a committee of twelve international movie scholars " . This has come to be known as the " Vatican film list " , and includes La Strada as one of 15 films in the sub @-@ category labeled " art " . Pope Francis , has said it is " the movie that perhaps I loved the most " , because of his personal identification with its implicit reference to his namesake , Francis of Assisi . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 During Fellini 's early film career , he was closely associated with the movement known as neorealism , a set of films produced by the Italian film industry during the post @-@ World War II period , particularly 1945 – 1952 , and characterized by close attention to social context , a sense of historical immediacy , political commitment to progressive social change , and an anti @-@ Fascist ideology . Although there were glimpses of certain lapses in <unk> orthodoxy in some of his first films as a director , La Strada has been widely viewed as a definitive break with the ideological demands of neorealist theorists to follow a particular political slant or embody a specific " realist " style . This resulted in certain critics vilifying Fellini for , as they saw it , reverting to prewar attitudes of individualism , mysticism and preoccupation with " pure style " . Fellini vigorously responded to this criticism : " Certain people still think neorealism is fit to show only certain kinds of reality , and they insist that this is social reality . It is a program , to show only certain aspects of life " . Film critic Millicent Marcus wrote that , " La Strada remains a film indifferent to the social and historical concerns of orthodox neorealism " . Soon , other Italian filmmakers , including Michelangelo Antonioni and even Fellini 's mentor and early collaborator Roberto Rossellini were to follow Fellini 's lead and , in the words of critic Peter <unk> , " pass beyond a dogmatic approach to social reality , dealing poetically with other equally compelling personal or emotional problems " . As film scholar Mark Shiel has pointed out , when it won the first Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film in 1956 , La Strada became the first film to win international success as an example of a new brand of neorealism , " bittersweet and self @-@ conscious " . 
 International film directors who have named La Strada as one of their favorite films include Stanley Kwan , Anton Corbijn , Gillies MacKinnon , Andreas <unk> , Jiří Menzel , Adoor Gopalakrishnan , Mike Newell , Rajko <unk> , Laila <unk> , Ann Hui , Kazuhiro Soda , Julian Jarrold , Krzysztof Zanussi , and Andrey Konchalovsky . 
 The film has found its way into popular music , too . Bob Dylan and Kris Kristofferson have mentioned the film as an inspiration for their songs " Mr. Tambourine Man " and " Me and Bobby McGee " , respectively , and a Serbian rock band took the film 's name as their own . 
 Rota 's main theme was adapted into a 1954 single for Perry Como under the title " Love Theme from La Strada ( Traveling Down a Lonely Road ) " , with Italian lyrics by Michele <unk> and English lyrics by Don Raye . Twelve years later , the composer expanded the film music to create a ballet , also called La Strada . 
 The New York stage has seen two productions derived from the film . A musical based on the film opened on Broadway on December 14 , 1969 , but closed after one performance . Nancy Cartwright , the voice of Bart Simpson , was so impressed by Giulietta Masina 's work in La Strada that she attempted to obtain theatrical rights to the film in order to mount a stage production in New York . After traveling to Rome in an unsuccessful attempt to meet with Fellini , she created a one @-@ woman play , In Search of Fellini . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 La Strada won more than fifty international awards , including an Oscar in 1956 for Best Foreign Language Film , the first recipient in that category . 
 = Mortara case = 
 The Mortara case ( Italian : caso Mortara ) was an Italian cause célèbre that captured the attention of much of Europe and the United States in the 1850s and 1860s . It concerned the Papal States ' seizure from a Jewish family in Bologna of one of their children , six @-@ year @-@ old Edgardo Mortara , on the basis of a former servant 's testimony that she had administered emergency baptism to the boy when he fell sick as an infant . Mortara grew up as a Catholic under the protection of Pope Pius IX — who refused his parents ' desperate pleas for his return — and eventually became a priest . The domestic and international outrage against the pontifical state 's actions may have contributed to its downfall amid the unification of Italy . 
 In late 1857 , Bologna 's inquisitor Father Pier Feletti heard that Anna Morisi , who had worked in the Mortara house for six years , had secretly baptised Edgardo when she had thought he was about to die as a baby . The Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Roman and Universal Inquisition held that this made the child irrevocably a Catholic and , because the Papal States forbade the raising of Christians by members of other faiths , ordered that he be taken from his family and brought up by the Church . Police came to the Mortara home late on 23 June 1858 and removed Edgardo the following evening . 
 After the child 's father was allowed to visit him during August and September , two starkly different narratives emerged — one told of a boy who wanted to return to his family and the faith of his ancestors , while the other described a child who had learned the catechism perfectly and wanted his parents to become Christians as well . International protests mounted , but the Pope would not be moved . After pontifical rule in Bologna ended in 1859 , Father Feletti was prosecuted for his role in Mortara 's seizure , but was acquitted when the court decided he had simply followed orders . With the Pope as a substitute father , Mortara trained for the priesthood in Rome until the Kingdom of Italy captured the city in 1870 , ending the Papal States . Leaving the country , he was ordained in France three years later at the age of 21 . Father Mortara spent most of his life outside Italy and died in Belgium in 1940 , aged 88 . 
 For many , the Vatican 's actions encapsulated all that was wrong with the Papal States and exposed pontifical rule as an anachronism . Several historians highlight the affair as one of the most significant events of Pius IX 's papacy , and juxtapose his handling of it in 1858 with the loss of most of his territory a year later . The case notably altered the policy of the French Emperor Napoleon III , who shifted from opposing the movement for Italian unification to actively supporting it . The traditional Italian historiography of unification does not give much prominence to the Mortara case , which by the late 20th century was remembered mostly by Jewish scholars , but a 1997 study by the American historian David Kertzer has marked the start of a wider re @-@ examination . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Political context = = = 
 For more than a millennium , starting around 754 , the Papal States were territories in Italy under the direct sovereign rule of the Pope . The Catholic Church 's control over Rome and a neighbouring swathe of central Italy was generally seen as a manifestation of the Pope 's secular " temporal " power , as opposed to his ecclesiastical primacy . After the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 , the other main Italian states were the Kingdom of Sardinia — governed from Piedmont on the mainland by King Victor Emmanuel II — the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies in the south , and the Grand Duchy of Tuscany in the west . The French occupation during the 1790s had led the Pope 's popularity and spiritual authority to greatly increase , but had also severely damaged the geopolitical credibility of the Papal States . The historian David Kertzer suggests that by the 1850s " what had once appeared so solid — a product of the divine order of things — now seemed terribly fragile " . 
 Pope Pius IX , elected in 1846 , was initially widely seen as a great reformer and <unk> who might throw his weight behind the growing movement for Italian unification — referred to in Italian as the Risorgimento ( meaning " Resurgence " ) . When the revolutions of 1848 broke out , however , he refused to support a pan @-@ Italian campaign against the Austrian Empire , which controlled Lombardy – Venetia in the north @-@ east . This prompted a popular uprising in the Papal States , Pope Pius 's flight to the Two Sicilies , and the proclamation in 1849 of the short @-@ lived Roman Republic , which was crushed by Austrian and French intervention in support of the Pope . Rome was thereafter guarded by French troops while Austrians garrisoned the rest of the Papal States , much to the resentment of most of the inhabitants . Pope Pius shared the traditional pontifical view that the Papal States were essential to his independence as head of the Catholic Church . He regained some of his popularity during the 1850s , but the drive for Italian unification spearheaded by the Kingdom of Sardinia continued to unsettle him . 
 The Jews of the Papal States , numbering 15 @,@ 000 or so in 1858 , were grateful to Pope Pius IX because he had ended the long @-@ standing legal obligation for them to attend sermons in church four times a year , based on that week 's Torah portion and aimed at their conversion to Christianity . He had also torn down the gates of the Roman Ghetto despite the objections of many Christians . However , Jews remained under many restrictions and the vast majority still lived in the ghetto . 
 = = = Mortara and Morisi = = = 
 Edgardo Levi Mortara , the sixth of eight children born to <unk> " Momolo " Mortara , a Jewish merchant , and his wife Marianna ( née Padovani ) , was born on 27 August 1851 in Bologna , one of the Papal <unk> in the pontifical state 's far north . The family had moved in 1850 from the Duchy of Modena , just west of Bologna . Bologna 's Jewish population of about 900 had been expelled in 1593 by Pope Clement VIII . Some Jews , mostly merchants like Edgardo 's father , had started to settle in Bologna again during the 1790s , and by 1858 there was a Jewish community of about 200 in the city . The Jews of Bologna practised Judaism discreetly , with neither a rabbi nor a synagogue . The Papal States officially forbade them to have Christian servants , but observant Jewish families perceived gentile maids as essential because they were not covered by Jewish laws , and thus provided a way for Jews to have household tasks carried out while still observing their Sabbath . In practice Church authorities turned a blind eye , and almost every Jewish family in Bologna employed at least one Catholic woman . 
 A few months after Edgardo 's birth , the Mortara family engaged a new servant : Anna " Nina " Morisi , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old Catholic from the nearby village of San Giovanni in Persiceto . Like all her family and friends , Morisi was illiterate . She had come to the city , following her three sisters , to work and save money towards a dowry , so she could eventually marry . In early 1855 , Morisi became pregnant , as was not uncommon for unmarried servants in Bologna at this time . Many employers would simply sack girls in such situations , but the Mortaras did not ; they paid for Morisi to spend the last four months of her pregnancy at a midwife 's home and deliver the child , then had her return to work with them . To protect Morisi and themselves from embarrassment , they told neighbours that their maid was sick and recuperating at home . Morisi gave her newborn baby to an orphanage , as the Papal States required unwed mothers to do , then returned to work with the Mortaras . She remained there until she was hired by another Bologna family in 1857 ; soon after that she married and moved back to San Giovanni in Persiceto . 
 = = Removal = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In October 1857 the inquisitor of Bologna , a Dominican friar called Father Pier Gaetano Feletti , learned of rumours to the effect that a secret baptism had been administered to one of the city 's Jewish children by a Catholic servant . If true , this would make the child a Catholic in the eyes of the Church — a fact with secular as well as spiritual ramifications since the Church stance was that children they considered to be Christians could not be raised by non @-@ Christians , and should be taken from their parents in such circumstances . Cases like this were not uncommon in 19th @-@ century Italy , and often revolved around the baptism of a Jewish child by a Christian servant . The official Church position was that Catholics should not baptise Jewish children without the parents ' consent , except if a child was on the brink of death — in these cases the Church considered the customary deferment to parental authority to be outweighed by the importance of allowing the child 's soul to be saved and go to Heaven , and permitted baptism without the parents ' assent . Many Jewish families feared clandestine baptisms by their Christian maids ; to counter this perceived threat some households required Christians leaving their employment to sign <unk> statements confirming that they had never baptised any of the children . 
 The servant identified in the rumours was Anna Morisi . After receiving written permission to investigate from the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Roman and Universal Inquisition ( also called the Holy Office ) , the body of cardinals responsible for overseeing and defending Catholic doctrine , Feletti interrogated her at the Basilica of San Domenico in Bologna . Morisi averred that while she was employed by the Mortaras , their infant son Edgardo had fallen gravely sick while in her care , leading her to fear he might die . She said that she had performed an emergency baptism herself — sprinkling some water on the boy 's head and saying : " I baptise you in the Name of the Father , and of the Son , and of the Holy Ghost " — but had never revealed this to the child 's family . Edgardo had since recovered . Feletti had Morisi swear to keep the story quiet and sent a transcript of the meeting to Rome , requesting permission to remove the now six @-@ year @-@ old Edgardo from his family . 
 It is not known by historians whether Pope Pius IX was involved in any of the early Holy Office discussions over Mortara , or was otherwise aware of Feletti 's initial investigation . He was its official head but he only occasionally attended its meetings , and was not likely to be consulted about what the cardinals saw as routine matters . For the Holy Office , situations such as that reported by Feletti presented a profound quandary — on the one hand the Church officially disapproved of forced conversions , but on the other it held that the baptismal sacrament was sacrosanct and that if it had been properly administered , the recipient was thereafter a member of the Christian communion . According to the laws of the Papal States it was illegal to take a child from non @-@ Christian parents for baptism , but if such a child was indeed baptised the Church was held to bear responsibility to provide a Christian education . The cardinals considered Morisi 's account and ultimately accepted it as bearing " all the earmarks of the truth without leaving the least doubt about the reality and the validity of the baptism she performed " . Feletti was instructed to arrange Edgardo 's removal and transport to the House of Catechumens in Rome , where instruction was given to those newly converted or in the process of converting to Catholicism . 
 = = = Seizure = = = 
 A detail of papal carabinieri ( military police ) led by Marshal Pietro Lucidi and Brigadier Giuseppe Agostini arrived at the Mortara apartment in Bologna soon after sunset on 23 June 1858 . After asking a few questions about the family , Lucidi announced : " Signor Mortara , I am sorry to inform you that you are the victim of a betrayal " , and explained that they were under orders from Father Feletti to take Edgardo as he had been baptised . Marianna screamed hysterically , ran to Edgardo 's bed and shrieked that they would have to kill her before taking him . Lucidi said repeatedly that he was only following Feletti 's orders . He reported afterwards that he " would have a thousand times preferred to be exposed to much more serious dangers in performing my duties than to have to witness such a painful scene . " 
 Lucidi offered to let Edgardo 's father accompany them to the inquisitor to discuss the matter with him — Momolo refused — then allowed Momolo to send his eldest son Riccardo to summon relatives and neighbours . Marianna 's uncle Angelo Padovani , a prominent member of Bologna 's Jewish community , concluded that their only hope was to appeal to Feletti . The inquisitor received Padovani and Marianna 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Angelo Moscato at San Domenico soon after 23 : 00 . Feletti said that he , like Lucidi , was merely following orders . He declined to reveal why it was thought that Edgardo had been baptised , saying that this was confidential . When the men begged him to at least give the family one last day with Edgardo , the inquisitor acquiesced on the condition that no attempt was made to spirit the child away . He gave Padovani a note to this effect to pass on to the marshal . Lucidi left as ordered , leaving two men to stay in the Mortaras ' bedroom and watch over Edgardo . 
 The Mortaras spent the morning of 24 June attempting to have Feletti 's order overruled by either the city 's cardinal legate , Giuseppe <unk> Pironi Ferretti , or the Archbishop of Bologna , Michele Viale @-@ <unk> , but they found that neither was in the city . Around noon , the Mortaras decided to take steps to make the separation as painless as possible . Edgardo 's siblings were taken to visit relatives while Marianna reluctantly agreed to spend the evening with the wife of Giuseppe <unk> , a Jewish family friend . Around 17 : 00 Momolo visited San Domenico to make one last plea to Feletti . The inquisitor repeated all he had said to Padovani and Moscato the previous night and told Momolo not to worry as Edgardo would be well cared for , under the protection of the Pope himself . He warned that it would benefit no @-@ one to make a scene when the carabinieri returned that evening . 
 Momolo came home to find the apartment empty apart from <unk> , Marianna 's brother ( also called Angelo Padovani ) , the two policemen and Edgardo himself . At about 20 : 00 the carabinieri arrived , in two carriages — one for Lucidi and his men , and another in which Agostini would drive Edgardo . Lucidi entered the apartment and took Edgardo from his father 's arms , prompting the two policemen who had guarded him to shed tears . Momolo followed the police down the stairs to the street , then fainted . Edgardo was passed to Agostini and driven away . 
 = = Appeal = = 
 = = = Initial appeal ; Morisi confronted = = = 
 With no way of knowing where the boy had been taken — Momolo found out only in early July — the Mortaras , supported by the Jewish communities in Bologna , Rome and elsewhere in Italy , initially focused on drafting appeals and trying to rally support from Jews abroad . The greatly expanded public voice wielded by Jews in western European countries following recent moves towards freedom of the press , coupled with Jewish political emancipation in the Kingdom of Sardinia , Britain , France and the United States , caused Mortara 's removal to gain press attention far beyond anything previously given to such incidents . The papal government was initially disposed to simply ignore Momolo 's appeals , but reconsidered after newspapers began reporting on the case ; the pontifical state 's many detractors seized on the episode as an example of papal tyranny . 
 Anxious to protect the Papal States ' precarious diplomatic position , the Cardinal Secretary of State Giacomo Antonelli liaised with Rome 's Jewish community to arrange a meeting with Momolo Mortara , and received him politely in early August 1858 . Antonelli promised that the matter would be referred to the Pope and granted Momolo 's request that he be allowed to visit Edgardo regularly in the House of Catechumens . Kertzer cites Antonelli 's concession of repeated visits , as opposed to the usual single meeting , as the first sign that the Mortara case would take on a special significance . 
 The attempts of the Mortaras and their allies to identify who was supposed to have baptised Edgardo quickly bore fruit . After their present servant Anna Facchini adamantly denied any involvement , they considered former employees and soon earmarked Morisi as a possible candidate . In late July 1858 the Mortara home was visited by <unk> Scagliarini , a friend of Morisi 's who had once worked for Marianna 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Cesare De Angelis . Marianna 's brother Angelo Padovani tested Scagliarini by saying falsely that he had heard it was Morisi who had baptised Edgardo . The ruse worked — Scagliarini said that she had been told the same thing by Morisi 's sister Monica . 
 The younger Angelo Padovani went with De Angelis to confront Morisi in San Giovanni in Persiceto . Padovani recalled finding her in tears . After the visitors assured her that they meant no harm , Morisi recounted what she had told Feletti . She said that a grocer named Cesare Lepori had suggested the baptism when she mentioned Edgardo 's sickness , and shown her how to perform it . She had not mentioned it to anyone , she went on , until soon after Edgardo 's brother Aristide died at the age of one in 1857 — when a neighbour 's servant called Regina proposed that Morisi should have baptised Aristide , that she had done so to Edgardo " slipped out of my mouth " . According to Padovani , Morisi described crying during her interrogation by the inquisitor , and expressed guilt over Edgardo 's removal : " figuring that it was all my fault , I was very unhappy , and still am . " Morisi agreed to have this formally recorded , but was gone when Padovani and De Angelis returned after three hours with a notary and two witnesses . After searching for her in vain , they went back to Bologna with only their hearsay account of her story , which Padovani thought genuine : " Her words , and her demeanour , and her tears before she could launch into her story , persuaded me that what she told me was all true . " 
 = = = Two narratives = = = 
 Edgardo was visited by his father several times under the supervision of the rector of the Catechumens , Enrico Sarra , from mid @-@ August to mid @-@ September 1858 . The wildly divergent accounts of what happened during these encounters grew into two rival narratives of the entire case . Momolo 's version of events , favoured by the Jewish community and other backers , was that a family had been destroyed by the government 's religious fanaticism , that helpless Edgardo had spent the journey to Rome crying for his parents , and that the boy wanted nothing more than to return home . The narrative favoured by the Church and its supporters , and propagated in the Catholic press throughout Europe , was one of divinely ordained , soul @-@ stirring redemption , and a child endowed with spiritual strength far beyond his years — the neophyte Edgardo had faced a life of error followed by eternal damnation but now stood to share in Christian salvation , and was distraught that his parents would not convert with him . 
 The central theme in almost all renditions of the narrative favouring the Mortara family was that of Marianna Mortara 's health . From July 1858 onwards it was reported across Europe that as a result of her grief , Edgardo 's mother had practically if not actually gone insane , and might even die . The powerful image of the heartbroken mother was stressed heavily in the family 's appeals both to the public and to Edgardo himself . Momolo and the secretary of Rome 's Jewish community , Sabatino Scazzocchio , told Edgardo that his mother 's life was at risk if he did not come back soon . When Marianna wrote to her son in August , Scazzocchio refused to deliver the letter on the grounds that , being relatively calm and reassuring in tone , it might work against the impression they were trying to give him that she was no longer herself and that only his return could save her . One correspondent reported in January 1859 : " The father shows a great deal of courage , but the mother is having a hard time carrying on . ... If the Holy Father had seen this woman as I saw her , he would not have the courage to keep her son another moment . " 
 There were many different versions of the Catholic story , but all followed the same basic structure . All had Edgardo quickly and fervently embracing Christianity and trying to learn as much as possible about it . Most described a dramatic scene of Edgardo wondering at a painting of the Virgin Mary in sorrow , either in Rome or during the journey from Bologna . Agostini , the policeman who had escorted him to Rome , reported that the boy had at first stubbornly refused to enter a church with him for mass , but displayed an apparently miraculous transformation when he did . A common theme was that Edgardo had become a kind of prodigy — according to an eyewitness account published in the Catholic L <unk> della <unk> colla <unk> , he had learned the catechism perfectly within a few days , " <unk> [ d ] the servant who baptised him , " and declared that he wanted to convert all Jews to Christianity . The most influential pro @-@ Church article on Mortara was an account published in the Jesuit periodical La Civiltà Cattolica in November 1858 , and subsequently reprinted or quoted in Catholic papers across Europe . This story had the child begging the rector of the Catechumens not to send him back but to let him grow up in a Christian home , and initiated what became a central plank of the pro @-@ Church narrative — that Edgardo had a new family , namely the Catholic Church itself . The article quoted Edgardo as saying : " I am baptised ; I am baptised and my father is the Pope . " 
 According to Kertzer , the proponents of this pro @-@ Church narrative did not seem to realise that to many these accounts sounded " too good to be true " and " absurd . " Kertzer comments : " If Edgardo in fact told his father that he did not want to return with him , that he now regarded the Pope as his true father and wanted to devote his life to converting the Jews , this message seems not to have registered with Momolo . " Liberals , Protestants and Jews across the continent ridiculed the Catholic press reports . A booklet published in Brussels in 1859 outlined the two contrasting narratives , then concluded : " Between the miracle of a six @-@ year @-@ old apostle who wants to convert the Jews and the cry of a child who keeps asking for his mother and his little sisters , we don 't hesitate for a moment . " Mortara 's parents furiously denounced the Catholic accounts as lies , but some of their supporters were less certain about where Edgardo 's loyalties now lay . These included Scazzocchio , who had attended some of the disputed meetings at the Catechumens . 
 = = = Lepori 's denial ; Morisi discredited = = = 
 Momolo returned to Bologna in late September 1858 after his two brothers @-@ in @-@ law wrote to him that if he stayed in Rome any longer the family might be ruined . He left Scazzocchio to represent the family 's cause in Rome . Momolo shifted his priority to attempting to undermine Morisi 's credibility , either by disproving aspects of her story or by showing her to be untrustworthy . He also resolved to confront Cesare Lepori , the grocer who Morisi said had both suggested the baptism and shown her how to perform it . Based on Morisi 's story , Lepori had already been identified by many observers as being ultimately to blame for the affair . When Momolo visited his shop in early October , Lepori vehemently denied that he had ever spoken to Morisi about Edgardo or any baptism , and said that he was prepared to testify to this effect before any legal authority . He claimed that he did not himself know how to administer baptism , so had such a conversation occurred it could hardly have gone as Morisi described . 
 Carlo Maggi , a Catholic acquaintance of Momolo 's who was also a retired judge , sent a report of Lepori 's refutation to Scazzocchio , who asked Antonelli to pass it on to the Pope . A cover letter attached to Maggi 's statement described it as proof that Morisi 's story was false . Scazzocchio also forwarded an affidavit from the Mortara family doctor , Pasquale <unk> , who acknowledged that Edgardo had fallen sick when he was about a year old , but stated that he had never been in danger of dying , and that in any case Morisi had been herself bedridden at the time she was supposed to have baptised the boy . A further report sent from Bologna in October 1858 , comprising the statements of eight women and one man , all Catholics , corroborated the doctor 's claims about the sicknesses of Edgardo and Morisi respectively , and alleged that the former maid was given to theft and sexual impropriety . Four women , including the servant Anna Facchini and the woman who had employed Morisi after she left the Mortaras , Elena Pignatti , claimed that Morisi had regularly flirted with Austrian officers and invited them into her employers ' homes for sex . 
 = = = Alatri , then back to Rome = = = 
 Momolo set out for Rome again on 11 October 1858 , this time bringing Marianna with him in the hope that her presence might make a stronger impression on the Church and Edgardo . Anxious about the possible consequences of a dramatic reunification between mother and son , the rector Enrico Sarra took Edgardo from Rome to Alatri , his own home town about 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) away . The Mortaras tracked them to a church in Alatri , where from the door Momolo saw a priest saying mass — and Edgardo by his side assisting him . Momolo waited outside , and afterwards persuaded the rector to let him see his son . Before this meeting could take place , the Mortaras were arrested on the orders of the Mayor of Alatri , himself following a request from the town 's bishop , and despatched back to Rome . Antonelli was not impressed , thinking this an undignified line of action that would give obvious ammunition to the Church 's detractors , and ordered Sarra to bring Edgardo back to the capital to meet his parents . 
 Edgardo returned to the Catechumens on 22 October , and was visited by his parents often over the next month . As with Momolo 's first round of visits , two different versions emerged of what happened . According to Edgardo 's parents , the boy was obviously intimidated by the clergymen around him and threw himself into his mother 's arms when he first saw her . Marianna later said : " He had lost weight and had turned pale ; his eyes were filled with terror ... I told him that he was born a Jew like us and like us he must always remain one , and he replied : ' Si , mia cara mamma , I will never forget to say the Shema every day . ' " One report in the Jewish press described the priests telling Edgardo 's parents that God had chosen their son to be " the apostle of Christianity to his family , dedicated to converting his parents and his siblings " , and that they could have him back if they also became Christians . The clerics and nuns then knelt and prayed for the conversion of the Mortara household , prompting Edgardo 's parents to leave in terror . 
 The pro @-@ Church accounts , by contrast , described a boy very much resolved to stay where he was , and horrified by his mother 's exhortations to return to the Judaism of his ancestors . In this narrative , the main reason for the Mortaras ' grief was not that their son had been taken , but that he now stood to grow up in the Christian faith . According to La Civiltà Cattolica , Marianna flew into a rage on seeing a medallion hanging from Edgardo 's neck bearing the image of the Virgin Mary , and ripped it off ; one article went so far as to claim the Jewish mother had done this with the words : " I 'd rather see you dead than a Christian ! " Some of the Church 's critics had charged that by keeping Edgardo , it was violating the commandment that a child should honour his father and mother — La Civiltà Cattolica countered that Edgardo still loved his family despite their religious differences and indeed , after being taught by the priests to read and write , had chosen to write his first letter to his mother , signing it " your most affectionate little son " . Louis <unk> , the <unk> editor of the L <unk> newspaper and one of the Pope 's staunchest defenders , reported after meeting Edgardo in Rome that the boy had told him " that he loves his father and his mother , and that he will go to live with them when he is older ... so that he can speak to them of Saint Peter , of God , and of the most Holy Mary . " 
 = = Outrage = = 
 = = = International scandal ; political machinations = = = 
 Having made no progress in Rome , Momolo and Marianna Mortara returned to Bologna in early December 1858 , and soon afterwards moved to Turin , in Piedmont . The case — an anti @-@ Catholic " publicist 's dream " , to quote Kertzer — had by now become a massive controversy in both Europe and the United States , with voices across the social spectrum clamouring for the Pope to return Edgardo to his parents . Mortara became a cause célèbre not only for Jews but for Protestant Christians as well , particularly in the United States , where anti @-@ Catholic sentiment abounded — The New York Times published more than 20 articles on the case in December 1858 alone . In Britain , The Spectator presented the Mortara case as evidence that the Papal States had " the worst government in the world — the most insolvent and the most arrogant , the cruelest and the meanest " . The Catholic press both in Italy and abroad steadfastly defended the Pope 's actions . The pro @-@ Church articles often took on an overtly anti @-@ Semitic character , charging for example that if coverage in Britain , France or Germany was critical this was hardly a surprise " since currently the newspapers of Europe are in good part in the hands of the Jews " . Scazzocchio suggested that the press storm attacking the Church was actually counter @-@ productive for the Mortara family 's cause , as it angered the Pope and thereby steeled his resolve not to compromise . 
 Regardless of whether Pope Pius IX had been personally involved in the decision to remove Mortara from his parents — whether he had been or not was debated extensively in the press — what is certain is that he was greatly surprised by the international furore that erupted over the matter , and promptly adopted the position that to return the baptised child to his non @-@ Christian family would be totally incompatible with Church doctrine . As foreign governments and the various branches of the Rothschild family one by one condemned his actions , Pius IX stood firm on what he saw as a matter of principle . Those angered included Emperor Napoleon III of France , who found the situation particularly vexing as the pontifical government owed its very existence to the French garrison in Rome . Napoleon III had indifferently supported the Pope 's temporal rule because it enjoyed widespread support among French Catholics ; the scandal over Mortara weakened this considerably and , according to the historian Roger Aubert , provided the final straw that changed French policy . In February 1859 Napoleon III concluded a secret pact with the Kingdom of Sardinia pledging French military support for a campaign to drive the Austrians out and unify Italy — most of the pontifical domain would be absorbed along with the Two Sicilies and other minor states . 
 It was then an annual custom for the Pope to receive a delegation from Rome 's Jewish community shortly after the New Year . The meeting on 2 February 1859 quickly descended into a heated argument , with Pope Pius berating the Jewish visitors for " stirring up a storm all over Europe about this Mortara case " . When the delegation denied that the Jews of Rome had had any hand in the anti @-@ clerical articles , the Pope dismissed Scazzocchio as inexperienced and foolish , then shouted : " The newspapers can write all they want . I couldn 't care less what the world thinks ! " The Pope then calmed down somewhat : " So strong is the pity I have for you , that I pardon you , indeed , I must pardon you . " One of the delegates proposed that the Church should not give so much credence to Morisi 's testimony , given her spurious morals — the Pope countered that regardless of her character , so far as he could see the servant had no reason to invent such a story , and in any case Momolo Mortara should not have employed a Catholic in the first place . 
 Pope Pius IX 's determination to keep Edgardo developed into a strong paternal attachment . According to Edgardo 's memoirs , the pontiff regularly spent time with him and played with him ; the Pope would amuse the child by hiding him under his cassock and calling out : " Where 's the boy ? " At one of their meetings , Pope Pius told Edgardo : " My son , you have cost me dearly , and I have suffered a great deal because of you . " He then said to others present : " Both the powerful and the powerless tried to steal this boy from me , and accused me of being barbarous and pitiless . They cried for his parents , but they failed to recognise that I , too , am his father . " 
 = = = Montefiore 's petition ; fall of Bologna = = = 
 The Italian Jewish appeals brought the attention of Sir Moses Montefiore , the president of the Board of Deputies of British Jews , whose willingness to travel great distances to help his co @-@ religionists — as he had over the Damascus blood libel of 1840 , for example — was already well known . From August to December 1858 he headed a special British committee on Mortara that relayed reports from Piedmont to British newspapers and Catholic clergymen , and happily noted the support expressed by British Protestants , particularly the Evangelical Alliance led by Sir Culling Eardley . After unsuccessfully attempting to have the British government lodge an official protest with the Vatican , Montefiore resolved to personally travel to Rome to present a petition to the Pope calling for Edgardo to be returned to his parents . He arrived in Rome on 5 April 1859 . 
 Montefiore failed to gain an audience with the Pope , and was received by Cardinal Antonelli only on 28 April . Montefiore gave him the Board of Deputies ' petition to pass on to the Pope , and said that he would wait in the city a week for the pontiff 's reply . Two days later , news reached Rome that fighting had broken out between Austrian and Piedmontese troops in the north — the War of 1859 had begun . While most foreign dignitaries fled Rome as quickly as possible , Montefiore waited in vain for the Pope 's response ; he finally left on 10 May . On his return to Britain more than 2 @,@ 000 leading citizens — including 79 mayors and provosts , 27 peers , 22 Anglican bishops and archbishops and 36 Members of Parliament — signed a protest calling the Pope 's conduct a " dishonour to Christianity " , " repulsive to the instincts of humanity " . Meanwhile , the Church quietly had Edgardo confirmed as a Catholic in a private chapel on 13 May 1859 . Edgardo was by this time no longer in the Catechumens but at San Pietro in Vincoli , a basilica elsewhere in Rome where Pope Pius had personally decided the boy would be educated . 
 As the war turned against the Austrians , the garrison in Bologna left early in the morning on 12 June 1859 . By the end of the same day the papal colours flying in the squares had been replaced with the Italian green , white and red , the cardinal legate had left the city , and a group styling itself Bologna 's provisional government had proclaimed its desire to join the Kingdom of Sardinia . Bologna was promptly incorporated as part of the province of Romagna . The Archbishop Michele Viale @-@ <unk> attempted to persuade the citizenry not to co @-@ operate with the new civil authorities , but had little success . One of the new order 's first official acts was to introduce freedom of religion and make all citizens equal before the law . In November 1859 the governor Luigi Carlo Farini issued a proclamation abolishing the inquisition . 
 = = Retribution = = 
 = = = Feletti arrested = = = 
 Momolo Mortara spent late 1859 and January 1860 in Paris and London , trying to rally support . While he was away his father Simon , who lived about 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) west of Bologna in Reggio Emilia , successfully asked the new authorities in Romagna to launch an inquiry into the Mortara case . On 31 December 1859 Farini ordered his justice minister to pursue the " authors of the kidnapping " . Filippo Curletti , the new director @-@ general of police for Romagna , was put in charge of the investigation . After two officers identified the erstwhile inquisitor Feletti as having given the order to take Edgardo , Curletti and a detachment of police went to San Domenico and arrested him at about 02 : 30 on 2 January 1860 . 
 The police inspectors questioned Feletti , but each time they asked about anything to do with Mortara or his removal the monk said that a sacred oath precluded his discussing affairs of the Holy Office . When Curletti ordered him to hand over all files relating to the Mortara case , Feletti said that they had been burned — when asked when or how , he repeated that on Holy Office matters he could say nothing . Pressed further , Feletti said : " As far as the activities that I carried out as Inquisitor of the Holy Office of Bologna , I am obliged to explain myself to one forum only , to the Supreme Sacred Congregation in Rome , whose Prefect is His Holiness Pope Pius IX , and to no @-@ one else . " After the police searched the convent for documents relating to the Mortara case — they found nothing — the inquisitor was escorted to prison . The news that Feletti had been arrested caused the press storm surrounding Mortara , which had died down somewhat , to flare up again across Europe . 
 = = = Investigation = = = 
 Father Feletti 's trial was the first major criminal case in Bologna under the new authorities . The magistrate Francesco Carboni announced on 18 January 1860 that Feletti and Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Luigi De <unk> would be prosecuted , but not Lucidi or Agostini . When Carboni interviewed Feletti in prison on 23 January , the friar said that in seizing Edgardo from his family he had only carried out instructions from the Holy Office , " which never promulgates any decree without the consent of the Roman Pontiff " . Feletti then recounted a version of the Church narrative of the case , stating that Edgardo had " always remained firm in his desire to remain a Christian " and was now studying successfully in Rome . He predicted in conclusion that Edgardo would one day be the " support and pride " of the Mortara family . 
 On 6 February Momolo Mortara gave an account of the case that contradicted the inquisitor 's at almost every turn ; in Rome , he said , Edgardo had been " frightened , and intimidated by the rector 's presence , [ but ] he openly declared his desire to return home with us " . Carboni then travelled to San Giovanni in Persiceto to interrogate Morisi , who gave her age as 23 rather than the actual 26 . Morisi said that Edgardo had fallen sick in the winter of 1851 – 52 , when he was about four months old . She recounted having seen the Mortaras sitting sadly by Edgardo 's crib and " reading from a book in Hebrew that the Jews read when one of them is about to die " . She repeated her account of giving Edgardo an emergency baptism at the instigation of the grocer Lepori and later telling the story to a neighbour 's servant called Regina , adding that she had also told her sisters about the baptism . As before , Lepori denied any role in the affair whatsoever , indeed saying he could not even remember Morisi . The " Regina " in Morisi 's story was identified as Regina Bussolari ; though Morisi averred to have told her the whole story , Bussolari professed to know nothing of the case . She said that she had only spoken with Morisi " once or twice , when she was going up to the storage room to get something " , and never about anything to do with the Mortaras ' children . 
 Elena Pignatti , who had employed Morisi after she left the Mortaras in 1857 — her words about Morisi 's misconduct had formed part of the Mortaras ' appeal to the Pope — testified that " seven or eight years ago ... a son of the Mortaras , whose name I don 't know , became sick , and it was said that he was going to die . Around then , one morning ... I ran into Morisi . Among the other things we talked about , she — without mentioning the child 's illness — asked me , ' I 've heard that if you baptise a Jewish child who 's about to die he goes to Heaven and gets indulgence ; isn 't that right ? ' I don 't remember what I told her , but when the Mortara boy was kidnapped by order of the Dominican Father , I was sure that he must have been the one who was sick " . Pignatti said that she had herself seen Edgardo during his illness , and Marianna sitting by the crib — " Since his mother was crying , and despaired for his life , I thought he was dying , also because of his appearance : his eyes were closed , and he was hardly moving . " She added that during the three months when Morisi worked for her in late 1857 , the servant had been summoned to San Domenico four or five times , and had said that the inquisitor had promised her a dowry . 
 Bussolari 's denial that she had discussed any baptism with Morisi raised the question of who could have reported the rumours to the inquisitor in the first place . On 6 March , Carboni interviewed Morisi again and pointed out the inconsistencies between her story and the testimony of the Mortara family doctor , the Mortaras themselves , and both Lepori and Bussolari . She replied : " It 's the Gospel truth " . Carboni put it to Morisi that she might have invented the whole story out of spite against the Mortara family in the hope that the Church might reward her . When Carboni asked Morisi if she had been to San Domenico apart from for her interrogation , she stated that she had been there on two other occasions to try to secure a dowry from Father Feletti . Carboni suggested that Morisi must have herself prompted the interrogation by recounting Edgardo 's baptism during one of these visits — Morisi insisted that the interrogation had been first and the other two visits later . 
 After one last interview with Feletti — who again said almost nothing , citing a sacred oath — Carboni informed him that so far as he could see , there was no evidence to support his version of events . Feletti replied : " I commiserate with the Mortara parents for their painful separation from their son , but I hope that the prayers of the innocent soul succeed in having God reunite them all in the Christian religion ... As for my punishment , not only do I place myself in the Lord 's hands , but I would argue that any government would recognise the legitimacy of my action . " The next day Feletti and De <unk> , the latter of whom had fled to the rump Papal States , were formally charged with the " violent separation of the boy Edgardo Mortara from his own Jewish family " . 
 = = = Trial ; acquittal = = = 
 Feletti faced a court trial under the code of laws in effect in Bologna at the time of Edgardo 's removal . Carboni proposed that even under the pontifical laws , the seizure was illegal — he reported that he had seen no evidence to support the friar 's claim that he had acted following instructions from Rome , and that there was substantial evidence casting doubt on Morisi 's account , but so far as he could see Feletti had done nothing to verify what she had said before ordering the child removed . After Feletti refused to appoint a defence counsel when prompted , saying he was putting his defence in the hands of God and the Virgin Mary , the experienced Bologna lawyer Francesco Jussi was appointed by the state to defend him . 
 The hearing before a panel of six judges on 16 April 1860 was attended by neither the Mortara family nor Feletti — the former because they were in Turin and learned of the trial date only two days beforehand , and the latter because he refused to recognise the new authorities ' right to put him on trial . With the evidence gathered by Curletti and Carboni already in hand , the prosecution had no witnesses to call . The prosecutor Radamisto Valentini , a lawyer fighting his first major case , declared that Feletti had ordered the seizure alone and on his own initiative , and then turned his focus to Carboni 's second point of how the authorities in Rome could have possibly concluded that Morisi 's story was genuine . Valentini went over Morisi 's account in detail , arguing that even if things had happened as she said , the baptism had not been administered properly and was therefore invalid . He then highlighted the inconsistencies between her testimony and the other accounts , condemned Morisi as a silly girl " corrupted by the foul breath and touch of foreign soldiers ... [ who ] rolled over without shame with them " , and finally charged that Feletti had ordered the seizure himself out of megalomania and " an inquisitor 's hatred of Judaism " . 
 Jussi found himself in the unusual position of attempting to defend a client who refused to defend himself . With no evidence at his disposal to support Feletti 's testimony , he was forced to rely almost entirely on his own oratory . Jussi put forward some aspects of the sequence of events that he said suggested that orders had indeed come from Rome — for example , that Feletti had sent Edgardo straight off to the capital without seeing him — and asserted that the Holy Office and the Pope were far better placed to adjudge the validity of the baptism than a secular court . He quoted at length from Angelo Padovani 's account of his meeting with Anna Morisi in July 1858 , then cast doubt on the grocer Lepori 's claim that he did not even know how to baptise a child — Jussi produced a police report in which Lepori was described as a close friend of a Jesuit priest . Jussi proposed that Lepori and Bussolari might both be lying to protect themselves , and that Morisi 's sexual impropriety did not necessarily mean her story was false . He concluded that since Feletti had been inquisitor at the time , he had merely done what that office required him to do , and no crime had been committed . 
 The judging panel , headed by <unk> Ferrari , ruled following a swift deliberation that Feletti should be released as he had acted under instructions from the government of the time . The interval between the priest 's arrest and his trial , coupled with the swift progress being made towards Italian unification , meant that the Mortara case had lost much of its prominence , so there was little protest against the decision . The Jewish press expressed disappointment — an editorial in the Italian Jewish paper L <unk> <unk> suggested that it had perhaps been unwise to target Feletti rather than someone more senior . In France Archives <unk> took a similar line , positing : " what good does it do to strike at the arm when it is the head that in this case conceived , carried out , and sanctioned the attack ? " 
 = = = Plans to recapture Edgardo = = = 
 The Mortaras were not surprised by the verdict in Feletti 's trial . Momolo hoped that his son might be a major topic of discussion at an international conference on the future of Italy , but was disappointed when no such summit materialised . His cause and visit to Paris partly motivated the formation in May 1860 of the Alliance Israélite Universelle , a Paris @-@ based organisation dedicated to the advancement of Jewish civil rights across the world . As the Italian nationalist armies advanced through the peninsula , the fall of Rome seemed imminent . In September 1860 the Alliance Israélite Universelle wrote to Momolo offering him financial and logistical support if he wished to reclaim his son by force , as " getting your child back is the cause of all Israel " . A separate plan was formulated by Carl Blumenthal , an English Jew serving in Giuseppe Garibaldi 's nationalist volunteer corps : Blumenthal and three others would dress up as clergymen , seize Edgardo and spirit him away . Garibaldi approved this plan in 1860 , but it was apparently called off after one of the conspirators died . 
 = = Conclusion = = 
 = = = Italian unification ; Edgardo flees = = = 
 The Pope remained steadfastly determined not to give Edgardo up , declaring : " What I have done for this boy , I had the right and the duty to do . If it happened again , I would do the same thing . " When the delegation from Rome 's Jewish community attended their annual meeting at the Vatican in January 1861 , they were surprised to find the nine @-@ year @-@ old Edgardo at the pontiff 's side . The new Kingdom of Italy was proclaimed a month later with Victor Emmanuel II as king . A reduced incarnation of the Papal States , comprising Rome and its immediate environs , endured outside the new kingdom because of Napoleon III 's reluctance to offend his Catholic subjects by withdrawing the French garrison . He pulled these troops out following the entrance of a Jewish child from the Roman Ghetto , nine @-@ year @-@ old Giuseppe Coen , to the Catechumens in 1864 . The removal of the French garrison brought the Roman Question to the fore in the Italian parliament . The statesman Marco <unk> dismissed a proposed compromise whereby Rome would become part of the kingdom with the Pope retaining some special powers , saying : " we cannot go to guard the Mortara boy for the Pope " . The French garrison returned in 1867 , following an unsuccessful attempt by Garibaldi to capture the city . 
 In early 1865 , at the age of 13 , Edgardo became a novice in the Canons Regular of the Lateran , adding the Pope 's name to his own to become Pio Edgardo Mortara . He wrote repeatedly to his family , he recalled , " dealing with religion and doing what I could to convince them of the truth of the Catholic faith , " but received no reply until May 1867 — his parents , who were now living in Florence , wrote that they still loved him dearly , but saw nothing of their son in the letters they had received . In July 1870 , just before Edgardo turned 19 , the French garrison in Rome was withdrawn for good after the Franco @-@ Prussian War broke out . Italian troops captured the city on 20 September 1870 . 
 Momolo Mortara followed the Italian Army into Rome hoping to finally reclaim his son . According to some accounts , he was preceded by his son Riccardo , Edgardo 's elder brother , who had entered the kingdom 's service as an infantry officer . Riccardo Mortara fought his way to San Pietro in Vincoli and found his brother 's convent room . Edgardo covered his eyes , raised his hand in front of him and shouted : " Get back , Satan ! " When Riccardo said that he was his brother , Edgardo replied : " Before you get any closer to me , take off that assassin 's uniform . " Whatever the truth , what is certain is that Edgardo reacted to the capture of Rome with intense panic . He later wrote : " After the Piedmontese troops entered Rome ... they used their force to seize the neophyte Coen from the Collegio degli <unk> , [ then ] turned toward San Pietro in Vincoli to try to kidnap me as well . " The Roman chief of police asked Edgardo to return to his family to appease public opinion , but he refused . He subsequently met the Italian commander , General Alfonso Ferrero La Marmora , who told him that as he was 19 years old he could do as he wished . Edgardo was smuggled out of Rome by train along with a priest on 22 October 1870 , late at night and in lay clothes . He made his way north and escaped to Austria . 
 = = = Father Mortara = = = 
 Edgardo found shelter in a convent of the Canons Regular in Austria , where he lived under an assumed name . In 1872 he moved to a monastery at Poitiers in France , where Pope Pius regularly corresponded with the bishop about the young man . After a year , Pio Edgardo Mortara was ordained as a priest — with special dispensation as at 21 he was technically too young . He received a personal letter from the Pope to mark the occasion , as well as a lifetime trust fund of 7 @,@ 000 lire to support him . 
 Father Mortara spent most of the rest of his life outside Italy , travelling throughout Europe and preaching . It was said that he could give sermons in six languages , including Basque , and read three more , including Hebrew . " As a preacher he was in great demand , " Kertzer writes , " not least because of the inspirational way he was able to weave the remarkable story of his own childhood into his sermons . As he recounted it , his saga was the stuff of faith and hope : a story of how God chose a simple , illiterate servant girl to invest a small child with the miraculous powers of divine grace , and in doing so rescued him from his Jewish family — good people but , as Jews , on a God @-@ forsaken path . " 
 Momolo Mortara died in 1871 , shortly after spending seven months in prison during his trial over the death of a servant girl who had fallen from the window of his apartment . He had been found guilty of murdering her by the Florentine court of appeal , but then acquitted by the court of assizes . Pope Pius IX died in 1878 . The same year Marianna travelled to Perpignan in south @-@ western France , where she had heard Edgardo was preaching , and enjoyed an emotional reunion with her son , who was pleased to see her , but disappointed when she refused his pleas to convert to Catholicism . Edgardo thereafter attempted to re @-@ establish connections with his family , but not all of his relatives were as receptive to him as his mother . 
 Following Marianna 's death in 1890 , it was reported in French newspapers that she had finally , on her deathbed and with Edgardo beside her , become a Christian . Edgardo refuted this : " I have always ardently desired that my mother embrace the Catholic faith , " he wrote in a letter to Le Temps , " and I tried many times to get her to do so . However , that never happened " . A year later , Father Pio Edgardo Mortara returned to Italy for the first time in two decades to preach in Modena . A sister and some of his brothers came out to hear his sermon , and for the rest of his life Edgardo called on his relatives whenever he was in Italy . During a 1919 sojourn in Rome he visited the House of Catechumens he had entered 61 years before . By this time he had settled at the abbey of the Canons Regular at Bouhay in Liège , Belgium . Bouhay had a sanctuary to the Virgin of Lourdes , to which Father Mortara felt a special connection , the Lourdes apparitions of 1858 having occurred in the same year as his own conversion to Christianity . Father Pio Edgardo Mortara resided at Bouhay for the rest of his life and died there on 11 March 1940 , at the age of 88 . 
 = = Appraisal and legacy = = 
 The Mortara case is given little attention in most Risorgimento histories , if it is mentioned at all . The first book @-@ length scholarly work was Rabbi Bertram Korn 's The American Reaction to the Mortara Case : 1858 – 1859 ( 1957 ) , which was devoted entirely to public opinion in the United States and , according to Kertzer , often incorrect about details of the case . The main historical reference until the 1990s was a series of articles written by the Italian scholar Gemma <unk> and published around the centenary of the controversy in 1958 – 60 . When David Kertzer began studying the case he was surprised to find that many of his Italian colleagues were not familiar with it , while specialists in Jewish studies across the world invariably were — Mortara had , as Kertzer put it , " [ fallen ] from the mainstream of Italian history into the ghetto of Jewish history " . Kertzer explored many sources that had not previously been studied and eventually published The Kidnapping of Edgardo Mortara ( 1997 ) , which has become the standard reference work for the affair . 
 The Mortara case was , in the view of Timothy Verhoeven , the greatest controversy to surround the Catholic Church in the mid @-@ 19th century , as it " more than any other single issue ... exposed the divide between supporters and opponents of the Vatican " . Abigail Green writes that " this clash between liberal and Catholic worldviews at a moment of critical international tension ... gave the Mortara affair global significance — and rendered it a transformative episode in the Jewish world as well " . Mortara himself suggested in 1893 that his abduction had been , for a time , " more famous than that of the Sabine Women " . In the months before Pius IX 's beatification by the Catholic Church in 2000 , Jewish commentators and others in the international media raised the largely forgotten Mortara episode while analysing the Pope 's life and legacy . According to Dov Levitan , the basic facts of the Mortara case are far from unique , but it is nevertheless of particular importance because of its effect on public opinion in Italy , Britain and France , and as an example of " the great sense of Jewish solidarity that emerged in the latter half of the 19th century [ as ] Jews rose to the cause of their brethren in various parts of the world " . The Alliance Israélite Universelle , whose formation had been partly motivated by the Mortara case , grew into one of the most prominent Jewish organisations in the world and endures into the 21st century . 
 According to Michael Goldfarb , the Mortara controversy provided " an embarrassing example of just how out of touch with modern times the Church was " , and demonstrated that " Pope Pius IX was incapable of bringing the Church into the modern era " . Kertzer takes a similar line : " The refusal to return Edgardo contributed to the growing sense that the Pope 's role as temporal ruler , with his own police force , was an anachronism that could no longer be maintained . " Kertzer goes so far as to suggest that as a primary motivator for the French change of stance that precipitated Italian unification in 1859 – 61 , this " story of an illiterate servant girl , a grocer , and a little Jewish child from Bologna " may well have changed the course of both Italian and Church history . 
 = HMS Swiftsure ( 1903 ) = 
 HMS Swiftsure , originally known as Constitución , was the lead ship of the Swiftsure @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships . The ship was ordered by the Chilean Navy , but she was purchased by the United Kingdom as part of ending the Argentine – Chilean naval arms race . In British service , Swiftsure was initially assigned to the Home Fleet and Channel Fleets before being transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet in 1909 . She rejoined Home Fleet in 1912 and was transferred to the East Indies Station in 1913 , to act as its flagship . 
 After the beginning of World War I in August 1914 , Swiftsure escorted troop convoys in the Indian Ocean until she was transferred to the Suez Canal Patrol in December . After defending the Canal in early 1915 from Ottoman attacks , the ship was then transferred to the Dardanelles in February and saw action in the Dardanelles Campaign bombarding Ottoman fortifications . Swiftsure was assigned to convoy escort duties in the Atlantic from early 1916 until she was paid off in April 1917 to provide crews for anti @-@ submarine vessels . In mid @-@ 1918 , the ship was disarmed to be used as a blockship during a proposed second raid on Ostend . Swiftsure was sold for scrap in 1920 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Swiftsure was ordered by Chile , with the name of Constitución , in response to the Argentine purchase of two armoured cruisers from Italy during a time of heightened tensions with Argentina . After the crisis subsided , financial problems forced Chile put the ship up for sale in early 1903 ; concerned that Russia might buy them , the United Kingdom stepped in and purchased the still @-@ incomplete ships from Chile on 3 December 1903 for £ 2 @,@ 432 @,@ 000 . The ship was designed to Chilean specifications , particularly the requirement to fit in the graving dock at Talcahuano , and was regarded by the British as a second @-@ class battleship . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Swiftsure had an overall length of 475 feet 3 inches ( 144 @.@ 9 m ) , a beam of 71 feet 1 inch ( 21 @.@ 7 m ) , and a draught of 28 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 7 m ) at deep load . She displaced 12 @,@ 175 long tons ( 12 @,@ 370 t ) at standard load and 13 @,@ 840 long tons ( 14 @,@ 060 t ) at deep load . At deep load she had a metacentric height of 4 @.@ 01 feet ( 1 @.@ 22 m ) . In 1906 , the crew numbered 729 officers and enlisted men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ship was powered by two four @-@ cylinder inverted vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one propeller . A dozen Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers provided steam to the engines which produced a total of 12 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 9 @,@ 300 kW ) which was intended to allow them to reach a speed of 19 @.@ 5 knots ( 36 @.@ 1 km / h ; 22 @.@ 4 mph ) . The engines proved to be more powerful than anticipated and Swiftsure exceeded 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) during sea trials . She carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 048 long tons ( 2 @,@ 081 t ) of coal , enough to steam 6 @,@ 210 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 500 km ; 7 @,@ 150 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . In service she and her sister proved to be more economical than first thought with an estimated range of 12 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 22 @,@ 000 km ; 14 @,@ 000 mi ) at 10 knots . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ship was armed with four 45 @-@ calibre BL 10 @-@ inch Mk VI guns in two twin gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . The guns fired 500 @-@ pound ( 227 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 656 ft / s ( 810 m / s ) ; this provided a maximum range of 14 @,@ 800 yards ( 13 @,@ 500 m ) at the gun 's maximum elevation of 13 @.@ 5 ° . The firing cycle of the Mk VI guns was claimed to be 15 seconds . Each gun was provided with 90 shells . 
 Swiftsure 's secondary armament consisted of fourteen 50 @-@ calibre 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Mk III guns . Ten of the guns were mounted in a central battery on the main deck ; the other four were in casemates abreast the fore- and mainmasts on the upper deck . A major problem with the guns on the main deck was that they were mounted low in the ship — only about 10 feet ( 3 m ) above water at deep load — and were unusable at high speed or in heavy weather as they dipped their muzzles in the sea when rolling more than 14 ° . The guns fired 200 @-@ pound ( 91 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 781 ft / s ( 848 m / s ) at a rate of four rounds per minutes . At their maximum elevation of 15 ° they had a maximum range of about 14 @,@ 000 yards ( 13 @,@ 000 m ) . The ship carried 150 rounds per gun . 
 Defence against torpedo boats was provided by fourteen QF 14 @-@ pounder Mk I guns , the guns were modified to use the standard 12 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 7 kg ) shell used by the QF 12 pounder 18 cwt gun in British service . They fired 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) , 12 @.@ 5 @-@ lb projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 548 ft / s ( 777 m / s ) . Their maximum range and rate of fire is unknown . 200 rounds per gun was carried by Swiftsure . The ship also mounted four QF 6 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns in the fighting tops , although these were removed in 1906 – 08 . 
 The ship was also armed with a pair of 18 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) submerged torpedo tubes , one on each broadside . She was provided with nine torpedoes . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The Swiftsures ' armour scheme was roughly comparable to that of the Duncan class . The waterline main belt was composed of Krupp cemented armour ( KCA ) 7 inches ( 178 mm ) thick . It was 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) high of which 5 feet 3 inches ( 1 @.@ 6 m ) was below the waterline at normal load . Fore and aft of the 2 – 6 @-@ inch ( 51 – 152 mm ) oblique bulkheads that connected the belt armour to the barbettes , the belt continued , but was reduced in thickness . It was six inches thick abreast the barbettes , but was reduced to two inches fore and aft of the barbettes . It continued forward to the bow and supported the ship 's spur @-@ type ram . It continued aft to the steering gear compartment and terminated in 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) transverse bulkhead . The upper strake of 7 @-@ inch armour covered the ship 's side between the rear of the barbettes up to the level of the upper deck . The upper deck casemates were also protected by 7 @-@ inch faces and sides , but were enclosed by rear 3 @-@ inch plates . The 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns on the main deck were separated by 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) screens with .5 inches ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) plating protecting the funnel uptakes to their rear . A longitudinal 1 @-@ inch bulkhead divided the battery down its centreline . 
 The turret faces were 9 inches ( 229 mm ) thick and their sides and rear were 8 inches ( 203 mm ) thick . Their roofs were two inches thick and the sighting hood protecting the gunners was 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) thick . Above the upper deck the barbettes were 10 inches ( 254 mm ) thick on their faces and eight inches on the rear . Below this level they thinned to three and two inches respectively . The conning tower was protected by 11 inches ( 279 mm ) of armour on its face and eight inches on its rear . The deck armour inside the central citadel ranged from 1 to 1 @.@ 5 inches in thickness . Outside the citadel , the lower deck was three inches thick and sloped to meet the lower side of the belt armour . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ World War I = = = 
 Swiftsure was ordered by Chile as Constitución and laid down by Armstrong Whitworth at Elswick on 26 February 1902 and launched on 12 January 1903 . She was completed in June 1904 and commissioned at Chatham Dockyard on 21 June 1904 for service in the Home Fleet . Under a fleet reorganization in January 1905 , the Home Fleet became the Channel Fleet . She collided with her sister ship Triumph on 3 June 1905 and suffered damage to her propellers , sternwalk and aft hull . The ship was refitted at Chatham Dockyard in June – July 1906 . Swiftsure was briefly placed in reserve at Portsmouth Dockyard from 7 October 1908 until 6 April 1909 when she was recommissioned for service with the Mediterranean Fleet . The ship was reassigned to Home Fleet on 8 May 1912 until she was given a lengthy refit from September 1912 to March 1913 . Swiftsure was recommissioned on 26 March and assigned as the flagship of the East Indies Station . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 During World War I , the ship escorted Indian troop convoys from Bombay to Aden from September – November 1914 , when the destruction of the German light cruiser SMS Emden , which had been raiding in the Indian Ocean , made this escort duty unnecessary . She was then transferred to the Suez Canal Patrol on 1 December to help defend the Canal , although she remained East Indies Station flagship while at Suez . From 27 January to 4 February 1915 , the ship helped to defend the Canal near Kantara during the First Suez Offensive by Ottoman forces . 
 Swiftsure was relieved as East Indies Station flagship by the armored cruiser Euryalus later in February 1915 and transferred to the Dardanelles for service in the Dardanelles Campaign . She joined the Dardanelles Squadron on 28 February 1915 and took part in the attack on Fort Dardanos on 2 March 1915 . She and Triumph were detached from the Dardanelles on 5 March 1915 for operations against forts at Smyrna and returned to the Dardanelles on 9 March 1915 . She participated in the main attack on the Narrows forts on 18 March 1915 and supported the main landings at West Beach at Cape Helles on 25 April and subsequent landings , including the attack on Achi Baba on 4 June . On 18 September , a German submarine unsuccessfully attacked her while she was on a voyage from Mudros to Suvla Bay . She took part in the bombardment of Dedeagatch on 18 January 1916 . 
 Swiftsure left the Dardanelles in February 1916 , departing <unk> on 7 February 1916 for Gibraltar , where she was attached to the 9th Cruiser Squadron for service on the Atlantic Patrol and convoy escort duty in the Atlantic . She transferred out of the 9th Cruiser Squadron in March 1917 , departing Sierra Leone on 26 March and arriving at Plymouth on 11 April . Swiftsure was paid off at Chatham on 26 April to provide crews for anti @-@ submarine vessels . She then went into reserve , undergoing a refit at Chatham in mid @-@ 1917 and being employed as an accommodation ship beginning in February 1918 . In the autumn of 1918 she was disarmed and stripped for use as a blockship in a proposed second attempt to block the entrance to the harbor at Ostend , but the war ended before this operation could take place . The ship was briefly used as a target ship before she was listed for sale in March 1920 . Swiftsure was sold for scrap on 18 June 1920 to the Stanlee Shipbreaking Company . 
 = 70th Infantry Division ( United Kingdom ) = 
 The 70th Infantry Division was an infantry division of the British Army that fought during the Western Desert Campaign of the Second World War . What would become the 70th Division originated with the 7th Infantry Division , which was formed in 1938 to serve in the British Mandate of Palestine during the Arab Revolt . This division then transferred to Egypt on the outbreak of the Second World War and soon became the 6th Infantry Division , which went on to take part in the Battle of Crete and the Syria – Lebanon Campaign . On 10 October 1941 , the 6th Division was re @-@ created as the 70th Infantry Division , in an attempt to deceive Axis intelligence concerning the strength of the British military in the Middle East . 
 The Royal Navy transported the division to Tobruk from 19 September to 25 October , in a politically controversial move to relieve the mainly Australian garrison which had been defending the port for almost seven months , since the beginning of the Siege of Tobruk . Under daily aerial and artillery attacks , the division defended the port and conducted nightly offensive patrols against German and Italian positions . On 18 November , the British Eighth Army launched Operation Crusader . The division was tasked with breaking out of Tobruk , following the destruction of the Axis armoured forces . Following unexpected early success , the division began its attacks on 21 November , before the armoured formations of Germans and Italians had been defeated . Heavy fighting soon followed as the division captured several well @-@ defended and dug @-@ in German and Italian strong points . The looming threat of the Axis tanks ended the break @-@ out offensive the following day . Renewed fighting on 26 November saw the division link up with the approaching New Zealand Division , cutting the Axis lines of communication . In response , the Germans launched several counter @-@ attacks to throw back the 70th Division from the territory they had gained . The failure of these attacks had a lasting strategic impact on Operation Crusader ; the Axis forces began their retreat and lifted the siege of Tobruk . Two men — from units attached to the division — were awarded the Victoria Cross for their actions during Operation Crusader . 
 Following the fighting at Tobruk , the division was withdrawn from the front and placed in reserve . When Japan entered the war , the division was transferred to India . It was considered the most experienced and best trained British formation available in Asia . In India , the division formed a reserve to counter possible Japanese landings while it trained in jungle warfare . It also served as a police force , protecting railways and being used to suppress civil disobedience caused by the Quit India Movement . While it was requested that the division be sent to the front line in Burma , it was instead transferred to Special Force , commonly known as the Chindits . Such a move was opposed by the highest military commanders in India and Burma , and proved controversial with the troops themselves . Despite their pleas , the division was broken up and officially ceased to exist on 24 November 1943 . Historian Woodburn Kirby and Lieutenant @-@ General William Slim ( who led the British troops in Burma ) believed that the division could have had a greater impact against the Japanese had it been retained as a single formation . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Arab Revolt in Palestine = = = 
 During 1936 , the Arab Revolt broke out in the British Mandate of Palestine . British troops were dispatched , ending the first phase of the war by the close of the year . Fighting soon resumed and reached its zenith during the summer of 1938 . With rising tensions in Europe , the British began to withdraw troops from Palestine for use elsewhere . The conclusion of the Munich Agreement — on 30 September 1938 — calmed the rising tensions in Europe and averted war , allowing the British to resume their military build @-@ up in Palestine . 
 The 7th Infantry Division was formed the following month and placed under the command of Major @-@ General Richard O 'Connor . The division was deployed to Palestine on internal security duties as part of a build @-@ up of 18 @,@ 500 men in the region . This force then began to suppress the revolt . Meanwhile , Palestinian guerrillas had overrun the Old City of Jerusalem . O 'Connor 's men proceeded to sweep the area , declaring the Old City free of militants on 19 October . The same day , the division seized Acre and by the end of the month were clearing Jaffa of rebels . Many Palestinians were detained and rebel activity significantly dropped off in the area . In the north , the 8th Infantry Division , under Major @-@ General Bernard Montgomery , and Special Night Squads engaged in counter @-@ terror operations , with O 'Connor writing that one brigadier " always encouraged his men to be brutal " . General Officer Commanding British Forces in Palestine and Trans @-@ Jordan Robert Haining wrote in late 1938 that " unnecessary violence , vindictiveness ... , [ and ] killing in cold blood " had to be curbed . O 'Connor was likewise opposed to the measures in the north , and wrote " harshness and unnecessary violence on the part of our soldiers " had to be curbed . During the operation in Jerusalem , only four to nineteen guerrillas were killed . In early 1939 , the revolt finally came to an end . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 On 1 September 1939 , the Second World War began with the German Invasion of Poland , and two days later the United Kingdom declared war on Germany . On 31 August , the headquarters of the 7th Infantry Division gave up command of its troops . O 'Connor and the divisional staff then left Jerusalem bound for Cairo , Egypt . From Cairo , the men moved forward to Mersa Matruh arriving on 7 September . The headquarters was then assigned all troops based there , with the exception of the 7th Armoured Division . The British Official Historian , I. S. O. Playfair , comments that this decision was undertaken to relieve the burden on Lieutenant @-@ General Henry Maitland Wilson , GOC British Troops Egypt , of " direct control of operations which had been his in addition to the command of all troops in Egypt " . Due to the logistical problems in maintaining substantial forces across the Western Desert and on the Libya – Egypt border , Mersa Matruh was the forward British base of operations and supplied by rail . Positioned 200 miles ( 320 km ) west of Alexandria and 120 miles ( 190 km ) from the border , the location had been chosen to shield forward Royal Air Force ( RAF ) landing strips behind it and to defend the Nile Delta . Mersa Matruh also offered the British the strategy of drawing Italian or other forces forward to them , to allow a counter @-@ attack after they ran into supply difficulties . 
 On 3 November , the division was renamed the 6th Infantry Division . The division initially commanded rear area personnel and the 22nd Infantry Brigade . Over the coming months , the 14th and 16th Infantry Brigades were assigned to the division as they arrived in Egypt from Palestine . On 10 June 1940 , Italy declared war upon Britain and her allies . Seven days later , the 6th Infantry Division was dissolved and its headquarters transformed into the command staff of a corps known as the Western Desert Force ( WDF ) . In early September 1940 , Italian forces based in Libya invaded Egypt . Three months later , the WDF began a limited raid , Operation Compass . The raid succeeded and was expanded ; in two months the WDF advanced 500 miles ( 800 km ) , occupied the Italian province of Cyrenaica and destroyed the Italian 10th Army . The operation was halted in February 1941 to give priority to the Battle of Greece . 
 On 17 February 1941 , the 6th Infantry Division was reformed in Egypt . It was initially made up of the 16th and the 22nd Guards Brigade , who were based in Egypt , but lacked artillery or other supporting arms . The 22nd Guards Brigade was soon withdrawn , and the division was assigned the 14th and 23rd Infantry Brigade . Here , the division trained for amphibious operations in the Dodecanese . The deteriorating situation in North Africa , which saw General Erwin Rommel 's Afrika Korps retake the territory lost by the Italians during Operation Compass , resulted in the 6th Infantry Division being reassigned to defend Egypt . The division had been earmarked to deploy to Crete , where the 14th Brigade had been based since November , but instead took up defensive positions at Mersa Matruh . The 14th Brigade later defended the airfield at Heraklion during the Battle of Crete when 2 @,@ 000 German paratroopers landed in the area on 20 May . The Germans were able to penetrate into Heraklion , before Anglo @-@ Greek forces cleared the town following heavy fighting . Despite many losses , the paratroopers were able to dig @-@ in on ridges around the brigade 's positions . Due to the deteriorating situation on Crete , the 14th Brigade was evacuated by Royal Navy ships on 29 May . En route to Egypt , they were repeatedly bombed by the Luftwaffe , suffering 800 casualties . 
 By late April , British attention had shifted to the Middle East due to the Anglo @-@ Iraqi War , although the situation was resolved by the end of May . A greater concern was that German and Italian forces had intervened in Iraq , using bases in Vichy Syria . With Germans and Italians threatening to gain full control of the French territory , thus jeopardising the British position in the Middle East , the Allies invaded Syria ( Operation Exporter ) on 8 June . In the face of stiff resistance from the Vichy French , the British realised that reinforcements were needed . On 13 June , the 6th Infantry Division ( with two infantry brigades ) was ordered to reinforce the effort . The leading elements of the 16th Infantry Brigade arrived on 17 June and captured Kuneitra . The 23rd Infantry Brigade arrived on 28 June . The division then took part in the Battle of Damascus . The campaign ended on 14 July and the division remained in Syria . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Tobruk = = = 
 Operation Sonnenblume , the counter @-@ attack launched by Italian troops and the Afrika Korps across Cyrenaica , had forced the British and Commonwealth forces into retreat during March and April . Richard O 'Connor — now General Officer Commanding British Troops Egypt — had been captured . The Australian 9th Infantry Division fell back to the fortress port of Tobruk and the remaining British and Commonwealth forces withdrew a further 100 miles ( 160 km ) east to Sollum on the Libyan – Egyptian border . 
 These moves initiated the Siege of Tobruk . Although isolated by land , the garrison was supplied by the Royal Navy and the first Axis attacks failed to take the port . This failure was significant ; Erwin Rommel 's front line positions at Sollum were at the end of an extended supply chain that stretched back to Tripoli and was threatened by the Tobruk garrison . <unk> Tobruk also required a substantial commitment of troops and prevented Rommel from making further advances into Egypt . By maintaining possession of Tobruk , the Allies regained the initiative . 
 Australian policy for the use of the Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2AIF ) was to have all forces concentrated in an Australian Corps , under Australian command . By June , Australian troops were dispersed throughout the Middle East , Cyprus and North Africa . The subject had been of concern to the Australian Government since 18 April . The issue came to a head on 18 July , when Lieutenant @-@ General Thomas Blamey ( commander of the 2AIF , and deputy commander Middle East Command ) wrote a letter to General Claude Auchinleck , the new commander of all forces in North Africa and the Middle East , stating " the agreed policy for the employment of Australian troops between the British and Australian Governments is that the ... troops should operate as a single force . " Blamey also highlighted that the troops in Tobruk were showing a decline in health due to the siege and that the attrition rate they were suffering would result in " considerable " casualties , if they were not replaced by fresh troops . This caused a diplomatic row between Winston Churchill and the Australian Government that continued after the war , and turned what Graham Freudenberg called a " reasonable request in July " into " a risky one in October " . 
 The relief of the garrison and replacement with fresh troops were finally agreed . The first stage saw the 1st Polish Carpathian Brigade replace the 18th Australian Infantry Brigade . Next came the 6th Infantry Division 's 16th Infantry Brigade , during late September , with elements of the 32nd Army Tank Brigade , in lieu of the 24th Australian Infantry Brigade . On 10 October , for security reasons and in an attempt to confuse Axis intelligence as to when the division was fully redeployed , the 6th Infantry Division was renamed the 70th Infantry Division . Major @-@ General Ronald Scobie was given command . 
 The final stage of the relief effort took place between 12 and 25 October . The remaining elements of the 70th Division were transported into Tobruk and the remaining Australian garrison ( save the 2 / 13th Battalion and elements of the 2 / 15th Battalion ) were shipped out . In total , the relief effort evacuated 47 @,@ 280 men ( including prisoners ) and brought in 34 @,@ 113 men ; it also brought the garrison 's armour strength to 126 tanks . On 22 October , the 32nd Army Tank Brigade was attached to the 70th Division . With the relief effort over , command of the garrison was given to Scobie . Investing Tobruk were some German infantry and the Italian 27th Infantry Division Brescia , 25th Infantry Division Bologna , 17th Infantry Division Pavia , and 102nd Motorised Division Trento . 
 Prior to their withdrawal , the Australians briefed the incoming British troops . The men of the division then took over from the Australians and settled into their task of defending Tobruk , with what the Black Watch Regiment described as a sense that it was " the main post of honour open to the British fighting man . " The soldiers ' lives were uncomfortable : fresh water was scarce , washing was a luxury and done in sea @-@ water , razor blades were in short supply , meals were basic and sand storms were common . The troops were engaged in a dull routine : daily artillery bombardments by both sides , Axis air raids every night on Tobruk harbour , and for the infantry , nightly patrols . These patrols , described by the Black Watch as " pure 1914 – 18 warfare " , varied from reconnaissance missions — to identify what was located at a certain position — to capturing enemy soldiers and large scale trench raids on enemy positions . Auchinleck and Rommel had planned offensive operations simultaneously . The latter sought to capture Tobruk , aiming to launch an assault during the period of 20 November – 4 December , whereas Auchinleck planned to relieve Tobruk with a slightly earlier start date . 
 = = = Operation Crusader = = = 
 Auchinleck planned for XXX Corps ( under Lieutenant @-@ General Willoughby Norrie ) , containing the British armour , to advance around the undefended southern Axis flank , south of Sidi Omar , before moving towards Tobruk and engaging the German and Italian armoured units in battle . Once the Axis armour was defeated , the British force would attack towards Tobruk aiming to capture Sidi Rezegh , while the garrison broke out aiming to capture Ed Duda , cutting the enemy lines of communication . On 18 November , the Eighth Army began the offensive . Rommel , believing the attack was an attempt to hinder his own plans to assault Tobruk , did little to counter the British offensive . This led to the capture of Sidi Rezegh and the suggestion that the 70th Division should begin its attack on 21 November , before the Axis armour had been defeated . The plan to break out of Tobruk had been well rehearsed ; the 2nd Battalion , York and Lancaster Regiment , 2nd Black Watch , 2nd King 's Own Royal Regiment ( Lancaster ) and 2nd Queen 's Royal Regiment ( West Surrey ) would lead the attack with tanks of the 32nd Army Tank Brigade in close support . 
 Under cover of dark the men moved forward , creating gaps in the barbed wire and minefields in front of their positions and bridging Tobruk 's anti @-@ tank ditch . At 06 : 30 , on 21 November , the division began its attack on the positions of the Bologna Division and the German 90th Light Division ( although the latter had not been expected ) . The Axis positions were well dug @-@ in , behind mines and barbed wire , supported by machine guns and artillery . The first position , codenamed " Butch " , was captured by 09 : 00 , shortly followed by " Jill " , but two attempts to capture " Tugun " were repulsed by the Italian defenders . The mix of Italian and German troops holding " Tiger " offered up the most resistance of the day . The supporting Matilda tanks ran into undetected minefields and were engaged periodically by Axis anti @-@ tank guns . The Black Watch , under flanking fire from other Axis strong points and being fired upon directly by the defenders of " Tiger " , led a bayonet charge to the sound of bagpipes and captured the position , in conjunction with elements of the 1st Royal Tank Regiment ( 1 RTR ) and the 4th Royal Tank Regiment ( 4 RTR ) . The Black Watch suffered 75 per cent casualties , being reduced to 165 men . 
 Despite the losses , the Black Watch launched another attack to capture " Jack " . Major <unk> , the commanding officer of the German sector under attack , was positioned there and reported nine more British tanks lost to mines . Minutes after his report , at 10 : 30 , the Black Watch overran the strong point . 1 RTR proceeded to overwhelm " Wolf " , but were repulsed by anti @-@ tank fire when they attempted to attack " Freddie " . During the afternoon , a further attack was launched that captured half of " Tugun " , but further progress was impeded by Italian artillery fire . The planned final thrust , to seize Ed Duda , was called off , due to the changing situation to the south . By the end of the day , a salient 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) deep and wide had been created , 550 German and 527 Italian soldiers had been captured , and 59 tanks of the 32nd Army Tank Brigade had been lost , of which half were repaired . The war diary of the German 90th Light Division described the day 's actions as " very serious " concluding " that the next day ' would probably bring a crisis ' " . 
 The following day the division improved its position . Strong point " Lion " , to the south west of " Tiger " , was captured , but an attempt to capture the remaining sections of " Tugun " was repelled . As a result of the fighting , the division began to face a shortage of ammunition for its artillery . Due to the tank battle raging to the south , Scobie was ordered not to make a further advance . The author of the Official History of New Zealand in the Second World War 1939 – 45 , W. E. Murphy , highlights that the fighting by the British armour and 70th Division had created much " confusion in the enemy camp " and that , had the 32nd Army Tank Brigade attempted , it " could certainly have got to Ed Duda " and in doing so would have thwarted the German plans , greatly aiding the beleaguered 7th Armoured Division . 
 To the south , having temporarily defeated the British armour , Rommel launched the Afrika Korps and the Italian mobile divisions towards Egypt in the " Dash to the Wire " . He sought to relieve the besieged Italian garrisons along the border , cut the British supply lines and inflict an overwhelming defeat upon the Eighth Army . Despite causing panic amongst rear echelon troops , the attack was weak and ran into difficulties against prepared positions . The 2nd New Zealand Division had advanced around the Italian border defences and on 24 November began an advance towards Tobruk . By the next day , the division had reached Zaafran and retaken the much @-@ contested Sidi Rezegh airfield . 
 From these positions , the New Zealanders were ordered to capture Belhamed , Sidi Rezegh proper and Ed Duda . This was to precede a renewed break @-@ out offensive by the 70th Division . Scobie had informed Lieutenant @-@ General Alfred Godwin @-@ Austen , the XIII Corps commander , responsible for all operations near Tobruk , that the positions between him and Ed Duda were strongly defended . Godwin @-@ Austen assured Scobie that he was under no obligation to attack until the New Zealand Division had taken Ed Duda . Undertaking a night assault , the New Zealand infantry captured Belhamed despite strong resistance , but their attacks to take their other objectives were repulsed . 
 Aware that Ed Duda was still in Axis hands and that the New Zealand Division had bogged down attempting to advance upon the feature and was caught up in heavy fighting , Scobie ordered his men to capture Ed Duda . The 1st Essex Regiment , with machine gun support from the Royal Northumberland Fusiliers and the 32nd Army Tank Brigade , began their attack just after midday on 26 November . Axis artillery fire damaged two tanks before they crossed the start line but the remaining 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) was covered without incident . The 4 RTR were able to silence several Axis gun positions , and were joined by Z Company of the Royal Northumberland Fusiliers , who helped eliminate a further position . Following the fighting , the Essex were ordered to join the tanks . 
 The 1st Essex now advanced on Ed Duda , which was not a fortified position as previously faced by the division . An artillery bombardment and the approaching British troops persuaded the defending Italian platoon to surrender . By 15 : 00 , Ed Duda was in British hands and the Essex began digging in to consolidate their position . Following the capture of the position , several Axis counterattacks were launched . Three German tanks inflicted heavy casualties upon a British detachment in front of the main Essex position , before being driven off . Two infantry companies advanced towards the Essex and " were badly shot up in their lorries at a range of some 200 yards . " In following engagements , the Essex took upwards of 110 prisoners . By the end of the day , the position was secure for the loss of only 65 casualties . That evening , the New Zealanders renewed their attacks and succeeded in linking with the 70th Division and cutting the Axis lines of communication . 
 On 27 November , Rommel abandoned his attack and ordered the Afrika Korps and accompanying Italians to return to the Tobruk area . It was not until 29 November that the Axis armour launched its attack upon the 70th and New Zealand divisions . Around 50 tanks of the 15th Panzer Division advanced on the 1st Essex and were engaged by anti @-@ tank guns and a handful of British infantry tanks . Several British tanks were hit and the rest retired . The anti @-@ tank guns of the Essex were silenced , and 300 German soldiers from II Battalion , Infantry Regiment 115 advanced . Two companies of the Essex were overrun , with 150 men captured . As darkness fell , British and German tanks again clashed before the former withdrew . Under the cover of night , the Australian 2 / 13th Battalion was ordered to counter @-@ attack along with the remnants of 4 RTR ( eleven tanks in total ) . Elements of the Essex battalion spontaneously joined the assault , retaking the lost ground and capturing 167 prisoners for the loss of around 25 men . Less than 60 German troops were able to retreat to friendly units . 
 Axis attention now concentrated upon the New Zealand Division ; after the recent fighting , the division , less 4 @,@ 500 men who joined the 70th Division , withdrew towards the frontier in need of rest , refitting and re @-@ organization ; the 70th Division was again cut off . On 1 December , Godwin @-@ Austen was concerned about the exposed British position at Ed Duda , as were the staff of 70th Division , who believed the area had become untenable . Infantry had reinforced the captured ground , the 14th Infantry Brigade holding a line from Ed Duda to roughly 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) to the north @-@ east . The Essex were still dug in at Ed Duda , with the 19th New Zealand Battalion to their north @-@ east , then the 4th Border Regiment , the 18th New Zealand Battalion to their east and the 1st Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire Regiment to their north at Bir ( Magen ) Belhamed and the captured Axis strong point known as " Leopard " . The commanding officer of the 1st Essex reported that the position was well prepared and he was confident of repelling any assault . Scobie sent word stating " Well done , I admire your spirit " . 
 For several days , the 70th Division was bombarded , and on 1 December an uncoordinated attack by the German 90th Division was repulsed by the 18th New Zealand Battalion . The following day , a larger attack was launched upon the 1st Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire Regiment . This attack was also repulsed inflicting heavy losses on one of the German battalions . On 4 December , elements of the 21st Panzer Division , supported by an ad hoc formation of 500 German infantry and Italian engineers and artillery support from the 90th Light Division , launched an assault on Ed Duda . This attack was met by the Essex , 4th Borders , 18th New Zealanders and elements of the 32nd Army Tank Brigade . The German attack was defeated and the 4th Borders , supported by tanks , counter @-@ attacked taking 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) of ground , for the loss of fifteen tanks . 
 The 70th Division had been planning another attack to capture El Adem but the battle made these plans redundant . The inability of the Germans and Italians to defeat the 70th Division and push the unit back inside Tobruk had strategic consequences . Rommel had come to the conclusion that his troops could not maintain the siege due to being overstretched , and decided to withdraw all of the troops he could to the east of Tobruk . The 70th Division initially joined other Eighth Army formations in advancing west in pursuit , but by 12 December it had returned to Tobruk . Over the course of December , Operation Crusader continued and the Axis forces retreated to El Agheila before fighting ceased . The 70th Division was withdrawn to Egypt for rest and refitting . Due to a lack of transport , the move took until mid @-@ January . By the end of the month , the division had returned to Syria to camp near Damascus . 
 = = = India and disbandment = = = 
 During the night of 7 / 8 December 1941 , one hour prior to the Attack on Pearl Harbor , the Empire of Japan entered the war with the Japanese invasion of Malaya . Four hours following the strike on Pearl Harbor , the Battle of Hong Kong was launched ; the city surrendered on Christmas Day . On 15 January 1942 , the Japanese attack was expanded as their troops invaded Burma . Then , on 15 February , Singapore fell . During February , the 70th Division began moving back to Egypt . On 17 February the order was given for the division to be transferred to India . The next day , Major @-@ General George Symes was given command of the division . They boarded ships at Suez , and had completely departed Egypt by 28 February . The division , without the 16th Brigade , reached Bombay on 10 March . With a Japanese invasion of British Ceylon expected , the 16th Brigade was sent in as reinforcements , arriving on 15 March . It remained until 1943 , when it rejoined the division . In June 1942 , the 70th Division was located near Ranchi ; along with the 50th Indian Armoured Brigade , it formed part of the Eastern Army reserve . The division was seen as a well @-@ trained formation and along with the 23rd Indian Infantry Division formed a mobile reserve against a Japanese landing or advance through Arakan in Burma . At Ranchi , the division also engaged in jungle warfare training . 
 In August 1942 , Mahatma Gandhi 's Quit India Movement resulted in civil disobedience spreading across Bihar , Orissa and Bengal . The division was deployed throughout these areas , suppressing the disturbances and protecting the railways of Bihar . After civil power was restored in the affected areas , the 70th Division was concentrated again at Ranchi and resumed training as part of XV Indian Corps . The corps commander , Lieutenant @-@ General William Slim , wrote in his memoirs that the 70th Division " was one of the best British formations I have met , with a magnificent battle hardened spirit gained in the Middle East " . 
 A member of the division , writing in May 1943 , commented that it would not be 
 ... enough for us to rest on our Middle East laurels [ despite them being ] " well deserved " ... those days should only be regarded as a starting point in efficiency for only 100 % trained <unk> ... will defeat the Japanese in Arakan or in any other theatre of operations . 
 In April 1943 , Slim requested that the 70th Division be released from Eastern Army reserve to relieve other units on the Arakan front , but elements of the division were only slowly redeployed . The 23rd Infantry Brigade arrived in the Arakan area in May . As of June , the remainder of the division was still part of the army reserve . 
 On 14 February 1943 , Brigadier Orde Wingate launched Operation <unk> . This operation saw the 77th Indian Infantry Brigade operate behind the Japanese lines , supplied via air drops , ambushing Japanese troops and destroying rail lines . The force returned to Allied lines during April , having lost nearly a third of its troops ; most of the remainder , as described by historian Christopher Chant , were " crippled by exhaustion , malnutrition , dysentery , and malaria . " Despite this , the operation was deemed a success . In August 1943 , Wingate ( now a major @-@ general ) was sent to attend the Quebec Conference . Churchill and the Americans were so impressed by Wingate that Special Force , commonly known as the Chindits , were ordered to be expanded . Under this expansion , the 70th Division would be broken up and its units transferred to Special Force . 
 Auchinleck , now Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , India , strongly opposed such a move preferring to retain the division as an entity . Instead , he proposed that the newly arrived 81st ( West Africa ) Division could be used in its place . Despite his arguments and the end of the division 's availability for operations against the Japanese @-@ occupied Ramree Island , he was over @-@ ruled by Churchill 's backing of Wingate . On 6 September , the division began reorganising for long @-@ range penetration . It had been estimated that 10 percent of the men would be unsuitable but this had been based on an erroneous report given in London ( believed to be from Wingate ) that the division was not first class , even though the standard of its infantry was high . 
 On 25 October , the division was broken up and all troops were transferred to Special Force . Symes , despite his seniority , became Wingate 's second @-@ in @-@ command and tried to prevent the further break @-@ up of the divisional units to retain the traditions , histories and esprit de corps of the British Army 's regimental structure , which reconciled his men and helped to ensure a smooth transition to Special Force . Having ceased to exist , the 70th Division was officially disbanded on 24 November . 
 The British Official Historian , Stanley Kirby , wrote that the best @-@ trained and most @-@ experienced British division had been broken up to reinforce Special Force , which eventually absorbed one @-@ sixth of the infantry in South East Asia Command . He judged that had the division been retained , it could have reinforced the Fourteenth Army , making the defence of Imphal and Kohima in 1944 easier . Historian F. W. Perry wrote , " it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the results achieved by the force did not represent an adequate return for the resources invested " . He further argued that the force was too lightly armed to capture strongly held positions or to hold one if captured , and concluded that Special Force " inflicted more damage and disruption on the British Army than it ever did on the Japanese . " Similarly , Slim argued in his memoirs that it had been a mistake to break up the 70th Division as it was the only British division which had been trained in jungle warfare , and that it would have been twice as effective as an experienced conventional formation than it proved to be as part of Special Force . 
 = = General officer commanding = = 
 Commanders included : 
 = = Order of Battle = = 
 = Myst III : Exile = 
 Myst III : Exile is the third title in the Myst series of graphic adventure puzzle video games . While the preceding games in the series , Myst and Riven , were produced by Cyan Worlds and published by Brøderbund , Exile was developed by Presto Studios and published by Ubisoft . The game was released on four compact discs for both Mac OS and Microsoft Windows on May 8 , 2001 ; versions for the Xbox and PlayStation 2 were released in late 2002 . 
 As in previous games , the player assumes the role of the Stranger , a friend of Atrus . A member of the D 'ni race , Atrus can create links to other worlds called Ages by writing descriptive books . In Exile , Atrus has written an Age for the D 'ni to live on while rebuilding their civilization ; it is stolen , however , by a mysterious figure . The Stranger pursues the thief in an attempt to reclaim Atrus ' book . 
 The creators of the Myst franchise gave the task of creating the third Myst game to Presto Studios , known for its adventure game series The Journeyman Project . Presto sought to develop a diverse and logical approach to puzzles and Ages , and worked to make the villain sympathetically multifaceted . The developers hired Jack Wall to develop a musical style different from earlier composer Robyn Miller but still recognizable as a Myst game . The project required millions of U.S. dollars and more than two years to complete . 
 Exile was received well by critics ; The Daily Telegraph called it the best game in the Myst series . Conversely , long @-@ time critics of the series complained that Exile continued to prove that Myst 's slower gameplay did not belong in the fast @-@ paced modern game market ; GameSpot editor Greg Kasavin described the Myst series as having lost its relevance . Despite selling more than one million copies within the first year of release , Exile fared poorer commercially than Myst and Riven , which had sold more than 10 million copies combined . Myst IV : Revelation , the fourth game in the series , was developed and published solely by Ubisoft . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Gameplay in Myst III : Exile is similar to that of its predecessors . The player explores immersive , pre @-@ rendered environments known as Ages by using either mouse clicks or the space bar for movement from set nodes across each Age . Unlike previous games , which employed a series of still images , Exile uses a " free look " system which gives the player a 360 @-@ degree field of view . The game also has an optional Zip mode , like Myst and Riven , to cross explored terrain quickly by skipping several nodes . Clicking allows the player to manipulate objects and pick up items . The on @-@ screen cursor changes in context to show possible actions . 
 Each of the game 's Ages has a distinctive look and theme . Players begin their journey on the Age of J 'nanin , which acts as a hub linking to other Ages and as a " lesson Age " demonstrating important principles for later puzzles . Three of these Ages are <unk> , a mechanical Age in the middle of a vast sea ; <unk> , a world of preserved nature , with abundant plant and animal life ; and Voltaic , a dusty island riddled with canyons filled with man @-@ made constructions . 
 By gathering clues and manipulating the environment , the player solves thematically linked puzzles . For example , the book leading to Voltaic is accessed by aligning beams of light across a canyon ; the Age itself contains similar energy @-@ based puzzles . <unk> 's plant @-@ filled puzzles require manipulation of the Age 's ecosystem . Puzzles often involve observing interactions between elements of the environment , then adjusting the links between them . The player can also pick up and view journals or pages written by game characters which reveal back @-@ story and give hints to solving puzzles . <unk> Mode allows the player to select items from a personal inventory at the bottom of the screen . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Exile begins 10 years after the events of Riven , when the Stranger arrives at the home of Atrus and his wife Catherine . Atrus is a scientist and explorer who has mastered an ancient practice known as the Art : he can create links to different worlds , called Ages , by writing special books . This ability is by an ancient civilization known as the D 'ni , whose society crumbles after the D 'ni city is devastated by a plague . Atrus calls the Stranger to his home to display his newest Age , Releeshahn , which Atrus has designed as a new home for the D 'ni survivors . 
 As Atrus is preparing to leave for Releeshahn , a mysterious man appears in Atrus ' study , steals the Releeshahn book and leaves behind another . Following the thief , the Stranger arrives at J 'nanin , an Age that Atrus had written long before as a way to teach the Art to his sons . Because the thief has caused considerable damage to the J 'nanin book , Atrus cannot accompany the Stranger . 
 The mysterious man is named Saavedro . Twenty years earlier , Atrus ' wayward sons Sirrus and Achenar destroyed Saavedro 's home Age of Narayan and trapped him on J 'nanin . Saavedro believes his family is dead and swears vengeance on Atrus , unaware that Atrus has already imprisoned his sons for their crimes and that Saavedro 's family is still alive . The game can end several ways depending on the player 's actions . In the most ideal scenario , Saavedro returns to Narayan peacefully after giving back the book of Releeshahn . Other endings result in Saavedro destroying Releeshahn or killing the player ; another option allows the player to leave Saavedro trapped forever . 
 = = Development = = 
 Cyan Worlds and Mattel ( then the owner of the Myst and Riven franchise ) offered the task of developing the sequel to several development companies ; according to Game Developer , interested parties developed proposals including story concepts , analysis of the first two games , technology discussion , and technology demonstration . A core team from Presto Studios held discussions which analyzed Myst and Riven , then set out specific goals for the third game . According to Presto founder and producer Greg Uhler , these goals included visual variety in the Ages , a satisfying ending , and a way for players to gauge their progress during the game . The progress goal was very important for Uhler , who stated : " Players who had failed to complete Myst or Riven did so because they were unsure of how much remained of the game and what their goals were . " Initially , Presto prepared three possible storylines for the game to follow ; a meeting between Cyan , Presto , and Mattel yielded a completely different plot , which explored some of the loose ends hinted at in Myst . Presto spent millions of U.S. dollars developing the game , using the studio 's entire staff to complete the project . Development took two and a half years , of which nine months were spent on design and pre @-@ production . 
 Pre @-@ rendered environments , like those in the earlier Myst games , were used , providing what producer Dan Irish described as the " photorealistic ability to present the world in a convincing way . The 360 @-@ degree camera view also allows you to experience it in a way that makes it feel real . " Particular attention was devoted to strong visual styles and mechanics , which a critic described as " a collaboration of Jules Verne , Rube Goldberg and Claes Oldenburg " . 
 As in Myst and Riven , the developers used live @-@ action sequences instead of computer @-@ generated actors and props ; Irish stated that using computer graphics would have reminded players they were in a game , " which would wreck the immersion that is so critical to the Myst games " . Live actors were filmed on a blue screen and then placed in the digital environments using chroma key technology . Before any shooting could begin , all the sets were constructed and filled with props the actors could use , costumes for all the characters were fashioned , and each scene was plotted out by storyboard . Rand Miller returned to play Atrus , a role he had filled since the first Myst game . Brad Dourif , a professional actor best known for the Child 's Play films , agreed to play Saavedro because he was a huge Myst fan . Dourif noted that acting for a game was much more difficult than working on movie sets , as he could not see the player or interact with the game environment . Other actors included Maria Galante as Atrus ' wife Catherine , and Greg Uhler 's daughter Audrey in a cameo as Atrus ' daughter Yeesha . Preparation for the video shoots took four months ; filming the scenes took just seven days . Uhler noted that the video was one aspect of Myst that Presto " did wrong " ; because high @-@ definition video cameras were not used , the resulting video was not as crisp as developers had hoped . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The music for Myst and Riven was composed by Robyn Miller ; Jack Wall created the score for the third installment . Irish stated that developing the music was one of the hardest aspects of Exile : " We had to match or exceed the surrealistic style of music that Robyn [ Miller ] had pioneered . It had to be recognizable as Myst , but unique and distinctive . " Wall looked at the increasing complexity of games as an opportunity to give players a soundtrack with as much force as a movie score . Wall also echoed Irish 's opinion that he wanted to make a very different score from the " wonderful sonic pastiche " of Myst and Riven , yet still recognizable as a sequel to the earlier games ; Wall considered copying Miller 's style as the " safe " yet unappealing route that was expected of him . 
 In preparation for his composition , Wall studied Miller 's music , noting that he and Miller differed on their use of music theory . Miller , according to Wall , felt that " melody could easily get in the way of the experience of playing the game " , but Wall felt that some melody provided something thematic for the player to grasp . Wall wanted the music to have a sense of purpose while still preserving interactivity , so he composed " reward music " for completing puzzles and recorded the score with a real orchestra . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Exile was generally received positively upon release ; the PC version holds a 79 % favorable rating at GameRankings and an 83 % rating at Metacritic . The game was the best @-@ selling title in North America within a week of release , selling 75 @,@ 000 copies within two weeks . Exile sold one million units within twelve months . 
 Exile 's graphics and sound received nearly universal praise , and were credited with completing the game 's immersion . The puzzles were described as less difficult and more contained , meaning that players did not have to experiment with switches and then click several screens away to see the effect , as in Riven . Macworld 's Peter Cohen praised Presto for giving out bits of story throughout the game , rather than providing exposition only during opening and closing sequences . The pacing and rewards system was also appreciated by reviewers . IGN concluded their review of the game by stating that Presto had done " a pretty good job with a notable addition to the series " . The Daily Telegraph offered even stronger praise , saying that Presto had crafted the best Myst game in the series thus far , a sentiment that was echoed in other publications . 
 Criticism of the game included complaints about the four @-@ disc format of the game , which required players to swap out the installer disc with one of the other discs every time the player entered a new Age . Gamespot 's Scott Osborne noted that due to the frame @-@ by @-@ frame nature of gameplay , it was occasionally difficult to discern where players were allowed to venture and what areas were unreachable . The Los Angeles Times reported that bugs including a lack of sound , incompatibility with certain graphics cards and system crashes were present in as many as 10 percent of the first shipment of discs . Reviewers who had not enjoyed Myst or Riven stated that there was nothing new or substantially different in the game to warrant interest ; The New York Times observed , " Exile has everything you loved or hated about Myst and Riven . " 
 Despite strong sales , Exile was considered commercially disappointing compared to the phenomenal sales of the first two games , which had sold nearly 10 million units by the time of Exile 's release . GameSpot editor Greg Kasavin told Time magazine that " Myst is no longer as relevant to gamers as it used to be " and that " it represents an antiquated style of gaming " compared to the 3 @-@ D action games being released at the time . Soon after Exile 's release , Presto announced it was discontinuing software development ; the Xbox title <unk> ! was to be the last title produced by the company . Presto employee Michael Saladino pointed to the maverick style of the studio and its inability to develop more than one title at a time as reasons for its folding . The next game in the Myst series , entitled Revelation , would be produced and published by Ubisoft . 
 = Human Nature ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Human Nature " is a song recorded by American singer Madonna for her sixth studio album Bedtime Stories ( 1994 ) . It was written as an answer song to her critics , who had panned her provocative image of the previous two years and Madonna 's release of sexually explicit works . Written and produced by Madonna and Dave Hall , with additional writing from Shawn McKenzie , Kevin McKenzie and Milo Deering , " Human Nature " includes a looping sample from Main Source 's 1994 track " What You Need " . The track was released on June 6 , 1995 , by Maverick Records as the fourth and final single from Bedtime Stories . 
 Musically it is an R & B track where the sound of drums and the sample is heard looping throughout , with Madonna sarcastically asking rhetorical questions based on her real @-@ life actions over the last two years . The song received mostly positive reviews from music critics who have later noted its anthemic and empowering nature . " Human Nature " became a moderate hit in the United States , peaking at number 46 on the Billboard Hot 100 and at number two on the Hot Dance Club Play chart . In the United Kingdom , the single entered the chart and peaked at number eight and it also charted within the top ten in Italy . 
 The accompanying music video was directed by Jean @-@ Baptiste Mondino , and features Madonna and her dancers dressed in latex and leather , while executing highly choreographed dance routines . Inspired by S & M imagery , the video later influenced the work of singers Rihanna and Christina Aguilera . Madonna has performed " Human Nature " on three of her concert tours , most recently on her 2012 The MDNA Tour , where it was the subject of controversy when the singer exposed her nipples during a show in Istanbul . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 In 1992 , Madonna released the coffee table book Sex and her fifth studio album Erotica , both being of explicit sexual content . She also starred in the erotic thriller Body of Evidence the next year . Madonna promoted Erotica with The Girlie Show World Tour , which was met with protests and boycott threats due to its explicit content . In March 1994 , Madonna 's appearance on Late Show with David Letterman was highly criticized for her controversial behavior and usage of profanity . The release of her sexually explicit film , album and book , and the aggressive appearance on Letterman all made critics question Madonna as a sexual renegade . She faced strong negative publicity from critics and fans , who commented that " she had gone too far " and that her career was over . 
 Madonna wanted to tone down her explicit image . Her first attempt was to release the tender ballad " I 'll Remember " ( 1994 ) from the soundtrack of the film With Honors . Musically she wanted to move in a new musical direction and started exploring new @-@ jack R & B styles with a generally mainstream , radio @-@ friendly sound . She incorporated it in her sixth studio album , Bedtime Stories , released in October 1994 . Journalist Mary von Aue from Vice magazine noted that Madonna and her publicist Liz Rosenberg started promoting Bedtime Stories as an apology album with the promotional videos promising that there would be " no sexual references on the album " . 
 However , the singer was still seething about how the media had treated her unfairly over the last two years . When she started working with producer Dave Hall on the album , she wrote an answer song for the media . Titled " Human Nature " , it directly addressed the media and the press who had criticized her for dealing with taboo issues with her previous record and tried to punish her for that . " I 'm saying in the song that I 'm giving my back to them . I 'm not sorry " , Madonna explained . Described by Billboard as " Madonna taking on her critics more directly than ever with a logical , defiant attack on slut @-@ shaming " , the song was also about closing the book on the previous two years of her life . " Human Nature " eventually became the fourth and final single released from Bedtime Stories on June 6 , 1995 , by Maverick Records . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Human Nature " was written and produced by Madonna and Hall , with additional writing credits from Shawn McKenzie , Kevin McKenzie and Milo Deering . The song was recorded and mixed by Frederick Jorio and P. Dennis Mitchell with Robert Kiss working as an assistant engineer during the sessions and Joey Moskowitz doing the programming . Musically , " Human Nature " is a R & B song with a hip @-@ hop influenced beat . It also includes a looping sample from the song " What You Need " performed by hip @-@ hop group Main Source along with the sound of slamming doors . " Human Nature " begins in a trip hop style with the sound of bass and drums and Madonna whispering " express yourself , don 't repress yourself " . Throughout the song , the music continues looping around the same chord sequence and Madonna utters whispered phrases to counterpoint the actual lyrics . Her vocals utilized the 1990s soul style of music with a nasal , thin sound . The chorus ends with the line " I 'm not your bitch , Don 't hang your shit on me " which was often censored by the radio stations from airplay . Unlike the other tracks on the album , " Human Nature " does not employ the pentatonic melody and is devoid of the melancholy nature of Bedtime Stories , as observed by Jon Pareles of The New York Times . Composed in the time signature of common time , " Human Nature " has a key of C major while progressing in 88 beats per minute . Madonna 's " nasal " vocals range from F3 to E7 and the song follows a repetitive sequence of Fmaj7 – E7 – Am7 – Fmaj7 – E7 – Am7 as its chord progression . 
 Rikky Rooksby , author of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna felt that the lyrics , along with being an answer @-@ song , could also be interpreted as a rebellious one , where Madonna looks back on a relationship where she was not allowed to speak her mind . The song 's lyrics contain sarcastic backing vocals with Madonna asking rhetorical questions based on her real @-@ life actions , such as " Did I say something wrong ? Oops , I didn 't know I couldn 't talk about sex . I must have been crazy , " as well as the line " What was I thinking ? " Madonna explained that the lyrics were about " about basically saying don 't put me in a box , don 't pin me down , don 't tell me what I can and can 't say . It 's about breaking out of the restraints . " With the Los Angeles Times she further clarified that there was a defensiveness with the lyrics for " Human Nature " : 
 It 's my definitive statement in regards to the incredible pay @-@ back I 've received for having the nerve to talk about the things that I did in the past few years with my Sex book and my record . It 's getting it off my chest . It is defensive , absolutely . But it 's also sarcastic , tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek . And I 'm not sorry . I do not apologize for any of it . 
 " Human Nature " also received nine official remixes clocking a total of 53 minutes and 26 seconds . Most of the remixes turned the R & B sounding song into a house one . The radio edit omitted the line " " I 'm not your bitch / Don 't hang your shit on me " but AllMusic 's Jose F. Promis felt that the removal made the version repetitive and made it " lack the punchline " . The " Runway Club Mix " is stripped down while the " I 'm Not Your Bitch Mix " replaced the verse and the chorus with whispered comments like " I have no regrets " , " I 'm not your bitch " , " Deal with it " and " I 'm HIV negative " which are added over a much deeper house groove . The hip hop mixes include one clean and one adult rated version . According to Promis , the " Love is the Nature Mix " was the best remix created , describing it as containing " swirling instruments " , which converted the song into a dance track . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Human Nature " received mostly positive reviews from music critics . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine gave the song a positive review , stating that " for years , Madonna spoke in metaphors , fantasies and blatant shock tactics , but the performer indignantly struck back at her critics on ' Human Nature ' . She didn 't just hold up a mirror , she became the mirror " . Barbara O 'Dair from Rolling Stone also gave a positive review of the song , commenting that " Madonna does a drive @-@ by on her critics , complete with a keening synth line straight outta Dre " , adding that " Madonna 's message is still ' Express yourself , don 't repress yourself . ' This time , however , it comes not with a bang but a whisper " . Scott Kearnan of The Boston Globe included the track at number 11 on his list of " 30 Ultimate Madonna Singles " , stating that the line " Absolutely no regrets " was a " Madonna mantra if ever there was one " . 
 Larry Flick from Billboard was also positive , and expected " radio to hungrily come to the table and dine on this wickedly catchy jeep / pop jam in which La M unapologetically snaps at her more close @-@ minded critics " . He complimented her vocals which were " playfully snide and aggressive , holding strong against a forceful hip @-@ hop groove and a host of ear @-@ pleasing funk guitar links and synth hoops " . Author Chris Wade wrote in his book , The Music of Madonna , that " Human Nature " lifted the sadness emanated from the first few tracks from the album . " There 's a great beat to this , a brilliant vocal where Madonna answers herself with whispers and an unforgettable chorus , " Wade added . Matthew Rettenmund wrote in his Encyclopedia Madonnica that " <unk> of the chart performance " , the song has become a modern " self @-@ empowerment anthem " . 
 Charles Aaron from Spin described the song as " slinking through [ Hall 's ] low @-@ ridin ' , gum @-@ <unk> ' groove , Maddy 's hard @-@ bitten ingenue expresses no regrets , but this time you feel for her . " Aaron highlighted the lyrics " Would it sound better if I were a man ? " as subversive and coy . Author Lucy O 'Brien described in her book , Madonna : Like an Icon , that " Human Nature " was one of the " quirkiest " tracks on Bedtime Stories , " throbbing with with a tightly restrained but devastating anger " . For Barry Walters from Moscow @-@ Pullman Daily News , the song had the catchiest chorus among all the other tracks from the album . Jim Farber from Entertainment Weekly gave the song a negative review , noting that Madonna 's " on far surer ground thrashing through such neurotic ( if not uncommon ) views of relationships than she is trashing the media . In striking back at her critics , Madonna simply sounds self @-@ righteous and smug . ' I didn 't know I couldn 't talk about sex , ' she sneers in ' Human Nature ' . ' Did I say something true ? ' Yes . But <unk> your own horn about it just sounds petty " . Rooksby said that the repetition of the sample was " wearing " and it " did not suggest that the world of the singer was very appealing " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Human Nature " debuted at number 86 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , for the week ending June 24 , 1995 , with 7 @,@ 400 units sold . It reached its peak position three weeks later , at number 46 . " Human Nature " became Madonna 's second consecutive single not to enter the top 40 in the United States , following her previous single " Bedtime Story " , which had reached a peak of number 42 . Fred Bronson from Billboard reported that although the song had moved up the chart with a positive bullet point , the song being a risky choice for radio , it stalled progress and failed to become Madonna 's 33rd top 40 hit . " Human Nature " was a success on the dance chart , peaking at number two on Hot Dance Club Play . It also peaked at number 35 on Hot 100 Singles Sales , number 58 on Hot 100 Airplay , and number 57 on Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . In Canada , " Human Nature " debuted at number 90 on the RPM Singles Chart on July 10 , 1995 . It reached a peak of number 64 on the chart and was present for a total of seven weeks only . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Human Nature " entered the chart at its peak position of number eight , but rapidly descended down the charts , being present for a total of six weeks only . According to the Official Charts Company , it has sold a total of 80 @,@ 685 copies as of August 2008 . In Australia , the single peaked within the top 20 , at number 17 , on the ARIA Charts . On the Irish Singles Chart the song peaked just outside the top 20 , at number 21 . It was not as successful in New Zealand , peaking at number 37 , making it Madonna 's poorest performing single to stay on the chart for a sole week . The song reached the top 20 in Finland and Switzerland , peaking at number 11 and number 17 respectively , while in Germany it reached a peak of number 50 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Human Nature " was directed by Jean @-@ Baptiste Mondino , who had previously directed Madonna 's videos for " Open Your Heart " and " Justify My Love " . It was shot over two days , May 6 to 7 , 1995 at Raleigh Studios in Hollywood , California and was created under Palomar Productions ' Anita <unk> . The video was choreographed by Jamie King , who later directed Madonna 's concert tours . " She wanted me to dance in her ' Human Nature ' video . I didn 't want to do it , but she begged " , he stated . King was one of the dancers in the S & M attires hanging down from a swinging trapeze in the video . Her dancer Luca <unk> was the choreography assistant . Madonna 's main inspiration behind the video was the work of artist Eric Stanton who did S & M inspired drawings . The singer enlisted Mondino to direct the video and wanted to be about the fun aspects of Stanton 's work and more dance @-@ oriented than her previous videos from Bedtime Stories . For Mondino , the main problem was that he did not prefer too much dancing in the videos , because that resulted in extra editing . 
 I remember most of the video you had shot with the crane , some Steadicam , plus some panning . So you have about five different cameras shooting a performance , and after they edit like crazy . It gives you a lot of freedom , but I feel very frustrated because I like to see somebody dancing . I hate when there 's too much editing . I like the steadiness of the performance because then you can really enjoy the movement of the body . You see the skill . 
 So Mondino came up with the concept of boxes and had Madonna and the dancers perform choreography inside it . The director was satisfied since the small space of the boxes meant there was not much movement , and he could create the desired graphic S & M imagery and choreography . According to Dustin Robertson , editor of the video , Mondino and Madonna both had opposite work ethics . While Mondino was " cool and laid @-@ back " , Madonna was a " stickler for details " and the former had " a wonderful way of handling her , while she demanded a strong handler to pull out the best she 's got to give " . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 The music video premiered on May 19 , 1995 , through MTV . It features Madonna , her dancers , and her chihuahua Chiquita in black leather and latex outfits . The S & M inspired outfits were to symbolize the " breaking out of the restraints " as the lyrics described . Her hair , which appears brown in the video was actually blonde at the time . She had leather strips painstakingly braided into her hair to blend with her dark roots . The frizzy afro she sports halfway through the video was actually a hairpiece . During the middle of the video , Madonna and her dancers appear in a series of boxes , trying to break free . Another sequence shows the singer being thrown around within a series of ropes managed by her dancers . As the video concludes there is a shot of Madonna sitting in a chair , looking straight into the camera as she says the line " Absolutely no regrets ! " . Then there is a brief shot of her standing next to the chair as she boxes into the air . 
 Rettenmund complimented the video saying " God Bless [ Mondino ] ... One of Madonna 's worst performing singles was nonetheless given one of her best videos ... Simply staged , it is equal parts funny and sexy ... If its possible for one video to sum up Madonna 's Madonna @-@ ness , ' Human Nature ' is that video " . Louis Virtel from The Backlot ranked the video at number 22 on a list for " Madonna 's 55 Best Videos " , and called it " tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek , pleather @-@ heavy " . He went on to say that " It 's rare that Madonna gets a chance to be both harsh and hilarious in a music video " , and in this one , " Madonna basically does whatever the hell she wants . <unk> a chihuahua ? Mock and celebrate <unk> ? <unk> at the camera like a bored third @-@ grader ? She does it all , and even in black cornrows , she 's a vision of coolness and sexual superiority " . Carol Vernallis , writer of Experiencing Music Video : Aesthetics and Cultural Context noted that the concept of black outfit against a white background " works well , but the snare drum , which corresponds to nothing in the imagery , seems to float above the soundtrack " . 
 Roger Beebe , one of the authors of the book Medium Cool : Music Videos from <unk> to <unk> noted that the video was an example of the viewer 's impulse being intensified regarding " what will happen next ? " by placing its primary performers against a stark background . In 2011 , singer Rihanna 's music video for the song " S & M " was compared to " Human Nature " ' s music video with James Montgomery from MTV News saying that the video for " S & M " was not a new concept and was done in the video for " Human Nature " . Montgomery also noted that singer Christina Aguilera 's music video for 2010 single " Not Myself Tonight " was heavily inspired by that of " Human Nature " , including scenes portraying Aguilera in " leather get @-@ ups , her dominatrix attitude and the sultry chair @-@ related activities she engages in throughout " . The music video further inspired the dancing and the video of the song " <unk> Ishq " , from the 2001 Bollywood film , Pyaar Tune Kya Kiya . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Madonna has performed " Human Nature " three times on tour . During the 2001 Drowned World Tour , she performed the song while slow @-@ riding on a mechanical bull , which was considered by Rob Mancini from MTV News as " magical " . During the performance , the singer was dressed as a cowgirl . For John McAlley from Entertainment Weekly , Madonna " prompts the oddly natural sight of lap @-@ dancing a mechanical bull " . Similar review was shared by Alexis Petridis from The Guardian , who noted that the media had heavily reported on the tour making all the details available from much before the London show that he reviewed . Nevertheless , Madonna riding the bull and performing " Human Nature " was one of the " most startling moments " of the tour according to him . The performance of the song on August 26 , 2001 , at The Palace of Auburn Hills was recorded and released in the live video album , Drowned World Tour 2001 . 
 Madonna performed the song again on her 2008 – 09 Sticky & Sweet Tour , while playing an electric guitar and adding vocoder voice effects on the background harmonies . The singer was dressed in a black leotard and fishnet tights . She also wore a white hat and black leather boots . During the performance a video backdrop portrayed American singer Britney Spears trapped in an elevator and trying to get out , while kicking the walls . At the end of the performance , the doors opened to reveal Spears saying the phrase " It 's Britney , bitch " , from her song " Gimme More " ( 2007 ) . Madonna explained that she intended the video to stand as an analogy of Spears ' career , saying " Didn 't that explain what I thought ? ' I 'm not your bitch , don 't hang your shit on me " . On November 6 , 2008 in the Los Angeles show at Dodger Stadium , Spears joined Madonna onstage halfway through the performance . Aidin Vaziri from <unk> was positive in his review , saying that the best moment of the tour was when Madonna picked up her black Les Paul guitar and emulated musician Slash while performing the song . Paul Schrodt from Slant Magazine was negative in his review of the performance , saying that by the time the performance of " Human Nature " had started , " it 's the same as all her shows : A remixed mind @-@ fuck " . The performance was included on the Sticky & Sweet Tour live CD and DVD release , recorded during Madonna 's four shows in Buenos Aires , Argentina , in December 2008 . 
 In 2012 , Madonna performed the song on The MDNA Tour as part of the third segment of the show . She performed the song while her dancers moved mirrors around her , as she removed articles of clothing . At her concert in Istanbul on June 7 , 2012 , Madonna briefly exposed her right breast to the audience , before covering it up again . This prompted criticism about her age , with Sophie Wilkinson from Heat World asking , " at 54 , is she too old to be getting a boob out ? " The striptease towards the end of the song continued in other cities where the tour visited , and most of the times the singer had messages written across her back talking about social issues . Amy Odell from The Huffington Post said that criticizing the gesture based on her age sends " a very archaic message " , adding that " Women who are 53 still have breasts and ... sex drives ! " . The performance of the song at the November 19 – 20 , 2012 , shows in Miami , at the American Airlines Arena were recorded and released in Madonna 's fourth live album , MDNA World Tour . In April 2015 , Madonna performed " Human Nature " along with her 2005 song " Hung Up " as a medley at the Coachella Festival during Drake 's act , sporting thigh @-@ high boots and a tank top that read " Big as Madonna " . She then went on to kiss Drake ; the activity went viral on the Internet due to Drake 's reaction to the kiss . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Bedtime Stories album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Nikolai Podgorny = 
 Nikolai Viktorovich Podgorny ( Russian : Никола ́ й <unk> ́ <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> ; IPA : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] , Ukrainian : Микола <unk> <unk> ; 18 February [ O.S. 5 February ] 1903 – 11 January 1983 ) was a Soviet statesman during the Cold War . He served as First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Ukraine from 1957 to 1963 and as Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet from 1965 to 1977 . He was replaced as Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet in 1977 by General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev . That same year he lost his seat in the Political Bureau ( Politburo ) and was forced to resign from active politics . 
 Podgorny was born in the city of Karlovka in 1903 to a Ukrainian working @-@ class family . He graduated in from a local worker 's school in 1926 , and in 1931 from the Kiev Technological Institute of Food Industry . He became a member of the All @-@ Union Communist Party ( bolsheviks ) in 1930 . Like his friend and ally Andrei Kirilenko , Podgorny climbed up the Soviet hierarchy through the industrial ladder ( delivering the production goals set by the bureaucrats in charge of the centrally planned economy ) . By 1953 he had become Second Secretary of the Communist Party of Ukraine . After Anastas Mikoyan 's resignation , Podgorny was voted into office as Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet . After Premier Alexei Kosygin 's fall from favour Podgorny became the second most powerful figure in the Soviet Union until his removal as head of state in 1977 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Podgorny was born on 18 February [ O.S. 5 February ] 1903 in Karlovka , Russian Empire , to a Ukrainian working @-@ class family . Podgorny started work at the age of 17 as a student at the mechanical workshops in Karlovka . After the Russian Revolution Podgorny became one of the founders of the Karlovka Komsomol . He served as a Secretary of the Komsomol from 1921 to 1923 . In 1926 Podgorny graduated from a local workers ' school , and then from the Kiev Technological Institute of Food Industry in 1931 . In 1930 , Podgorny became a member of the All @-@ Union Communist Party ( bolsheviks ) . Following his graduation Podgorny started working in the sugar industry . He was promoted to deputy chief engineer of Vinnytsia in 1937 and was promoted in 1939 as the chief engineer of the Kamenetz @-@ <unk> Oblast sugar trusts . By the end of 1939 Podgorny had become Deputy People 's Commissar for Food Industry of the Ukrainian SSR . The next year Podgorny was appointed Deputy People 's Commissar for Food Industry of the Soviet Union . 
 = = Ukraine and national politics ( 1942 – 1963 ) = = 
 Podgorny became the Director of the Moscow Technological Institute of Food Industry in 1942 , during the Great Patriotic War ( World War II ) . After the liberation of Ukraine from the hands of Nazi Germany , Podgorny reestablished Soviet control over Ukraine on the orders of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic ( Ukrainian SSR ) and the Soviet Government . In the post @-@ war years Podgorny regained his old office of Deputy People 's Commissar for Food Industry of the Ukrainian SSR , but was later appointed in 1946 as a Permanent Representative to the Council of Ministers of the Ukrainian SSR . In April 1950 he was made First Secretary of the Kharkiv Regional Committee of the Communist Party of Ukraine ( CPU ) . In 1953 Podgorny was elevated to Second Secretary of the Central Committee ( CC ) of the CPU . From 1957 to 1963 he was First Secretary of the CC of the CPU . In this role , Podgorny worked on reorganising and modernising the Ukrainian economy , which had been destroyed during the war years . He worked to increase the rate of industrial and agricultural production and to improve people 's welfare . He paid particular attention to improving party organisation and educating new cadres . 
 In 1960 Podgorny became a member of the Politburo ( Political Bureau ) and by 1963 had risen to prominence within the Soviet hierarchy as a member of the Secretariat of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union ( CPSU ) . As a protégé and close companion of Nikita Khrushchev , he travelled with him to United Nations headquarters in 1960 . He acted as a Soviet emissary to Czechoslovakia , East Germany , Canada , and Yugoslavia . Podgorny 's beliefs were strongly influenced by Khrushchev , and under Leonid Brezhnev 's rule , Podgorny was one of the most liberal members within the Soviet leadership , even more liberal than Premier Alexei Kosygin . 
 Podgorny briefly fell out of Khruschev 's favor in 1961 when he blamed bad corn yields in the Ukrainian SSR on " bad weather " . Khrushchev claimed the crops had been " stolen " and " pilfered " . However , in 1962 , Podgorny reported to Khrushchev that agricultural output had again increased : Under Podgorny 's leadership , the Ukrainian SSR had doubled Ukraine 's supply of grain to the state from the previous year . Because of his handling of agriculture , First World commentators saw Podgorny as one of Khrushchev 's many potential heirs . According to historian Ilya Zemtsov , the author of Chernenko : The Last Bolshevik : The Soviet Union on the Eve of Perestroika , Brezhnev began starting a conspiracy against Khrushchev when he found out that he had chosen Podgorny , and not himself , as his potential successor . The coup evidently took Podgorny by surprise , seeing that he left Moscow on 10 October , two days before the coup was initiated . 
 = = Head of state ( 1965 – 1977 ) = = 
 = = = Appointment and the collective leadership = = = 
 During the 1964 ouster to remove Khrushchev as First Secretary and Premier , Podgorny and Brezhnev appealed to the Central Committee , blaming Khrushchev for economic failures and accusing him of voluntarism and immodest behavior . Influenced by Brezhnev and his allies , Politburo members voted to remove Khrushchev from office . In the aftermath of Khrushchev 's removal , a collective leadership was formed , headed by Brezhnev as First Secretary , Alexei Kosygin as head of government , and Anastas Mikoyan as head of state . Before becoming head of state , Podgorny served as the party 's Second Secretary , and was therefore in charge of the Party 's Organisational Division . In this capacity , Podgorny threatened Brezhnev 's position as First Secretary because the Organisational Division , if Podgorny chose so , could easily be turned into his own power base within the party . Brezhnev allied himself with Alexander Shelepin , the KGB chairman , to oppose both Podgorny and Kosygin . 
 Podgorny 's position was constantly threatened by Brezhnev and his allies . In an article in <unk> Gazeta from February 1965 , the newspaper criticised the Kharkiv Party organisation which Podgorny had previously headed , but also its management of the economy . By indirectly criticising Podgorny , the article raised doubts about his qualifications as a leading member of the Soviet leadership . Podgorny launched a counterattack in his 1965 speech in Baku , Azerbaijani Soviet Socialist Republic , where he criticised the Soviet leadership 's heavy industrial policy . This , as it turned out , would be a move he would regret for life . Instead of offending just Brezhnev and Shelepin , he offended the whole conservative wing of the leadership . To make matters even worse for Podgorny , Mikhail Suslov , who had kept outside of the conflict , sided with Brezhnev , and called his views " revisionist " . Later in 1965 , Podgorny lost his seat in the Secretariat , and on 9 December 1965 he replaced Mikoyan as Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet . His removal from the Secretariat also signalled the end of his wish to assume the First Secretaryship . 
 The majority of Politburo members under Brezhnev were conservative communists . Even so , Podgorny remained one of the most liberal @-@ minded members in the Era of Stagnation . Other liberal @-@ minded Politburo members included Kosygin and Andrei Kirilenko . Factionalism within the Soviet leadership in the 1960s led Podgorny to become more active ; he held several speeches in Moscow and went on numerous state visits at the expense of Brezhnev and Kosygin 's popularity . There was speculation in Soviet society that Podgorny was trying to replace Kosygin as Premier , or even Brezhnev as General Secretary , due to his increasing presence in the late 1960s . The 24th Party Congress , while reaffirming Brezhnev 's and Kosygin 's respective positions , made it clear that Podgorny had become a major player in Soviet politics . The collective leadership was eventually left powerless in the late 1970s when Brezhnev had close to full control over the Politburo . 
 = = = Diplomatic protocol = = = 
 In 1967 , just before the outbreak of the Six @-@ Day War , Podgorny delivered an intelligence report to Egyptian Vice President Anwar Sadat which claimed , falsely , that Israeli troops were massing along the Syrian border . That same year , he engaged in a dialogue with Pope Paul VI as part of the pontiff 's <unk> ; the result was greater openness for the Roman Catholic Church in Eastern Europe . In 1971 Podgorny went on two state visits , the first to the People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) and the second to North Vietnam ; Kosygin went on a visit to Canada while Brezhnev visited Yugoslavia . Podgorny frequently paid visits to North Vietnam during the Vietnam War to discuss Soviet @-@ Vietnamese foreign relations . In 1973 , Podgorny visited Finland and Mohammed Daoud Khan 's Afghanistan . 
 Brezhnev conspired to oust Podgorny as early as 1970 . The reason was simple : Brezhnev was third , while Podgorny was first in the ranking of Soviet diplomatic protocol . Since September 1970 Brezhnev tried to form an opposition in the Politburo to oust Podgorny . According to Time , " There was some speculation in Moscow " that if Brezhnev didn 't succeed in removing Podgorny he would establish a Council of State modelled after institutions found in , for example , East Germany ( Staatsrat ) , People 's Republic of Bulgaria and the Socialist Republic of Romania . The post of Chairman of the Council of State would give Brezhnev the top state and party job in the USSR . Brezhnev 's backers were unable , and didn 't even try , to remove Podgorny from the head of state post at the 1970 Central Committee plenum . Brezhnev could count on only five votes , while another seven Politburo members were opposed to granting Brezhnev more power ; removing Podgorny would in fact mean the end of the collective leadership . 
 While Brezhnev was plotting , Podgorny 's position within the Politburo grew stronger . Podgorny had been able to win support from the hardline communists due to Brezhnev 's liberal @-@ minded policy regarding Yugoslavia , military disarmament deals with the First World , and forcing East Germany into a concession with West Germany in the Berlin negotiations . 
 = = = Later tenure = = = 
 In the Politburo Podgorny could count on the support of Gennady Voronov and Petro <unk> . Podgorny was constantly in conflict with Kosygin over policy issues in the Politburo . When Podgorny and Kosygin actually agreed on something Brezhnev would find himself in the minority , and forced to follow their decisions . However , Podgorny was pleased about his position within the leadership , and even more pleased by the extension of powers given to the Supreme Soviet . As head of state , Podgorny saw little threat to his position , even if a Central Committee resolution from 1971 had called for the expansion of Party activities in the Soviets . 
 With Brezhnev 's position consolidated in the early 1970s , he used Podgorny to weaken Kosygin 's position as Chairman of the Council of Ministers by giving the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet some executive powers . With the help from Brezhnev Podgorny managed to make the Council of Ministers subordinate to the Presidium . However , these changes threatened Brezhnev , and Brezhnev would later order Konstantin Chernenko to take a look at the 1936 Soviet Constitution to find a way to weaken Podgorny 's position . As it turned out there were none , Podgorny 's position as head of state meant that he could in fact block any measures taken by Brezhnev to circumscribe his powers . Chernenko did come up with a solution , to make it law that the Party leader would also become the leader of the Government apparatus . The 1977 Soviet Constitution was drafted to weaken the position of Podgorny by making it law that the Party leader was in fact also leader of the Government . The draft which dealt with the leading role of the Party , and its clear supremacy , in Soviet society was approved by the Soviet leadership . The approval of the 1977 Soviet Constitution is considered Podgorny 's death knell . 
 = = = Removal = = = 
 Podgorny 's removal from office in 1977 has become the most notable example of power transfer in the late Brezhnev Era . According to Robert Vincent Daniels , Podgorny was before his removal the second most powerful man in the Soviet Union , behind Brezhnev but ahead of Premier Kosygin . The post of Chairman of the Presidium had acquired more powers during his tenure , and had changed from a largely honorary office to the second most important office in the USSR . Though there were some Sovietologists who foresaw Podgorny 's fall , the decision to remove Podgorny from the Politburo took the world by surprise . On 24 May 1977 , a unanimous vote was taken by the Central Committee after Grigory Romanov proposed removing Podgorny from the Politburo . The vote seemed to have taken Podgorny by surprise , and immediately after the vote , he got up from his politburo seat to instead sit with the ordinary members . The Central Committee had however only voted him off the Politburo , and Podgorny still retained the position of Chairman of the Presidium . After his removal from the Politburo Podgorny 's name disappeared from Soviet media . The Soviet media told the Soviet people that he had retired due to his stance against détente and producing more consumer goods . Podgorny finally lost his Chairmanship of the Presidium on 16 June 1977 . 
 Due to his advanced age , Brezhnev was regarded as too old to carry out some of the functions of head of state . The Supreme Soviet , on Brezhnev 's orders , established the new post of First Deputy Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet , an office equivalent to the post of Vice President . Vasili Kuznetsov , at the age of 76 , was unanimously approved by the Supreme Soviet as First Deputy Chairman of the Presidium . 
 = = Retirement , death and recognition = = 
 Podgorny 's life after his resignation is not well documented . The last mention of him in any major Soviet media was his meeting with Urho Kekkonen , the President of Finland . There was never any explanation given , nor a denunciation of him , by the Soviet authorities . Podgorny retained his seat in the Supreme Soviet after his downfall . He was seen at the 61st anniversary reception of the October Revolution at the Grand Palace of the Kremlin in November 1978 by <unk> Uomoto , the Japanese Ambassador to the Soviet Union . Podgorny spoke to Brezhnev , Kosygin , and then to Andrei Gromyko , all of whom looked embarrassed by the presence of Podgorny , according to Uomoto . Soon after this incident , Podgorny lost his seat in the Supreme Soviet . In Tretyakov Gallery , Podgorny was removed from the 1977 painting of the Soviet leaders at the Red Square by Dmitriy <unk> in which Podgorny stood between Brezhnev and Kosygin . Podgorny died of cancer on 12 January 1983 , and was buried in Moscow at the Novodevichy cemetery . 
 As with many other high @-@ standing Soviet officials , Podgorny was honoured with several awards . He was awarded five Orders of Lenin , one Order of the Red Banner and several medals , as well as being awarded several foreign state prizes by the People 's Republic of Bulgaria , the Mongolian People 's Republic , the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic , and Finland . 
 = Steven Moffat = 
 Steven William Moffat , OBE ( / <unk> <unk> / , born 18 November 1961 ) is a Scottish television writer and producer , known for his work as showrunner , writer and producer of the British television series Doctor Who and Sherlock . 
 Moffat 's first television work was the teen drama series Press Gang . His first sitcom , Joking Apart , was inspired by the breakdown of his first marriage ; conversely , his later sitcom Coupling was based upon the development of his relationship with television producer Sue Vertue . In between the two relationship @-@ centred shows , he wrote Chalk , a sitcom set in a comprehensive school inspired by his own experience as an English teacher . 
 A lifelong fan of Doctor Who , Moffat 's first work on the series was the script of the parody episode The Curse of Fatal Death in 1999 . He then wrote six episodes of the revived series which began in 2005 ( " The Empty Child " , " The Doctor Dances " , " The Girl in the Fireplace " , " Blink " , " Silence in the Library " , and " Forest of the Dead " ) . In 2010 he replaced Russell T Davies as showrunner , lead writer and executive producer . The same year , he created Sherlock along with Mark Gatiss . In January 2016 , it was announced that Moffat would step down from being showrunner of Doctor Who after the spring 2017 season finale , and that <unk> creator Chris Chibnall would take over . He also co @-@ wrote Steven Spielberg 's The Adventures of Tintin : The Secret of the Unicorn in 2011 . 
 Moffat has won several awards , mainly for Doctor Who and Sherlock , including an Emmy Award , five BAFTA Awards and four Hugo Awards . 
 = = Early life and Press Gang = = 
 Moffat was born in Paisley , Scotland , where he attended <unk> High School . He studied at the University of Glasgow , where he was involved with the student television station , <unk> ( Glasgow University Student Television ) . After gaining an MA degree in English from Glasgow , he worked as a teacher for three and a half years at <unk> High School , Greenock . In the 1980s he wrote a play entitled War Zones ( performed at the 1985 Glasgow Mayfest and the Edinburgh Festival Fringe ) and a musical called <unk> . His father , Bill Moffat , was a head teacher at Thorn Primary School in Johnstone , Renfrewshire ; when the school was used for Harry Secombe 's Highway in the late 1980s , he mentioned to the producers that he had an idea for a television series about a school newspaper . The producers asked for a sample script , to which Bill Moffat agreed on condition his son write it . Producer Sandra Hastie said that it was " the best ever first script " that she had read . 
 The resulting series was titled Press Gang , starring Julia Sawalha and Dexter Fletcher , and ran for five series on ITV between 1989 and 1993 , with Moffat writing all forty @-@ three episodes . The programme won a BAFTA award in its second series . 
 During production of the second series of Press Gang , Moffat was experiencing an unhappy personal life as a result of the break @-@ up of his first marriage . The producer was secretly phoning his friends at home to check on his state . His wife 's new lover was represented in the episode " The Big Finish ? " by the character Brian Magboy ( Simon Schatzberger ) , a name inspired by Brian : Maggie 's boy . Moffat brought in the character so that all sorts of unfortunate things would happen to him , such as having a typewriter dropped on his foot . 
 = = Joking Apart = = 
 By 1990 , Moffat had written two series of Press Gang , but the programme 's high cost along with organisational changes at backers Central Independent Television cast its future in doubt . As Moffat wondered what to do next and worried about his future employment , Bob Spiers , Press Gang 's primary director , suggested that he meet with producer Andre Ptaszynski to discuss writing a sitcom . Inspired by his experience working in education , Moffat 's initial proposal was a programme similar to what would become Chalk , a sitcom set in a school that eventually aired in 1997 . During the pitch meeting at the Groucho Club , Ptaszynski realised that Moffat was talking passionately about his impending divorce and suggested that he write about that instead of a school sitcom . Taking Ptaszynski 's advice , Moffat 's new idea was about " a sitcom writer whose wife leaves him " . Moffat wrote two series of Joking Apart , which was directed by Bob Spiers , and starred Robert Bathurst and Fiona Gillies . The show won the Bronze Rose of Montreux and was entered for the Emmys . In an interview with Richard Herring , Moffat says that " The sit @-@ com actually lasted slightly longer than my marriage . " Fiona Gillies , who played the adulteress Becky , says that she was aware that some of her dialogue was based on what had been said to Moffat during his own separation . Moffat recycled his own dialogue : when he had learned that his wife 's lover was a fan of Press Gang , he replied , " Well , did he have to fuck my wife ? Most people just write in ! " . The line , with the expletive replaced by " shagged " , was used in the first episode of Joking Apart . 
 Speaking about the autobiographical elements of the show , the writer jokes that he has to remember that his wife didn 't leave him for an estate agent ; his wife was an estate agent . Conversely , his later sitcom Coupling was based on his relationship with his second wife , TV producer Sue Vertue . Moffat reused the surname " Taylor " , which is Mark 's surname in Joking Apart , for Jack Davenport 's character Steve in Coupling . 
 He wrote three episodes of Murder Most Horrid , an anthology series of comedic tales starring Dawn French . The first ( " Overkill " , directed by Bob Spiers ) was identified by the BBC as a " highlight " of the series . His other two episodes were " Dying Live " ( dir . Dewi Humphreys ) and " Elvis , Jesus and Zack " ( dir . Tony Dow ) . 
 = = Chalk and Coupling = = 
 Between marriages , Moffat claims that he " shagged [ his ] way round television studios like a mechanical digger . " According to an interview with The New York Times , Moffat met television producer Sue Vertue at the Edinburgh Television Festival in 1996 . Vertue had been working for Tiger Aspect , a production company run by Peter Bennett @-@ Jones . Bennett @-@ Jones and his friend and former colleague Andre Ptaszynski , who had worked with Moffat on Joking Apart , told Moffat and Vertue that each fancied the other . A relationship blossomed and they left their respective production companies to join Hartswood Films , run by Beryl Vertue , Sue 's mother . The couple have two children together : Joshua and Louis . 
 Before Moffat left Pola Jones for Hartswood , Ptaszynski produced Chalk , the series that the writer had pitched to him at the beginning of the decade . Set in a comprehensive school and starring David Bamber as manic deputy head Eric Slatt and Nicola Walker as Suzy Travis , the show was based on Moffat 's three years as an English teacher . The studio audience responded so positively to the first series when it was taped that the BBC commissioned a second series before the first had aired . However , it was met less enthusiastically by critics upon transmission in February 1997 , who had taken exception to the BBC 's publicity department comparing the show to the highly respected Fawlty Towers . In an interview in the early 2000s , Moffat refuses to even name the series , joking that he might get attacked in the street . 
 After production wrapped on Chalk in 1997 , Moffat announced to the cast that he was marrying Vertue . When she eventually asked him for a sitcom , he decided to base it around the evolution of their own relationship . Coupling was first broadcast on BBC2 in 2000 , with his wife producing for Hartswood Films . The series proved to be highly successful , running until 2004 and producing four series and twenty @-@ eight episodes , all written by Moffat . He also wrote the original , unbroadcast pilot episode for the U.S. version , also titled Coupling , although this was less successful and was cancelled after four episodes on the NBC network . Moffat has blamed its failure on an unprecedented level of network interference . 
 = = Jekyll , Tintin , and Sherlock = = 
 He wrote the Hartswood Films drama series Jekyll , a modern version of The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde , which aired on BBC One in June and July 2007 . In an interview with The Age , James Nesbitt , who played the eponymous character , called Moffat " an eccentric , shy fellow " , while commending his writing as " inventive and dark and funny " . 
 In June 2007 Moffat told The Stage that he was working on a new sitcom . Provisionally titled Adam and Eve , it concerned a boss and his personal assistant , who are long @-@ term friends but never get together . In October 2007 it was reported that Moffat would be scripting a trilogy of The Adventures of Tintin : The Secret of the Unicorn films for directors Steven Spielberg and Peter Jackson . According to The Times newspaper , Moffat had to be " love bombed " by Spielberg into accepting the offer to write the films , with the director promising to shield him from studio interference with his writing . He had intended to complete work on the whole trilogy before resuming work on Doctor Who , but the intervening WGA strike meant he could submit a finished script for the first film only . In July 2008 , Moffat was quoted by the Daily Mail as saying : " I could not work on the second Tintin film and work on Doctor Who . So I chose Doctor Who . " Moffat says that Spielberg was " lovely " about his decision . The script was completed by Edgar Wright and Joe Cornish , with a part of Moffat 's script used in the film . 
 Moffat remains a writer for Hartswood Films even after his appointment as show @-@ runner for Doctor Who . During their journeys from London to Cardiff for Doctor Who , Moffat and Mark Gatiss conceived a contemporary update of Sherlock Holmes , called Sherlock . Benedict Cumberbatch was cast as Holmes , with Martin Freeman as Dr Watson . A 60 @-@ minute pilot , written by Moffat , was filmed in January 2009 . The pilot was not broadcast , but three 90 @-@ minute episodes were commissioned . Moffat wrote the first of these , " A Study in Pink " , which was broadcast on 25 July 2010 on BBC One and BBC HD . A second series was broadcast in January 2012 , for which Moffat wrote the episode " A Scandal in Belgravia " , with a third following in January 2014 . 
 = = Doctor Who = = 
 Moffat has been a fan of Doctor Who since childhood . In 1995 , he contributed a segment to Paul Cornell 's Virgin New Adventures novel Human Nature . His first solo Doctor Who work was a short story , " Continuity Errors " , published in the 1996 Virgin Books anthology <unk> 3 : Consequences . In 1999 he scripted the parody Doctor Who and the Curse of Fatal Death , which aired as part of Comic Relief 's Red Nose Day charity telethon . The co @-@ producer for that year 's Comic Relief telethon was Moffat 's then @-@ new wife , Sue Vertue . 
 In 2004 , Moffat was signed to write for the revival of Doctor Who . He became known , according to The Guardian , for writing " the clever , darker episodes " of the first four series of the show . His contribution for the 2005 series was the two @-@ part story " The Empty Child " / " The Doctor Dances " . In the DVD audio commentary he says that he waited forty years to see his name appear on top of that theme music . He wrote an episode for each of the two following series : " The Girl in the Fireplace " in the 2006 series and " Blink " in the 2007 series . Moffat won the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , Short Form three years in a row for his contributions . " The Girl in the Fireplace " and " Blink " were both nominated for Nebula Awards . " Blink " also gained him the BAFTA Craft Award for Best Writer , and a BAFTA Cymru Award for Best Screenwriter . In the Doctor Who Magazine reader poll for the 2007 series , Moffat was voted as best writer and " Blink " as the best story . He also wrote the 2007 Children in Need " special scene " " Time Crash " . 
 He wrote a two @-@ part story for series four in 2008 , titled " Silence in the Library " / " Forest of the Dead " , making Moffat and series executive producer Russell T Davies the only writers to have contributed scripts to the first four series of the revived show . In March 2008 , Davies said that he often rewrote scripts from other writers , but didn 't " touch a word " of Moffat 's episodes . Moffat 's script for series four secured him his fourth consecutive Hugo Awards nomination , though it did not win . 
 The BBC announced in May 2008 that Moffat would be taking over from Russell T Davies as head writer and executive producer for the revived show 's fifth series , to be broadcast in 2010 , although Davies had initiated discussions with Moffat regarding this as far back as July 2007 . Commenting on his appointment , Moffat said it was " the proper duty of every British subject to come to the aid of the TARDIS " . Production on Moffat 's time in charge of the programme began in July 2009 . As executive producer and head writer , he was significantly involved in casting Matt Smith as the Eleventh Doctor . Smith first appeared as the Doctor at the end of Davies and David Tennant 's final episode , the second part of The End of Time , in a short post @-@ regeneration scene that Davies left for Moffat to write himself . Moffat wrote the scene in " about ten minutes " as " a bit of fun banter " for the new Doctor . 
 In addition to his television episodes , Moffat has also contributed stories to Panini Publishing 's Doctor Who Storybook series , penning the short stories " What I Did on My Christmas Holidays By Sally Sparrow " for the 2006 book ( which later formed the basis of his TV episode " Blink " ) , " Corner of the Eye " for the 2007 volume and " A Letter From the Doctor " which opens the 2009 Storybook . 
 In June 2015 , Moffat was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire for his services to drama . 
 = = Writing credits = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Bodyguard of Lies = 
 Bodyguard of Lies is a 1975 non @-@ fiction book written by Anthony Cave Brown , his first major historical work . Named for a wartime quote of Winston Churchill , it is a narrative account of Allied military deception operations during the Second World War . The British and American governments resisted Brown 's attempts to research the book . Many of the topics were still classified and he was denied access to British war records . The material in the book is predominantly based on oral testimony as well as some American records , declassified toward the end of Brown 's research . 
 Critical reception has been mixed , but generally negative . Contemporary historians , such as Charles B. MacDonald , praised the work – although some did comment on its length . Modern reviewers have identified inconsistencies or errors in the material , based on later declassified records . Also , some of Brown 's personal conclusions have been questioned . 
 = = Background = = 
 Bodyguard of Lies was Brown 's first published book , following his career as a journalist in the United Kingdom and Australia . The work narrates Allied deception strategy on the Western Front for the years of 1943 and 1944 . It particularly focuses on Operation Bodyguard , both the operation and the book 's title were inspired by one of Winston Churchill 's war @-@ time epigrams ; " In war @-@ time , truth is so precious that she should always be attended by a bodyguard of lies . " 
 Brown began researching and writing Bodyguard of Lies in 1961 . Most of the material is based on oral testimony from Second World War intelligence personnel , as well as records from the National Archives and declassified American records ( although Brown says that most of the book was written before he was able to access the latter , in 1974 ) . Brown wrote Bodyguard of Lies at a time when details of both cryptography and deception during the war were still classified . His attempts at research was resisted by the British and American governments ; he was denied access to British war records and had to undertake considerable work to obtain US records via Freedom of Information requests . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Bodyguard of Lies opens with an introduction to Ultra , the codename for decrypted signals intelligence . It goes on to document the origins of the London Controlling Section ( LCS ) and the work of Dudley Clarke in the Middle East . In late 1942 , Allied high command in London became aware of Clarke 's successes during the North African Campaign . Based on his theories of deception , the LCS was created under Colonel John Bevan and granted broad powers to plan deception strategy . The introduction finishes with a discussion of how the Allies evolved deception strategy prior to 1943 , including the Double @-@ Cross System ( the Allied system of double agents ) . The second section of the book introduces the German intelligence forces , in particular Admiral Canaris and his Abwehr intelligence agency . Brown discusses early deceptions , such as those surrounding Operation Torch , conducted against the Germans , and how the Abwehr struggled to decipher the information it was being fed . 
 The third section of the book covers Allied deceptions during 1943 , in particular Operation Mincemeat . Brown introduces Plan <unk> , the early revision of Operation Bodyguard , and follows Bevan 's work in creating the deception plan . The fourth section covers the events of early 1944 , leading up to the Normandy landings on 6 June . In particular , Brown discusses Operation Fortitude and the fictional First US Army Group , a key part of Bodyguard , calling it " the greatest charade in history " . The final section of the book covers events on and after D @-@ Day , including physical deceptions carried out on the night of the invasion , and the continued impact of Bodyguard in the months after the landings . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The book received mixed reviews ; particularly with regards to Brown 's focus on minutiae , which received both positive and negative comment . Later reviewers also criticised the factual basis of the work – describing it as containing " a multitude of errors of detail " – with some reviewers rejecting Brown 's analysis . One such error that Brown relates was a then @-@ widely held theory that Churchill had known of German intentions to bomb Coventry in November 1940 , but that the British leader had hidden the information to avoid giving up the secrets of Ultra ( intercepted German communications ) . By 1976 , declassified records showed that the intelligence was in fact more vague than popular myth had suggested . Writing in 1996 , reviewer Russell J. Bowen ascribes this to Brown 's reliance on secondary sourcing and oral interviews ( describing the book as an " outstanding example of scholarly investigative journalism applied to the field of oral military history " ) . 
 Hugh Trevor @-@ Roper , writing for The New York Review of Books , was highly critical of the " encyclopedic " detail in Brown 's writing : " He piles on the illustrative ( or irrelevant ) detail . He cannot leave anything out . Every person mentioned must have a potted biography . Every place must be equipped with atmosphere , furniture , associations . " Roper also criticised the material , writing that Brown had inserted " a novel thesis " , that Allied deception during the war was controlled by MI6 , " which , in my opinion , is quite wrong . " 
 Some critiques of the book have been positive . A 1976 New Scientist review praised the level of detail , saying that it " would ensure a large sale " . In a letter to the editor in reply , Deputy Chief Historian for the United States Army , Charles B. MacDonald , referred to the book as " the most important work on World War II in a quarter of a century . " Writing in Military Review , Alexander Cochran noted that the book was one of the first non @-@ memoir accounts of intelligence operations during the war and was unusual ( for its genre ) in documenting sources . However , he went on to call the book " suggestive more than definitive " . 
 Russell J. Bowen concludes that although the writing and coverage were better than similar books then available , " Cave Brown 's work fails to escape the common stigma of intelligence narratives : considerable inaccuracy as to detail and occasional lack of validity of interpretation . " 
 = Phallus ravenelii = 
 Phallus ravenelii , commonly known as Ravenel 's stinkhorn , is a fungus found in eastern North America . Its mushrooms commonly grow in large clusters and are noted for their foul odor and phallic shape when mature . It is saprobic , and as such it is encountered in a wide variety of habitats rich in wood debris , from forests to mulched gardens or sawdust piles in urban areas . It appears from August to October . The fruit body emerges from a pink or lavender @-@ colored egg to form a tall , cylindrical , hollow and spongy white stalk with a bell @-@ shaped cap . The remains of the egg persist as a white to pink or lilac volva at the base of the stalk . The cap is covered in a foul @-@ smelling olive @-@ green spore slime , which attracts insects that help to spread the spores . Sometimes , the cap has a " veil " attached — a thin membrane that hangs underneath . The lack of a roughly ridged and pitted cap differentiates it from the closely related Phallus impudicus . The fungus is named after Henry William Ravenel , a botanist who first discovered it in 1846 , though it remained undescribed until 1873 . It is considered to be an edible mushroom while in its egg form . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
