 The species was first described officially in the scientific literature by English mycologist Miles Berkeley in an 1873 publication . Berkeley obtained the specimens from Moses Ashley Curtis , which had in turn been sent to him by Ravenel from collections he made at the Santee River in South Carolina in 1846 . Although the specimen had been sent with Ravenel 's extensive collection notes , Berkeley 's description was brief , and he neglected to mention the veil . American Curtis Gates Lloyd later disparaged the quality of Berkeley 's description , and noted " he was so busy that he could not take the time to consider the details , and his " description " tells nothing of the leading characters of the species . " Charles Horton Peck , upon encountering the fungus in North America , could not identify it using Berkeley 's description , and instead had to contact Ravenel to obtain his original collection notes before he could confirm its identity . Peck later wrote a full description of the species . In 1898 , Edward Angus Burt placed the taxon in the genus Dictyophora , based on the presence of the veil . Otto Kuntze transferred the taxon to the genus <unk> ( now equivalent with Mutinus ) , resulting in the synonym <unk> ravenelii . The mushroom is commonly known as the eastern stinkhorn or Ravenel 's stinkhorn . 
 = = Description = = 
 The mushroom begins its development in the form of <unk> , <unk> , or purple @-@ tinged " eggs " that resemble a puffball . The egg expands rapidly to form a phallus @-@ shaped structure with a yellowish @-@ white stalk and thimble @-@ like cap . The cap ranges from 1 @.@ 5 to 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 6 in ) in width and 3 to 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 8 in ) in height ; the entire fruit body can reach heights of 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) . The cap texture is finely granular and it is attached to a white open circlet at the top where it meets the stalk . In some specimens , this opening is relatively large with a broad margin , and gives the mushroom a truncated appearance . Microscopically , the cap surfaces comprises minute cells and cavities , with a spongy structure similar to that of the stem , but with smaller perforations than the stem . The lower margin of the cap is free from attachment to the stalk , and there is sometimes a membranous veil suspended like a collar around the stem under the cap ; the veil can be of varying lengths . This veil can be seen in dissected eggs where it is present as a distinct , thin membranous tissue between the stalk and the cap before expansion . In this form , the veil is continuous from its attachment with the " primordial tissue " at the base of the stalk and volva below to the tip of the stem at the point where it joins the cap . The veil produced in P. ravenelli is distinct from the flaring , net @-@ like indusium produced by Phallus species like P. indusiatus . <unk> covers the head and is olive @-@ green to dark brown in color , slimy in texture , and foul smelling . The spores measure 3 to 4 @.@ 5 µm by 1 to 2 µm , are colorless , elliptical in shape , and smooth in texture . They are thin @-@ walled and covered with a thin , hyaline ( transparent ) , sticky coating . 
 The stalk is hollow and measures 10 to 15 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 to 5 @.@ 9 in ) tall and 1 @.@ 5 to 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick . It can range in color from slightly yellowish to white . At the stalk 's base there is usually a white to pink volva ( a sac @-@ like cup ) . When immature , the fruit body is encapsulated within the volva present as a peridium ( skin @-@ like tissue layer ) , which ruptures as the mushroom emerges . The volva attaches to the substrate with whitish or pinkish rhizomorphs ( thick , cord @-@ like strands of mycelia ) . <unk> and mycelia that are exposed to air eventually turn whitish in color ; those freshly exposed from their substrate usually quickly turn bluish @-@ purple . The fungus produces watery and fleshy sclerotia that range in thickness from 1 to 10 mm with a length of up to 30 mm . The sclerotia are irregularly convoluted and lobed , and become hard and horny upon drying . Sclerotia have a color reaction similar to that noted for rhizomorphs , and , after long exposure to air , will gradually turn a uniform dark reddish @-@ brown . Phallus ravenelli is considered edible if in the egg form , and has a " mild " taste . The foul odor of mature mushrooms would dissuade most from collecting for the table . 
 = = Similar species = = 
 Phallus ravenelli is often confused with P. impudicus and P. hadriani . P. impudicus has a highly reticulate ( a net @-@ like pattern of grooves and ridges ) cap under the gleba . P. hadriani also has a pitted cap , and occurs less frequently than P. ravenelii . The widespread species <unk> galericulata has a roughly spherical cap of several overlapping spongy tissue layers with gleba sandwiched in @-@ between . Phallus <unk> is tall , thin , pale orange , and tapers towards the smooth cap . The cap is blackish @-@ olive in color , while the volva is oval and white . It is found in the eastern and southern United States and China . P. <unk> is a rare Brazilian species with a superficial resemblance to P. ravenelii . Apart from its distribution , it is distinguished from P. ravenelii by its smaller fruit bodies up to 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) tall , a cogged cap margin , and somewhat larger spores that measure 3 @.@ 8 – 5 by 2 – 3 µm . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Ravenel 's stinkhorn is widespread in eastern North America , from Quebec in the north , south to Florida and west to Iowa and Ohio . West of the Mississippi , the common stinkhorn ( Phallus impudicus ) becomes more dominant . In the early 1900s , Lloyd called it the most common <unk> in the United States . The fungus is also found in Costa Rica . 
 As a saprobic mushroom , or decomposer of organic material , Ravenel 's stinkhorn can be found in almost any habitat that includes decaying wood . They are most often found growing in groups , though occasionally singly , on wood chips , rotten tree stumps or sawdust . They are common in urban flowerbeds , parks and lawns , as well as in meadows , cultivated areas and woods . The foul odor of the gleba attracts insects that walk and feed on the spore @-@ bearing surface , and later disseminate the sticky spores to other locales . 
 = Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride = 
 " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " is the fourth episode in the first season of the American animated television series South Park . It originally aired on September 3 , 1997 on Comedy Central in the United States . The episode was written by series co @-@ founders Trey Parker and Matt Stone , and directed by Parker . In this episode , Stan 's dog , Sparky , is revealed to be gay after humping a rival male dog . Under peer pressure , Stan tries to make him more masculine , and as a result , Sparky runs away and ends up at Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Animal Sanctuary . Stan comes to understand homosexuality and tries to make everyone in South Park accept it . 
 " Big Gay Al 's Gay Boat Ride " addressed open homosexuality in a way that was uncommon for television at the time , which created some anxiety among Comedy Central executives . The network initially objected to offensive remarks made by sports commentators in the episode , but the comments were kept in at the insistence of Parker and Stone . George Clooney made a guest appearance as Sparky , a small role with no dialog except for dog barks . The episode marked the first appearance of Big Gay Al . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews for its portrayal of homosexuality . Creators Stone and Parker considered it their favorite episode of the first season , noting that it helped elevate the credibility and relevance of South Park during its early days . It was nominated for both an Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program and a GLAAD Award , and was the episode submitted when South Park won a CableACE Award for Outstanding Animated Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Stan 's new dog Sparky follows the boys to the bus stop one morning . Stan believes Sparky to be the toughest dog in South Park ; but , when Sparky suddenly jumps on top of another male dog and begins humping him energetically , Cartman declares that Sparky is homosexual . At football practice for the school 's team , the South Park Cows , Stan 's Uncle Jimbo and his friend Ned show up and ask Coach Chef whether the boys can beat the betting spread of 70 points for the Cows ' game against the Middle Park Cowboys . Impressed by a play from Stan , who is the quarterback and star of the team , Jimbo and Ned go to the bookmaker , where Jimbo bets $ 500 on the Cows . As a result , everyone else bets all their money on the team , and they threaten Jimbo if the Cows lose . Intimidated , Jimbo and Ned seek a back @-@ up plan and learn that John Stamos ' brother Richard will be singing " Lovin ' You " at half @-@ time . Consequently , they plan to detonate the mascot for Middle Park , by placing a bomb to explode when Richard Stamos sings the high F note in the song . 
 After practice , Sparky appears and mounts another male dog . The next day , after class , Stan asks his teacher Mr. Garrison what a homosexual is , prompting Mr. Garrison to claim that " gay people are evil " . As a result , Stan attempts to make his dog heterosexual . Later , Sparky overhears a frustrated Stan ranting about how he wants a butch dog instead of a gay dog . This prompts Sparky to run away to the mountains , ending up at Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Animal Sanctuary . 
 Concerned about his dog , Stan goes to look for him , missing the start of the football game . When Stan finds Sparky at the Big Gay Animal Sanctuary , Big Gay Al takes Stan on a boat ride through his sanctuary and gives a speech about how homosexuality has been around for a long time , which eventually makes Stan accept his dog 's homosexuality . Meanwhile , Richard Stamos fails to hit the high note of the song at half time . Returning to the final moments of the game , Stan steps in as the quarterback , passing the ball to Kyle for a touchdown that beats the betting spread as time runs out . In his speech after the game , Stan tells the people of South Park about the Big Gay Animal Sanctuary and that " it 's okay to be gay " . He leads the people to the site of the Sanctuary , but it has mysteriously disappeared ; people 's runaway gay pets , however , return . Before leaving , Big Gay Al thanks Stan for making everyone understand homosexuality . Although the Cows beat the spread , Richard Stamos appears to prove he can hit the high note that he missed earlier , triggering the bomb and killing the Middle Park team 's mascot . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and objections raised before airing = = = 
 The plot for " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " originated from an idea by series co @-@ founders Trey Parker and Matt Stone to have a boy try to convince his gay dog not to be homosexual . Michael Smith , a childhood friend of Parker and a basis for the Ned <unk> character , claimed that Big Gay Al was based in part on a real @-@ life resident of Fairplay , Colorado . Smith , a minister at a Fairplay church , said of the resident , " We just call him Big Al , but he cross @-@ dresses every year for Fairplay Day . He lives out of town , which is why Big Gay Al 's cartoon pet sanctuary is set out in the hills " . However , Stone said the name " Big Gay Al " and the idea of his " gay animal sanctuary " came from Pam Brady , a producer and writer with the show . 
 When the episode was under production in 1997 , it was relatively uncommon for a television series to openly address homosexuality in such overt terms , especially in a cartoon . As a result , Parker and Stone said Comedy Central executives expressed more concern about " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " than any other previous South Park episode . Parker said of the network , " I don 't think they ever really discouraged it , but they were definitely freaked out " . The network , however , did object to scenes in which one of the football sports commentators made offensive jokes and was silenced by the other commentator . The network particularly objected to a joke in which , after watching Kyle run , the commentator said , " I haven 't seen a Jew run like that since Poland 1938 " , a reference to the country 's invasion by Nazi Germany ( which actually took place in 1939 ) . The jokes were based on a number of real @-@ life offensive remarks sports commentators made and gotten in trouble for . Stone said the scenes were meant to parody the commentators , not the subjects of the jokes . However , they were only allowed to stay in after what Stone called " a big fight " with Comedy Central . After the episode was scheduled to air , TV Guide refused to advertise it under its true title for fear of offending readers , and instead called the episode " Big Al 's Boat Ride " . 
 The episode was written by Trey Parker and Matt Stone , and was directed by Parker . Parker and Stone considered " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " their favorite episode of the first season , and they credit it with helping elevate the credibility and relevance of South Park during the early days of the series . Although the first season of South Park received a lot of criticism from commentators who felt the show was disgusting and offensive , Parker specifically defended the episodes " Mr. Hankey , the Christmas Poo " and " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " , which he felt included moral values and a " sweet side to it " among the sophomoric humor . Stone also said those two episodes became the specific shows people would most talk about when they discussed South Park . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 Actor George Clooney provided the small role of the voice of Sparky , which is limited entirely to dog barks . Clooney was a vocal South Park fan and was largely responsible for generating news about " The Spirit of Christmas " , a 1995 animated short film by Parker and Stone that served as a precursor to South Park . Parker said they decided to cast a famous actor in the small role of Sparky because " we thought it was funny " , and because they wanted to do something different from the animated series The Simpsons , which is known for having prominent guest appearances on a regular basis . Parker added , " Since South Park is sort of a show that rips on celebrity , we wanted to degrade them in other ways too . And we thought let 's have celebrities on , but have them do really minor , unimportant things " . Comedy Central executives were excited at the prospect of having Clooney appear on the show , but Parker said they were disappointed to learn his role was so small . 
 South Park animators created the episode using PowerAnimator , the Alias Systems Corporation animation program most commonly known as " Alias " . It was particularly challenging for animators to design the complex scheme of lights during the episode 's disco club scene . Eric Stough , director of animation for the series , said it took one of the technical directors " about half a day " to set up the brief scene . Parker said he was particularly happy with the animation in " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " , and said he believed the series was starting to settle into the defined look it has retained throughout the years . Parker said , " I think that this was where we finally felt like we got it right , we got the look of it right " . However , the animation includes some perspective errors , particularly during the football scenes , where Chef stands about as wide as a 10 @-@ yard marking on the field . Parker said the animators worked for a long time on the snow in the outdoor scenes , but ultimately decided they did not like how it came out . 
 The speech Big Gay Al gave while taking Stan on a boat ride through his animal sanctuary were based on actual speeches animation director Eric Stough made while working as a " jungle cruise director " at the Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando , Florida . The dirt smudges on the football player 's helmets and uniforms were intentionally designed to look like smudges on construction paper . This was done to maintain the show 's deliberately crude visual style they first created with construction paper in " The Spirit of Christmas " and the pilot episode , " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " . The characters Butters Stotch and Clyde Donovan are featured during the football game , although neither had been identified by name yet in the series . During a football crowd scene , a white character can be seen that looks identical to Token Black , an African @-@ American character introduced later in the series . The background character is wearing the same shirt Token wears , which Parker explained was the result of an animator placing a different head on the body in order to create a filler character for the crowd . The moment when Big Gay Al says , " My work here is done " and disappears into a suitcase is Stone 's favorite part of the episode , even though he admitted , " It makes no sense " . Parker said that the moment was written that way simply because the duo could not decide how to " get rid of " the character . Parker said , " We didn 't want him around all the time , ( so we asked ) how do we not make him a character each week " . 
 = = Theme = = 
 " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " explores the central theme of homosexuality , particularly through the gay characters Sparky and Big Gay Al , who would go on to play a more prominent role in the fifth season episode , " Cripple Fight " . The episode encourages tolerance of homosexuality , with protagonist Stan initially displaying anger and dismay upon learning that his dog is gay , but eventually learning to accept homosexuality and concluding that we should accept others for who they are . Big Gay Al displays several exaggerated gay stereotypes , including his lisping voice and flamboyant wardrobe , which includes an <unk> tie . Although some have described the depiction as inflammatory , other commentators have said the stereotypes are used as functions of satire . Nick Marx and Matt Sienkiewicz , PhD students in media and cultural studies at the University of Wisconsin – Madison , said in a 2009 journal article , " These episodes function not as part of a larger discursive web , but as media texts encoded in a manner similar to that of The Simpsons " . 
 " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " also explores and satirizes people 's reactions to homosexuality through Stan and other characters who react to Sparky 's behavior . For example , Stan admits he does not even know what being gay includes , except simply that it " is bad " . Also , when Cartman suggests to Stan that Sparky might be at the mall buying leather pants , it satirizes the stereotype that all gay men are engaged in the leather subculture . The episode also mocks what many LGBT activists perceive as hatred and misunderstandings about homosexuality often expressed by anti @-@ LGBT and right @-@ wing activists , including Christian ministers Jerry Falwell and Fred Phelps . This is partially illustrated in this episode by Mr. Garrison 's condemnation of homosexuals , rooted in deep @-@ seated fear of his own sexuality . Basing his comment off this episode , Gardiner commented that South Park had a " Queer Lite " attitude towards homosexuality , stating " they are <unk> tolerant , <unk> perverse , ambiguously gay affirmative " . 
 = = Cultural references and impact = = 
 The South Park football team plays a rival team from Middle Park , Colorado . Like South Park itself , Middle Park is an actual basin in the Rocky Mountains of north @-@ central Colorado . Matt Stone said the Middle Park kids were made to seem richer and cooler than the South Park students because that was the perception real South Park residents have of the actual Middle Park . Richard Stamos , who sings during halftime in the episode 's football game , is the fictional brother of John Stamos , a real @-@ life actor best known for his roles on Full House and ER . Trey Parker and Matt Stone did not know Stamos when they wrote " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " , but Parker said they assumed he was " a big douche " because of his role on Full House , which Parker called " just the most horrible thing ever put on television " . Since the episode aired , however , Parker and Stone have become acquainted with Stamos and found him to be " a really , really cool guy " . John Stamos told them he loved the inclusion of the Richard Stamos character in " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " . Richard Stamos sings " Lovin ' You " , a 1975 hit single by singer @-@ songwriter Minnie Riperton . Parker chose it because he felt it was a popular song in the gay community , and also because , " I 've just always hated that song . I hate any song from that era , really . It 's just a horrible time for music . " 
 During the beginning of Mr. Garrison 's class , Cartman writes an essay on the TV series Simon & Simon instead of Asian culture . Also , Bill suggested that Stan take Sparky to a Barbra Streisand concert . The disappearance of Big Gay Al at the end of the episode is a spoof of Dr. Lao 's disappearance at the end of the movie The 7 Faces of Dr. Lao . Big Gay Al 's ride also features a number of miniature characters , among them Olympic figure skater Brian Boitano , singing a song called " We Are Gay " , which is a parody of the ride " It 's a Small World " , an attraction at the Disneyland theme park . Boitano was featured in " The Spirit of Christmas " , and would later be the basis for the original song " What Would Brian Boitano Do ? " from South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut . The song played during the closing credits of " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " is " Now You 're a Man " by <unk> , a punk rock band that Parker and Stone founded . This song was also featured in their film Orgazmo . 
 In this episode , the sports announcer states he had not seen a " beating like that since Rodney King " , referencing to an incident in 1991 where King was beaten by six LAPD police officers . The incident sparked tensions in LA that eventually led to the 1992 LA Riots . When Pip is tackled later , the commentator states that he has not seen an Englishman take a blow like that since Hugh Grant . This references Grant 's arrest in June 1995 , when he was caught performing a lewd act in public with a Hollywood prostitute . Grant was fined $ 1 @,@ 180 , placed on probation for two years , and was ordered to complete an AIDS education program . The announcer makes an incomplete remark about a tackle , " I haven 't seen so many children molested since ... " . This was rumored to have been followed by a line , " since Michael Jackson came to town " , which was supposedly censored after the broadcast premiere , but there is no evidence of this . 
 Big Gay Al became one of the most popular and easily recognizable of the non @-@ regular South Park characters , and was featured in the 1999 film , South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut as the MC of a United Service Organizations show . Although not a major role , Big Gay Al performs a large musical number called " I 'm Super ( Thanks for Asking ) " , which was featured in the motion picture soundtrack . The episode also included the first appearance of Jesus and Pals , the Public @-@ access television talk show hosted by Jesus Christ . The show was mentioned in the episode " Weight Gain 4000 " , but actual footage from the show was not featured . Parker and Stone specifically sought to introduce Jesus and Pals , and the idea of Jesus as a South Park resident , as a reference to their original " The Spirit of Christmas " cartoon . Comedy Central censors were concerned about this portrayal of Jesus in South Park , but did not prevent Parker and Stone from following through with it . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " first aired on Comedy Central in the United States on September 3 , 1997 . Comedy Central representatives told media outlets that the episode received overwhelmingly positive responses from viewers who identified themselves as gay . In 1998 , Jonathan Van Meter of The New York Times Magazine called the episode " one of their best shows " , and praised the episode for mixing a moral message with the jokes , as well as a sentimental relationship between Stan and Sparky . Van Meter wrote , " What often keeps the show from being offensive is this kind of sweetness – and that it 's funny " . The same year , The Advertiser , a North Yorkshire @-@ based publication , called the episode " one of the all @-@ time best " . Also in the same year , Rick Marin of Newsweek described the episode as " gleefully offensive and profoundly silly " , but praised it as " juxtaposing cute and crude , jaded and juvenile " . 
 In 2003 , Chicago Tribune writer Allan Johnson praised the tolerance toward homosexuality displayed in the episode , which he rated the tenth greatest episode in the series ' history . The same year , Chicago @-@ based RedEye ranked it the fifth greatest South Park episode . In 2007 , Lorne Chan of the San Antonio Express @-@ News declared it the second best sport @-@ themed South Park , behind " Up the Down Steroid " , praising its satire of gambling on elementary schools and sports events . Also in 2007 , Travis Fickett of IGN gave the episode an 8 @.@ 4 out of 10 rating and identified several " great moments " . In particular , he praised closeted @-@ homosexual Mr. Garrison 's claim that gay people are evil and have a " black <unk> fluid " running through their veins , and the moment when Jesus was about to explain his feelings regarding homosexuality only to be cut off by " Marty 's Movie Reviews " . 
 Colorado for Family Values , a Christian advocacy group with a history of lobbying against homosexuality , used " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " in its materials when trying to mobilize Colorado to censor South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut in 1999 . The group circulated a " South Park Action Kit " , which included analyses of the South Park episode content , sample transcripts , reviews and tips on how to keep the movie from playing in local theaters . The kit also included a " Homosexual Issue Analysis " , which focused on " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " and warned the episode taught children " tolerance and acceptance of homosexuality through the perverse idea that Stan 's dog , Sparky , is a homosexual dog " . According to Westword , a Denver @-@ based alternative weekly newspaper , this anti @-@ South Park effort by Colorado for Family Values was <unk> ignored and decried by most Coloradans . 
 " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " was the first episode of the series to be nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program . It was also nominated for the 1998 GLAAD Award for Outstanding TV – Individual Episode . Matt Stone and Trey Parker chose " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " to represent South Park in their submission to the CableACE Awards in 1997 . The series won the CableACE Award for Animated Programming Special or Series as a result . It was the last year the CableACE Awards were given out before they were discontinued . Out magazine , one of the most widely circulated gay and lesbian publication in the United States , listed Big Gay Al among the most influential individuals in the gay and lesbian community in 1998 . Big Gay Al was the only fictional character listed in the " Entertainment " section of the magazine 's " Out 100 " list . 
 " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " was released , alongside five other episodes , in a three @-@ VHS set on May 5 , 1998 , marking the first time South Park was made available on video . The episode was released on the " Volume II " video , along with " Weight Gain 4000 " ; other featured episodes included " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " , " Volcano " , " An Elephant Makes Love to a Pig " and " Death " . The episode , along with the other twelve from the first season , was also included in the DVD release " South Park : The Complete First Season " , which was released on November 12 , 2002 . Parker and Stone recorded commentary tracks for each episode , but they were not included with the <unk> due to " standards " issues with some of the statements ; Parker and Stone refused to allow the tracks to be edited and censored , so they were released in a CD completely separately from the DVDs . 
 = Pong Tiku = 
 Pong Tiku ( also spelled <unk> and <unk> ; 1846 – 10 July 1907 ) , known among his Buginese allies as Ne ' <unk> , was a Torajan leader and guerrilla fighter who operated in southern Sulawesi , part of modern @-@ day Indonesia . 
 The son of the lord of Pangala ' , after Tiku captured the neighbouring kingdom Baruppu ' he became its leader , later ruling Pangala ' after his father 's death . By exploiting the coffee trade and allying with the lowlands Buginese , Tiku was able to obtain large amounts of wealth , land , and power . During the Coffee War ( 1889 – 1890 ) , his capital at Tondon was razed by another lord , but retaken the same day . When the Dutch colonials , based in Java , invaded Sulawesi in the early 1900s , Tiku and his soldiers utilised fortresses to withstand and launch attacks . Captured in October 1906 , in January 1907 he escaped and remained at large until June . He was executed several days later . 
 Tiku was the longest lasting resistance leader in Sulawesi , such that Governor @-@ General J. B. van Heutsz considered him damaging the stability of Dutch control over the region and dispatched the Governor of Sulawesi to oversee his capture . Since his death , Tiku has been used as a symbol of Torajan resistance . Long commemorated in Sulawesi , he was officially declared a National Hero of Indonesia in 2002 . 
 = = Early life and rise to power = = 
 Tiku was born near Rantepao in the highlands of Sulawesi ( now part of North Toraja Regency , South Sulawesi ) in 1846 . At the time , southern Sulawesi was home to a booming coffee trade and controlled by numerous warlords . Tiku was the last of six children born one of these warlords ; he was born to <unk> ' <unk> , lord of Pangala ' , and his wife <unk> 'ok . An athletic youth , Tiku was friendly with coffee traders who visited his village . 
 In 1880 , a war broke out between Pangala ' and Baruppu ' , a neighbouring state led by <unk> . Tiku took an active role in a successful campaign against the neighbouring state , and when <unk> was defeated Tiku took his place as ruler of Baruppu ' . The newly annexed kingdom was rich in rice fields and easily defensible , giving Tiku great power . Although the Torajans traditionally valued manpower and did not kill more people than necessary , Baruppu ' oral history describes Tiku as killing men , women , and children with abandon . 
 When , not long afterwards , Tiku 's father died , Tiku became leader of Pangala ' . As a leader , Tiku worked to strengthen the economy with an increase in the coffee trade and strategic alliances with predominantly Buginese lowlands groups . The economic success this brought led nearby rulers to respect and envy Tiku . 
 = = Coffee and civil wars = = 
 Fearing competition from the kingdoms of Luwu and Bone to the north and <unk> and <unk> to the south , Tiku worked on reinforcing his country 's defences . The kingdoms eventually reached several trade agreements . However , Buginese encroaches led to renewed tensions between the states , climaxing in the Coffee War ( Perang <unk> ) in 1889 . Tiku sided with the Buginese @-@ influenced southern kingdoms . 
 The Bone military leader <unk> <unk> and his <unk> ' <unk> soldiers invaded Pangala ' and sided with Pong <unk> ' , a minor lord . <unk> overtook Tiku 's capital at Tondon and razed the city , leading Tiku and the civilian population to abandon the area . Tiku , having sided with the <unk> leader Andi Guru , was able to retake the remains of the capital that night . The war ended in 1890 , after Dutch scouts – representing the colonial government on Java – reached Bone . However , the remaining states soon began another series of struggles over the arms and slave trade , where states would exchange weapons for slaves ; Tiku also participated in the trade . 
 Tiku eventually formed an alliance with nearby Buginese leaders , which reduced tensions and improved trade ; he also learned the group 's writing system and language , allowing him to easily correspond with Buginese leaders . By this time Tiku had captured numerous lands . To avoid a repetition of the raze of Tondon , Tiku began construction of seven fortresses in his lands , as well as several surveillance outposts and <unk> . The Torajan fortresses were designed to prevent entry to the valleys leading to population centres , and Tiku 's were divided between the eastern and western parts of his land . He instituted a tax system to fund these defensive measures : owners of rice fields were obligated to tax two thirds of their produce , while other farmers were taxed ten per cent . 
 = = Dutch advances = = 
 By 1905 the previously fragmented Buginese and Torajan lands had united into four major areas , one of which was under Tiku . In July of that year the king of <unk> , a nearby state , began collecting soldiers to fight off the invaders and prevent the remainder of the Torajan lands from conquest . Ma <unk> Bombing , a leader from a southern state , approached Tiku for his assistance . A month after the messengers had dispersed , the leaders gathered at <unk> to make a plan of action . The result was that the local lords were to stop warring amongst themselves and focus on the Dutch , who had superior strength ; these internal conflicts , however , did not completely abate . By the time the meeting adjourned , the Dutch had already begun making advances on Luwu . Tiku , tasked with diverting the Dutch from the indefensible town of <unk> , began to build his army and work on his defences . 
 In January 1906 Tiku sent scouts to <unk> and <unk> , which the Dutch were invading , to observe their way of battle . When the scouts reported of the Dutch forces ' overwhelming strength and seemingly magical powers used against the Bugis soldiers , he ordered his fortresses to increase readiness and begin stocking up on rice ; that month , Luwu fell to Dutch forces , who then moved further inland . In February Tiku 's men , sent to reinforce the southern kingdoms , reported that there was no longer coherent leadership and that both kingdoms were losing against the Europeans . This convinced Tiku to train more troops and form a nine @-@ member military council , with himself as its leader . 
 By March 1906 the other kingdoms had all fallen , leaving Tiku as the last Torajan lord . The Dutch took Rantepao without a struggle , unaware that the city 's surrender had been arranged by Tiku . Through a letter , the Dutch commander Captain Kilian told Tiku to surrender , a demand Tiku was unwilling to entertain . Aware of Tiku 's gathered forces and numerous fortresses , Kilian did not attempt a direct attack . Instead , in April 1906 he sent an expeditionary party to Tondon . Although the party 's approach was not resisted , after nightfall Tiku 's troops attacked the Dutch camp in Tondon ; this forced the Dutch forces to retreat to Rantepao with Tiku 's men in pursuit , suffering numerous casualties along the way . 
 Tiku 's military actions were based on the experience he had gained fighting the other lords . The Dutch and their mixed native forces , on the other hand , underestimated Tiku 's forces and were unable to cope with the cold weather of the high altitudes . 
 = = Initial struggle = = 
 The failed expeditionary force led to open warfare between Tiku , who went into hiding in his fortress at <unk> Batu , and Dutch troops . Tiku kept spies on the Dutch forces at Rantepao . On 22 June they reported that the preceding night a Dutch battalion consisting of roughly 250 men and 500 porters had departed the village , headed south towards Tiku 's fortress at Lali ' Londong . Tiku ordered the road sabotaged , extending the travel time from one day to five . On the night of 26 June , Tiku 's forces attacked the Dutch forces outside of Lali ' Londong , an attack for which the Dutch were unprepared ; nobody was killed in the attack . The following morning , the Dutch began a siege on Lali ' Londong , using hand grenades and ladders . Unable to deal with the grenades , which the Dutch had not used on the other lords , that afternoon the fortress was captured . 
 This loss led Tiku to reinforce his men . The Torajan troops were armed with rifles , spears , boulders , swords , and chili pepper extract , sprayed into enemy eyes with a device called a <unk> <unk> , or blowgun , to blind them . Tiku himself was armed with a Portuguese rifle , spear , and <unk> . He wore protective armour , a <unk> ( crotch guard ) , and a songkok with protrusions in the shape of buffalo horns , and carried a decorated shield . With his soldiers , Tiku dug pits filled with bamboo stakes along Dutch supply routes ; those who wandered over the pits would fall in and be impaled . However , these were not enough to stop the advancing Dutch . On 17 October 1906 , two more fortresses , Bamba Puang and <unk> , fell , after several unsuccessful Dutch attacks since June . As the campaign against Tiku , which had already lasted longer than most other campaigns in the occupation , was thought to undermine Dutch authority in Sulawesi , Governor @-@ General J. B. van Heutsz dispatched Governor of Sulawesi Swart to personally lead the attack . 
 After a long siege , Andi Guru and Tiku 's former lieutenant <unk> <unk> ' – both by then working for the Dutch – approached Tiku on 26 October and offered a cease fire . Although initially unwilling , Tiku was reportedly convinced by civilians who reminded him that his mother – who had died in the siege – needed to be buried . After three days of peaceful intermingling , on the night of 30 October the Dutch forces took over the fortress , appropriated all weapons , and captured Tiku . He and his soldiers were forced to go to Tondon . 
 = = Second struggle and death = = 
 In Tondon Tiku began preparations for his mother 's funeral , preparations which , in Torajan culture , took several months . While taking care of the preparations , he had an advisor collect weapons secretly while another went to his fortresses in Alla ' and <unk> . Tiku then made preparations to escape Dutch custody ; he also returned all property that he had taken as a lord , as he knew he would no longer use it . While in Tondon , Dutch forces may have harassed the Torajan leader . The night before his mother 's funeral , in January 1907 , Tiku and 300 of his followers escaped Tondon , heading south . 
 After he was told that the Dutch had followed him , Tiku ordered most of his followers to return to Tondon while he and a group of fifteen , including his two wives , continued south . They first arrived at <unk> , but the fortress fell several days later , at which time they evacuated to Alla ' . This fortress fell at the end of March 1907 and Tiku began to work his way back to Tondon through the forest . He and the other leaders , Buginese and Torajan alike , were chased by Dutch troops . The other leaders capitulated to the Dutch and were sentenced to either three years in a prison in Makassar or exile to Buton . Tiku , meanwhile , stayed hidden in the forests . 
 On 30 June 1907 Tiku and two of his men were caught by the Dutch forces ; he was the last guerrilla leader to be caught . After several days in prison , on 10 July 1907 Tiku was shot and killed by the Dutch soldiers near the Sa 'dan River ; some reports have him bathing at the time . He was buried with the rest of his family in <unk> , while his cousin <unk> ' became the native rule of Pangala ' , serving under the Dutch ; 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After Tiku 's death , the colonial powers hoped that he would be forgotten , a hope which was not realised ; <unk> ' rebelled in 1917 , and other local rebellions arose in different areas of Sulawesi until the Dutch withdrawal following the Japanese occupation . During the occupation , the Japanese forces used Tiku as a symbol of Torajan struggle against colonial aggression , working to unite the people against Europeans . However , this was poorly received in conquered areas such as Baruppu ' and <unk> , where Tiku was remembered as a man who killed others to steal their wives . 
 The Tana Toraja Regency government declared Tiku a national hero in 1964 , and in 1970 a monument to him was built on the bank of the Sa 'dan . Tiku was declared a National Hero of Indonesia with Presidential Decree 073 / TK / 2002 on 6 November 2002 . On the anniversary of Tiku 's death , commemorative ceremonies are held in the provincial capital of Makassar . Aside from several streets , <unk> Airport in Tana Toraja is named after him . 
 = Alien ( film ) = 
 Alien is a 1979 British @-@ American science @-@ fiction horror film directed by Ridley Scott , and starring Tom Skerritt , Sigourney Weaver , Veronica Cartwright , Harry Dean Stanton , John Hurt , Ian Holm and Yaphet Kotto . The film 's title refers to a highly aggressive extraterrestrial creature that stalks and kills the crew of a spaceship . Dan O 'Bannon wrote the screenplay from a story he wrote with Ronald Shusett , drawing influence from previous works of science fiction and horror . The film was produced by Gordon Carroll , David Giler and Walter Hill through their Brandywine Productions and distributed by 20th Century Fox . Giler and Hill made revisions and additions to the script . Shusett was executive producer . The eponymous Alien and its accompanying elements were designed by Swiss surrealist artist H. R. Giger , while concept artists Ron Cobb and Chris Foss designed the human aspects of the film . Alien launched the Alien franchise and is chronologically the first of the main series , with the prequel series set in an earlier timeframe . 
 Alien received both critical acclaim and box office success , receiving an Academy Award for Best Visual Effects , Saturn Awards for Best Science Fiction Film , Best Direction for Scott , and Best Supporting Actress for Cartwright , and a Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , along with numerous other award nominations . It has remained highly praised in subsequent decades , being considered one of the greatest films of all time . In 2002 the film was deemed " culturally , historically or aesthetically significant " by the Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry . In 2008 , it was ranked as the seventh @-@ best film in the science fiction genre by the American Film Institute , and as the 33rd greatest film of all time by Empire magazine . 
 The success of Alien spawned a media franchise of novels , comic books , video games , and toys . It also launched Weaver 's acting career by providing her with her first lead role , and the story of her character Ripley 's encounters with the Alien creatures became the thematic thread that ran through the sequels Aliens ( 1986 ) , Alien 3 ( 1992 ) and Alien : Resurrection ( 1997 ) . A prequel series , which includes Prometheus ( 2012 ) and Alien : Covenant ( 2017 ) , continues in development . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The commercial spacecraft Nostromo is on a return trip to Earth with a seven @-@ member crew in stasis : Captain Dallas , Executive Officer Kane , Navigator Lambert , Science Officer Ash , Warrant Officer Ripley , and Engineers Parker and Brett . Detecting a mysterious transmission , possibly a distress signal , from a nearby planetoid , the ship 's computer , MOTHER , awakens the crew . Following standard company policy for such situations , the Nostromo lands on the planetoid and Dallas , Kane , and Lambert head out to investigate , damaging their ship upon landing in dust . They discover the signal is coming from a derelict alien spacecraft . Inside , they find the remains of a large alien creature whose ribcage appears to have exploded from the inside . 
 On the Nostromo , Ripley determines that the transmission is not a distress signal but a warning . In the alien ship , Kane discovers a chamber containing hundreds of eggs . As he inspects one , a creature springs out , spits acid through his space helmet and attaches itself to his face . Dallas and Lambert carry the unconscious Kane back to the Nostromo . As acting senior officer , Ripley refuses to let them aboard , citing quarantine regulations , but Ash violates protocol by overriding Ripley 's lock and letting them in . The crew are unable to remove the creature from Kane 's face , as its grip is strong and its blood is an extremely corrosive acid . It eventually lets go , crawls away , and dies . 
 The crew repair the ship and lift off . Kane awakens and seems healthy , but during the crew 's final meal before re @-@ entering stasis , he chokes and <unk> in pain before a small alien creature bursts from his chest , killing him , and escapes into the depths of the ship . Since attacking the creature with conventional weapons could result in its corrosive blood breaching the ship 's hull , the crew attempts to locate and capture it with motion trackers , nets , electric prods , and flamethrowers . 
 Brett is sent to look for the crew 's cat , Jones , and the now fully grown alien attacks him and disappears with his body into the air shafts . After a heated discussion , the group devises a plan to jettison the creature out of the ship . Dallas enters the Nostromo 's labyrinthine ventilation shafts , intending to force the alien into an airlock , but it ambushes him . Lambert , realizing the alien is killing the crew one by one , implores the others to escape in the ship 's shuttle . Now in command , Ripley explains that the shuttle will not support four people , and recommends that they continue with Dallas ' plan of flushing the alien out . 
 Accessing MOTHER , Ripley discovers that Ash has secretly been ordered to return the alien to the crew 's employers , who consider the crew expendable . When Ripley confronts Ash , he tries to choke her to death . Parker intervenes and knocks off Ash 's head , revealing him to be an android . Parker reanimates Ash 's head , and Ripley interrogates him . They learn he was assigned to the Nostromo to convince the crew to capture the creature and return it for analysis , even at the expense of the human personnel . Ash taunts them about their chances of survival against the " perfect organism . " Parker turns a flamethrower on Ash . 
 Ripley , Lambert and Parker agree to set the Nostromo to self @-@ destruct and escape in the shuttle . However , Parker and Lambert are ambushed and killed by the alien while gathering life @-@ support supplies . Ripley initiates the self @-@ destruct sequence and heads for the shuttle with Jones , but the alien blocks her path . She retreats and unsuccessfully attempts to abort the self @-@ destruct sequence , then returns to retrieve Jones , finding the alien gone . She narrowly escapes in the shuttle as the Nostromo explodes . 
 As she prepares to enter stasis , Ripley discovers the Alien is aboard the shuttle . She dons a spacesuit and opens the shuttle 's airlock , causing explosive decompression which forces the Alien into the shuttle 's open doorway . She propels it into space by shooting it with a grappling hook , but the gun catches in the closing door , tethering the alien to the shuttle . Ripley activates the engines , blasting the alien into space . After recording the ship 's final log entry , she places herself and Jones into stasis for the voyage home . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Tom Skerritt as Dallas , the captain of the Nostromo 
 Skerritt had been approached early in the film 's development but declined as it did not yet have a director and had a very low budget . Later , when Scott was attached as director and the budget had been doubled , Skerritt accepted the role of Dallas . 
 Sigourney Weaver as Ripley , the warrant officer aboard the Nostromo 
 Weaver , who had Broadway experience but was relatively unknown in film , impressed Scott , Giler , and Hill with her audition . She was the last actor to be cast for the film , and performed most of her screen tests in @-@ studio as the sets were being built . The role of Ripley was Weaver 's first leading role in a motion picture , and earned her nominations for a Saturn Award for Best Actress and a BAFTA award for Most Promising Newcomer to Leading Film Role . 
 Veronica Cartwright as Lambert , the Nostromo 's navigator 
 Cartwright had previous experience in horror and science fiction films , having acted as a child in The Birds ( 1963 ) and Invasion of the Body Snatchers ( 1978 ) . She originally read for the role of Ripley , and was not informed that she had instead been cast as Lambert until she arrived in London for wardrobe . She disliked the character 's emotional weakness , but nevertheless accepted the role : " They convinced me that I was the audience 's fears ; I was a reflection of what the audience is feeling . " Cartwright won a Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress for her performance . 
 Harry Dean Stanton as Brett , the engineering technician 
 Stanton 's first words to Scott during his audition were " I don 't like sci fi or monster movies . " Scott was amused and convinced Stanton to take the role after reassuring him that Alien would actually be a thriller more akin to Ten Little Indians . 
 John Hurt as Kane , the executive officer who becomes the host for the Alien 
 Hurt was Scott 's first choice for the role but was contracted on a film in South Africa during Alien 's filming dates , so Jon Finch was cast as Kane instead . However , Finch became ill during the first day of shooting and was diagnosed with severe diabetes , which had also exacerbated a case of bronchitis . Hurt was in London by this time , his South African project having fallen through , and he quickly replaced Finch . His performance earned him a nomination for a BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role . He was the only actor aware of the extremely bloody scene of Alien 's " birth " in advance . 
 Ian Holm as Ash , the ship 's science officer who is revealed to be an android 
 Holm , a character actor who by 1979 had already been in twenty films , was the most experienced actor cast for Alien ( he was 46 at the time of filming ) . 
 Yaphet Kotto as Parker , the chief engineer 
 Kotto , an African American , was chosen partly to add diversity to the cast and give the Nostromo crew an international flavor . Kotto was sent a script off the back of his recent success with Live and Let Die , although it took some time and deliberation between Kotto and his agent before he was offered the part . 
 <unk> Badejo as The Alien 
 Nigerian Badejo , while a 26 @-@ year @-@ old design student , was discovered in a bar by a member of the casting team , who put him in touch with Ridley Scott . Scott believed that Badejo , at 6 feet 10 inches ( 208 cm ) ( <unk> inside the costume ) and with a slender frame , could portray the Alien and look as if his arms and legs were too long to be real , creating the illusion that there could not possibly be a human being inside the costume . <unk> Eddie Powell and Roy Scammell also portrayed the Alien in some scenes . 
 Helen Horton as the voice of Mother , the Nostromo 's computer . Mother gives the countdown to the destruction of the ship . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 While studying cinema at the University of Southern California , Dan O 'Bannon had made a science fiction comedy film with director John Carpenter and concept artist Ron Cobb entitled Dark Star . The film included an alien which had been created using a spray @-@ painted beach ball , and the experience left O 'Bannon " really wanting to do an alien that looked real . " A " couple of years " later he began working on a similar story that would focus more on horror : " I knew I wanted to do a scary movie on a spaceship with a small number of astronauts " , he later recalled , " Dark Star as a horror movie instead of a comedy . " Ronald Shusett , meanwhile , was working on an early version of what would eventually become Total Recall . Impressed by Dark Star , he contacted O 'Bannon and the two agreed to collaborate on their projects , choosing to work on O 'Bannon 's film first as they believed it would be less costly to produce . O 'Bannon had written twenty @-@ nine pages of a script titled Memory comprising what would become the film 's opening scenes : a crew of astronauts awaken to find that their voyage has been interrupted because they are receiving a signal from a mysterious planetoid . They investigate and their ship breaks down on the surface . He did not yet , however , have a clear idea as to what the alien antagonist of the story would be . 
 O 'Bannon soon accepted an offer to work on Alejandro Jodorowsky 's film adaptation of Dune , a project which took him to Paris for six months . Though the project ultimately fell through , it introduced him to several artists whose works gave him ideas for his science @-@ fiction story including Chris Foss , H. R. Giger , and Jean " Moebius " Giraud . O 'Bannon was impressed by Foss 's covers for science fiction books , while he found Giger 's work " disturbing " : " His paintings had a profound effect on me . I had never seen anything that was quite as horrible and at the same time as beautiful as his work . And so I ended up writing a script about a Giger monster . " After the Dune project collapsed O 'Bannon returned to Los Angeles to live with Shusett and the two revived his Memory script . Shusett suggested that O 'Bannon use one of his other film ideas , about gremlins infiltrating a B @-@ 17 bomber during World War II , and set it on the spaceship as the second half of the story . The working title of the project was now Star Beast , but O 'Bannon disliked this and changed it to Alien after noting the number of times that the word appeared in the script . He and Shusett liked the new title 's simplicity and its double meaning as both a noun and adjective . Shusett came up with the idea that one of the crew members could be implanted with an alien embryo that would later burst out of him , feeling that this was an interesting plot device by which the alien creature could get aboard the ship . 
 In writing the script , O 'Bannon drew inspiration from many previous works of science fiction and horror . He later stated that " I didn 't steal Alien from anybody . I stole it from everybody ! " The Thing from Another World ( 1951 ) inspired the idea of professional men being pursued by a deadly alien creature through a claustrophobic environment . Forbidden Planet ( 1956 ) gave O 'Bannon the idea of a ship being warned not to land , and then the crew being killed one by one by a mysterious creature when they defy the warning . Planet of the Vampires ( 1965 ) contains a scene in which the heroes discover a giant alien skeleton ; this influenced the Nostromo crew 's discovery of the alien creature in the derelict spacecraft . O 'Bannon has also noted the influence of " Junkyard " ( 1953 ) , a short story by Clifford D. Simak in which a crew lands on an asteroid and discovers a chamber full of eggs . He has also cited as influences Strange Relations by Philip José Farmer ( 1960 ) , which covers alien reproduction , and various EC Comics horror titles carrying stories in which monsters eat their way out of people . 
 With roughly eighty @-@ five percent of the plot completed , Shusett and O 'Bannon presented their initial script to several studios , pitching it as " Jaws in space . " They were on the verge of signing a deal with Roger Corman 's studio when a friend offered to find them a better deal and passed the script on to Gordon Carroll , David Giler , and Walter Hill , who had formed a production company called Brandywine with ties to 20th Century Fox . O 'Bannon and Shusett signed a deal with Brandywine , but Hill and Giler were not satisfied with the script and made numerous rewrites and revisions to it . This caused tension with O 'Bannon and Shusett , since Hill and Giler had very little experience with science fiction and according to Shusett : " They weren 't good at making it better , or in fact at not making it even worse . " O 'Bannon believed that they were attempting to justify taking his name off of the script and claiming it as their own . Hill and Giler did add some substantial elements to the story , however , including the android character Ash which O 'Bannon felt was an unnecessary subplot , but which Shusett later described as " one of the best things in the movie ... That whole idea and scenario was theirs . " In total Hill and Giler went through eight different drafts of the script , mostly concentrating on the Ash subplot but also making the dialogue more natural and trimming some sequences set on the alien planetoid . 
 Despite the multiple rewrites , 20th Century Fox did not express confidence in financing a science @-@ fiction film . However , after the success of Star Wars in 1977 the studio 's interest in the genre rose substantially . According to Carroll : " When Star Wars came out and was the extraordinary hit that it was , suddenly science fiction became the hot genre . " O 'Bannon recalled that " They wanted to follow through on Star Wars , and they wanted to follow through fast , and the only spaceship script they had sitting on their desk was Alien " . Alien was greenlit by 20th Century Fox at an initial budget of $ 4 @.@ 2 million . Alien was funded by American dollars , but made by Twentieth Century @-@ Fox 's British production subsidiary . 
 = = = Direction = = = 
 O 'Bannon had originally assumed that he would direct Alien , but 20th Century Fox instead asked Hill to direct . Hill declined due to other film commitments as well as not being comfortable with the level of visual effects that would be required . Peter Yates , Jack Clayton , and Robert Aldrich were considered for the task , but O 'Bannon , Shusett , and the Brandywine team felt that these directors would not take the film seriously and would instead treat it as a B monster movie . Giler , Hill , and Carroll had been impressed by Ridley Scott 's debut feature film The Duellists ( 1977 ) and made an offer to him to direct Alien , which Scott quickly accepted . Scott created detailed storyboards for the film in London , which impressed 20th Century Fox enough to double the film 's budget from $ 4 @.@ 2 million to $ 8 @.@ 4 million . His storyboards included designs for the spaceship and space suits , drawing influences from films such as 2001 : A Space Odyssey and Star Wars . However , he was keen on emphasizing horror in Alien rather than fantasy , describing the film as " The Texas Chain Saw Massacre of science fiction " . 
 O 'Bannon introduced Scott to the artwork of H. R. Giger ; both of them felt that his painting <unk> IV was the type of representation they wanted for the film 's antagonist and began asking the studio to hire him as a designer . 20th Century Fox initially believed Giger 's work was too ghastly for audiences , but the Brandywine team were persistent and eventually won out . According to Gordon Carroll : " The first second that Ridley saw Giger 's work , he knew that the biggest single design problem , maybe the biggest problem in the film , had been solved . " Scott flew to Zürich to meet Giger and recruited him to work on all aspects of the Alien and its environment including the surface of the planetoid , the derelict spacecraft , and all four forms of the Alien from the egg to the adult . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Casting calls and auditions for Alien were held in both New York and London . With only seven human characters in the story , Scott sought to hire strong actors so he could focus most of his energy on the film 's visual style . He employed casting director Mary Selway , who had worked with him on The Duellists , to head the casting in the United Kingdom , while Mary Goldberg handled casting in the United States . In developing the story O 'Bannon had focused on writing the Alien first , putting off developing the characters for a later draft . He and Shusett had therefore written all of the roles as generic male ones with a note in the script explicitly stating " The crew is unisex and all parts are interchangeable for men or women . " This left Scott , Selway , and Goldberg free to interpret the characters as they liked and to cast accordingly . They wanted the Nostromo 's crew to resemble working astronauts in a realistic environment , a concept summed up as " truckers in space " . According to Scott , this concept was inspired partly by Star Wars , which deviated from the pristine future often depicted in science fiction films of the time . 
 To assist the actors in preparing for their roles , Ridley Scott wrote several pages of backstory for each character explaining their histories . He filmed many of their rehearsals in order to capture spontaneity and improvisation , and tensions between some of the cast members , particularly towards the less @-@ experienced Weaver , translated convincingly on film as tension between their respective characters . 
 Film critic Roger Ebert notes that the actors in Alien were older than was typical in thriller films at the time , which helped make the characters more convincing : 
 None of them were particularly young . Tom Skerritt , the captain , was 46 , Hurt was 39 but looked older , Holm was 48 , Harry Dean Stanton was 53 , Yaphet Kotto was 42 , and only Veronica Cartwright at 30 and Weaver at 29 were in the age range of the usual thriller cast . Many recent action pictures have improbably young actors cast as key roles or sidekicks , but by skewing older , Alien achieves a certain texture without even making a point of it : These are not adventurers but workers , hired by a company to return 20 million tons of ore to Earth . 
 David McIntee , author of Beautiful Monsters : The Unofficial and Unauthorised Guide to the Alien and Predator Films , asserts that part of the film 's effectiveness in frightening viewers " comes from the fact that the audience can all identify with the characters ... Everyone aboard the Nostromo is a normal , everyday , working Joe just like the rest of us . They just happen to live and work in the future . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Alien was filmed over fourteen weeks from July 5 to October 21 , 1978 . Principal photography took place at Shepperton Studios near London , while model and miniature filming was done at Bray Studios in Water Oakley , Berkshire . Production time was short due to the film 's low budget and pressure from 20th Century Fox to finish on schedule . A crew of over 200 workmen and technicians constructed the three principal sets : The surface of the alien planetoid and the interiors of the Nostromo and derelict spacecraft . Art Director Les Dilley created 1 / 24th scale miniatures of the planetoid 's surface and derelict spacecraft based on Giger 's designs , then made moulds and casts and scaled them up as diagrams for the wood and fiberglass forms of the sets . Tons of sand , plaster , fiberglass , rock , and gravel were shipped into the studio to sculpt a desert landscape for the planetoid 's surface , which the actors would walk across wearing space suit costumes . The suits themselves were thick , bulky , and lined with nylon , had no cooling systems and , initially , no venting for their exhaled carbon dioxide to escape . Combined with a heat wave , these conditions nearly caused the actors to pass out and nurses had to be kept on @-@ hand with oxygen tanks . For scenes showing the exterior of the Nostromo , a 58 @-@ foot ( 18 m ) landing leg was constructed to give a sense of the ship 's size . Ridley Scott still did not think that it looked large enough , so he had his two sons and the son of one of the cameramen stand in for the regular actors , wearing smaller space suits to make the set pieces seem larger . The same technique was used for the scene in which the crew members encounter the dead alien creature in the derelict spacecraft . The children nearly collapsed due to the heat of the suits , and eventually oxygen systems were added to assist the actors in breathing . Four identical cats were used to portray Jones , the Nostromo crew 's pet . During filming Sigourney Weaver discovered that she was allergic to the combination of cat hair and the glycerin placed on the actors ' skin to make them appear sweaty . By removing the glycerin she was able to continue working with the cats . 
 Alien originally was to conclude with the destruction of the Nostromo while Ripley escapes in the shuttle Narcissus . However , Ridley Scott conceived of a " fourth act " to the film in which the Alien appears on the shuttle and Ripley is forced to confront it . He pitched the idea to 20th Century Fox and negotiated an increase in the budget to film the scene over several extra days . Scott had wanted the Alien to bite off Ripley 's head and then make the final log entry in her voice , but the producers vetoed this idea as they believed that the Alien had to die at the end of the film . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Editing and post @-@ production work on Alien took roughly twenty weeks to complete . Terry Rawlings served as Editor , having previously worked with Scott on editing sound for The Duellists . Scott and Rawlings edited much of the film to have a slow pace to build suspense for the more tense and frightening moments . According to Rawlings : " I think the way we did get it right was by keeping it slow , funny enough , which is completely different from what they do today . And I think the slowness of it made the moments that you wanted people to be sort of scared ... then we could go as fast as we liked because you 've sucked people into a corner and then attacked them , so to speak . And I think that 's how it worked . " The first cut of the film was over three hours long ; further editing trimmed the final version to just under two hours . 
 One scene that was cut from the film occurred during Ripley 's final escape from the Nostromo : she encounters Dallas and Brett who have been partially cocooned by the Alien . O 'Bannon had intended the scene to indicate that Brett was becoming an Alien egg while Dallas was held nearby to be implanted by the resulting facehugger . Production Designer Michael Seymour later suggested that Dallas had " become sort of food for the alien creature " , while Ivor Powell suggested that " Dallas is found in the ship as an egg , still alive . " Scott remarked that " they 're morphing , metamorphosing , they are changing into ... being consumed , I guess , by whatever the Alien 's organism is ... into an egg . " The scene was cut partly because it did not look realistic enough and partly because it slowed the pace of the escape sequence . Tom Skerritt remarked that " The picture had to have that pace . Her trying to get the hell out of there , we 're all rooting for her to get out of there , and for her to slow up and have a conversation with Dallas was not appropriate . " The footage was included amongst other deleted scenes as a special feature on the Laserdisc release of Alien , and a shortened version of it was re @-@ inserted into the 2003 " Director 's Cut " which was re @-@ released in theaters and on DVD . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The musical score for Alien was composed by Jerry Goldsmith , conducted by Lionel Newman , and performed by the National Philharmonic Orchestra . Ridley Scott had originally wanted the film to be scored by Isao Tomita , but 20th Century Fox wanted a more familiar composer and Goldsmith was recommended by then @-@ President of Fox Alan Ladd , Jr . Goldsmith wanted to create a sense of romanticism and lyrical mystery in the film 's opening scenes , which would build throughout the film to suspense and fear . Scott did not like Goldsmith 's original main title piece , however , so Goldsmith rewrote it as " the obvious thing : weird and strange , and which everybody loved . " Another source of tension was editor Terry Rawlings ' choice to use pieces of Goldsmith 's music from previous films , including a piece from Freud : The Secret Passion , and to use an excerpt from Howard Hanson 's Symphony No. 2 ( " Romantic " ) for the end credits . 
 Scott and Rawlings had also become attached to several of the musical cues they had used for the temporary score while editing the film , and re @-@ edited some of Goldsmith 's cues and re @-@ scored several sequences to match these cues and even left the temporary score in place in some parts of the finished film . Goldsmith later remarked that " you can see that I was sort of like going at opposite ends of the pole with the filmmakers of the picture . " Nevertheless , Scott praised Goldsmith 's score as " full of dark beauty " and " seriously threatening , but beautiful . " It was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score , a Grammy Award for Best Soundtrack Album , and a BAFTA Award for Best Film Music . The score has been released as a soundtrack album in several versions with different tracks and sequences . 
 = = Design = = 
 O 'Bannon brought in artists Ron Cobb and Chris Foss ( with whom he had worked on Dark Star and Dune , respectively ) to work on designs for the human aspects of the film such as the spaceship and space suits . Cobb created hundreds of preliminary sketches of the interiors and exteriors of the ship , which went through many design concepts and possible names such as Leviathan and Snark as the script continued to develop . The final name of the ship was derived from the title of Joseph Conrad 's 1904 novel Nostromo , while the escape shuttle , called Narcissus in the script , was named after Conrad 's 1897 novella The Nigger of the ' Narcissus ' . The production team particularly praised Cobb 's ability to depict the interior settings of the ship in a realistic and believable manner . Under Ridley Scott 's direction the design of the Nostromo shifted towards an 800 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 240 m ) tug towing a refining platform 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) long and 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) wide . Cobb also created some conceptual drawings of the Alien , but these were not used . Moebius was attached to the project for a few days as well , and his costume renderings served as the basis for the final space suits created by costume designer John Mollo . 
 = = = Sets = = = 
 The sets of the Nostromo 's three decks were each created almost entirely in one piece , with each deck occupying a separate stage and the various rooms connected via corridors . To move around the sets the actors had to navigate through the hallways of the ship , adding to the film 's sense of claustrophobia and realism . The sets used large transistors and low @-@ resolution computer screens to give the ship a " used " , industrial look and make it appear as though it was constructed of " retrofitted old technology " . Ron Cobb created industrial @-@ style symbols and color @-@ coded signs for various areas and aspects of the ship . The company that owns the Nostromo is not named in the film , and is referred to by the characters as " the company " . However , the name and logo of " <unk> @-@ Yutani " appears on several set pieces and props such as computer monitors and beer cans . Cobb created the name to imply a business alliance between Britain and Japan , deriving " <unk> " from the British Leyland Motor Corporation and " Yutani " from the name of his Japanese neighbor . The 1986 sequel Aliens named the company as " Weyland @-@ Yutani " , and it has remained a central aspect of the film franchise . 
 Art Director Roger Christian used scrap metal and parts to create set pieces and props to save money , a technique he employed while working on Star Wars . Some of the Nostromo 's corridors were created from portions of scrapped bomber aircraft , and a mirror was used to create the illusion of longer corridors in the below @-@ deck area . Special effects supervisors Brian Johnson and Nick Allder made many of the set pieces and props function , including moving chairs , computer monitors , motion trackers , and flamethrowers . 
 H. R. Giger designed and worked on all of the alien aspects of the film , which he designed to appear organic and biomechanical in contrast to the industrial look of the Nostromo and its human elements . For the interior of the derelict spacecraft and egg chamber he used dried bones together with plaster to sculpt much of the scenery and elements . Veronica Cartwright described Giger 's sets as " so erotic ... it 's big vaginas and penises ... the whole thing is like you 're going inside of some sort of womb or whatever ... it 's sort of visceral " . The set with the deceased alien creature , which the production team nicknamed the " space jockey " , proved problematic as 20th Century Fox did not want to spend the money for such an expensive set that would only be used for one scene . Ridley Scott described the set as the cockpit or driving deck of the mysterious ship , and the production team was able to convince the studio that the scene was important to impress the audience and make them aware that this was not a B movie . To save money only one wall of the set was created , and the " space jockey " sat atop a disc that could be rotated to facilitate shots from different angles in relation to the actors . Giger airbrushed the entire set and the " space jockey " by hand . 
 The origin of the jockey creature was not explored in the film , but Scott later theorized that it might have been the ship 's pilot , and that the ship might have been a weapons carrier capable of dropping Alien eggs onto a planet so that the Aliens could use the local lifeforms as hosts . In early versions of the script the eggs were to be located in a separate pyramid structure which would be found later by the Nostromo crew and would contain statues and hieroglyphs depicting the Alien reproductive cycle , offering a contrast of the human , Alien , and space jockey cultures . Cobb , Foss , and Giger each created concept artwork for these sequences , but they were eventually discarded due to budgetary concerns and the need to trim the length of the film . Instead the egg chamber was set inside the derelict ship and was filmed on the same set as the space jockey scene ; the entire disc piece supporting the jockey and its chair were removed and the set was redressed to create the egg chamber . Light effects in the egg chamber were created by lasers borrowed from English rock band The Who . The band was testing the lasers for use in their stage show in the sound stage next door . 
 = = = Spaceships and planets = = = 
 The spaceships and planets for the film were shot using models and miniatures . These included models of the Nostromo , its attached mineral refinery , the escape shuttle Narcissus , the alien planetoid , and the exterior and interior of the derelict spacecraft . Visual Effects Supervisor Brian Johnson , supervising <unk> Martin Bower , and their team worked at Bray Studios , roughly 25 miles ( 40 km ) from Shepperton Studios where principal filming was taking place . The designs of the Nostromo and its attachments were based on combinations of Ridley Scott 's storyboards and Ron Cobb 's conceptual drawings . The basic outlines of the models were made of wood and plastic , and most of the fine details were added from model kits of warships , tanks , and World War II bombers . Three models of the Nostromo were made : a 12 @-@ inch ( 30 cm ) version for medium and long shots , a 4 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) version for rear shots , and a 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) , 7 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 6 @.@ 4 t ) rig for the undocking and planetoid surface sequences . Scott insisted on numerous changes to the models even as filming was taking place , leading to conflicts with the modeling and filming teams . The Nostromo was originally yellow , and the team filmed shots of the models for six weeks before Johnson left to work on The Empire Strikes Back . Scott then ordered it changed to gray , and the team had to begin shooting again from scratch . He ordered more and more pieces added to the model until the final large version with the refinery required a metal framework so that it could be lifted by a forklift . He also used a hammer and chisel on sections of the refinery , knocking off many of its spires which Bower had spent weeks creating . Scott also had disagreements with miniature effects cinematographer Dennis Ayling over how to light the models . 
 A separate model , approximately 40 feet ( 12 m ) long , was created for the Nostromo 's underside from which the Narcissus would detach and from which Kane 's body would be launched during the funeral scene . Bower carved Kane 's burial shroud out of wood and it was launched through the hatch using a small catapult and filmed at high speed , then slowed down in editing . Only one shot was filmed using blue screen compositing : that of the shuttle racing past the Nostromo . The other shots were simply filmed against black backdrops , with stars added via double exposure . Though motion control photography technology was available at the time , the film 's budget would not allow for it . The team therefore used a camera with wide @-@ angle lenses mounted on a drive mechanism to make slow passes over and around the models filming at 2 ½ frames per second , giving them the appearance of motion . Scott added smoke and wind effects to enhance the illusion . For the scene in which the Nostromo detaches from the refinery , a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) docking arm was created using pieces from model railway kits . The Nostromo was pushed away from the refinery by the forklift , which was covered in black velvet , causing the arm to extend out from the refinery . This created the illusion that the arm was pushing the ship forward . Shots from outside the ship in which the characters are seen through windows moving around inside were filmed using larger models which contained projection screens showing pre @-@ recorded footage . 
 A separate model was created for the exterior of the derelict alien spacecraft . Matte paintings were used to fill in areas of the ship 's interior as well as exterior shots of the planetoid 's surface . The surface as seen from space during the landing sequence was created by painting a globe white , then mixing chemicals and dyes onto transparencies and projecting them onto it . The planetoid was not named in the film , but some drafts of the script gave it the name Acheron after the river which in Greek mythology is described as the " stream of woe " , a branch of the river Styx , and which forms the border of Hell in Dante 's Inferno . The 1986 sequel Aliens named the planetoid as " LV @-@ 426 " , and both names have been used for it in subsequent expanded universe media such as comic books and video games . 
 = = = Creature effects = = = 
 The scene of Kane inspecting the egg was shot during post @-@ production . A fiberglass egg was used so that actor John Hurt could shine his light on it and see movement inside , which was provided by Ridley Scott fluttering his hands inside the egg while wearing rubber gloves . The top of the egg opened via hydraulics , and the innards were made of a cow 's stomach and tripe . Initial test shots of the eggs were filmed using hen 's eggs , and this footage was used in early teaser trailers . For this reason a hen 's egg was used as the primary image for the film 's advertising poster , and became a lasting image for the series as a whole rather than the Alien egg that actually appears in the film . 
 The " facehugger " and its proboscis , which was made of a sheep 's intestine , were shot out of the egg using high @-@ pressure air hoses . The shot was acted out and filmed in reverse , then reversed and slowed down in editing to prolong the effect and show more detail . The facehugger itself was the first creature that Giger designed for the film , going through several versions in different sizes before deciding on a small creature with humanlike fingers and a long tail . Dan O 'Bannon drew his own version based on Giger 's design , with help from Ron Cobb , which became the final version . Cobb came up with the idea that the creature could have a powerful acid for blood , a characteristic that would carry over to the adult Alien and would make it impossible for the crew to kill it by conventional means such as guns or explosives , since the acid would burn through the ship 's hull . For the scene in which the dead facehugger is examined , Scott used pieces of fish and shellfish to create its viscera . 
 The design of the " chestburster " was inspired by Francis Bacon 's 1944 painting Three Studies for Figures at the Base of a Crucifixion . Giger 's original design resembled a plucked chicken , which was redesigned and refined into the final version seen onscreen . Screenwriter Dan O 'Bannon credits his experiences with Crohn 's disease for inspiring the chest @-@ busting scene . 
 For the filming of the chestburster scene the cast members knew that the creature would be bursting out of Hurt , and had seen the chestburster puppet , but they had not been told that fake blood would also be bursting out in every direction from high @-@ pressure pumps and squibs . The scene was shot in one take using an artificial torso filled with blood and viscera , with Hurt 's head and arms coming up from underneath the table . The chestburster was shoved up through the torso by a puppeteer who held it on a stick . When the creature burst through the chest a stream of blood shot directly at Veronica Cartwright , shocking her enough that she fell over and went into hysterics . According to Tom Skerritt : " What you saw on camera was the real response . She had no idea what the hell happened . All of a sudden this thing just came up . " The creature then runs off @-@ camera , an effect accomplished by cutting a slit in the table for the puppeteer 's stick to go through and passing an air hose through the puppet 's tail to make it whip about . 
 The real @-@ life surprise of the actors gave the scene an intense sense of realism and made it one of the film 's most memorable moments . During preview screenings the crew noticed that some viewers would move towards the back of the theater so as not to be too close to the screen during the sequence . In subsequent years the chestburster scene has often been voted as one of the most memorable moments in film . In 2007 , the British film magazine Empire named it as the greatest 18 @-@ rated moment in film as part of its " 18th birthday " issue , ranking it above the decapitation scene in The Omen ( 1976 ) and the transformation sequence in An American Werewolf in London ( 1981 ) . 
 For the scene in which Ash is revealed to be an android and has his head knocked off , a puppet was created of the character 's torso and upper body which was operated from underneath by a small puppeteer . During a preview screening of the film this scene caused an usher to faint . In the following scene Ash 's head is placed on a table and re @-@ activated ; for portions of this scene an animatronic head was made using a face cast of actor Ian Holm . However , the latex of the head shrank while curing and the result was not entirely convincing . For the bulk of the scene Holm knelt under the table with his head coming up through a hole and milk , caviar , pasta , fiber optics , and glass marbles were used to show the android 's inner workings and fluids . 
 = = = The Alien = = = 
 Giger made several conceptual paintings of the adult Alien before crafting the final version . He sculpted the creature 's body using plasticine , incorporating pieces such as vertebrae from snakes and cooling tubes from a Rolls @-@ Royce . The creature 's head was manufactured separately by Carlo Rambaldi , who had worked on the aliens in Close Encounters of the Third Kind . Rambaldi followed Giger 's designs closely , making some modifications in order to incorporate the moving parts which would animate the jaw and inner mouth . A system of hinges and cables was used to operate the creature 's rigid tongue , which protruded from the main mouth and had a second mouth at the tip of it with its own set of movable teeth . The final head had about nine hundred moving parts and points of articulation . Part of a human skull was used as the " face " , and was hidden under the smooth , translucent cover of the head . Rambaldi 's original Alien jaw is now on display in the Smithsonian Institution , while in April 2007 the original Alien suit was sold at auction . Copious amounts of K @-@ Y Jelly were used to simulate saliva and to give the Alien an overall slimy appearance . The creature 's vocalizations were provided by Percy Edwards , a voice artist famous for providing bird sounds for British television throughout the 1960s and 1970s as well as the whale sounds for Orca : Killer Whale ( 1977 ) . 
 For most of the film 's scenes the Alien was portrayed by <unk> Badejo . A latex costume was specifically made to fit Badejo 's 6 @-@ foot @-@ 10 @-@ inch ( 208 cm ) slender frame , made by taking a full @-@ body plaster cast of him . Scott later commented that " It 's a man in a suit , but then it would be , wouldn 't it ? It takes on elements of the host – in this case , a man . " Badejo attended t 'ai chi and mime classes in order to create convincing movements for the Alien . For some scenes , such as when the Alien lowers itself from the ceiling to kill Brett , the creature was portrayed by stuntmen Eddie Powell and Roy Scammell ; in that scene a costumed Powell was suspended on wires and then lowered in an unfurling motion . 
 Scott chose not to show the Alien in full through most of the film , showing only pieces of it while keeping most of its body in shadow in order to heighten the sense of terror and suspense . The audience could thus project their own fears into imagining what the rest of the creature might look like : " Every movement is going to be very slow , very graceful , and the Alien will alter shape so you never really know exactly what he looks like . " The Alien has been referred to as " one of the most iconic movie monsters in film history " in the decades since the film 's release , being noted for its biomechanical appearance and sexual overtones . Roger Ebert has remarked that " Alien uses a tricky device to keep the alien fresh throughout the movie : It evolves the nature and appearance of the creature , so we never know quite what it looks like or what it can do ... The first time we get a good look at the alien , as it bursts from the chest of poor Kane ( John Hurt ) . It is unmistakably phallic in shape , and the critic Tim Dirks mentions its ' open , dripping vaginal mouth . ' " 
 = = Marketing = = 
 Around and shortly after Alien 's release in theaters , a number of merchandise items and media were released and sold to coincide with the film . These included a novelization by Alan Dean Foster , in both adult and " junior " versions , which was adapted from the film 's shooting script . Heavy Metal magazine published a comic strip adaptation of the film entitled Alien : The Illustrated Story , as well as a 1980 Alien calendar . Two behind @-@ the @-@ scenes books were released in 1979 to accompany the film : The Book of Alien contained many production photographs and details on the making of the film , while Giger 's Alien contained much of H. R. Giger 's concept artwork for the movie . A soundtrack album was released as an LP featuring selections of Goldsmith 's score , and a single of the main theme was released in 1980 . A twelve @-@ inch tall model kit of the Alien was released by the Model Products Corporation in the United States and by Airfix in the United Kingdom . Kenner also produced a larger @-@ scale Alien action figure , as well as a board game in which players raced to be first to reach the shuttle pod while Aliens roamed the Nostromo 's corridors and air shafts . Official Halloween costumes of the Alien were released for October 1979 . Several computer games based on the film were released , but not until several years after its theatrical run . 
 = = Release = = 
 An initial screening of Alien for 20th Century Fox representatives in St. Louis suffered from poor sound in the theater . A subsequent screening in a newer theater in Dallas went significantly better , eliciting genuine fright from the audience . Two theatrical trailers were shown to the public . The first consisted of rapidly changing still images set to some of Jerry Goldsmith 's electronic music from Logan 's Run . The second used test footage of a hen 's egg set to part of Goldsmith 's Alien score . The film was previewed in various American cities in the spring of 1979 and was promoted by the tagline " In space no one can hear you scream . " 
 Alien was rated " R " in the United States , " X " in the United Kingdom , and " M " in Australia . In the UK , the British Board of Film Classification almost passed the film as an " AA " ( for ages 14 and over ) , although there were concerns over the prevalent sexual imagery . 20th Century Fox eventually relented in pushing for an AA certificate after deciding that an X rating would be a better choice commercially for selling a horror film . 
 Alien opened in American theaters on May 25 , 1979 . The film had no formal premiere , yet moviegoers lined up for blocks to see it at Grauman 's Egyptian Theatre in Hollywood where a number of models , sets , and props were displayed outside to promote it during its first run . Religious zealots set fire to the model of the space jockey , believing it to be the work of the devil . In the United Kingdom , Alien premiered at a gala performance at the Edinburgh Film Festival on September 1 , 1979 , before starting an exclusive run at the Odeon Leicester Square in London on September 6 , 1979 , but it did not open widely in Britain until January 13 , 1980 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critical reaction to the film was initially mixed . Some critics who were not usually favorable towards science fiction , such as Barry Norman of the BBC 's Film series , were positive about the film 's merits . Others , however , were not : Reviews by Variety , Sight and Sound , Vincent Canby and Leonard Maltin were mixed or negative . ( Maltin , however , reassessed the film upon the release of the Director 's Cut and gave Alien a positive review . ) A review by Time Out said the film was an " empty bag of tricks whose production values and expensive trickery cannot disguise imaginative poverty " . In a 1980 episode of Sneak Previews discussing science fiction films of the 1950s and 1970s , critics Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert were critical of Alien . Ebert called it " basically just an intergalactic haunted house thriller set inside a spaceship " and one of several science fiction pictures that were " real disappointments " compared to Star Wars , Close Encounters of the Third Kind , and 2001 : A Space Odyssey , though he did compliment the early scene of the Nostromo 's crew exploring the alien planet as showing " real imagination " . However , the film later made it onto Ebert 's Great Movies list , giving it four stars and stating , " Ridley Scott 's 1979 movie is a great original . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film was a commercial success , making $ 78 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 in the United States and £ 7 @,@ 886 @,@ 000 in the United Kingdom during its first run . It ultimately grossed $ 80 @,@ 931 @,@ 801 in the United States , though international box office figures have varied from $ 24 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to $ 122 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 . Its total worldwide gross has been listed within the range of $ 104 @,@ 931 @,@ 801 to $ 203 @,@ 630 @,@ 630 . 
 According to 20th Century Fox accounts , however , by April 1980 when the film had earned a reported $ 100 million at the box office , after advertising , distribution fees , penalties and other costs were deducted , it was still recorded as having made a loss to the studio of $ 2 @.@ 4 million . This was seen as an example of Hollywood creative accounting and was much criticised . By August 1980 Fox was saying the film was $ 4 million in profit . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Alien won the 1979 Academy Award for Visual Effects and was also nominated for Best Art Direction ( for Michael Seymour , Leslie Dilley , Roger Christian , and Ian Whittaker ) . It won Saturn Awards for Best Science Fiction Film , Best Direction for Ridley Scott , and Best Supporting Actress for Veronica Cartwright , and was also nominated in the categories of Best Actress for Sigourney Weaver , Best Make @-@ up for Pat Hay , Best Special Effects for Brian Johnson and Nick Allder , and Best Writing for Dan O 'Bannon . It was also nominated for British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) awards for Best Costume Design for John Mollo , Best Editing for Terry Rawlings , Best Supporting Actor for John Hurt , and Most Promising Newcomer to Leading Film Role for Sigourney Weaver . It also won a Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation and was nominated for a British Society of Cinematographers award for Best Cinematography for Derek <unk> , as well as a Silver Seashell award for Best Cinematography and Special Effects at the San Sebastián International Film Festival . Jerry Goldsmith 's score received nominations for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score , the Grammy Award for Best Soundtrack Album , and a BAFTA Award for Best Film Music . 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 Alien has been released in many home video formats and packages over the years . The first of these was a seventeen @-@ minute Super @-@ 8 version for home projectionists . It was also released on both VHS and Betamax for rental , which grossed it an additional $ 40 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 in the United States alone . Several VHS releases were subsequently sold both singly and as boxed sets . LaserDisc and Videodisc versions followed , including deleted scenes and director commentary as bonus features . A VHS box set containing Alien and its sequels Aliens and Alien 3 was released in facehugger @-@ shaped boxes , and included some of the deleted scenes from the Laserdisc editions . When Alien : Resurrection premiered in theaters , another set of the first three films was released including a Making of Alien : Resurrection tape . A few months later the set was re @-@ released with the full version of Alien : Resurrection taking the place of the making @-@ of video . Alien was released on DVD in 1999 , both singly and , as The Alien Legacy , packaged with Aliens , Alien 3 and Alien : Resurrection . This set , which was also released in a VHS version , included a commentary track by Ridley Scott . The first three films of the series have also been packaged as the Alien Triple Pack . 
 In 2003 20th Century Fox was preparing the Alien Quadrilogy DVD box set , which would include Alien and its three sequels . In addition , the set would also include alternate versions of all four films in the form of " special editions " and " director 's cuts " . Fox approached Ridley Scott to digitally restore and remaster Alien , and to restore several scenes which had been cut during the editing process for inclusion in an expanded version of the film . Upon viewing the expanded version , Scott felt that it was too long and chose to recut it into a more streamlined alternate version : 
 Upon viewing the proposed expanded version of the film , I felt that the cut was simply too long and the pacing completely thrown off . After all , I cut those scenes out for a reason back in 1979 . However , in the interest of giving the fans a new experience with Alien , I figured there had to be an appropriate middle ground . I chose to go in and recut that proposed long version into a more streamlined and polished alternate version of the film . For marketing purposes , this version is being called " The Director 's Cut . " 
 The " Director 's Cut " restored roughly four minutes of deleted footage while cutting about five minutes of other material , leaving it about a minute shorter than the theatrical cut . Many of the changes were minor , such as altered sound effects , while the restored footage included the scene in which Ripley discovers the cocooned Dallas and Brett during her escape of the Nostromo . Fox decided to release the Director 's Cut in theaters , and it premiered on October 31 , 2003 . The Alien Quadrilogy box set was released December 2 , 2003 , with both versions of the film included along with a new commentary track featuring many of the film 's actors , writers , and production staff , as well as other special features and a documentary entitled The Beast Within : The Making of Alien . Each film was also released separately as a DVD with both versions of the film included . Scott noted that he was very pleased with the original theatrical cut of Alien , saying that " For all intents and purposes , I felt that the original cut of Alien was perfect . I still feel that way " , and that the original 1979 theatrical version " remains my version of choice " . He has since stated that he considers both versions " director 's cuts " , as he feels that the 1979 version was the best he could possibly have made it at the time . 
 The Alien Quadrilogy set earned Alien a number of new awards and nominations . It won <unk> Exclusive Awards for Best Audio Commentary and Best Overall DVD , Classic Movie , and was also nominated for Best Behind @-@ the @-@ Scenes Program and Best Menu Design . It also won a Sierra Award for Best DVD , and was nominated for a Saturn Award for Best DVD Collection and Golden Satellite Awards for Best DVD Extras and Best Overall DVD . In 2010 both the theatrical version and Director 's Cut of Alien were released on Blu @-@ ray Disc , as a stand @-@ alone release and as part of the Alien Anthology set . 
 In 2014 , to mark the film 's 35th anniversary , a special re @-@ release box set named Alien : 35th Anniversary Edition , containing the film on Blu @-@ ray , a digital copy , a reprint of Alien : The Illustrated Story , and a series of collectible art cards containing artwork by H.R. Giger related to the film , was released . The disk itself is the same as the respective disk on the 2010 Anthology Blu @-@ ray release , and contains MU @-@ TH @-@ UR mode , despite the lack of the required bonus disk . A reprint of the novel by Alan Dean Foster was also released . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Sequels = = = 
 The success of Alien led 20th Century Fox to finance three direct sequels over the next eighteen years , each by different writers and directors . Sigourney Weaver remained the only recurring actor through all four films , and the story of her character Ripley 's encounters with the Aliens became the thematic thread running through the series . James Cameron 's Aliens ( 1986 ) focused more on action and involved Ripley returning to the planetoid accompanied by marines to confront hordes of Aliens . David Fincher 's Alien 3 ( 1992 ) had nihilistic tones and found her on a prison planet battling another Alien , ultimately sacrificing herself to prevent her employers from acquiring the creatures . Jean @-@ Pierre Jeunet 's Alien : Resurrection ( 1997 ) saw Ripley resurrected through cloning to battle more Aliens even further in the future . 
 The success of the film series resulted in the creation of a media franchise with numerous novels , comic books , video games , toys , and other media and merchandise appearing over the years . A number of these began appearing under the Alien vs. Predator crossover imprint , which brought the Alien creatures together with the titular Predators of the Predator franchise . The film series eventually followed suit , with Paul W. S. Anderson 's Alien vs. Predator ( 2004 ) and Colin and Greg Strause 's Aliens vs. Predator : Requiem ( 2007 ) . These stories are set in the 2000s . 
 Sigourney Weaver has expressed interest in reuniting with Ridley Scott to revive her character for another Alien film . In the 2003 commentary track for the Alien DVD included in the Alien Quadrilogy set , she and Scott both speculated on the possibility , with Weaver stating : " There is an appetite for a fifth one , which is something I never expected ... it 's really hard to come up with a fifth story that 's new and fresh ... but I have wanted to go back into space ... I think outer space adventure is a good thing for us right now , ' cause Earth is so grim ... so we 've been talking about it , but very generally . " Scott remarked that , if the series were to continue , the most logical course would be to explore the origins of the space jockey and the Aliens . Weaver supported this idea , stating that " I think it would be great to go back , because I 'm asked that question so many times : ' Where did the Alien come from ? ' People really want to know in a very visceral way . " David Giler stated that he , Walter Hill , and Gordon Carroll , the producers of the first four films in the series , would not be willing to produce another unless it was about the Aliens ' homeworld and Weaver was on board ( although they were among the producers of Aliens vs. Predator and its sequel ) . Weaver , in turn , indicated that she would only return to the franchise if either Scott or James Cameron were directing . Cameron had been working on a story for a fifth Alien film which would explore the origins of the creatures , but ceased work on it when he learned that Fox was pursuing Alien vs. Predator , which he felt would " kill the validity of the franchise " . Weaver has continued to express interest in another installment , stating in 2008 that " I would definitely do another if I had a director like Ridley Scott and we had a good idea . Ridley is enthusiastic about it . " 
 In July 2009 , 20th Century Fox announced that Jon Spaihts had been hired to write a prequel to Alien , with Scott attached to direct . The script was subsequently re @-@ worked by Scott and Damon Lindelof . Titled Prometheus , it went into production in May 2011 , and was subsequently released in 2012 . Scott released a statement : " While Alien was indeed the jumping @-@ off point for this project , out of the creative process evolved a new , grand mythology and universe in which this original story takes place . The keen fan will recognize strands of Alien 's DNA , so to speak , but the ideas tackled in this film are unique , large and provocative . " 
 Variety reported on February 18 , 2015 that a new Alien film will be directed by Neill Blomkamp . On February 25 , it was confirmed that Sigourney Weaver would have a role in the film . 
 = = = Imitations = = = 
 Alien had both an immediate and long @-@ term impact on the science fiction and horror genres . Shortly after its debut , Dan O 'Bannon was sued by another writer named Jack Hammer for allegedly plagiarising a script entitled Black Space . However , O 'Bannon was able to prove that he had written his Alien script first . In the wake of Alien 's success a number of other filmmakers imitated or adapted some of its elements , sometimes by copying its title . One of the first was The Alien Dead ( 1979 ) , which was titled at the last minute to cash in on Alien 's popularity . Contamination ( 1980 ) was initially going to be titled Alien 2 until 20th Century Fox 's lawyers contacted writer / director Luigi <unk> and made him change it , and it built on press coverage of Alien 's chestburster scene by having many similar creatures , which originated from large , slimy eggs , bursting from characters ' chests . An unauthorized sequel to Alien , titled Alien Terror ( later Alien 2 : On Earth ) , was released in 1980 and included alien creatures which incubate inside human hosts . Other science fiction films of the time that borrowed elements from Alien include Galaxy of Terror ( 1981 ) , Inseminoid ( 1981 ) , Forbidden World ( 1982 ) , <unk> ( 1982 ) , and Dead Space ( 1991 ) . 
 The film studio The Asylum has produced two <unk> based on the Alien franchise : <unk> : Alien vs. Hunter ( based on the crossover Alien vs. Predator : Requiem ) and Alien Origin ( based on Prometheus ) . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 Critics have analyzed Alien 's sexual overtones . Following Barbara Creed 's analysis of the Alien creature as a representation of the " monstrous @-@ feminine as archaic mother , " Ximena Gallardo C. and C. Jason Smith compared the facehugger 's attack on Kane to a male rape and the chestburster scene to a form of violent birth , noting that the Alien 's phallic head and method of killing the crew members add to the sexual imagery . Dan O 'Bannon has argued that the scene is a metaphor for the male fear of penetration , and that the " oral invasion " of Kane by the facehugger functions as " payback " for the many horror films in which sexually vulnerable women are attacked by male monsters . McIntee claims that " Alien is a rape movie as much as Straw Dogs ( 1971 ) or I Spit on Your Grave ( 1978 ) , or The Accused ( 1988 ) . On one level it 's about an intriguing alien threat . On one level it 's about parasitism and disease . And on the level that was most important to the writers and director , it 's about sex , and reproduction by non @-@ consensual means . And it 's about this happening to a man . " He notes how the film plays on men 's fear and misunderstanding of pregnancy and childbirth , while also giving women a glimpse into these fears . Film analyst Lina Badley has written that the Alien 's design , with strong Freudian sexual undertones , multiple phallic symbols , and overall feminine figure , provides an androgynous image conforming to archetypal mappings and <unk> in horror films that often redraw gender lines . O 'Bannon himself later described the sexual imagery in Alien as overt and intentional : " One thing that people are all disturbed about is sex ... I said ' That 's how I 'm going to attack the audience ; I 'm going to attack them sexually . And I 'm not going to go after the women in the audience , I 'm going to attack the men . I am going to put in every image I can think of to make the men in the audience cross their legs . Homosexual oral rape , birth . The thing lays its eggs down your throat , the whole number . ' " 
 In the decades since its original release critics have analyzed and acknowledged Alien 's roots in earlier works of fiction . It has been noted as sharing thematic similarities with earlier science fiction films such as The Thing from Another World ( 1951 ) and It ! The Terror from Beyond Space ( 1958 ) as well as a kinship with other 1970s horror films such as Jaws ( 1975 ) and Halloween ( 1978 ) . Literary connections have also been suggested , including thematic comparisons to And Then There Were None ( 1939 ) . Many critics have also suggested that the film derives in part from A. E. van Vogt 's The Voyage of the Space Beagle ( 1950 ) , particularly the stories " The Black Destroyer " , in which a cat @-@ like alien infiltrates the ship and hunts the crew , and " Discord in Scarlet " , in which an alien implants parasitic eggs inside crew members which then hatch and eat their way out . O 'Bannon , however , denies that this was a source of his inspiration for Alien 's story . Van Vogt initiated a lawsuit against 20th Century Fox over the similarities , but Fox settled out of court . Rick Sanchez of IGN noted the " striking resemblance " to Mario Bava 's cult classic Planet of the Vampires ( 1965 ) , especially in a celebrated sequence in which the crew discovers a ruin containing the skeletal remains of long dead giant beings , and in the design and shots of the ship itself , similar to the derelict spacecraft in Alien . Despite the visual similarities , both O 'Bannon and director Ridley Scott claimed in a 1979 interview that they had not seen Planet of the Vampires . 
 Writer David McIntee has also noted similarities to the Doctor Who episode " The Ark in Space " ( 1975 ) , in which an insectoid queen alien lays larvae inside humans which later eat their way out , a life cycle inspired by that of the ichneumon wasp . He has also noted similarities between the first half of the film , particularly in early versions of the script , to H.P. Lovecraft 's At the Mountains of Madness , " not in storyline , but in dread @-@ building mystery " , and calls the finished film " the best Lovecraftian movie ever made , without being a Lovecraft adaptation " , due to its similarities in tone and atmosphere to Lovecraft 's works . In 2009 , Dan O 'Bannon said the film was " strongly influenced , tone @-@ wise , by Lovecraft , and one of the things it proved is that you can 't adapt Lovecraft effectively without an extremely strong visual style ... What you need is a cinematic equivalent of Lovecraft 's prose . " Regarding O 'Bannon 's initial Alien storyline , H. R. Giger stated , " I liked it particularly because I found it was in the vein of Lovecraft , one of my greatest sources of inspiration . " 
 = = = Lasting critical praise = = = 
 Alien has continued to receive critical acclaim over the years , particularly for its realism and unique environment . It has a 97 % approval rating at the online review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes based on 89 reviews , while Metacritic gives an 83 % approval rating based on 22 reviews . Critical interest in the film was re @-@ ignited in part by the theatrical release of the " Director 's Cut " in 2003 . Despite having criticized Alien in 1980 , Roger Ebert included it in his " Great Movies " column in 2003 , ranking it among " the most influential of modern action pictures " and praising its pacing , atmosphere , and settings : 
 One of the great strengths of Alien is its pacing . It takes its time . It waits . It allows silences ( the majestic opening shots are underscored by Jerry Goldsmith with scarcely audible , far @-@ off metallic <unk> ) . It suggests the enormity of the crew 's discovery by building up to it with small steps : The interception of a signal ( is it a warning or an SOS ? ) . The descent to the extraterrestrial surface . The bitching by Brett and Parker , who are concerned only about collecting their shares . The masterstroke of the surface murk through which the crew members move , their helmet lights hardly penetrating the soup . The shadowy outline of the alien ship . The sight of the alien pilot , frozen in his command chair . The enormity of the discovery inside the ship ( " It 's full of ... leathery eggs ... " ) . 
 McIntee praises Alien as " possibly the definitive combination of horror thriller with science fiction trappings . " He notes , however , that it is a horror film first and a science fiction film second , since science fiction normally explores issues of how humanity will develop under other circumstances . Alien , on the other hand , focuses on the plight of people being attacked by a monster : " It 's set on a spaceship in the future , but it 's about people trying not to get eaten by a drooling monstrous animal . Worse , it 's about them trying not to get raped by said drooling monstrous animal . " Along with Halloween and Friday the 13th ( 1980 ) , he describes it as a prototype for the slasher film genre : " The reason it 's such a good movie , and wowed both the critics , who normally frown on the genre , and the casual cinema @-@ goer , is that it is a distillation of everything that scares us in the movies . " He also describes how the film appeals to a variety of audiences : " Fans of Hitchcockian thrillers like it because it 's moody and dark . <unk> like it for the chest @-@ burster . Science fiction fans love the hard science fiction trappings and hardware . Men love the battle @-@ for @-@ survival element , and women love not being cast as the helpless victim . " 
 David Edelstein wrote , " Alien remains the key text in the ' body horror ' subgenre that flowered ( or , depending on your viewpoint , festered ) in the seventies , and Giger ’ s designs covered all possible avenues of anxiety . Men traveled through vulva @-@ like openings , got forcibly impregnated , and died giving birth to rampaging gooey vaginas dentate — how ’ s that for future shock ? This was truly what David Cronenberg would call ' the new flesh , ' a dissolution of the boundaries between man and machine , machine and alien , and man and alien , with a psychosexual invasiveness that has never , thank God , been equaled . " 
 In 2002 , Alien was deemed " culturally , historically or aesthetically significant " by the National Film Preservation Board of the United States , and was inducted into the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress for historical preservation alongside other films of 1979 including All That Jazz , Apocalypse Now , The Black Stallion , and Manhattan . In 2008 the American Film Institute ranked Alien as the seventh @-@ best film in the science fiction genre as part of AFI 's 10 Top 10 , a CBS television special ranking the ten greatest movies in ten classic American film genres . The ranks were based on a poll of over 1 @,@ 500 film artists , critics , and historians , with Alien ranking just above Terminator 2 : Judgment Day ( 1991 ) and just below Ridley Scott 's other science fiction film Blade Runner ( 1982 ) . The same year , Empire magazine ranked it thirty @-@ third on its list of the five hundred greatest movies of all time , based on a poll of 10 @,@ 200 readers , critics , and members of the film industry . 
 = French ironclad Belliqueuse = 
 The French ironclad Belliqueuse ( " Bellicose " ) was a wooden @-@ hulled , armored corvette , built for the French Navy in the 1860s and designed as a cheap ironclad . She was the first French ironclad to sail around the world , which she did between December 1867 and May 1869 . She spent the bulk of her career in the Pacific before returning to Toulon , where she was used as a target in 1886 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Belliqueuse was designed as a small and cheap ironclad suitable for foreign deployments . Her armament and armor was concentrated in the middle of the ship like a central battery ironclad , but unlike those ships she lacked armored transverse bulkheads and was very vulnerable to raking fire . Like most ironclads of her era she was equipped with a bronze ram ; hers weighed 2 @,@ 200 kilograms ( 4 @,@ 900 lb ) . 
 Belliqueuse measured 68 @.@ 05 meters ( 223 ft 3 in ) at the waterline and 70 meters ( 229 ft 8 in ) between perpendiculars , with a beam of 14 @.@ 01 meters ( 46 ft 0 in ) . She had a draft of 6 @.@ 97 meters ( 22 ft 10 in ) and displaced 3 @,@ 777 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 717 long tons ) . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ship had a single horizontal return connecting @-@ rod steam engine driving a single propeller . Her engine was powered by four oval boilers . The engine produced a total of 1 @,@ 200 indicated horsepower ( 890 kW ) and gave a top speed of 11 knots ( 20 km / h ; 13 mph ) . On sea trials the engine produced 1 @,@ 227 indicated horsepower ( 915 kW ) and the ship reached 11 @.@ 83 knots ( 21 @.@ 91 km / h ; 13 @.@ 61 mph ) . Belliqueuse carried 250 metric tons ( 250 long tons ) of coal which allowed the ship to steam for 1 @,@ 410 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 610 km ; 1 @,@ 620 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Belliqueuse was barque @-@ rigged ; initially she had a sail area of 1 @,@ 450 square meters ( 15 @,@ 600 sq ft ) , but this was later increased to 1 @,@ 800 square metres ( 19 @,@ 000 sq ft ) in 1869 . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Belliqueuse mounted her four 194 @-@ millimeter ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) Modèle 1864 guns in the central battery on the battery deck along with four of her six 164 @-@ millimeter ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) Modèle 1864 guns . The other two 164 mm guns were carried on pivot mounts fore and aft on the upper deck . She was partially rearmed in 1870 and exchanged her 164 @-@ mm pivot guns for a pair of 138 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 4 in ) Modèle 1870 guns . In addition four 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss 5 @-@ barrel revolving guns each were added . They fired a shell weighing about 500 g ( 1 @.@ 1 lb ) at a muzzle velocity of about 610 m / s ( 2 @,@ 000 ft / s ) to a range of about 3 @,@ 200 meters ( 3 @,@ 500 yd ) . They had a rate of fire of about 30 rounds per minute . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 Belliqueuse was completely armored with 150 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) of wrought iron from the battery deck down to 1 @.@ 5 meters ( 4 ft 11 in ) below the waterline . The sides of the battery itself were protected with 120 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) of armor , but the ends were closed only by light screens . Fore and aft of the battery , her sides were unprotected . 
 = = Service = = 
 Belliqueuse was laid down at Toulon in September 1863 , and launched on 6 September 1865 . The ship began her sea trials on 30 December 1865 , but did not enter service until 30 October 1866 . That day she was commissioned as the flagship of the Pacific Station under command of Rear Admiral <unk> . On 22 December 1867 , the ship departed Toulon in an attempt to circumnavigate the world . Belliqueuse arrived at Brest on 26 May 1869 after 396 days at sea , the first French ironclad to do so . On 15 November 1869 she hoisted the flag of Rear Admiral Chevalier as commander of the Levant Squadron . During 1870 she was transferred to New Caledonia as flagship of the Western Pacific Division ( French : Division de l <unk> <unk> ) , but returned to Toulon on 5 June 1871 after the death of Rear Admiral Chevalier . In 1872 the ship was sent to the China Station and relieved French ironclad Alma as flagship of the station on 1 October 1872 . She returned to Toulon on 3 May 1874 . 
 Belliqueuse served with the Evolutionary Squadron for six months from 5 June 1877 and was reduced to reserve afterwards . She was paid off on 15 November 1884 and struck off the Navy List on 3 May 1886 . Belliqueuse was used as a target afterwards . 
 = Delaware Route 92 = 
 Delaware Route 92 ( DE 92 ) is a 8 @.@ 83 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 14 @.@ 21 km ) road in northern New Castle County , Delaware that runs a short distance to the south of the Pennsylvania / Delaware state line for most of its length . The route runs from DE 100 near Montchanin east to U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) in Claymont . The road is a two @-@ lane rural road between the western terminus and US 202 , passing through Brandywine Creek State Park . East of US 202 , DE 92 is a four @-@ lane divided highway called Naamans Road that passes through suburban areas to the north of Wilmington , interchanging with Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) in Claymont . DE 92 was first built as a state highway east of US 202 during the 1920s and 1930s . By 1968 , the route was designated onto its current alignment . In the 1990s , DE 92 east of US 202 was widened into a divided highway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 92 begins at the intersection with DE 100 and Adams Dam Road near Montchanin . The route runs northeast on a two @-@ lane undivided road called Thompson Bridge Road , passing through farmland to the north of Brandywine Creek State Park . The road continues into forested areas of the state park , crossing the Brandywine Creek . After the state park , DE 92 heads into areas of fields within First State National Historical Park , continuing northeast along Ramsey Road before curving to the north . The route turns east onto Beaver Valley Road , widening into a four @-@ lane divided highway as it passes south of business parks and intersects US 202 . 
 Past the US 202 intersection , DE 92 becomes Naamans Road and passes to the south of Brandywine Town Center as it continues into residential and commercial areas and intersects Shipley Road . Past the Brandywine Town Center , the route heads through neighborhoods in Brandywine Hundred and passes to the south of Concord High School before intersecting <unk> Road , which goes north to the highest point in Delaware ( <unk> Azimuth ) and into Pennsylvania . After this , the road comes to an intersection with DE 261 . 
 Farther east , DE 92 reaches a junction with the northern terminus of DE 3 . From here , the road crosses over CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision and turns to the east @-@ southeast . The route heads into business areas in Claymont and comes to an interchange with I @-@ 95 at the northern terminus of I @-@ 495 . After the I @-@ 95 interchange , DE 92 passes to the south of the Tri @-@ State Mall and has an intersection with the southern terminus of DE 491 . Past this intersection , the route turns southeast before ending at US 13 south of the Robinson House . 
 DE 92 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 28 @,@ 720 vehicles at the Shipley Road intersection to a low of 8 @,@ 065 vehicles at the Creek Road intersection . The portion of DE 92 east of US 202 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , what is now DE 92 originally existed as a county road , with the portion east of Foulk Road proposed to become a state highway . The state highway between Foulk Road and Philadelphia Pike was completed four years later . By 1931 , the portion of road between Grubb Road and Foulk Road was upgraded to a state highway . The state highway portion was extended west to Concord Pike by 1936 . 
 By 1968 , DE 92 was designated onto its current alignment between DE 100 and US 13 , with the easternmost portion replacing what had been designated a part of US 13 Bypass . DE 92 was widened into a divided highway by 1997 between US 202 and DE 261 and between DE 3 and DE 491 . Two years later , the road was upgraded to a divided highway between DE 261 and DE 3 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Azusa Street Revival = 
 The Azusa Street Revival was a historic Pentecostal revival meeting that took place in Los Angeles , California and is the origin of the Pentecostal movement . It was led by William J. Seymour , an African American preacher . It began with a meeting on April 9 , 1906 , and continued until roughly 1915 . The revival was characterized by ecstatic spiritual experiences accompanied by miracles , dramatic worship services , speaking in tongues , and inter @-@ racial mingling . The participants were criticized by the secular media and Christian theologians for behaviors considered to be outrageous and unorthodox , especially at the time . Today , the revival is considered by historians to be the primary catalyst for the spread of Pentecostalism in the 20th century . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Los Angeles = = = 
 In 1905 , William J. Seymour , the one @-@ eyed 34 @-@ year @-@ old son of former slaves , was a student of well @-@ known Pentecostal preacher Charles Parham and an interim pastor for a small holiness church in Houston , Texas . Neely Terry , an African American woman who attended a small holiness church pastored by Julia Hutchins in Los Angeles , made a trip to visit family in Houston late in 1905 . While in Houston , she visited Seymour 's church , where he preached receiving the Holy Ghost with the evidence of speaking in other tongues , and though he had not experienced this personally , Terry was impressed with his character and message . Once home in California , Terry suggested that Seymour be invited to speak at the local church . Seymour received and accepted the invitation in February 1906 , and he received financial help and a blessing from Parham for his planned one @-@ month visit . 
 Seymour arrived in Los Angeles on February 22 , 1906 , and within two days was preaching at Julia Hutchins ' church at the corner of Ninth Street and Santa Fe Avenue . During his first sermon , he preached that speaking in tongues was the first biblical evidence of the inevitable infilling in the Holy Ghost . On the following Sunday , March 4 , he returned to the church and found that Hutchins had padlocked the door . Elders of the church rejected Seymour 's teaching , primarily because he had not yet experienced the blessing about which he was preaching . Condemnation of his message also came from the Holiness Church Association of Southern California with which the church had affiliation . However , not all members of Hutchins ' church rejected Seymour 's preaching . He was invited to stay in the home of congregation member Edward S. Lee , and he began to hold Bible studies and prayer meetings there . 
 = = = North Bonnie Brae Street = = = 
 Seymour and his small group of new followers soon relocated to the home of Richard and Ruth <unk> at 216 North Bonnie Brae Street . White families from local holiness churches began to attend as well . The group would get together regularly and pray to receive the baptism of the Holy Spirit . On April 9 , 1906 , after five weeks of Seymour 's preaching and prayer , and three days into an intended 10 @-@ day fast , Edward S. Lee spoke in tongues for the first time . At the next meeting , Seymour shared Lee 's testimony and preached a sermon on Acts 2 : 4 and soon six others began to speak in tongues as well , including Jennie Moore , who would later become Seymour 's wife . A few days later , on April 12 , Seymour spoke in tongues for the first time after praying all night long . 
 News of the events at North Bonnie Brae St. quickly circulated among the African American , Latino and White residents of the city , and for several nights , various speakers would preach to the crowds of curious and interested onlookers from the front porch of the <unk> home . Members of the audience included people from a broad spectrum of income levels and religious backgrounds . Hutchins eventually spoke in tongues as her whole congregation began to attend the meetings . Soon the crowds became very large and were full of people speaking in tongues , shouting , singing and moaning . Finally , the front porch collapsed , forcing the group to begin looking for a new meeting place . A resident of the neighborhood described the happenings at 216 North Bonnie Brae with the following words : 
 They shouted three days and three nights . It was Easter season . The people came from everywhere . By the next morning there was no way of getting near the house . As people came in they would fall under God 's power ; and the whole city was stirred . They shouted until the foundation of the house gave way , but no one was hurt . 
 = = Azusa Street = = 
 = = = Conditions = = = 
 The group from Bonnie Brae Street eventually discovered an available building at 312 Azusa Street in downtown Los Angeles , which had originally been constructed as an African Methodist Episcopal Church in what was then a poverty part of town . The rent was $ 8 @.@ 00 per month . A newspaper referred to the downtown Los Angeles building as a " tumble down shack " . Since the church had moved out , the building had served as a wholesale house , a warehouse , a lumberyard , stockyards , a tombstone shop , and had most recently been used as a stable with rooms for rent upstairs . It was a small , rectangular , flat @-@ roofed building , approximately 60 feet ( 18 m ) long and 40 feet ( 12 m ) wide , totaling 2 @,@ 400 square feet ( 220 m2 ) , sided with weathered whitewashed <unk> . The only sign that it had once been a house of God was a single Gothic @-@ style window over the main entrance . 
 <unk> lumber and plaster littered the large , barn @-@ like room on the ground floor . Nonetheless , it was secured and cleaned in preparation for services . They held their first meeting on April 14 , 1906 . Church services were held on the first floor where the benches were placed in a rectangular pattern . Some of the benches were simply planks put on top of empty nail kegs . There was no elevated platform , as the ceiling was only eight feet high . Initially there was no pulpit . Frank <unk> , an early participant in the revival , recalled that " Brother Seymour generally sat behind two empty shoe boxes , one on top of the other . He usually kept his head inside the top one during the meeting , in prayer . There was no pride there .... In that old building , with its low rafters and bare floors ... " 
 The second floor at the now @-@ named Apostolic Faith Mission housed an office and rooms for several residents including Seymour and his new wife , Jennie . It also had a large prayer room to handle the overflow from the altar services below . The prayer room was furnished with chairs and benches made from California Redwood planks , laid end to end on backless chairs . 
 By mid @-@ May 1906 , anywhere from 300 to 1 @,@ 500 people would attempt to fit into the building . Since horses had very recently been the residents of the building , flies constantly bothered the attendees . People from a diversity of backgrounds came together to worship : men , women , children , black , white , Hispanic , Asian , rich , poor , illiterate , and educated . People of all ages flocked to Los Angeles with both skepticism and a desire to participate . The intermingling of races and the group 's encouragement of women in leadership was remarkable , as 1906 was the height of the " Jim Crow " era of racial segregation , and fourteen years prior to women receiving suffrage in the United States . 
 = = = Services and worship = = = 
 Worship at 312 Azusa Street was frequent and spontaneous with services going almost around the clock . Among those attracted to the revival were not only members of the Holiness Movement , but also Baptists , Mennonites , Quakers , and Presbyterians . An observer at one of the services wrote these words : 
 No instruments of music are used . None are needed . No <unk> the angels have been heard by some in the spirit . No collections are taken . No bills have been posted to advertise the meetings . No church organization is back of it . All who are in touch with God realize as soon as they enter the meetings that the Holy Ghost is the leader . 
 The Los Angeles Times was not so kind in its description : 
 Meetings are held in a tumble @-@ down shack on Azusa Street , and the devotees of the weird doctrine practice the most fanatical rites , preach the wildest theories and work themselves into a state of mad excitement in their peculiar zeal . African Americans and a sprinkling of whites compose the congregation , and night is made hideous in the neighborhood by the <unk> of the worshippers , who spend hours swaying forth and back in a nerve racking attitude of prayer and supplication . They claim to have the " gift of tongues " and be able to understand the <unk> . 
 The first edition of the Apostolic Faith publication claimed a common reaction to the revival from visitors : 
 Proud , well @-@ dressed preachers came to ' investigate ' . Soon their high looks were replaced with wonder , then conviction comes , and very often you will find them in a short time wallowing on the dirty floor , asking God to forgive them and make them as little children . 
 Among first @-@ hand accounts were reports of the blind having their sight restored , diseases cured instantly , and immigrants speaking in German , Yiddish , and Spanish all being spoken to in their native language by uneducated black members , who translated the languages into English by " supernatural ability " . 
 Singing was sporadic and in a cappella or occasionally in tongues . There were periods of extended silence . <unk> were occasionally slain in the Spirit . Visitors gave their testimony , and members read aloud testimonies that were sent to the mission by mail . There was prayer for the gift of tongues . There was prayer in tongues for the sick , for missionaries , and whatever requests were given by attenders or mailed in . There was spontaneous preaching and altar calls for salvation , sanctification and baptism of the Holy Spirit . Lawrence <unk> , whose family attended the revival , said that in most services preaching consisted of Seymour opening a Bible and worshippers coming forward to preach or testify as they were led by the Holy Spirit . Many people would continually shout throughout the meetings . The members of the mission never took an offering , but there was a receptacle near the door for anyone that wanted to support the revival . The core membership of the Azusa Street Mission was never much more than 50 – 60 individuals with hundreds and thousands of people visiting or staying temporarily over the years . 
 = = = Charles Parham = = = 
 By October 1906 , Charles Parham was invited to speak for a series of meetings at Azusa Street , but was quickly un @-@ invited . Several reasons can be given for Azusa Street 's disassociation from him . Firstly , Parham had personality conflicts with Seymour and wanted to be the chief authority figure of the movement that was taking place , but the presiding leaders of the Apostolic Faith Mission were slow to make any changes to their methods or leadership . 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 In a skeptical front @-@ page story titled " Weird Babel of Tongues " , a Los Angeles Times reporter attempted to describe what would soon be known as the Azusa Street Revival . " Breathing strange utterances and mouthing a creed which it would seem no sane mortal could understand " , the story began , " the newest religious sect has started in Los Angeles " . Another local paper reporter in September 1906 described the happenings with the following words : 
 ... disgraceful intermingling of the races ... they cry and make howling noises all day and into the night . They run , jump , shake all over , shout to the top of their voice , spin around in circles , fall out on the sawdust blanketed floor jerking , kicking and rolling all over it . Some of them pass out and do not move for hours as though they were dead . These people appear to be mad , mentally deranged or under a spell . They claim to be filled with the spirit . They have a one eyed , illiterate , Negro as their preacher who stays on his knees much of the time with his head hidden between the wooden milk crates . He doesn 't talk very much but at times he can be heard shouting , ' Repent , ' and he 's supposed to be running the thing ... They repeatedly sing the same song , ' The Comforter Has <unk> 
 The attenders of the meetings were often described as " Holy Rollers " , " Holy Jumpers " , " Tangled <unk> " and " Holy <unk> " . Reports were published throughout the U.S. and the world of the strange happenings in Los Angeles . 
 Christians from many traditions were critical , saying the movement was hyper @-@ emotional , misused Scripture and lost focus on Christ by overemphasizing the Holy Spirit . Within a short time ministers were warning their congregations to stay away from the Azusa Street Mission . Some called the police and tried to get the building shut down . 
 = = = Apostolic Faith publication = = = 
 Also starting in September 1906 was the publication of the revival 's own newsletter , the Apostolic Faith . Issues were published occasionally up until May 1908 , mostly through the work of Seymour and a white woman named Clara Lum , a member of the Apostolic Faith Mission . The Apostolic Faith was distributed without charge , and thousands of laypersons and ministers received copies worldwide . Five thousand copies of the first edition were printed , and by 1907 the press run reached over 40 @,@ 000 . 
 The Apostolic Faith publication reported the happenings at the Azusa Street Mission to the world . Its first issue 's lead story was titled " Pentecost has Come " . It contained a letter from Charles Parham , an article on Pentecost from Acts , and a series of anecdotes of people 's experience within the revival . One edition in 1907 wrote , " One token of the Lord 's coming is that He is melting all races and nations together , and they are filled with the power and glory of God . He is baptizing by one spirit into one body and making up a people that will be ready to meet Him when He comes " . The Apostolic Faith brought increasing attention to the happenings at Azusa Street and the fledgling movement that was emerging from the revival . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 By 1913 , the revival at Azusa Street had lost momentum , and by 1915 most of the media attention and crowds had left . Seymour remained there with his wife , Jennie , for the rest of their lives as pastors of the small African American congregation , though he often made short trips to help establish other smaller revivals later in life . After Seymour died of a heart attack on September 28 , 1922 , Jennie led the church until 1931 , when the congregation lost the building . 
 = = = Sending of missionaries = = = 
 As The Apostolic Faith and many secular reports advertised the events of the Azusa Street Revival internationally , thousands of individuals visited the Mission in order to witness it firsthand . At the same time , thousands of people were leaving Azusa Street with the intentions of evangelizing abroad . Reverend K. E. M. Spooner visited the revival in 1909 and became one of the Pentecostal Holiness Church 's most effective missionaries in Africa , working among the Tswana people of Botswana . A. G. Garr and his wife were sent from Azusa Street as missionaries to Calcutta , India , where they managed to start a small revival . Speaking in tongues in India did not enable them to speak the native language , Bengali . The <unk> later traveled to China where they arrived in Hong Kong and began to spread Pentecostalism in mainland China . They did this by working through other Protestant churches and organizations that had already been established . Garr significantly contributed to early Pentecostalism through his later work in redefining the " biblical evidence " doctrine and changing the doctrine from a belief that speaking in tongues was explicitly for evangelism to a belief that speaking in tongues was a gift for " spiritual empowerment " . 
 Missionary Bernt Bernsten traveled all the way from North China to investigate the happenings after hearing that the biblical prophecy of Acts 2 : 4 was being fulfilled . Other visitors left the revival to become missionaries in remote areas all over the world . So many missionaries went out from Azusa ( some thirty @-@ eight left in October 1906 ) that within two years the movement had spread to over fifty nations , including Britain , Scandinavia , Germany , Holland , Egypt , Syria , Palestine , South Africa , Hong Kong , China , Ceylon and India . Christian leaders visited from all over the world . 
 = = = Birth of Pentecostal movement = = = 
 By the end of 1906 , most leaders from Azusa Street had spun off to form other congregations , such as the 51st Street Apostolic Faith Mission , the Spanish AFM , and the Italian Pentecostal Mission . These missions were largely composed of immigrant or ethnic groups . The Southeast United States was a particularly prolific area of growth for the movement , since Seymour 's approach gave a useful explanation for a charismatic spiritual climate that had already been taking root in those areas . Other new missions were based on preachers who had charisma and energy . Nearly all of these new churches were founded among immigrants and the poor . 
 Many existing Wesleyan @-@ holiness denominations adopted the Pentecostal message , such as the Church of God ( Cleveland , Tennessee ) , the Church of God in Christ , and the Pentecostal Holiness Church . The formation of new denominations also occurred , motivated by doctrinal differences between Wesleyan Pentecostals and their Finished Work counterparts , such as the Assemblies of God formed in 1914 and the Pentecostal Church of God formed in 1919 . An early doctrinal controversy led to a split between Trinitarian and Oneness Pentecostals , the latter founded the Pentecostal Assemblies of the World in 1916 . 
 Today , there are more than 500 million Pentecostal and charismatic believers across the globe , and it is the fastest @-@ growing form of Christianity today . The Azusa Street Revival is commonly regarded as the beginning of the modern @-@ day Pentecostal Movement . 
 = Jaws 2 = 
 Jaws 2 is a 1978 American thriller film , the first sequel to Steven Spielberg 's Jaws ( 1975 ) , and the second installment in the Jaws franchise . Directed by Jeannot Szwarc , it stars Roy Scheider as Police Chief Martin Brody , who must deal with another great white shark terrorizing the waters of Amity Island , a fictional seaside resort , with Lorraine Gary and Murray Hamilton reprising their respective roles as Martin 's wife Ellen Brody and mayor Larry Vaughn . 
 Like the first film , the production of Jaws 2 was troubled . The original director , John D. Hancock , proved to be unsuitable for an action film and was replaced by Szwarc . Scheider , who only reprised his role to end a contractual issue with Universal , was also unhappy during production and had several heated exchanges with Szwarc . 
 Jaws 2 was briefly the highest @-@ grossing sequel in history until The Empire Strikes Back was released in 1980 . The film 's tagline , " Just when you thought it was safe to go back in the water ... , " has become one of the most famous in film history and has been parodied and homaged several times . Jaws 2 is widely considered to be the best Jaws sequel . 
 Jaws 2 was followed by Jaws 3 @-@ D and Jaws : The Revenge , released in 1983 and 1987 , respectively . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Prior to a new hotel opening on Amity Island , an enormous great white shark ambushes and kills two divers who are photographing the wreck of the Orca , the late Quint 's boat . A couple of days later , their camera is recovered , and the shark goes after a female water skier and speedboat driver , devouring the skier while the driver fends off the shark using a gas tank and flare gun , causing the boat to explode , which kills her and severely burns the shark 's face . 
 Along with these disappearances , a killer whale bearing large wounds is beached . Police Chief Martin Brody believes these events are the work of a shark . Brody explains his concerns to Mayor Larry Vaughn , who doubts the town has another shark problem . Later , Brody finds a piece of the destroyed speedboat in the surf just off the beach . He wades over to retrieve it and uncovers the boat driver 's burnt remains . 
 The following day , at the beach , Brody sees a dark shadow that approaches the swimmers . Thinking it is a shark , he frantically orders everyone out of the water and causes a panic by firing his gun . However , the shadow is revealed to be a school of bluefish , making people think Brody 's insane . His fears are later confirmed when he acquires a close @-@ up picture of the shark from the diver 's camera . The Amity town council , including local developer Len Peterson , deny the evidence and vote Brody out as Police Chief . 
 The next morning , Brody 's teenage son Mike ( who witnessed the shark attack in the estuary last time ) disobeys his father by sneaking out to go sailing with his friends after his love interest Jackie Peters goads him to , but his younger brother Sean catches him , and encourages Mike to bring him along . After an argument at the dock , Marge , one of Mike 's friends , playfully lets Sean come in her boat with her , and after a couple other grouping arrangements , they head out , going past a team of divers , led by instructor Tom Andrews . Moments after going underwater , one of the divers encounters the shark . Panicking , he rushes to the surface , causing an embolism . Soon after , the shark hits teenagers Tina Wilcox and Eddie Marchand ; Eddie falls in the water and is killed by the shark . 
 Brody and his wife Ellen follow an ambulance to the docks , where they find Tom as he is put on a stretcher ; the divers suspect something scared him underwater . Deputy Len Hendricks , Brody 's replacement , tells them Mike went sailing with his friends , so Brody , along with Ellen and Hendricks , takes the police boat to rescue them . While searching , they come across Tina 's boat , and find her hiding in the bow ; she fearfully mentions the shark 's presence . Hendricks and Ellen take Tina to shore , where the truth is revealed , while Brody goes on to find the kids . 
 Meanwhile , the shark attacks the other kids , hitting one of their boats and causing most of them to capsize and crash into each other in the ensuing panic , throwing several of them , including Mike and Sean , in the water . The other teens help them out of the water while two of them pull Mike out as the shark goes for him and head back to get help . Sean and the others remain adrift on the wreckage of tangled boats . A Coast Guard marine helicopter that Brody contacted arrives to tow them to shore . Before the pilot can tow them , the shark attacks and sinks the chopper , and then knocks Sean into the water , but Marge sacrifices herself to save him from the shark . 
 Brody runs into Mike , who tells his father that Sean is with his friends , drifting towards Cable Junction , a small island housing an electrical relay station , and apologizes for not knowing about the shark . Brody accepts his apology while telling him to get to safety and quickly finds them , but when the shark reappears , he panics and maroons the police boat on Cable Junction . He then tries to pull them with a winch but hooks an underwater power cable . The shark 's next attack sends most of the teenagers into the water , and they swim to Cable Junction while Sean and Jackie are trapped on the boats . Using an inflatable raft , Brody hits the power cable with an oar to attract the shark and encourages it to bite the cable ; the shark is fatally electrocuted , and its corpse sinks to the bottom of the sea . The shaken kids rejoice as Brody picks up Sean and Jackie and they join them on Cable Junction to await rescue . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 Universal wanted a sequel to Jaws early into the success of the original film . Producers Brown and Zanuck realized that someone else would produce the film if they did not , and preferred to be in charge of the project themselves . 
 In October 1975 , Steven Spielberg told the San Francisco Film Festival that " making a sequel to anything is just a cheap carny trick " and that he did not even respond to the producers when they asked him to direct Jaws 2 . He claimed that the planned plot was to involve the sons of Quint and Brody hunting a new shark . Brown said that Spielberg did not want to direct the sequel because he felt that he had done the " definitive shark movie " . The director later added that his decision was influenced by the problems the Jaws production faced - " I would have done the sequel if I hadn ’ t had such a horrible time at sea on the first film . " 
 Despite Spielberg 's rejection , the studio went ahead with plans to make the sequel , leading to an arduous 18 @-@ month pre @-@ production process . Howard Sackler , who had contributed to the first film 's script but chose not to be credited , was charged with writing the first draft . He originally proposed a prequel based on the sinking of the USS Indianapolis , the story relayed by Quint in the first film . Although Universal president Sidney Sheinberg thought Sackler 's treatment for the film was intriguing , he rejected the idea . On Sackler 's recommendation , theatre and film director John D. Hancock was chosen to helm the picture . Sackler later felt betrayed when Dorothy Tristan , Hancock 's wife , was invited to rewrite his script . 
 The film , under Hancock 's direction and Tristan 's writing , had originally a different tone and premise than what would eventually be seen in the final film . The two had envisioned Amity as a sort of ghost @-@ town when the film opened with several businesses shuttered and the island 's overall economy in ruins due to the events seen in the first film . The new resort and condos built on the island by developer Len Peterson were to help celebrate its rebirth giving the island 's economy a much needed boost . Tristan had borrowed a subplot from the original Jaws novel and from a discarded early draft of the first film , in which Amity officials were in debt to the Mafia . Both Mayor Vaughn and Len Peterson were anxious for the new island resort to be a success not only to revive Amity but to pay back loans from the Mob that helped build it , thus leading to Vaughn 's and Peterson 's ignoring of Brody 's warning . Tristan and Hancock felt this treatment would lead to more character development that would make the overall story that much more believable . 
 Hancock began filming in June 1977 . However , after nearly a month of filming , Universal and MCA executives disliked the dark , subtle tone that the film was taking and wanted a more lighthearted and action oriented story . Additionally , Hancock ran into trouble with Sheinberg , who suggested to Hancock and Tristan that his wife , actress Lorraine Gary ( Ellen Brody ) , " should go out on a boat and help to rescue the kids . " When told of the idea , Zanuck replied , " Over my dead body . " The next draft of the film 's screenplay was turned in with Gary not going out to sea . Hancock says that this , and his later firing of another actress who turned out to be a Universal executive 's girlfriend , contributed to his own dismissal from the film . 
 Hancock began to feel the pressure of directing his first epic adventure film " with only three film credits , and all small @-@ scale dramas " . The producers were unhappy with his material , and on a Saturday evening in June 1977 , after a meeting with the producers and Universal executives , the director was fired . He and his wife left for Rome and production was shut down for a few weeks . The couple had been involved in the film for eighteen months . Hancock blamed his departure on the mechanical shark , telling a newspaper that it still couldn 't swim or bite after a year and a half ; " You get a couple of shots and [ the shark ] breaks . " Echoing the first film 's production , Carl Gottlieb was enlisted to further revise the script , adding humor and reducing some of the violence . Gottlieb wrote on location at Fort Walton Beach , Florida . It cost the producers more money to hire Gottlieb to do the rewrite than it would have if they had hired him in the first place . 
 At this point , Spielberg considered returning to direct the sequel . Over the Bicentennial weekend in 1976 , Spielberg had hammered out a screenplay based on Quint 's Indianapolis speech . Because of his contract for Close Encounters of the Third Kind , however , he would not be able to work on the film for a further year , a gap too long for the producers . Production designer Joe Alves ( who would direct Jaws 3 @-@ D ) and Verna Fields ( who had been promoted to vice @-@ president at Universal after her acclaimed editing on the first film ) proposed that they co @-@ direct it . The request was declined by the Directors Guild of America , partly because they would not allow a DGA member to be replaced by someone who was not one of its members , and partly because they , in the wake of events on the set of The Outlaw Josey Wales , had instituted a ban on any cast or crew members taking over as director during a film 's production . The reins were eventually handed to Jeannot Szwarc , best known for the film Bug and whom Alves knew from working on the TV series Night Gallery . Szwarc recommenced production by filming the complicated <unk> scene , giving Gottlieb some time to complete the script . He reinstated the character of Deputy Hendricks , played by Jeffrey Kramer , who had been missing from the earlier script . Many of the teenagers were sacked , with the remaining roles developed . 
 Three sharks were built for the film . The first was the " platform shark " , also referred to as the " luxurious shark " . Special mechanical effects supervisor Robert Mattey and Roy Arbogast used the same body mould used for the shark in the first film . The sharks from the original film had rotted behind sheds on the lower lot of Universal Studios in the intervening years , and the only pieces that were salvageable were the <unk> tube frames . Mattey 's design was much more complicated and ambitious than the first film . The same ( male ) body was used , but a brand new head was made by sculptor Chris Mueller which made use of an all @-@ new mouth mechanism , one which incorporated jowls to disguise the pinching of the cheeks that had proven to be a problem with the shark in the original film . The sharks for Jaws 2 were known as Bruce Two ( the sharks for the original film had been nicknamed " Bruce " , after Steven Spielberg 's lawyer ) , but on set they were referred to as " Fidel " and " Harold " , the latter after David Brown 's Beverly Hills lawyer . The other shark props used were a fin and a full shark , both of which could be pulled by boats . " Cable Junction " , the island shown in the film 's climax , was actually a floating barge covered with fiber @-@ glass rocks . This was created in order to enable the shark platform to be positioned to it as close as possible ( a real island would have hindered this due to the upward slope of the seabed making the shark platform visible ) . Like the first film , footage of real sharks filmed by Australian divers Ron & Valerie Taylor were used for movement shots that could not be convincingly achieved using the mechanical sharks . 
 Although the first film was commended for leaving the shark to the imagination until two thirds of the way through , Szwarc felt that they should show it as much as possible because the dramatic " first image of it coming out of the water " in the first film could never be repeated . Szwarc believed that the reduction of the first film 's Hitchcockian suspense was inevitable because the audience already knew what the shark looked like from the first film . Reviewers have since commented that there was no way that they were ever going to duplicate the original 's effectiveness . The filmmakers gave the new shark a more menacing look by scarring it in the early boat explosion . 
 Like the first film , shooting on water proved challenging . Scheider said that they were " always contending with tides , surf and winds [ ... ] jellyfish , sharks , waterspouts and hurricane warnings . " After spending hours anchoring the sailboats , the wind would change as they were ready to shoot , blowing the sails in the wrong direction . The saltwater 's corrosive effect damaged some equipment , including the metal parts in the sharks . 
 Susan Ford , daughter of U.S. President Gerald Ford , was hired to shoot publicity photographs . Many of these appeared in Ray <unk> 's Jaws 2 Log , a book documenting the film 's production , similar to what Carl Gottlieb had done for the first film . 
 = = = Location = = = 
 Martha 's Vineyard was again used as the location for the town scenes . Although some residents guarded their privacy , many islanders welcomed the money that the company was bringing . Shortly after the production arrived in June 1977 , local newspaper the Grapevine wrote : 
 The Jaws people are back among us , more efficient , more organized and more moneyed . Gone are the happy @-@ go @-@ lucky days of the first Jaws , where the big trucks roved about the Island from day to day , always highly visible with miles of cables snaking here and there over roads and lawns . Gone are the acrimonious wrangles and Select persons over noise and zoning regulations and this and that . What is still here is money — about $ 2 million of it . 
 Many residents enjoyed being cast as extras . Some people , however , were less pleased by the film crew 's presence and refused to cooperate . Only one drugstore allowed its windows to be boarded up for the moody look that Hancock wanted . " Universal Go Home " T @-@ shirts began appearing on the streets in mid @-@ June 1977 . 
 When Szwarc took over , the majority of the film was shot at Navarre Beach in Florida , because of the warm weather and the water 's depth being appropriate for the shark platform . The company was at this location from August 1 until December 22 , 1977 . The production " was a boost to the local economy because local boaters , extras and stand @-@ ins or doubles were hired . Universal brought in actors , directors , producers and their wives , camera and crew people who needed housing , food and clothing for the movie . Services were needed for laundry , dry @-@ cleaning and recreation . " Navarre 's Holiday Inn " <unk> " was used as the film 's headquarters , with the ground floor converted into production offices , and some of the Gulf @-@ front suites remodelled for David Brown and Roy Scheider . Universal rented 100 of the hotel 's 200 rooms , spending $ 1 million . The Holiday Inn was destroyed in the 2004 Atlantic hurricane season . Boats and parts for their maintenance were purchased from local businesses . One proprietor said that he sold " Universal approximately $ 400 @,@ 000 worth of boats and equipment " . 
 On one occasion , the Cable Junction Island set , which was built on a barge , broke loose from its anchorage and had to be rescued . Szwarc was contacted one night and told that his island was drifting towards Cuba . Real hammerhead sharks circled the teen actors during the filming of one shot . Because the characters they were playing were meant to be in distress , the crew ( filming from a distance ) did not realize that the actors were genuinely calling for help . 
 The interior shots of the teen hang @-@ out where they play pinball were filmed in the original location of the Hog 's Breath Saloon on Okaloosa Island . This restaurant later relocated to Destin , Florida as its original building was susceptible to hurricane damage . The production company had to seek dredge and fill permits from Florida 's Department of Environmental Regulation to sink the revised platform that controlled the shark on the sea bottom . 
 Principal photography ended three days before Christmas 1977 , on the <unk> Bay , near Destin , Florida . The actors had to put ice cubes in their mouths to prevent their breath showing on camera . The final sequence to be filmed was the shark being electrocuted on the cable . In mid @-@ January , the crew reconvened in Hollywood with some of the teenage actors for five weeks of post @-@ production photography . 
 Jaws 2 cost $ 30 million to produce , over three times more than the original . David Brown says that they did not budget the film " because Universal would never have given a green light to a $ 30 million budget in those days . " The Marine Division Head for Universal on location , Philip <unk> , says that " It cost approximately $ 80 @,@ 000 per day to make that movie . " When <unk> asked Brown what his budget was , the producer responded , " We 're not wasteful , but we 're spending the profit from Jaws , and it will take what it takes . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Roy Scheider reluctantly returned to reprise his role as Martin Brody . In 1977 , he had quit the role of Steven <unk> in The Deer Hunter two weeks before the start of filming because of " creative differences " . Scheider was contracted to Universal at the time for a three @-@ picture deal , but the studio offered to forgive his failure to fulfill his contractual obligation if he agreed to appear in Jaws 2 . The actor heavily resisted the film , claiming that there was nothing new to create and that people would be watching the film to see the shark , not him . According to his biographer , Scheider was so desperate to be relieved from the role that he " pleaded insanity and went crazy in The Beverly Hills Hotel " . However , he was given an attractive financial package for appearing in Jaws 2 ; he quadrupled his base salary from the first film , and negotiated points ( a percentage of the film 's net profits ) . The Star newspaper reported that Scheider received $ 500 @,@ 000 for 12 weeks work , plus $ 35 @,@ 000 for each additional week that the schedule ran over . 
 Despite his reluctance , Scheider pledged to do the best job that he could , wanting to make Brody believable . However , the atmosphere was tense on the set , and he often argued with Szwarc . On one occasion , Scheider complained ( in front of extras ) that Szwarc was wasting time with technical issues and the extras while ignoring the principal actors . A meeting was called with the two , David Brown and Verna Fields , in which Scheider and Szwarc were encouraged to settle their differences . The discussion became heated and a physical fight broke out , which Brown and Fields broke up . The rift was also articulated in written correspondence . In a letter to Szwarc , Scheider wrote that " working with Jeannot Szwarc is knowing he will never say he is sorry or ever admitting he overlooked something . Well , enough of that shit for me ! " He requested an apology from the director for not consulting him . Szwarc 's reply focused upon completing the film to the " best possible " standard : 
 Time and pressure are part of my reality and priorities something I must deal with . 
 You have been consulted and your suggestions made part of my scenes many times , whenever they did not contradict the overall concept of the picture . 
 If you have to be offended , I deplore it , for no offense was meant . At this point in the game , your feelings or my feelings are immaterial and irrelevant , the picture is all that matters . 
 Sincerely , Jeannot 
 Many extras were recruited from Gulf Breeze High School . The students were paid $ 3 per hour , well above the minimum wage at the time ( $ 2 @.@ 65 / hr ) , and revelled in being able to miss classes . Casting director Shari Rhodes , requested members of the Gulf Breeze band performed as the Amity High Band , seen in an early scene in the film showing the opening of the Holiday Inn Amity Shores " Amity Scholarship Fund Benefit " . " The <unk> band consisted of approximately 100 members , and band director John Henley chose 28 student musicians , including the band 's section known as Henley 's Honkers . " Universal scheduled their involvement for mid @-@ afternoons to prevent them missing too much time in school . Universal made a contribution of $ 3 @,@ 500 to the school and the band for their part in the film . Several other <unk> students were hired as stand @-@ ins or doubles for the teenage actors to appear in the water scenes and to maintain and sail the boats . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 John Williams returned to score Jaws 2 after winning an Academy Award for Original Music Score for his work on the first film . Williams says that it was assumed by everyone that " the music would come back also and be part of the cast ... it would require new music , certainly , but the signature music of Jaws should be used as well " . He compares this to " the great tradition " for repeating musical themes in Hollywood serials such as Roy Rogers and The Lone Ranger . In addition to the familiar themes , Szwarc says Williams also composed a " youthful counterpoint to the shark that is always around when the kids are sailing or going out to sea . It was very inventive " . 
 Szwarc said that the sequel 's music should be " more complex because it was a more complex film " . Williams says that this score is broader , allowing him to make more use of the orchestra , and use longer notes , and " fill the space " created by the director . Williams used a larger ensemble than for the first film , and " the orchestral palette may have been broader or had longer notes " . Delays in shooting meant that Williams was forced to start working on the score before the film was completed . Szwarc discussed the film with the composer , showing him edited sequences and storyboards . The director praises Williams in being able to work under such difficult conditions . Critic Mike Beek suggests these time constraints enabled Williams " to create themes based on ideas and suggestions , rather than a locked down print . " 
 Critics have praised Williams ' score , comparing it favorably to the original . Williams " uses a few basic elements of the original — the obligatory shark motif , for one — and takes the music off in some new and interesting directions . " The score is " more disturbing in places " than the original , and " Williams fashion [ sic ] some new and hugely memorable out to sea adventure music . " Because Jaws 2 " isn 't a film that requires subtlety ... Williams pulls out all the stops to make it as exciting and hair raising as possible . " 
 According to the liner notes on the soundtrack album , Williams ' " sense of the dramatic , coupled with his exquisite musical taste and knowledge of the orchestra definitely stamp this score as truly one of his best . " It is " brilliantly performed by a mini @-@ symphony made up of the finest instrumentalists to be found anywhere . " Mike Beek makes positive comments about the film , saying that " the music certainly elevates it to a level it would otherwise never have achieved . " 
 In 2015 , Intrada Records issued a two @-@ disc edition with Williams ' complete score in chronological order on disc one ( listed below ) , and the original 1978 soundtrack album on disc two . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Jaws 2 was the most expensive film that Universal had produced up until that point , costing the studio $ 20 million . It opened to a $ 9 @,@ 866 @,@ 023 gross in 640 theaters across the United States and Canada , ranking first and giving it the highest grossing opening weekend of all time up to that point . ; It went on to earn $ 77 @,@ 737 @,@ 272 during its initial release , making it one of the highest @-@ grossing films of 1978 . It eventually surpassed the $ 100 million with reissues , ultimately earning $ 102 @,@ 922 @,@ 376 , and $ 208 @,@ 900 @,@ 376 worldwide . Despite grossing less than half of its predecessor , it became the highest @-@ grossing sequel in history up to that point . 
 Jaws 2 inspired much more merchandising and sponsors than the first film . Products included sets of trading cards from Topps and Baker 's bread , paper cups from Coca @-@ Cola , beach towels , a souvenir program , shark tooth necklaces , coloring and activity books , and a model kit of Brody 's truck . A novelization by Hank Searls , based on an earlier draft of the screenplay by Sackler and Tristan , was released , as well as Ray <unk> 's The Jaws 2 Log , an account of the film 's production . Marvel Comics published a comic book adaptation of the film by writer Rick Marschall and artists Gene Colan and Tom Palmer in Marvel Super Special # 6 ( also based on the earlier script ) . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The film , throughout the years , has received mixed reviews , though it is widely regarded as the best of the Jaws sequels . John Kenneth Muir comments that opinions towards Jaws 2 depend upon which side of the series it is being compared . Against Spielberg 's original , " it is an inferior sequel to a classic " , but comparison with the subsequent films Jaws 3 @-@ D and Jaws : The Revenge shows Szwarc 's film to be " a decent sequel , and one produced before the franchise hit troubled waters . " Jaws 2 , he says , is " at the deep end of the pool , better than its two shallow follow ups , and there is enough of Jaws ' lingering greatness floating about to make it an entertaining and exciting two hours . " 
 On the film 's Rotten Tomatoes listing , 53 % of critics gave the film positive reviews from a total of 19 reviews . DVD Authority says " After this one , the other Jaws movies seemed to just not be as good . " One review says : " it 's obviously not a patch on Spielberg 's classic , but it 's about as good as could be hoped for , with some excellent sequences , almost worthy of the original , several genuine shocks , a different enough story and some pretty decent characters . " The performances of Scheider , Gary and Hamilton are particularly praised . George Morris for the Texas Monthly preferred Jaws 2 over the original because it is " less insidious in its methods of manipulation " and " because director Jeannot Szwarc streamlines the terror ... By crosscutting among the teenagers , Scheider , and the officials ' efforts to rescue them , Szwarc works up enough suspense to keep the adrenaline going . " However , Morris ' review is not entirely complimentary . He would have preferred the shark to have been seen less , positing " producers and audiences alike seem to have forgotten that the greatest suspense derives from the unseen and the unknown , and that the imagination is capable of conceiving far worse than the materialization of a mere mechanical monster . " Similarly , John Simon felt that the " shark 's waning is caused by a decline in direction : Jeannot Szwarc has none of Steven Spielberg 's manipulative cleverness . For one thing , he allows us close and disarming close @-@ ups of the shark almost immediately ... " A reviewer for the BBC complained that the additional screen time awarded to the shark makes it " seems far less terrifying than its almost mystical contemporary " . The Radio Times was not pleased with Jaws 2 , calling it a " pale imitation of the classic original " and stating that " the suspense comes unglued because the film floats in all @-@ too @-@ familiar waters . You just know how everyone is going to react — from the stars to the director , and even the mechanical shark . " 
 Although many critics identify some flaws , often comparing Szwarc negatively to Spielberg , they say that " this sequel does have some redeeming qualities going for it that make it a good movie in its own right " . The presence of Richard Dreyfuss and Robert Shaw are missed , especially since the teenage characters are labeled " largely annoying ' Afterschool Special ' archetypes " who are " irritating and incessantly screaming " and " don 't make for very sympathetic victims " . Because of its emphasis upon the teenage cast , some critics have compared the film to the slasher films that were rising in popularity at that time . Also comparing the film 's " interchangeable teens to slasher films , particularly the Friday the 13th franchise , Muir says that " it feels wrong for a Jaws film to dwell in that shallow domain . " However , Muir commends the teen characters ' comradeship and heroism , citing the girl killed when saving Sean from the shark . 
 The film 's tagline , " Just when you thought it was safe to go back in the water ... " , has become one of the most famous in film history . Andrew J. Kuehn , who developed the first film 's trailer , is credited with coining the phrase . It has been parodied in numerous films ; most notably the tagline of the 1996 feature film adaptation of the television series , Flipper , " This summer it 's finally safe to go back in the water . " 
 = = Home media = = 
 In 1980 , MCA Home Video ( then known as MCA Videocassette Inc . ) released Jaws 2 on VHS and Laserdisc , following its 1980 theatrical re @-@ release . In the 1990s , MCA @-@ Universal Home Video reissued it on both formats . The film received a DVD release on May 22 , 2001 . Many reviewers praised it for the quantity of special features , with DVD Authority asserting that it had " more than a lot of titles labeled as ' special edition ' discs " . It includes a 45 @-@ minute documentary produced by Laurent Bouzereau , who is responsible for many of the documentaries about Universal 's films . Actor Keith Gordon reminisces in a short feature , and Szwarc explains the phonetic problem with its original French title , Les <unk> de la mer 2 , as it sounded like it ended with the expletive merde ( mer deux ) . This was combated by using the suffix Part 2 . 
 The disc also contains a variety of deleted scenes . These scenes show the animosity between Brody and his wife 's boss , Len Peterson ( Joseph <unk> ) , Brody explaining to Ellen that he 's not about to take any chances letting Mike go sailing , saying that the " smell of death " is the same in Amity as it is in New York , and the selectmen voting to fire Brody ; the Mayor ( Murray Hamilton ) is the only person to vote to save him . These scenes were cut because they were slowing the film 's pace . Also included is footage of the shark attacking the coast guard pilot underwater after his helicopter had capsized . The scene was cut because of the struggle with the ratings board to acquire a PG certificate . In the storyboard , it is shown that the helicopter pilot would have escaped and saved Marge ( Martha <unk> ) from being eaten after she saves Sean , and saves himself as well . 
 Although the audio was presented in Dolby Digital 2 @.@ 0 mono , a reviewer for Film Freak Central comments that " Williams ' score often sounds deceptively stereophonic " . The BBC , though , suggest that the mix " really demands the added bass that a 5 @.@ 1 effort could have lent it " . 
 Universal Studios Home Entertainment released Jaws 2 on Blu @-@ ray in Australia on 2 June 2016 , USA and Canada on June 14 , 2016 , most European counties in July 2016 and Japan in August 2016 . The Blu @-@ ray contains the bonus materials from the 2001 DVD release , with the exception of the text based bonus features . 
 = SMS Derfflinger = 
 SMS Derfflinger was a battlecruiser of the German Kaiserliche Marine built just before the outbreak of World War I. She was the lead vessel of her class of three ships ; her sister ships were Lützow and Hindenburg . The Derfflinger @-@ class battlecruisers were larger and featured significant improvements over the previous German battlecruisers , in terms of armament , armor protection , and cruising range . The ship was named after Field Marshal Georg von Derfflinger who fought in the Thirty Years ' War . 
 Derfflinger was part of the I Scouting Group for most of World War I , and was involved in several fleet actions during the war . She took part in the bombardments of English coastal towns , as well as the Battles of Dogger Bank and Jutland , where her stubborn resistance led to the British nicknaming her " Iron Dog " . The ship was partially responsible for the sinking of two British battlecruisers at Jutland ; Derfflinger and Seydlitz destroyed Queen Mary , and Lützow assisted her elder sister in the sinking of Invincible . Derfflinger was interned with the rest of the High Seas fleet at Scapa Flow following the armistice in November 1918 . Under the orders of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , the interned ships were scuttled on 21 June 1919 ; Derfflinger sank at 14 : 45 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Built by Blohm & Voss at their yard in Hamburg , Derfflinger 's keel was laid in January 1912 . She was to have been launched on 14 June 1913 , but the wooden sledges upon which the ship rested became jammed ; the ship moved only 30 – 40 centimeters . A second attempt was successful on 12 July 1913 . A crew composed of dockyard workers took the ship around the Skagen to Kiel . In late October , the vessel was assigned to the I Scouting Group , but damage to the ship 's turbines during trials prevented her from joining the unit until 16 November . 
 On completion she displaced 26 @,@ 600 t ( 26 @,@ 200 long tons ) and was 210 @.@ 40 m ( 690 ft 3 in ) long . The ship had a crew of 44 officers and 1 @,@ 068 enlisted men . Derfflinger was equipped with two sets of high- and low @-@ pressure turbines powered by 14 coal @-@ burning boilers that drove four propellers . She was capable of a top speed of 26 @.@ 5 knots ( 49 @.@ 1 km / h ; 30 @.@ 5 mph ) , and could steam for 5 @,@ 600 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 400 km ; 6 @,@ 400 mi ) at a cruising speed of 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . In early August 1915 , a derrick was mounted amidships , and tests with Hansa @-@ Brandenburg W seaplanes were conducted . 
 Mounting a main armament of eight 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 in ) guns , Derfflinger was the largest and most powerful German battlecruiser at the time . The ship 's armament was rounded out by twelve 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns in single casemate mounts and eight 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 45 in ) guns , also placed in casemates , though four of these were removed in 1916 . An additional four 8 @.@ 8 cm flak guns were installed amidships . Four 50 cm ( 20 in ) submerged torpedo tubes were carried ; one was located in the bow , two on the broadside , and one in the stern . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = Bombardment of Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby = = = 
 Derfflinger 's first combat operation was a raid on the English coastal towns of Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby . One raid had already been conducted by the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group , on the town of Yarmouth in late 1914 . Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander of the High Seas Fleet , decided to conduct another raid on the English coast . His goal was to lure a portion of the Grand Fleet into combat where it could be isolated and destroyed . At 03 : 20 on 15 December , Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper , with his flag in Seydlitz , departed the Jade estuary . Following Seydlitz were Derfflinger , Moltke , Von der Tann , and Blücher , along with the light cruisers Kolberg , Strassburg , Stralsund , and Graudenz , and two squadrons of torpedo boats . The ships sailed north past the island of Heligoland , until they reached the Horns Reef lighthouse , at which point the ships turned west towards Scarborough . Twelve hours after Hipper left the Jade , the High Seas Fleet departed to provide distant cover . The main fleet consisted of 14 dreadnoughts , eight pre @-@ dreadnoughts and a screening force of two armored cruisers , seven light cruisers , and 54 torpedo boats . 
 Some four months earlier , on 26 August 1914 , the German light cruiser Magdeburg had run aground in the Gulf of Finland ; the wreck was captured by the Russian navy , which found code books used by the German navy , along with navigational charts for the North Sea . The Russians passed these documents to the Royal Navy , whose cryptographic unit — the so @-@ called Room 40 — began decrypting German signals . On 14 December , they intercepted messages relating to the planned bombardment of Scarborough . However , the exact details of the plan were unknown , and the British assumed that the High Seas Fleet would remain safely in port , as in the previous bombardment . Vice Admiral David Beatty 's four battlecruisers , supported by the 3rd Cruiser Squadron and the 1st Light Cruiser Squadron , along with the 2nd Battle Squadron 's six dreadnoughts , were to ambush Hipper 's battlecruisers . 
 During the night of 15 December , the main body of the High Seas Fleet encountered British destroyers . Fearing the prospect of a nighttime torpedo attack , Admiral Ingenohl ordered the ships to retreat . Hipper was unaware of Ingenohl 's reversal , and so he continued with the bombardment . Upon reaching the British coast , Hipper 's battlecruisers split into two groups . Derfflinger and Von der Tann went south to shell Scarborough and Whitby while Seydlitz , Moltke , and Blücher went north to shell Hartlepool . By 09 : 45 on the 16th , the two groups had reassembled , and they began to retreat eastward . 
 By this time , Beatty 's battlecruisers were positioned to block Hipper 's chosen withdrawal route , while other forces were en route to complete the encirclement . At 12 : 25 , the light cruisers of the II Scouting Group began to pass through the British forces searching for Hipper . One of the cruisers in the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron spotted Stralsund and signaled a report to Beatty . At 12 : 30 , Beatty turned his battlecruisers towards the German ships . Beatty presumed that the German cruisers were the advance screen for Hipper 's ships ; however , those were some 50 km ( 31 mi ) ahead . The 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron , which had been screening for Beatty 's ships , detached to pursue the German cruisers , but a misinterpreted signal from the British battlecruisers sent them back to their screening positions . This confusion allowed the German light cruisers to slip away and alerted Hipper to the location of the British battlecruisers . The German battlecruisers wheeled to the northeast of the British forces and escaped . 
 Both the British and the Germans were disappointed that they failed to effectively engage their opponents . Admiral Ingenohl 's reputation suffered greatly as a result of his timidity . Moltke 's captain was furious ; he stated that Ingenohl had turned back " because he was afraid of 11 British destroyers which could have been eliminated ... under the present leadership we will accomplish nothing . " The official German history criticized Ingenohl for failing to use his light forces to determine the size of the British fleet , stating : " he decided on a measure which not only seriously jeopardized his advance forces off the English coast but also deprived the German Fleet of a signal and certain victory . " 
 = = = Battle of Dogger Bank = = = 
 In early January 1915 , the German naval command became aware that British ships were reconnoitering in the Dogger Bank area . Admiral Ingenohl was initially reluctant to attempt to destroy these forces , because the I Scouting Group was temporarily weakened while Von der Tann was in drydock for periodic maintenance . Konteradmiral Richard Eckermann , the Chief of Staff of the High Seas Fleet , insisted on the operation , and so Ingenohl relented and ordered Hipper to take his battlecruisers to the Dogger Bank . On 23 January , Hipper sortied , with Seydlitz in the lead , followed by Moltke , Derfflinger , and Blücher , along with the light cruisers Graudenz , Rostock , Stralsund , and Kolberg and 19 torpedo boats from V Flotilla and II and XVIII Half @-@ Flotillas . Graudenz and Stralsund were assigned to the forward screen , while Kolberg and Rostock were assigned to the starboard and port , respectively . Each light cruiser had a half @-@ flotilla of torpedo boats attached . 
 Again , interception and decryption of German wireless signals played an important role . Although they were unaware of the exact plans , the cryptographers of Room 40 deduced that Hipper would be conducting an operation in the Dogger Bank area . To counter it , Beatty 's 1st Battlecruiser Squadron , Rear Admiral Archibald Moore 's 2nd Battlecruiser Squadron and Commodore William Goodenough 's 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron were to rendezvous with Commodore Reginald Tyrwhitt 's Harwich Force at 08 : 00 on 24 January , approximately 30 mi ( 48 km ) north of the Dogger Bank . 
 At 08 : 14 , Kolberg spotted the light cruiser Aurora and several destroyers from the Harwich Force . Aurora challenged Kolberg with a search light , at which point Kolberg attacked Aurora and scored two hits . Aurora returned fire and scored two hits on Kolberg in retaliation . Hipper immediately turned his battlecruisers towards the gunfire , when , almost simultaneously , Stralsund spotted a large amount of smoke to the northwest of her position . This was identified as a number of large British warships steaming towards Hipper 's ships . 
 Hipper turned south to flee , but was limited to 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) , which was the maximum speed of the older armored cruiser Blücher . The pursuing British battlecruisers were steaming at 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) , and quickly caught up to the German ships . At 09 : 52 , the battlecruiser Lion opened fire on Blücher from a range of approximately 20 @,@ 000 yards ( 18 @,@ 300 m ) ; shortly thereafter , Queen Mary and Tiger began firing as well . At 10 : 09 , the British guns made their first hit on Blücher . Two minutes later , the German ships began returning fire , primarily concentrating on Lion , from a range of 18 @,@ 000 yards ( 15 @,@ 460 m ) . At 10 : 28 , Lion was struck on the waterline , which tore a hole in the side of the ship and flooded a coal bunker . At 10 : 30 , New Zealand , the fourth ship in Beatty 's line , came within range of Blücher and opened fire . By 10 : 35 , the range had closed to 17 @,@ 500 yards ( 16 @,@ 000 m ) , at which point the entire German line was within the effective range of the British ships . Beatty ordered his battlecruisers to engage their German counterparts . Confusion aboard Tiger led the captain to believe he was to fire on Seydlitz , which left Moltke able to fire without distraction . During this period of the battle , Derfflinger was hit once , but the shell did only minor damage . Two armor plates in the hull were forced inward and some of the protective coal bunkers were flooded . 
 At 10 : 40 , one of Lion 's 13 @.@ 5 in ( 34 cm ) shells struck Seydlitz causing nearly catastrophic damage that knocked out both of the rear turrets and killed 159 men . The executive officer ordered the flooding of both magazines to avoid a flash fire that would have destroyed the ship . By this time , the German battlecruisers had zeroed in on Lion , scoring repeated hits . At 11 : 01 , an 11 in ( 28 cm ) shell from Seydlitz struck Lion and knocked out two of her dynamos . At 11 : 18 , two of Derfflinger 's 12 in ( 30 cm ) shells hit Lion , one of which struck the waterline and penetrated the belt , allowing seawater to enter the port feed tank . Lion had to turn off its engines due to seawater contamination and as a result fell out of the line . 
 By this time , Blücher was severely damaged after having been pounded by heavy shells . The chase ended when there were several reports of U @-@ boats ahead of the British ships ; Beatty quickly ordered evasive maneuvers , which allowed the German ships to increase the distance to their pursuers . At this time , Lion 's last operational dynamo failed , which dropped her speed to 15 knots ( 28 km / h ) . Beatty , in the stricken Lion , ordered the remaining battlecruisers to " Engage the enemy 's rear , " but signal confusion caused the ships to solely target Blücher , allowing Moltke , Seydlitz , and Derfflinger to escape . Blücher was hit by over 70 shells from the British battlecruisers over the course of the battle . The severely damaged warship capsized and sank at approximately 13 : 10 . By the time Beatty regained control over his ships , after having boarded Princess Royal , the German ships had too great a lead for the British to catch them ; at 13 : 50 , he broke off the chase . 
 = = = Bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft = = = 
 Derfflinger also took part in the bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft on 24 – 25 April 1916 . Hipper was away on sick leave , so the German ships were under the command of Konteradmiral Friedrich Boedicker . Derfflinger , her newly commissioned sister ship Lützow , and the veterans Moltke , Seydlitz and Von der Tann left the Jade Estuary at 10 : 55 on 24 April . They were supported by a screening force of 6 light cruisers and two torpedo boat flotillas . The heavy units of the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Admiral Reinhard Scheer , sailed at 13 : 40 , with the objective to provide distant support for Boedicker 's ships . The British Admiralty was made aware of the German sortie through the interception of German wireless signals , and deployed the Grand Fleet at 15 : 50 . 
 By 14 : 00 , Boedicker 's ships had reached a position off Norderney , at which point he turned his ships northward to avoid the Dutch observers on the island of Terschelling . At 15 : 38 , Seydlitz struck a naval mine , which tore a 50 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) hole in her hull , just abaft of the starboard broadside torpedo tube , allowing 1 @,@ 400 short tons ( 1 @,@ 250 long tons ) of water to enter the ship . Seydlitz turned back , with the screen of light cruisers , at a speed of 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The four remaining battlecruisers turned south immediately in the direction of Norderney to avoid further mine damage . By 16 : 00 , Seydlitz was clear of imminent danger , so the ship stopped to allow Boedicker to disembark . The torpedo boat V28 brought Boedicker to Lützow . 
 At 04 : 50 on 25 April , the German battlecruisers were approaching Lowestoft when the light cruisers Rostock and Elbing , which had been covering the southern flank , spotted the light cruisers and destroyers of Commodore Tyrwhitt 's Harwich Force . Boedicker refused to be distracted by the British ships , and instead trained his ships ' guns on Lowestoft . At a range of approximately 14 @,@ 000 yd ( 13 @,@ 000 m ) , the German battlecruisers destroyed two 6 in ( 15 cm ) shore batteries and inflicted other damage to the town , including the destruction of some 200 houses . 
 At 05 : 20 , the German raiders turned north , towards Yarmouth , which they reached by 05 : 42 . The visibility was so poor that the German ships fired one salvo each , with the exception of Derfflinger , which fired fourteen rounds from her main battery . The German ships turned back south , and at 05 : 47 encountered for the second time the Harwich Force , which had by then been engaged by the six light cruisers of the screening force . Boedicker 's ships opened fire from a range of 13 @,@ 000 yards ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) . Tyrwhitt immediately turned his ships around and fled south , but not before the cruiser Conquest sustained severe damage . Due to reports of British submarines and torpedo attacks , Boedicker broke off the chase and turned back east towards the High Seas Fleet . At this point , Scheer , who had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's sortie from Scapa Flow , turned back towards Germany . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 Almost immediately after the Lowestoft raid , Admiral Reinhard Scheer began planning another foray into the North Sea . He had initially intended to launch the operation in mid @-@ May , but the mine damage to Seydlitz had proved difficult to repair — Scheer was unwilling to embark on a major raid without his battlecruiser forces at full strength . At noon on 28 May , the repairs to Seydlitz were finally completed , and the ship returned to the I Scouting Group . 
 Derfflinger and the rest of Hipper 's I Scouting Group battlecruisers lay anchored in the outer Jade roadstead on the night of 30 May 1916 . The following morning , at 02 : 00 CET , the ships steamed out towards the Skagerrak at a speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . Derfflinger was the second ship in the line of five , ahead of Seydlitz , and to the rear of Lützow , the group flagship . The II Scouting Group , consisting of the light cruisers Frankfurt , Rear Admiral Boedicker 's flagship , Wiesbaden , Pillau , and Elbing , and 30 torpedo boats of the II , VI , and IX Flotillas , accompanied Hipper 's battlecruisers . 
 An hour and a half later , the High Seas Fleet under the command of Admiral Scheer left the Jade ; the force was composed of 16 dreadnoughts . The High Seas Fleet was accompanied by the IV Scouting Group , composed of the light cruisers Stettin , München , Hamburg , Frauenlob , and Stuttgart , and 31 torpedo boats of the I , III , V , and VII Flotillas , led by the light cruiser Rostock . The six pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the II Battle Squadron had departed from the Elbe roads at 02 : 45 , and rendezvoused with the battle fleet at 05 : 00 . 
 Shortly before 16 : 00 , Hipper 's force encountered the six ships of Vice Admiral Beatty 's 1st and 2nd battlecruiser squadrons . The German ships were the first to open fire , at a range of approximately 15 @,@ 000 yards ( 14 @,@ 000 m ) . When the British ships began returning fire , confusion amongst the British battlecruisers resulted in Moltke being engaged by both New Zealand and Tiger . The British rangefinders had misread the range to their German targets , and so the first salvos fired by the British ships fell a mile past the German battlecruisers . Due to errors in British communication , Derfflinger was unengaged during the first 10 minutes of the battle . Derfflinger 's gunnery officer , Korvettenkapitän Georg von Hase later remarked " By some mistake we were being left out . I laughed grimly and now I began to engage our enemy with complete calm , as at gun practice , and with continually increasing accuracy . " At 17 : 03 , the British battlecruiser HMS Indefatigable exploded after 15 minutes of gunfire from Von der Tann . Shortly thereafter the second half of Beatty 's force , the four Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships of the 5th Battle Squadron , came into range and began firing at Von der Tann and Moltke . 
 Following severe damage inflicted by Lützow on Lion , Derfflinger lost sight of the British ship , and so at 17 : 16 transferred her fire to HMS Queen Mary . Seydlitz was also engaging Queen Mary , and under the combined fire of the two battlecruisers , Queen Mary was hit repeatedly in quick succession . Observers on New Zealand and Tiger , the ships behind and ahead , respectively , reported three shells from a salvo of four struck the ship at the same time . Two more hits followed , and a gigantic explosion erupted amidships ; a billowing cloud of black smoke poured from the burning ship , which had broken in two . 
 The leading ships of the German High Seas fleet had by 18 : 00 come within effective range of the British battlecruisers and Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships and had begun trading shots with them . Between 18 : 09 and 18 : 19 , Derfflinger was hit by a 38 cm ( 15 in ) shell from either Barham or Valiant . At 18 : 55 , Derfflinger was hit again ; this shell struck the bow and tore a hole that allowed some 300 tons of water to enter the ship . 
 Shortly after 19 : 00 , the German cruiser Wiesbaden had become disabled by a shell from the battlecruiser Invincible ; the German battlecruisers made a 16 @-@ point turn to the northeast and made for the crippled cruiser at high speed . At 19 : 15 , they spotted the British armored cruiser Defence , which had joined the attack on Wiesbaden . Hipper initially hesitated , believing the ship was the German cruiser Rostock , but at 19 : 16 , Kapitan zur See Harder , Lützow 's commanding officer , ordered his ships ' guns to fire . The other German battlecruisers and battleships joined in the melee ; Defence was struck by several heavy @-@ caliber shells from the German ships . One salvo penetrated the ship 's ammunition magazines and a massive explosion destroyed the cruiser . 
 By 19 : 24 , the 3rd Battlecruiser Squadron had formed up with Beatty 's remaining battlecruisers ahead of the German line . The leading British ships spotted Lützow and Derfflinger and began firing on them . In the span of eight minutes , the battlecruiser Invincible scored eight hits on Lützow . In return , both Lützow and Derfflinger concentrated their fire on their antagonist , and at 19 : 31 , Derfflinger fired her final salvo at Invincible . Shortly thereafter the forward magazine detonated and the ship disappeared in a series of massive explosions . 
 By 19 : 30 , the High Seas Fleet , which was by that point pursuing the British battlecruisers , had not yet encountered the Grand Fleet . Scheer had been considering retiring his forces before darkness exposed his ships to torpedo boat attack . He had not yet made a decision when his leading battleships encountered the main body of the Grand Fleet . This development made it impossible for Scheer to retreat , for doing so would have sacrificed the slower pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of the II Battle Squadron . If he chose to use his dreadnoughts and battlecruisers to cover their retreat , he would have subjected his strongest ships to overwhelming British fire . Instead , Scheer ordered his ships to turn 16 points to starboard , which would bring the pre @-@ dreadnoughts to the relative safety of the disengaged side of the German battle line . 
 Derfflinger and the other battlecruisers followed the move , which put them astern of König . Hipper 's badly battered ships gained a temporary moment of respite , and uncertainty over the exact location and course of Scheer 's ships led Admiral Jellicoe to turn his ships eastward , towards what he thought was the likely path of the German retreat . The German fleet was instead sailing west , but Scheer ordered a second 16 @-@ point turn , which reversed course and pointed his ships at the center of the British fleet . The German fleet came under intense fire from the British line , and Scheer sent Derfflinger , Seydlitz , Moltke , and Von der Tann at high speed towards the British fleet , in an attempt to disrupt their formation and gain time for his main force to retreat . By 20 : 17 , the German battlecruisers had closed to within 7 @,@ 700 yards ( 7 @,@ 000 m ) of Colossus , at which point Scheer directed the ships to engage the lead ship of the British line . Three minutes later , the German battlecruisers turned in retreat , covered by a torpedo boat attack . 
 A pause in the battle at dusk ( approximately from 20 : 20 to 21 : 10 ) allowed Derfflinger and the other German battlecruisers to cut away wreckage that interfered with the main guns , extinguish fires , repair the fire control and signal equipment , and prepare the searchlights for nighttime action . During this period , the German fleet reorganized into a well @-@ ordered formation in reverse order , when the German light forces encountered the British screen shortly after 21 : 00 . The renewed gunfire gained Beatty 's attention , so he turned his battlecruisers westward . At 21 : 09 , he sighted the German battlecruisers , and drew to within 8 @,@ 500 yards ( 7 @,@ 800 m ) before opening fire at 21 : 20 . In the ensuing melee , Derfflinger was hit several times ; at 21 : 34 , a heavy shell struck her last operational gun turret and put it out of action . The German ships returned fire with every gun available , and at 21 : 32 hit both Lion and Princess Royal in the darkness . The maneuvering of the German battlecruisers forced the leading I Battle Squadron to turn westward to avoid collision . This brought the pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the II Battle Squadron directly between the two lines of battlecruisers . In doing so , this prevented the British ships from pursuing their German counterparts when they turned southward . The British battlecruisers opened fire on the old battleships ; the German ships turned southwest to bring all of their guns to bear against the British ships . This engagement lasted only a few minutes before Admiral Mauve turned his ships 8 @-@ points to starboard ; the British inexplicably did not pursue . 
 Close to the end of the battle , at 03 : 55 , Hipper transmitted a report to Admiral Scheer informing him of the tremendous damage his ships had suffered . By that time , Derfflinger and Von der Tann had only two operational guns each , Moltke was flooded with 1 @,@ 000 tons of water , Lützow had sunk , and Seydlitz was severely damaged . Hipper reported : " I Scouting Group was therefore no longer of any value for a serious engagement , and was consequently directed to return to harbor by the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , while he himself determined to await developments off Horns Reef with the battlefleet . " 
 During the course of the battle , Derfflinger was hit 17 times by heavy caliber shells and nine times by secondary guns . She was in dock for repairs until 15 October . Derfflinger fired 385 shells from her main battery , another 235 rounds from her secondary guns , and one torpedo . Her crew suffered 157 men killed and another 26 men wounded ; this was the highest casualty rate on any ship not sunk during the battle . Because of her stalwart resistance at Jutland , the British nicknamed her " Iron Dog . " 
 = = = Later operations = = = 
 During the Second Battle of Heligoland Bight in November 1917 , Derfflinger sailed from port to assist the German light cruisers of the II Scouting Group , but by the time she and the other battlecruisers arrived on the scene , the British raiders had fled northward . 
 In late 1917 , the High Seas Fleet began to conduct anti @-@ convoy raids in the North Sea between Britain and Norway . In October and December , German cruisers and destroyers intercepted and destroyed two British convoys to Norway . This prompted Beatty , now the Commander in Chief of the Grand Fleet , to detach several battleships and battlecruisers to protect convoys in the North Sea . This presented to Admiral Scheer the opportunity for which he had been waiting the entire war : the chance to isolate and eliminate a portion of the Grand Fleet . At 05 : 00 on 23 April 1918 , the High Seas Fleet left harbor with the intention of intercepting one of the heavily escorted convoys . Wireless radio traffic was kept to a minimum to prevent the British from learning of the operation . By 14 : 10 , the convoy had still not yet been located , and so Scheer turned the High Seas Fleet back towards German waters . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Derfflinger was to have taken part in what would have amounted to the " death ride " of the High Seas Fleet shortly before the end of World War I. The bulk of the High Seas Fleet was to have sortied from its base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet ; Scheer — by now the Großadmiral of the fleet — intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , in order to retain a better bargaining position for Germany , whatever the cost to the fleet . While the fleet was consolidating in Wilhelmshaven , war @-@ weary sailors began deserting en masse . As Derfflinger and Von der Tann passed through the locks that separated Wilhelmshaven 's inner harbor and roadstead , some 300 men from both ships climbed over the side and disappeared ashore . 
 On 24 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors mutinied on several battleships ; three ships from the III Squadron refused to weigh anchors , and the battleships Thüringen and Helgoland reported acts of sabotage . The order to sail was rescinded in the face of this open revolt . The following month , the German Revolution toppled the monarchy and was quickly followed by the Armistice that ended the war . 
 Following Germany 's capitulation , the Allies demanded that the majority of the High Seas Fleet be interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow . On 21 November 1918 , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , the ships sailed from their base in Germany for the last time . The fleet rendezvoused with the light cruiser Cardiff , before meeting a massive flotilla of some 370 British , American , and French warships for the voyage to Scapa Flow . Once the ships were interned , their breech locks were removed , which disabled their guns . 
 The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Versailles Treaty . It became apparent to Reuter that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June , which was the deadline by which Germany was to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to 23 June , Reuter ordered his ships be sunk . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers . With the majority of the British fleet away , Reuter transmitted the order to his ships at 11 : 20 . Derfflinger sank at 14 : 45 . The ship was raised in 1939 and was anchored , still capsized , off the island of Risa until 1946 . Derfflinger was then sent to Faslane Port and broken up by 1948 . The ship 's bell was delivered to the German Federal Navy on 30 August 1965 . Her bell is now on display outside the church of St Michael on the Outer Hebrides island of Eriskay . 
 = ArtRave : The Artpop Ball = 
 ArtRave : The Artpop Ball ( stylized as <unk> : The ARTPOP Ball ) was the fourth headlining concert tour by American singer Lady Gaga . Supporting her third studio album Artpop ( 2013 ) , the tour ran from May 4 , 2014 to November 24 , 2014 . The tour dates included cities where Gaga had canceled shows of her previous Born This Way Ball tour after suffering a hip injury . The ArtRave tour was preceded by a performance at the South by Southwest music festival , which drew controversy due to a segment where an artist vomited on Gaga , and a seven @-@ day residency at the Roseland Ballroom in Manhattan , New York . 
 ArtRave 's concept and name are derived from the similarly named release party for Artpop . The stage resembled a cave and consisted of two sections connected by catwalks made of translucent lucite , allowing the audience to move underneath the catwalks while still being able to watch the show . Gaga 's costumes in the show included one with tentacles , one with bejeweled wings , a rave @-@ inspired outfit and a necklace made of marijuana leaves . Costume designers and choreographers aspired to make a single , coherent show . The lighting fixtures used for the concert were from Clay Paky and the main idea was to create an immersive rave experience with the lights . They were also designed to accommodate minor changes in the show sequences . 
 The tour was produced by Live Nation , and promoted by Absolut Vodka in the United States and O2 in the United Kingdom . Tickets for several shows sold out immediately once available , prompting additional dates . Negative reports about the tour 's commercial performance were dismissed by Live Nation chairman Arthur Fogel . Gaga repeatedly placed within the top @-@ ten of the Billboard Boxscore lists for the 2014 tour grosses . At the end , ArtRave : The Artpop Ball grossed a total of $ 83 million from 920 @,@ 088 sold tickets at the 74 reported performances . Billboard also listed it as the ninth best concert tour of the year with 76 reported shows . The tour additionally received positive response from reviewers , but some criticized it for being disjointed . On November 24 , 2014 , the concert was streamed live from Bercy Arena in France . 
 = = Background = = 
 While releasing her third studio album Artpop , Gaga held a private event in New York known as ArtRave , where she performed songs from the album and showcased art pieces . Later , she took the concept of ArtRave and created ArtRave : The Artpop Ball tour . After abruptly cancelling the North American leg of her previous Born This Way Ball ( 2012 – 13 ) tour due to a major hip injury , the tour began with its first leg in the United States on May 4 , 2014 , in Fort Lauderdale , Florida . ArtRave : The Artpop Ball had the singer visiting cities where she canceled tour dates in order to undergo the surgery , as well as playing new cities . Gaga explained to The Independent : " When I 'm onstage with the Artpop Ball , the point of the show is to take what was the mess of my life and make art of it – to raise the spirit of artistic dreams and creativity and take all the things I was feeling in pain about , and rage ... I take a much more meditative approach to the performance . I 've got wide @-@ open ears . The ArtRave has routines , and there 's a performance @-@ art aspect that has been designed . " Prior to the beginning of the tour , Gaga headlined six shows ( March 28 , 30 , 31 and April 2 , 4 , and 6 ) at the Roseland Ballroom in Manhattan , New York , and these shows were the final performances at the venue . A seventh show was also added for April 7 and officially closed the venue . 
 Gaga also held a one @-@ off concert for ArtRave : The Artpop Ball inside a six @-@ storey vending machine at Doritos ' annual South by Southwest ( SXSW ) music festival at Austin , Texas . The city 's Music and Entertainment division had initially denied permission to Gaga for playing inside the venue citing that it was for " public safety concerns " . Don Pitts from the division said that the venue being in close proximity with a parking lot was the reason they had to cancel Gaga 's application . On March 6 , 2014 , it was announced that Gaga would indeed play at the venue . Tickets were sold to the fans through different competitions and challenges . Randal Lane from Forbes reported that the concert would support Gaga 's Born This Way Foundation and charity events , but nevertheless opined that " the way they 're doling out the tickets is still crass " . The concert was criticized when artist Millie Brown vomited a green liquid over Gaga during the performance of " Swine " from Artpop . The performance received complaints about " glamorizing " eating disorders . In response to the controversy , Brown told MTV News : " I can understand why people would make that association , but my performance is really not a statement about eating disorders themselves . " Gaga herself told Today " Millie and I know that not everybody 's going to love that performance , but we both really believe in artistic expression and strong identities , and I support her and what she does . Artpop , my new album , is about bringing art and music together in the spirit of creative rebellion , and for us , that performance was art in its purest form . " 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Stage setup = = = 
 For the tour , Gaga told Capital FM that she wanted something other than the " Monster Pit " arrangement she previously had in the Born This Way Ball tour , since she was always limited to performing on one portion of the arena . Hence Gaga and her team thought of building two stages , one main stage and an accompanying one on the far end of the arena . It would be enhanced by the addition of a catwalk which would wind all around the arena floor , enabling the singer to interact with the audience . In March 2014 , Gaga tweeted a picture of the stage which showed a runway extending from the main platform up to the general admission seats and then bifurcating into two additional runways , ending in small stages within the audience . At the end of the first runway , another platform was constructed which descended into the crowd directly . Gaga noted that the 110 feet ( 34 m ) long runways would be made of lucite rendering them translucent , so that the crowd can dance underneath it while still being able to watch the show . The main stage was described as a white cave , reminiscent of Atlantica from the 1989 Disney film The Little Mermaid , and featured a digital backdrop showing stars and the moon . 
 The band was placed inside the white dome like structures on the stage , described by John Jurgenson from The Wall Street Journal as like the planet Tatooine in the Star Wars series . At the end of one of the Lucite runways , a piano was hidden beneath enormous stalagmite @-@ like structures reminiscent of Superman 's Fortress of Solitude in the comics . There was also a bar overlooking the piano area , where the audience could order drinks while watching the show . Carl Williot from Idolator website compared the stage with that of ArtRave , and felt that it looked like an " insect " with the extended runway and smaller stages . Following the reveal of the image , the hashtag # <unk> started trending globally in Twitter . According to Stacy Lambe from Out magazine , the stage took over 21 @,@ 000 hours to construct , including the catwalks . There are 15 inflatable trees which are air hosed on the stage to re @-@ create a garden during one of the segments . The whole set up took three hours to dismantle and 21 trucks to carry it from one venue to another . Production manager Jason " JD " Danter explained that the whole set up started from 8 : 00 am in the morning , with lighting and sound checks taking six hours to complete . 
 For the production of the show , Gaga enlisted choreographer Richard Jackson and together with him and the Haus of Gaga , they came up with ideas regarding how the show should be constructed and what music should be performed . They also had to find a way to co @-@ mingle all the different ideas to make a single , coherent show . For the choreography , which encompassed all the stages present , Jackson had to employ a different approach , so that the audience could see the performance from every angle . 
 = = = Costume design = = = 
 Gaga did not preview the costumes for the tour until the opening night . There were seven outfits created for the show , all throughout the different segments . The first was a bejeweled leotard which had the Jeff Koons blue gazing ball attached in the middle ; the ball was previously used in the album cover art for Artpop . Gaga accessorized the dress with a pair of feathered wings while wearing a blond bob wig reminiscent of her looks from The Fame era . A rave inspired outfit was worn for the last segment and consisted of colorful dreadlocks and <unk> made of fur . She added a shirt consisting of straps and plastic sleeves with it . One of the complex outfits was made of latex and consisted of a polka dotted leotard and a number of tentacles attached to the dress as well as a headpiece with two tentacles from it . 
 The singer also wore a short dress coupled with a platinum bob wig ; another version of the dress had a gown attached to it , with Gaga wearing a long wig inspired by Donatella Versace . Before the final performance Gaga wore black latex pants and a top , with a green wig on her head and a necklace made of marijuana leaves . Finally , Gaga also wore a seashell bikini top and voluminous wig ; the ensemble had been worn by Gaga in previous live performances for the Artpop era . Her dancers wore neon colored outfits with matching head gears and accessories . Gaga also had a number of unique props , including a Gibson Flying V guitar during " Venus " , a plastic chair shaped like a claw and a keytar which was shaped like a sea horse . 
 BBC News reported that some of the costumes for the tour were designed by Sunderland University fashion graduate Dayne Henderson . He had been chosen by one of Gaga 's stylists after seeing his tweet to the singer with a photo of his design which included clothing inspired by fetish fashion . Henderson developed hoods , masks and head pieces for Gaga and her dancers . He had to produce the clothes in latex , and within 12 days had to deliver it to Gaga 's management . 
 = = = Lighting fixtures = = = 
 Production and lighting designer Roy Bennett used Clay Paky 's <unk> B @-@ Eye K20 LED @-@ based moving lights and Clay Paky Sharpys as lighting attachments . Also around 120 B @-@ Eyes by <unk> , were obtained for the tour as well with lighting control from three full @-@ sized <unk> and 10 <unk> . According to lighting programmer Jason <unk> , " Bennett 's approach to the show was to make it an immersive rave that reflected Gaga 's non @-@ stop party aesthetic ... That means active , alive , vibrant and high energy — it requires us to be just as active on stage as in the crowd . The audience is every bit as much a set piece as they are a room of spectators , so we had to include them as part of Gaga 's same party not just watching the spectacle from afar . Cue wise , that 's almost like programming two shows at once : Both had to behave as one cohesive element . " 
 Bennett had started designing the lighting from November 2013 and three months later presented it to Gaga . She approved off the audience experience theme that Bennett developed . The B @-@ Eyes , which were previously used in the Roseland shows , were mounted above the 3 by 40 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m × 12 m ) video screens in the tour . <unk> rigging were used throughout , in the front of the stage , rear , side , as well as on the pods over the audience . They were the main lighting accessory for the tour . <unk> explained that they had faced technical challenges , due to high pixel content . The B @-@ Eyes added a total of 4 @,@ 500 pixel and was varied through all possible configurations . The lighting effects varied along with the tone and the inflections of the song being performed . Clay Paky was distributed by <unk> Lighting in North America . Solotech were signed as the video contractor , while 8th Day Sound group were the audio contractors throughout the tour . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 The show starts off with a video introduction about the tour , followed by dancers appearing on stage with balloons and blue gazing balls . The video continues to play as Gaga emerges from beneath the stage , wearing a golden leotard with wings . She proceeds to sing " Artpop " and then " G.U.Y. " , the latter having choreography from its music video . The song transitions to " Donatella " with the screen showing flashing stars and colorful cloud formations . Gaga then performs " Fashion ! " on the piano and goes back for a costume change as the band plays the remaining part of the song . 
 Next section starts with " Venus " as large inflatable flowers rise from below on stage . Gaga appears in the seashell bikini ensemble and also uses a guitar as a prop . After a short speech , " Manicure " and " Cake Like Lady Gaga " are performed . Gaga disappears inside for another outfit change as the band plays an outro . She emerges back onto stage in the white outfit and wig as a video shows her twirling on screen . A short version of " Just Dance " is sung , with her dancers dressed as " sea people " . The sea horse shaped keytar is used for the performance . It is followed by short versions of " Poker Face " and " Telephone " , transitioning to another outfit . 
 The section begins with Gaga wearing the tentacle dress , performing " <unk> " and " Paparazzi " with some ambient and quiet music . As she makes her way down the runways , her dancers bring the " Monster Paw Chair " and puts it on one of the small stages . There Gaga sings " Do What U Want " and near the end she reaches for the piano to perform an acoustic version of " Born This Way " . A speech ensues , which is followed by " Jewels n ' Drugs " , as Gaga disappears beneath the stage . A video interlude starts showing the singer dancing . Gaga rises from the stage , wearing the black latex dress near the piano , to sing the chorus of " Jewels n ' Drugs " . 
 " Aura " triggers off the next act with Gaga and the dancers performing on the main stage . A red couch is brought out on which " Sexxx Dreams " is sung . Following this , white chairs are brought out onto the stage by the dancers for " Mary Jane Holland " , during which a choreography is shown with the chairs . " Alejandro " takes place on the lucite runways while Gaga declares that she would change costume on stage . " Ratchet " plays as an intro as Gaga strips naked while her stylists help change into the rave inspired outfit and wig . The performance of " Bad Romance " starts with the original choreography from its music video , followed by " Applause " , during which a video backdrop shows the singer in various disguises . Next Gaga begins performing " Swine " , during which her dancers fire stuffed animals into the crowd using cannons . Gaga leaves the stage for a final costume change , appearing to perform " Gypsy " for the encore . Gaga performs most of the song at the piano then makes her way along the runway to finish the performance on the main stage and closes the show . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 = = = Ticket sales = = = 
 The tickets were first available to members of Gaga 's social network website , <unk> They were provided with a unique code for ordering tickets from online , but were limited to four tickets per member . According to Live Nation , the first batch of tickets for the tour went on sale from December 9 , 2013 , and sell @-@ out shows were reported from Toronto , Winnipeg , Calgary , Los Angeles and Edmonton within hours . This led to two new dates being added to the itinerary : June 26 at Milwaukee 's Marcus Amphitheater , and June 28 at Atlantic City 's Boardwalk Hall . On January 29 , 2014 , Gaga released the dates for the European leg of the tour , which would begin September 23 , 2014 , from Belgium . The singer partnered with British mobile network O2 , for a deal which would enable the company 's customers to avail tickets for the tour three days prior to the general release . The deal included Gaga being featured in a new advertisement , for promoting the UK leg of the tour and showed her wearing a dress with large , glittering shoulder pads while running towards a concert stage . This was the second time Gaga partnered with O2 , first in November 2013 , for exclusive access to the tracks from Artpop , ahead of its UK release . Upon release , Ticketmaster reported that the UK venues sold out within five minutes , prompting the singer to add another two dates in London . In April and May 2014 , she released more floor tickets for sale , after ensuring larger crowd capacity for all the UK venues and a total of eight new dates . 
 For the US dates , Gaga partnered with Absolut Vodka , who transformed the bar adjacent to the stage into a lounge called " Absolut Artpop Lounge " , where some of the lucky fans could watch the show , while ordering cocktails of their choice . Two fans would be chosen on the spot to have seats at the bar ; tickets could also be won through a contest at the Absolut website . Gaga explained that with the help of Absolut she could " [ create ] a special experience where fans can actually sit inside the stage and have their own bar . It 's going to be a huge rave in the spirit of art and creativity . " Other promotions announced at the website included winning an all @-@ expense @-@ paid trip to see Gaga 's show on September 30 at Stockholm , Sweden , and Gaga @-@ inspired runway shows at LGBT bars across the nation , from where another set of tickets could be won . Four dates were added in Australia , starting from August 20 , 2014 , at Perth . She had one concert at Dubai 's Meydan Racecourse on September 10 , but newspaper Gulf News reported that the show would be censored for respecting cultural traditions in the UAE . According to Marco <unk> , chairman of AMI Live which organized the show in Dubai , " there will be some edits ... It cannot be the full show , because it wouldn 't be allowed . So it 's a special show for Dubai and for the culture " . 
 = = = Boxscore = = = 
 Forbes spoke about the commendable ticket pricing ensued by Live Nation for the tour . Jesse Lawrence from the magazine noticed how the ticket prices were lowered to an average of $ 68 in Gaga 's primary markets and ensuing fast sell @-@ outs , compared to those of her contemporaries , like Miley Cyrus ' Bangerz Tour which had an average ticket price at $ 86 . Conversely , the average price was raised to as high as $ 269 in Gaga 's secondary markets , although with fewer tickets available than Cyrus ' tour . This again ensued that the revenue was earned with profit . Lawrence concluded by saying that " Lady Gaga 's pricing , seems to be taking a longer @-@ term view and is focused on providing access to as many of her fans as possible as opposed to wringing out every last dollar on the current tour . " In April 2014 , Lawrence reported that following Gaga 's performance at Roseland Ballroom , the tour ticket prices in the secondary markets went up by 5 @.@ 3 % , with major increases being visible at Philips Arena in Atlanta . Tickets at Madison Square Garden rose up to $ 338 @.@ 81 , which was 42 @.@ 6 % higher than the average price . Other locations where ticket prices saw an increase were MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas , TD Garden Arena in Boston and United Center in Chicago . A higher price was set for the first of two nights at Staples Center in Los Angeles , resulting in one of the costliest tickets in the show . The pricing was leveled off for the second night and they gradually decreased with the tour 's progress . This was evident in the tour date switch up between May 12 and 15 at Washington and Philadelphia , respectively , where the ticket prices fell by 29 @.@ 5 % . 
 Reports arose in the media that the ticket sales for the tour were falling , leading Arthur Fogel , Chairman of Live Nation 's Global Touring division , to brand them as " ridiculous " . He clarified to Billboard that the about 80 % of the tickets were sold in North America and Europe , and they were still in the process of releasing future dates for numerous venues . The 29 shows in North America had grossed around US $ 26 million , with an average of almost $ 900 @,@ 000 per show . Fogel also addressed concerns that Live Nation had lost $ 30 million from Gaga 's tour , saying that if a similar situation really happened , then the company would have cancelled the concerts . " I just don 't know how this shit gets any traction without people doing their homework ... Just a complete fool would say something like that and it could only come from somebody who has an agenda , because it makes absolutely no sense , on any level " , Fogel concluded . A total of 800 @,@ 000 tickets have been sold for the tour , as reported by Billboard . 
 In June 2014 , Billboard released the first boxscore figures for the tour , up to the June 2 date . Gaga placed at number four on the boxscore list with total gross of $ 13 @.@ 9 million , and more than 171 @,@ 000 tickets sold . The boxscore figure for her Roseland Ballroom performance was also revealed to have grossed $ 1 @.@ 5 million with more than 24 @,@ 000 tickets sold . In October 2014 , the second set of boxscore were released , with sales of 509 @,@ 741 tickets and a gross of $ 46 @,@ 933 @,@ 594 , ranking at number two on the boxscore list . Final <unk> were released in December 2014 , with the last performance at Paris ' Palais Omnisports Bercy grossing $ 1 @.@ 2 million and audience of 13 @,@ 013 . In total , ArtRave : The Artpop Ball grossed $ 83 million from 920 @,@ 088 sold tickets at the 74 reported performances to Billboard Boxscore . On Pollstar 's Year @-@ end Top 20 Worldwide Tours list , Gaga ranked at number seven with $ 88 @.@ 7 million in gross and 947 @,@ 852 tickets sold for 84 shows , including the seven shows from Roseland Ballroom . Billboard listed it as the ninth best concert tour of the year with 76 reported shows . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 = = = North America = = = 
 John Walker from MTV News reviewed the opening concert in Fort Lauderdale , and was impressed with the show . He particularly liked the segment , when after the performance of " Alejandro " , Gaga decided to change her costume onstage and did so with the help of her stylists . Walker added that " to prove this , [ Gaga ] ripped the green , shoulder @-@ length wig right off of her head . Yes , she literally snatched her own wig . Reverse <unk> expedition says what ? " Walker further emphasized in another review for MTV that the tour expanded on Gaga 's characteristic " fan @-@ to @-@ artist " connections and theatrics she had developed with the Born This Way Ball . Adam Carlson from Billboard praised the show saying that it turned the " spectacle " into a " surprise " . He complimented the choreography and the constant costume changes , explaining that " talking about [ Gaga 's ] performances is more fun than listening to them , but don 't take that as an insult . There 's just a lot to talk about . " Chris Richards from The Washington Post said that " for a pop concert in an arena [ Verizon Center ] , it felt good . As a public exercise in reciprocal , unconditional love , it felt unique [ from Gaga ] . " 
 Glenn Gamboa from Newsday was impressed with the performances , saying " Whether it was the goofiness of ' Venus ' , the playfulness of ' Donatella ' or the throwback soul of ' Do What U Want ' , which she crowned with an a cappella bit of gospel , she filled the songs with an intensity that was infectious . " Lauren Moraski from CBS News felt that Gaga was in " full @-@ force " during the concert and " seemed right at home " with the New York crowd . Frank Scheck from The Hollywood Reporter commended the stage setup , the costumes and the overall entertainment aspect of the tour , saying that " Unlike Madonna , who engages in similar , but decidedly <unk> , over @-@ the @-@ top theatrics , Gaga invests her spectacles with an undeniable sweetness and heart . " Scheck was positive about the performances of " Gypsy " and " Born This Way " . 
 Negative commentary came from Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone who reviewed the show at Madison Square Garden and was disappointed , calling it " a run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill arena @-@ rock show , the kind where a band has a shoddy new album to flog " . He was not impressed that Gaga chose to ignore songs from Born This Way and its successful singles . Dan DeLuca from Philadelphia Daily News wrote that " the show was seriously marred by too many electro powered would @-@ be dance cuts from ARTPOP whose weaknesses were exposed whenever she reached back to her more enticing greatest hits " and that she performed " far too many songs " from Artpop . The Boston Globe writer James Reed felt that " something " was missing from Gaga 's performance , and it felt " hollow " . He also criticized Gaga 's reliance on backing tracks to sing her songs . Joey Guerra from Houston Chronicle found the show to be " disjointed " , saying that there was " little in the way of real transition between sequences , particularly in the later moments . " 
 = = = Oceania , Asia , and Europe = = = 
 Candice Barnes from The Sydney Morning Herald gave the show positive review , saying that Gaga " delivered a show fit for a queen " at Perth Arena . " Plugged as an ' art rave ' , it was hard to distinguish where the art finished and the music began " , she concluded . Conversely , Ross McCrae from The West Australian panned the show calling it " middle of the road arena rock show " , and noticed the public 's lack of interest in the performances . The lack of ticket sales was also noted by a reviewer for News.com.au , who went on to add that " one could never accuse Lady Gaga of lacking attention to detail in her live productions or failing to put in a wholehearted and energetic performance . " Jenny <unk> from Time Out awarded the show in Melbourne five stars , calling Gaga " a phenomenal singer with an immense voice ( ... ) who could try her hand at any genre " , also praising her live band and the costume changes . 
 The National critic Saeed Saeed described the show as " hugely entertaining " and something that " delivers pop music 's ultimate mandate : to dance your worries away " . Writing about the subdued concert in Dubai due to religious sentiments , Mohammed <unk> from Khaleej Times noted that Gaga could still put on a " spectacle " and she " was determined to connect with her local audience as she attempted to piece together flattering colloquial phrases " . Debra Kamin from The Times of Israel praised Gaga 's vocals , adding that " show was everything Gaga promised and everything fans have come to expect from her — loud , <unk> , sexually explicit and mind @-@ numbingly bright . " 
 Dave Simpson from The Guardian gave a positive review for the Birmingham concert , awarding the show with 4 out of 5 stars . He stated that " Gaga has often been accused of being all artifice and no heart , but tonight 's show is a powerful statement from a star who refuses to be pinned down or written off . " Daniel Dylan Wray from The Independent awarded the Birmingham concert with 4 out of 5 stars and described ArtRave as " loud , colourful and frequently emblematic of feel @-@ good , throwaway party times " . Katie Fitzpatrick from Manchester Evening News awarded the concert with 5 out of 5 stars . She praised Lady Gaga 's voice , her live band , the outfits and the connection of the fans – especially in this show that Gaga helped a fan to propose to his partner on stage . Katie stated that " the ostentatiously named ArtRave may reaffirm that Gaga the show @-@ woman is definitely about her art . But this little lady with the powerful set of lungs is also undoubtedly all heart . " Ludovic Hunter @-@ Tilney from the Financial Times rated the concert three out of five stars . He criticized the songs from Artpop except the title track , but complimented the acoustic and piano sequences . 
 = = Broadcast and recording = = 
 On November 17 , 2014 , Gaga announced through her social medias that the last concert show , which took place at Bercy Arena in France on November 24 , would be streamed live around the world , online on Yahoo ! Live . The concert started with a 30 @-@ minute video presentation of Gaga 's portraits , as shot by Robert Wilson , and which were previously exhibited at the Louvre Museum in Paris . The live stream broke records for Yahoo ! Live and Live Nation . 
 = = Set list = = 
 This setlist is representative of the show in Milan , Italy . It does not represent all dates throughout the tour . 
 = = Shows = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Main personnel 
 Personnel taken from ArtRave : The Artpop Ball tour book . 
 = Evander Kane = 
 Evander Frank Kane ( born August 2 , 1991 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey left winger currently playing for the Buffalo Sabres of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Kane was selected fourth overall in the first round of the 2009 NHL Entry Draft by the Atlanta Thrashers . 
 During his major junior career , Kane won the Memorial Cup with the Vancouver Giants of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) in 2007 , finished as runner @-@ up for the Jim Piggott Memorial Trophy as WHL rookie of the year in 2008 and was named to the WHL West First All @-@ Star Team in 2009 . Kane also set the Giants ' franchise record for single @-@ season goals in 2008 – 09 . 
 Internationally , Kane has won gold medals with Team Canada at the 2008 Ivan Hlinka Memorial Tournament and 2009 World Junior Championships . He has also competed in the 2010 IIHF World Championship . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kane was born on August 2 , 1991 , in Vancouver , British Columbia , to Perry and Sheri Kane , who named him after American boxer Evander Holyfield ( he later met Holyfield at age 18 ) . Kane has two sisters , Brea and Kyla , who are two and four years younger , respectively . 
 Coming from an athletic lineage , his father was an amateur boxer and hockey player . Kane 's mother was a professional volleyball player . His uncle , Leonard Kane , is a member of the Canadian Ball Hockey Hall of Fame . Kane 's cousin , Dwayne Provo , played in the Canadian Football League ( CFL ) for seven years and spent one season with the New England Patriots of the National Football League ( NFL ) . Another cousin , Kirk Johnson , boxed for Canada at the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona and later fought John Ruiz for the 2002 World Boxing Association ( WBA ) Heavyweight title . 
 Growing up in East Vancouver , Kane attended high school at John Oliver Secondary . In addition to hockey , he played baseball , basketball and soccer growing up . After beginning to skate at the age of three , he began playing minor hockey at eight . His father instructed him in his early years and initially wanted to keep him out of organized hockey until Kane was ten . At the age of 14 years , Kane recorded 140 points in 66 games with the bantam North Shore Winter Club , followed by a 22 @-@ goal , 54 @-@ point campaign to finish fourth in league scoring with the Greater Vancouver Canadians of the BC Hockey Major Midget League ( <unk> ) . Kane also played minor hockey with the Vancouver Thunderbirds , prior to bantam and midget . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Amateur = = = 
 = = = Vancouver Giants ( 2006 – 09 ) = = = 
 Kane was drafted 19th overall in the 2006 WHL Bantam Draft by the Vancouver Giants . He received his first WHL call @-@ up for a game against the Seattle Thunderbirds on December 13 , 2006 , due to other Giants players international commitments in the World Junior Championships . Kane scored his first WHL goal , a game @-@ tying marker , on March 25 , 2007 , the last game of the regular season . He also suited up for five WHL post @-@ season games , being originally called up for the playoffs after Giants forward Tim Kraus was suspended for game three of the opening round . He later appeared in two Memorial Cup games , tallying an assist , as part of the Giants ' 2007 Memorial Cup championship . 
 Set to begin his rookie campaign with the Giants the following season , Kane experienced a minor setback , as he was forced to miss the start of training camp with a case of mononucleosis . He nevertheless recovered and joined the Giants full @-@ time to tally 24 goals – third in team scoring – and 41 points in his first WHL season . Finishing tenth in rookie scoring , he was nominated for the Jim Piggott Memorial Trophy as WHL rookie of the year , which was awarded to Brayden Schenn of the Brandon Wheat Kings . 
 Kane emerged with an impressive start to the 2008 – 09 season , registering at least a point in each of his first 22 games . After recording his first WHL hat @-@ trick on October 10 , 2008 , against the Kelowna Rockets , he was named WHL Player of the Week on October 12 , succeeding linemate Casey Pierro @-@ Zabotel , who had been chosen the previous week . Kane earned a spot as an injury replacement at the 2009 World Junior Championships with Team Canada . Upon returning with a gold medal , Kane was named player of the week for the second time in the season on January 12 , 2009 , after scoring six points in two games immediately following the World Juniors . Later that month , he participated in the 2009 CHL Top Prospects Game as captain for Team Cherry . 
 Kane finished his second WHL season with 48 goals and 96 points , fourth in League scoring . He <unk> Adam Courchaine 's team record of 43 goals in a single season , set in 2002 – 03 . Second in team scoring to Pierro @-@ Zabotel 's 115 points , the linemates finished one @-@ two in all @-@ time Giants ' single @-@ season scoring as Pierro @-@ Zabotel and Kane both surpassed Gilbert Brulé 's previous 87 @-@ point mark . Kane received WHL West First Team All @-@ Star honours along with teammates Pierro @-@ Zabotel and Jonathon Blum . In the subsequent 2009 playoffs , after the Giants swept the Prince George Cougars in the first round , Kane scored a double @-@ overtime game @-@ winner to force a seventh game in the second round against the Spokane Chiefs . After eliminating the Chiefs in the seventh game , the Giants were then defeated by the Kelowna Rockets in six games in the semi @-@ finals . In 17 post @-@ season games , Kane accumulated 15 points . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 = = = Atlanta Thrashers / Winnipeg Jets ( 2009 – 2015 ) = = = 
 Kane was selected fourth overall by the Atlanta Thrashers . Less than a month later , the Thrashers signed Kane to an entry @-@ level contract on July 20 , 2009 . 
 Kane made the Thrashers ' lineup out of his first NHL training camp for the 2009 – 10 season . He recorded his first career NHL point in his debut on October 3 , 2009 , earning an assist on a goal by Rich <unk> against the Tampa Bay Lightning . His first goal was scored five days later , on October 8 , beating Chris Mason with a snap shot in a 4 – 2 win over the St. Louis Blues . He suffered a bone fracture , late in his rookie season , blocking a shot during a game against the Tampa Bay Lightning on March 6 , 2010 . Kane missed 15 games before returning to the lineup on April 3 . Kane finished his NHL rookie campaign with 14 goals and 26 points in 66 games , ranked 12th among first @-@ year point @-@ scorers . 
 Kane suffered several minor injuries during his second NHL season in 2010 – 11 season . During a game against the Colorado Avalanche on November 30 , 2010 , Kane suffered a left knee injury after he was struck by a shot from teammate Tobias <unk> ; he missed two games . The following month , he missed one game due to an arm injury , sustained during a game against the Pittsburgh Penguins on December 7 . In January 2011 , he missed an additional six games due to a lower @-@ body injury . Kept from the lineup for a total nine games , Kane increased his points total to 43 with 19 goals and 24 assists . He ranked fifth in team point @-@ scoring – third among forward behind captain Andrew Ladd and Bryan Little . 
 During the off @-@ season , the Thrashers franchise was bought and relocated by True North Sports and Entertainment , becoming the Winnipeg Jets . Kane was enjoying a successful first season as a Jet , leading his team in scoring with 18 goals and 31 points by mid @-@ January 2012 . During that month , however , he was sidelined with a concussion that was reported on January 21 . Later in the season , he recorded a four @-@ point game ( two goals and two assists ) in a 7 – 0 win against the Florida Panthers on March 1 , 2012 . On September 15 , 2012 , Kane signed a six @-@ year , $ 31 @.@ 5 million contract extension with the Jets . 
 As a result of the 2012 – 13 NHL lockout , Kane joined Dinamo Minsk of the Kontinental Hockey League ( KHL ) . He was the first Canadian NHL player to sign a contract with the KHL . However , after 12 games with the club , in which he recorded one goal , Kane was released . The club 's athletic director suggested that Kane " could not adapt to hockey in the KHL , " but also said that both sides mutually agreed to end the contract . 
 On April 3 , 2014 , Kane was accused of assault , after an incident in Vancouver , and sued for financial damages . On April 5 , 2014 , Kane was a healthy scratch under new head coach Paul Maurice , in a game against the Toronto Maple Leafs . After the game , Maurice said it was a coach 's decision , and that if Kane wanted back in the lineup , all he needed to do was " probably just come to the rink . " On February 3 , 2015 Kane was a healthy scratch against the Vancouver Canucks . It was later determined that he was scratched because of an incident with his teammates . Kane revealed in an October 2015 interview that he felt the Jets did not " have his back " throughout his legal and behavioral issues but instead felt that they traded away their problem . 
 = = = Buffalo Sabres ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 The Jets traded Kane on February 11 , 2015 , as well as Zach Bogosian and the rights to Jason <unk> , to the Buffalo Sabres in exchange for Tyler Myers , Drew Stafford , Joel Armia , Brendan Lemieux and a conditional first @-@ round pick in the 2015 NHL Entry Draft ( Jack <unk> ) . 
 = = International play = = 
 Kane competed in the 2008 Ivan Hlinka Memorial Tournament , capturing gold with Canada 's under @-@ 18 team . He totalled four points in four games , including an assist in the 6 – 3 gold medal game win against Russia . Later that year , Kane competed on Team Canada during the 2009 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships . As the youngest player on the team , Kane contributed six points in six games , helping Canada to a fifth @-@ straight gold medal with a 5 – 1 victory over Sweden in the final . 
 Following his rookie season in the NHL , Kane was named to the Canadian men 's team for the 2010 IIHF World Championship in Germany . General Manager Mark Messier made a specific effort to assemble a young team ; as a result , Kane was one of five teenagers on the roster . He finished the tournament with two goals and two assists in seven games . Canada was eliminated in the quarterfinal by Russia and finished in seventh place . 
 The following year , Kane returned to the national team for the 2011 IIHF World Championship in Slovakia . Kane recorded two assists over seven games as Canada suffered a second consecutive defeat in the quarterfinal to Russia . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = CHL = = = 
 = = = WHL = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Records = = 
 Vancouver Giants franchise record ; most goals , single @-@ season – 48 in 2008 – 09 ( surpassed Adam Courchaine – 43 in 2002 – 03 ) 
 = Military career of Audie Murphy = 
 The military career of Audie Murphy ( 20 June 1925 – 28 May 1971 ) encompassed two separate careers . His U. S. Army service covered nine World War II campaigns fought by the 3rd Infantry Division : Tunisia , Sicily , Naples @-@ Foggia , Anzio , Rome @-@ Arno , Southern France , Ardennes @-@ Alsace , Rhineland and Central Europe . He lied about his age to enlist in the United States Army in 1942 . Before his 20th birthday he had earned every Army combat award for valor available during his period of service and had risen to the rank of first lieutenant . On the day he was awarded the Medal of Honor for his January 1945 actions at the Colmar Pocket in France , he was considered to be America 's most decorated World War II soldier and received national recognition as such when Life magazine made him their cover story . His superior officers , as well as the Speaker of the U. S. House of Representatives , encouraged him to apply for enrollment at West Point and offered to provide any assistance and influence needed to help him be accepted as a cadet . Murphy eventually passed on the opportunity of enrollment at West Point , in part because of limitations resulting from his war injuries . At the end of his active Army service , he was given 50 percent disability classification and transferred to the Officers ' Reserve Corps . The psychological effects of the war remained with him for the rest of his life in the form of combat stress . Although the military did little for Murphy 's post @-@ war stress , he was publicly forthcoming about it in hopes of prodding the government into providing better treatment and medical benefits for other veterans suffering the same issues . 
 At the 1950 onset of the Korean War , Murphy was commissioned with the rank of captain in the 36th Infantry Division of the Texas National Guard . He was charged with training new recruits and fully believed that he and the 36th would be sent to the Korean front for combat duty . His film career began to take off in 1951 , limiting Murphy 's Guard involvement . The Korean Armistice Agreement of 1953 ended hostilities without the 36th ever being sent to Korea . Murphy , however , remained with the Guard actively participating in recruitment drives and allowing his name and image to be used for that purpose . He retired with the rank of major in 1966 and was transferred to the United States Army Reserve . In 1969 the Army transferred him to Retired Reserve . For his combined service in the Army and the Guard , his home state posthumously awarded Murphy the Texas Legislative Medal of Honor . 
 = = United States Army = = 
 = = = Enlistment and initial training = = = 
 Murphy had wanted to be a soldier all his youth and dreamed about combat . The death of his mother in May 1941 added even more impetus to his desire to achieve that goal . When he heard the news of Japan 's 7 December attack on Pearl Harbor he tried to enlist in the Marines , the Navy and the Army , but was turned down for being underweight and underage . He added weight with a change in diet , and gave the Army an affidavit from his sister Corinne that falsified his birth date by a year . Murphy enlisted on 30 June 1942 in Dallas . During his physical examination his height was recorded as 5 feet 5 @.@ 5 inches ( 1 @.@ 66 m ) and his weight as 112 pounds ( 50 @.@ 8 kg ) . Assigned to the infantry , during basic training at Camp Wolters , Texas , Murphy earned the Marksman Badge with Rifle Clasp and the Expert Badge with Bayonet Clasp . While participating in a close @-@ order drill during that hot Texas summer , he passed out . His company commander thought his build was too slight for service in the infantry , and tried to have him transferred to a cook and bakers ' school , but Murphy insisted on becoming a combat soldier . He completed the 13 @-@ week basic training course and in October was given leave to visit his family , after which he was sent to Fort George G. Meade in Maryland for advanced infantry training until January 1943 . 
 = = = Mediterranean Theater = = = 
 = = = = North Africa = = = = 
 In January 1943 , Murphy was processed through Camp Kilmer , New Jersey . He arrived at Casablanca , in French Morocco on 20 February and was assigned to Company B , 1st Battalion , 15th Infantry Regiment , 3rd Infantry Division . 
 As part of Operation Torch the United States seized Port Lyautey in French Morocco on 8 November 1942 , and the 3rd Infantry Division was sent there on 7 March 1943 . The Division was placed under the command of Major General Lucian Truscott , who took them through rigorous training at Arzew in Algeria , for an amphibious landing at Sicily . Private Murphy participated with his division in 30 @-@ mile ( 48 km ) 8 @-@ hour marches , known as the " Truscott Trot " . For the first hour , the men marched at a pace of 5 mph ( 8 @.@ 0 km / h ) , and slowed to 4 mph ( 6 @.@ 4 km / h ) for the second hour , taking the final 21 miles ( 34 km ) at a pace of 3 @.@ 5 mph ( 5 @.@ 6 km / h ) . They also performed bayonet and land mine drills , obstacle course training and other exercises . Murphy was promoted to private first class on 7 May . After the 13 May surrender of the Axis forces in French Tunisia , the division was put in charge of the prisoners . They returned to Algeria on 15 May for " Operation Copycat " , training exercises in preparation for the assault landing in Sicily . 
 = = = = Italy = = = = 
 = = = = = Sicily = = = = = 
 The 3rd Infantry Division , as part of the U. S. Seventh Army under the command of Lieutenant General George S. Patton , sailed from Tunisia on 7 July , 1943 , for the Allied invasion of Sicily , landing at Licata on 10 July . Murphy was promoted to the rank of corporal on 15 July . Company B later took part in fighting around <unk> , during which Murphy killed two fleeing Italian officers . 
 They arrived in Palermo on 20 July , and Murphy was sidelined by illness for a week . Allied capture of the transit port of Messina was crucial to taking Sicily from the Axis . En route there , Company B was assigned to a hillside location protecting a machine @-@ gun emplacement , while the rest of the 3rd Infantry Division fought at San Fratello . The Axis began their evacuation of Messina on 27 July . Although the 3rd Infantry Division 's 7th Infantry Regiment secured the port on 17 August , the Axis had already completed their evacuation hours before . During the fighting in Sicily , Murphy became realistic about military duty : " I have seen war as it actually is , and I do not like it . But I will go on fighting . " 
 = = = = = Mainland invasion = = = = = 
 With Sicily secured from Axis forces , Supreme Commander General Dwight D. Eisenhower made the decision to invade Italy in early September 1943 . As part of the Salerno landings , the 3rd Infantry Division came ashore at <unk> . One of the early skirmishes recounted by author Don Graham involved Murphy , his best friend <unk> Tipton ( referred to as " Brandon " in Murphy 's book To Hell and Back ) and an unnamed soldier in their unit as they traveled along the Volturno River . The trio were near a bridge when the third soldier was killed by German machine @-@ gun fire . Tipton tossed hand grenades in the direction of the fire and Murphy responded with a Thompson submachine gun , killing five German soldiers . 
 Allied forces entered Naples on 1 October . The 3rd Division took part in the Allied assault on the Volturno Line . Near Mignano Monte Lungo Hill 193 , Company B repelled a reconnaissance by seven German soldiers , killing three and taking four prisoners . 
 Murphy was promoted to sergeant on 13 December . By this time , the 3rd Infantry Division had suffered heavy casualties : 683 dead , 170 missing , and 2 @,@ 412 wounded . 
 = = = = = Anzio = = = = = 
 The 3rd Infantry Division was notified in December 1943 of the planned January 1944 storming of Anzio beachhead , the beginning of the liberation of Rome . The division began training near Naples and practiced an amphibious landing at Salerno . Murphy was made section leader on 4 January and promoted to staff sergeant on 13 January . He was hospitalized in Naples with malaria on 21 January , and was unable to participate in the initial landing commanded by Major General John P. Lucas . Murphy returned to his unit in time to take part in the unsuccessful First Battle of Cisterna , which was fought between 30 January and 1 February . It was the most fierce and sustained fighting Murphy had experienced to date . 
 Lieutenant Colonel Michael Paulick , commander of the 1st Battalion of the 15th Infantry , temporarily took charge of Company B when the company commander 's wounds left him unable to lead . Paulick later stated that the ensuing 3 @-@ day battle decimated the company , leaving fewer than 30 soldiers alive . 
 If the suffering of men could do the job , the German lines would be split wide open . Replacements cannot begin to keep pace with the slaughter . Some of the companies have been reduced to twenty men . Not a yard of ground has been gained by the murderous three days of assault . A <unk> quality hangs over the beachhead . 
 Lucas was replaced in February by Truscott . The men were forced back to Anzio and remained there for months . Taking shelter in an abandoned farmhouse on 2 March , their artillery fire disabled a German tank . Although the tank crew were killed as they tried to escape , Murphy knew the tank could be repaired by the Germans and put back into use . Leaving his men in the farmhouse , Murphy advanced towards the tank by crawling on his stomach . He then used rifle grenades to permanently put the tank out of commission . For this action , he received the Bronze Star with " V " Device . Murphy continued to make scouting patrols to take German prisoners before being hospitalized for a week on 13 March with a second bout of malaria . 
 The 3rd Division was taken off the front line in late March and placed in reserve status . 1 to 11 April , the Division was put through additional combat training at Torre Astura . The training was so intense that Murphy felt his men needed relief and refused to put them through the required close order drill . Although already recommended for a promotion to technical sergeant , his refusal on behalf of his men cost him the promotion . Upon completion of the training , Murphy and his men occupied the area of Campo Morto @-@ <unk> . On 1 May , the 3rd Division was sent back to Torre Astura , where they remained until 21 May . Sixty @-@ one infantry officers and enlisted men of Company B , 15th Infantry , including Murphy , were awarded the Combat Infantryman Badge on 8 May . Murphy was also awarded an Oak Leaf Cluster for his Bronze Star . 
 The 3rd Division began its assault of German troops in the Second Battle of Cisterna on 22 May , and by 25 May , Cistern and Cori were in Allied hands . Audie 's platoon moved towards <unk> on 26 to 27 May , regrouping with the Division at <unk> . Combat action 29 May to 1 June put <unk> and <unk> under Allied control . After Rome was liberated , the Division was assigned to patrol the city 6 to 15 June . The Division was moved to southwest of Rome 16 June where they remained bivouacked until the end of July . Murphy was made platoon sergeant on 4 August . He moved out of Italy with the Division on 8 August 1944 . 
 = = = European Theater = = = 
 = = = = Southern and southeastern France = = = = 
 The U.S. Seventh Army under the command of Lieutenant General Alexander Patch was the initial amphibious landing force for the 15 August 1944 , Allied invasion of southern France , known as Operation Dragoon . The 3rd Infantry Division was now under the command of Major General John W. O 'Daniel . At 0800 military time , they came ashore on Yellow Beach near <unk> with the first wave of the assault . They began to move inland through a vineyard . As the 3rd Platoon progressed toward an incline , one of their own light machine @-@ gun squads got detached . German soldiers began firing at them , initially killing one and wounding another . Murphy ran out alone to locate the lost squad and led them back to the unit . He then used the retrieved machine gun to return fire at the German soldiers , killing two and wounding one . When he relinquished the machine gun back to his own men and took up a new position , he was joined by his best friend <unk> Tipton . At that moment , two Germans exited a house about 100 yards ( 91 m ) away , and feigned surrender by waving a white flag . Tipton believed it to be a real surrender gesture , and made himself visible , beckoning to the German soldiers to come towards him . He was immediately killed by machine @-@ gun fire coming from within the house . 
 I remember the experience as I do a nightmare . A demon seems to have entered my body . My brain is coldly alert and logical . I do not think of the danger to myself . My whole being is concentrated on killing . 
 Murphy advanced alone on the house , impervious to the German fire being directed at him . He wounded two , killed six , and took the others as prisoners . His actions that day took approximately one hour , during which he had killed eight German soldiers , wounded three and taken eleven prisoners . Murphy received the Distinguished Service Cross . 
 During 27 – 28 August , at Montélimar , Murphy and the 1st Battalion , 15th Infantry Regiment , 3rd Infantry Division , along with the 36th Infantry Division , engaged in an offensive battle to secure the area from the Germans . The 3rd and 36th divisions took 500 prisoners in the city on 29 August . For these actions the 1st Battalion of the 15th Infantry Regiment received the Presidential Unit Citation . 
 = = = = Northeastern France = = = = 
 The 3rd Infantry Division was part of an offensive plan to break through German resistance in northeastern France , as far as Saint @-@ Dié @-@ des @-@ Vosges . In the area of <unk> on 15 September 1944 , Murphy narrowly escaped death from a mortar shell hit that killed two others and wounded three . Although his resulting heel wound was not serious , he received his first Purple Heart . By this point , all but Murphy and two others of Company B 's original group had either been killed or taken off the lines with wounds . General O 'Daniel moved the 15th Infantry , 3rd Division to the Moselle and the Cleurie river valley in late September . Stone quarries dotted the hills and provided good defensive positions for the Germans . The 15th was met with fierce resistance north of St. Ame at the heavily fortified multi @-@ tunneled L 'Omet quarry . On 2 October at L 'Omet , Murphy advanced alone to the location of a machine gun manned by a unit of German soldiers . Within 15 yards ( 14 m ) of the machine gun nest , he rose to his feet . " The Germans spot me instantly " , he recalled . " The gunner spins the tip of his weapon toward me . But the barrel catches in a limb , and the burst whizzes to my right " . Murphy lobbed two hand grenades at the men , killing four and wounding three . He was awarded the Silver Star for this action . The 15th achieved success in its continued attack when Germans began evacuating the quarry on 5 October . On that date , Murphy advanced carrying a SCR @-@ 536 radio for 50 yards ( 46 m ) towards the Germans while they continually fired directly at him . Around 200 yards ( 180 m ) from the German location , he relayed firing orders by radio to the artillery , and remained at his position alone for an hour directing his men . When Murphy 's men finally took the hill , 15 German combatants were killed and 35 wounded . Murphy 's actions earned him an Oak Leaf Cluster for his Silver Star . 
 Murphy was awarded a battlefield commission to second lieutenant on 14 October , which elevated him to platoon leader . Operation Dogface was the 3rd Infantry Division 's support role for the VI Corps in securing Bruyères and Brouvelieures , with the goal of getting the U. S. Sixth Army Group through the Belfort Gap by November . While en route to Brouvelieures on 26 October , the 3rd Platoon of Company B was attacked by a German sniper group . Murphy captured two before being shot in the hip by a sniper whom he in turn killed . 
 Because of the rain and the mud , we cannot be evacuated for three days . We lie on cots , six to a pyramidal tent , while the fever spreads through our flesh . Delirious men moan and curse . 
 The wounded waited at an aid station for hours for their turn with a medic . After the 3 @-@ day delay caused by the weather , they were transported to the 3rd General Hospital at Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence , where they were met with more delays before treatment and hospitalization . Gangrene developed in Murphy 's wound , for which he was treated with penicillin and multiple surgeries to remove the dead tissue . He remained hospitalized until 28 December 1944 . As a result of the injury , Murphy received the first Oak Leaf Cluster for his Purple Heart . 
 = = = = = Colmar Pocket = = = = = 
 The Colmar Pocket was 850 square miles ( 2 @,@ 200 km2 ) in the Vosges Mountains and had been held by German troops since November 1944 . Murphy was still hospitalized on 15 December when General O 'Daniel moved the 3rd Infantry Division into the area . Murphy described it as " a huge and dangerous bridgehead thrusting west of the Rhine like an iron fist . Fed with men and materiel from across the river , it is a constant threat to our right flank ; and potentially it is a perfect springboard from which the enemy could start a powerful counterattack . " He rejoined his platoon on 14 January 1945 , the date Lieutenant General Jacob Devers ordered the 3rd Division reinforced by the 28th Infantry Division . The 3rd Division engaged in sixteen days of battle to secure the bridgeheads west of the Rhine at the Colmar Canal . After crossing the Ill river through the <unk> Woods on 24 January , the 3rd Division was ordered to the town of Holtzwihr , where they met with a strong German counterattack . Two officers in the division were killed by mortar shells in an attack the following day during which Murphy was wounded in both legs , and for which he received a second Oak Leaf Cluster for his Purple Heart . 
 From its peak of 235 men , disease , injuries and casualties had reduced Company B 's fighting strength to 18 men . Murphy being the only officer remaining on 26 January was made the company commander . The company awaited reinforcements as Murphy watched the approaching Germans , " I see the Germans lining up for an attack . Six tanks rumble to the outskirts of Holtzwihr , split into groups of threes , and fan out toward either side of the clearing . Then wave after wave of white dots , barely discernible against the background of snow , start across the field . They are enemy infantrymen " . The Germans scored a direct hit on an M10 tank destroyer , setting it on fire and causing its crew to abandon it . Murphy ordered his men to retreat to positions in the woods , remaining alone at his post shooting his M1 carbine and relaying orders via his telephone while the Germans aimed fire directly at his position . Murphy mounted the abandoned , burning tank destroyer and began firing its .50 caliber machine gun at the advancing Germans , killing a squad crawling through a ditch towards him . 
 It was like standing on top of a time bomb ... he was standing on the TD chassis , exposed to enemy fire from his ankles to his head and silhouetted against the trees and the snow behind him . 
 For an hour , Murphy stood on the tank destroyer returning German fire from foot soldiers and advancing tanks , during which he sustained a leg wound . He stopped only after he ran out of ammunition . 
 As if under the influence of some drug , I slide off the tank destroyer and , without once looking back , walk down the road through the forest . If the Germans want to shoot me , let them . I am too weak from fear and exhaustion to care . 
 He rejoined his men with complete disregard for his own wound , leading them back to successfully repel the Germans . Only afterwards would he allow treatment of his leg wound , and still insisted on remaining with his men . 
 ... during his indomitable one @-@ man struggle , Lieutenant Murphy broke the entire attack of the Germans and held hard @-@ won ground that it would have been disastrous to lose . 
 While standing on the burning tank destroyer Murphy killed or wounded 50 Germans . For his actions that day he was awarded the Medal of Honor . 
 On 4 February , Murphy led Company B in a battle to successfully rid the Jewish Cemetery near <unk> of German troops holed up inside , killing six and taking the remainder prisoners . Two days later , Company B advanced to Neuf @-@ <unk> . By 8 February , the city of Colmar surrendered to combined Allied forces , ending the battle . The 3rd Division was charged with guarding the Rhine west bank 10 to 18 February . Murphy was promoted to first lieutenant on 16 February . The 3rd Infantry Division was awarded the Presidential Unit Citation for its <unk> which earned Murphy an Oak Leaf Cluster for the PUC awarded for action at <unk> . 
 While the Division was stationed at Nancy , General O 'Daniel held a ceremony on 5 March to award Murphy his previously won Distinguished Service Cross and Silver Star . Murphy was reassigned as 15th Infantry Regiment liaison officer on 11 March . From then until 20 May , he was assigned to the Director for Plans and Operations , a non @-@ combat assignment that moved with the regiment . Although not authorized to do so , he did step out of that role when a message arrived that Company B 's senior officers had been killed , leaving the unit in charge of an inexperienced officer . He commandeered a jeep , a driver and an interpreter and advanced to the Siegfried Line to successfully rescue the company . 
 = = = = = Medal of Honor and other decorations = = = = = 
 Brigadier General Ralph B. Lovett and Lieutenant Colonel Hallet D. Edson recommended Murphy for the Medal of Honor for his actions at Holtzwihr , the awarding of which was confirmed by an official press release on 24 May 1945 . Near Salzburg , Austria on 2 June , General Patch presented Murphy with both the Medal of Honor and the Legion of Merit . As of that presentation , Murphy was then considered " the most decorated American soldier in World War II . " When asked after the war why he had seized the machine gun and taken on an entire company of German infantry , Murphy replied simply , " They were killing my friends . " For his war @-@ time service , Murphy had earned every Army combat award for valor available during his period of service . 
 He was awarded the American Campaign Medal , the European @-@ African @-@ Middle Eastern Campaign Medal with nine combat campaign stars ( one silver representing 5 , and 4 bronze ) and one arrowhead device for amphibious landings in Sicily and Southern France , the World War II Victory Medal , and the Army of Occupation Medal with Germany Clasp . 
 On 16 April 1945 , France awarded Murphy the French Croix de guerre with Silver Star , which was presented to him in Dallas on 15 September by U.S. Army Brigadier General William Albert Collier . At a public ceremony in Paris on 19 July 1948 , French General Jean de Lattre de Tassigny presented Murphy the French Legion of Honor – Grade of Chevalier and the French Croix de guerre with Palm . He was also the recipient of the French Liberation Medal . Belgium awarded Murphy the Belgian Croix de guerre with 1940 Palm on 10 December 1955 . 
 The 3rd Infantry Division received the Croix de guerre with Palm as a unit award , and all individual members were awarded the French <unk> . 
 = = = Homecoming and discharge = = = 
 Murphy received orders on 8 June 1945 , to report to Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio , Texas . At a 13 June San Antonio homecoming parade held for returning Texas veterans , a quarter of a million people cheered Murphy , Charles P. Cabell , Lucian Truscott , Harold L. Clark and others . He was then assigned to the Army Ground & Services Redistribution Station at the base and given 30 days leave . Murphy was the home grown hero , and on a visit to Dallas , the media followed his every move , interviewing and photographing him . Farmersville pulled out all the stops , giving him an escort caravan , and five thousand local citizens showed up to hear a band concert and speeches in his honor . He was the star attraction at the 2 to 4 July McKinney rodeo where he opened the event every night . The 16 July issue of Life magazine brought Murphy national attention when its cover story proclaimed him " most decorated " next to a smiling image of him in full dress uniform . Photographers for the magazine followed him to a birthday party in his honor , to his first civilian haircut since 1942 , and around to visit friends and relatives . 
 While on leave , he discussed with family and friends the possibility of his enrolling in West Point and making the Army a lifetime career . Inquiries on his behalf had been sent through military channels before he left Europe , and Patch had encouraged him to enroll . Both Edson and Paulick had also counseled Murphy about attending the military academy , with Paulick offering to tutor him for the entrance examinations . Speaker of the U. S. House of Representatives Sam Rayburn supported the idea and offered to use his influence to help Murphy enroll at West Point . Murphy expressed concerns to Edison and others that his war injuries might prevent him from passing the physical examination required to enroll . Texas A & M University was another military school Murphy considered as a possibility . In the end , he enrolled in neither school . A belated Good Conduct Medal was presented to Murphy on 21 August . He was discharged with the rank of first lieutenant at a 50 percent disability classification on 21 September and transferred to the Officers ' Reserve Corps . 
 = = = Post @-@ war trauma = = = 
 When Murphy returned from World War II , symptoms of combat stress immediately became evident to family and friends . He was on medication for stomach problems and tightly wound , with any unexpected sound triggering a defensive reflex reaction to an imagined attack . When he slept , it was with a loaded pistol under his pillow . Recurring nightmares had him reliving the war , repeatedly calling out to individual soldiers . Turning the lights on sometimes brought relief , if only to keep him from falling asleep again . He had waking graphic flashbacks that caused him to freeze , reliving a life @-@ threatening moment on the battlefield . His first wife Wanda Hendrix stated that he once held her at gunpoint . She witnessed her husband being moved to tears by newsreel footage of German war orphans , guilt @-@ ridden that his war actions might have been the cause of their having no parents . As others had noticed since his return from Europe , Hendrix said his dreams were punctuated with the battles he had fought . She tried to coax him into seeking psychiatric help . During a publicity tour in 1952 , his dreams caused him to beat the wall of his motel room until his fists bled . 
 His service medical records reveal that the Army was aware of the symptoms and provided sleeping pills . There is no indication that the military otherwise provided any counseling or treatment for his post @-@ combat stress . Murphy briefly found a creative stress outlet in writing poetry after his Army discharge . His poem " The Crosses Grow on Anzio " appeared in his book To Hell and Back , but was attributed to the fictitiously named Kerrigan . In the mid @-@ 1960s , he recognized his dependence on <unk> , and locked himself alone in a hotel room for a week to successfully break the addiction . His friend David " Spec " McClure who helped him write the book said he never recovered from the war . In an effort to draw attention to the combat – related problems of returning Korean War and Vietnam War veterans , Murphy spoke out candidly about his own problems . He called on the government to give increased consideration and study to the emotional impact of combat experiences , and to extend Veteran 's Administration benefits to cover combat stress treatment . 
 After the war , they took Army dogs and rehabilitated them for civilian life . But they turned soldiers into civilians immediately , and let ' em sink or swim . 
 = = Texas National Guard = = 
 The 36th Infantry Division was federalized as part of the United States Army during both World War I and World War II . It was called the Texas Division due to most of its members being from the Texas National Guard . During World War II , they were in Operation Dragoon and participated in the same battles to liberate Rome as Murphy had . At the end of the war , the 36th reverted to state control as part of the Texas National Guard . When the Korean War commenced on 25 June 1950 , the 36th looked to recruit experienced veterans to help it gain federal recognition . Major General H. Miller Ainsworth and Brigadier General Carl L. Phinney were the 36th 's commander and deputy commander respectively . Both men were acquaintances of Murphy , who at the time was being considered for the lead in The Red Badge of Courage . He was having doubts about his acting career and was considering re @-@ enlisting in the Army . The onset of the Korean conflict became the deciding factor in his returning to active military service , and he believed the 36th would be deployed to Korea . On 14 July , Murphy was accompanied by Ainsworth to his physical examination at Camp Mabry . As of his swearing in with the rank of captain in the Guard , he received federal recognition of the promotion in rank from first lieutenant to captain . Attending a lunch for Murphy afterwards were Ainsworth , Phinney , 36th Chief of Staff Colonel James E. Taylor and the State Director of the Selective Service Brigadier General Paul Wakefield . A press conference followed during which Murphy expressed his concerns that World War III was about to erupt . 
 Murphy was initially assigned to the Intelligence Office headquarters , 1st Battalion , 141st Infantry as S @-@ 2 , and attended the Guard 's two @-@ week summer training at Fort Hood as a range officer . 19 December 1950 , Murphy was transferred to division headquarters as an aide to Ainsworth . At the 1951 summer training camp at Fort Polk , Louisiana , Murphy was in charge of training approximately 500 inexperienced new recruits in bayonet , marksmanship and close order drill . Fellow instructor Captain Tom Berry remembered , " In my opinion , Audie Murphy set the tone for the obvious high esprit de corps for the 36th Division which lasted throughout my association with the Division [ eighteen years ] . Audie Murphy walked the way he talked . " 
 He requested to transfer to inactive status on 1 October 1951 , due to his film commitments with MGM Studios . On 21 January 1952 , Murphy was relieved of his assignment as aide . Fort Hood was the location of the 1952 summer training camp , during which Murphy was in charge of field application of classroom training . The 1953 summer training at Fort Hood once again had Murphy in charge of bayonet training . The Korean Armistice Agreement was signed on 27 July , without the 36th having been called up . He missed the 1954 summer training camp due to his location shooting for To Hell and Back 
 During his service he granted the Guard permission to use his name and image in recruiting materials . His activities aside from being an instructor at the training camps also included touring the state to make unit inspections and to visit local commanders . On 22 June 1955 , Murphy requested a temporary waiver of his Army disability pension from the Veteran 's Administration while he was put on active duty with the Guard . 6 July 1955 , at his request , Murphy 's status with the Guard was changed back to active . In doing so , he hoped to be promoted to the rank of major , in spite of his being short on the requirement of first serving seven years as a captain . He was recommended by several superior officers ; Major General K. L. Berry , Adjutant General of the Texas National Guard , requested a waiver for the 7 @-@ year requirement to the National Guard Bureau in Washington D.C. The waiver was granted and Murphy was promoted by the Guard to major on 14 February 1956 , receiving federal recognition of the promotion in rank from captain to major . Upon attaining the new rank , Murphy and General Phinney toured the state of Texas to help promote the " Guard Muster Recruiting Drive " set for 22 February . 1 July 1957 , Murphy transferred back to inactive status , and remained inactive until his separation from the Guard as of 7 November 1966 . On 8 November 1966 , he transferred to the United States Army Reserve , and remained with the USAR until his 1969 transfer to the Retired Reserve . 
 On 18 August 2013 , Texas Governor Rick Perry signed bill <unk> , which authorized the awarding of the Texas Legislative Medal of Honor to Murphy . It is the highest military decoration that may be awarded to a member of the Texas military , and was awarded in recognition of Murphy 's combined military service in the Army and the Guard . The medal was presented to Murphy 's sister Nadine at a public ceremony in Farmersville , Texas on 29 October 2013 . 
 = = Death = = 
 In his civilian life , Murphy was at odds with what he perceived as an innate film industry culture of phoniness , once likening his own acting career to prostitution . He was uncomfortable being an iconic war hero , and felt used because of that image . However , he often spoke of his kinship with the military , " I have to admit that I love the damned Army . It was father , mother , brother to me for years . It made me somebody , gave me self @-@ respect . " Although he was officially retired from the military when he died in a private plane crash on 28 May 1971 at Brush Mountain , near Catawba , Virginia , his ties to the military and to his home state were evident in the aftermath . 
 The Texas state legislature ordered all flags on state buildings to be flown at half staff to honor Murphy . The memorial service held in his hometown of Farmersville , Texas was in part sponsored by the Thomas Glenn Caraway Post of the VFW , and Farmersville businesses closed their doors for an hour in memoriam . His eulogy at the memorial service in the Hollywood Hills was delivered by an Army chaplain . While very few Hollywood celebrities attended , among the mourners were six Medal of Honor recipients , General John W. O 'Daniel and several 3rd Infantry Division veterans who had fought with him . A month later on 4 July , Sacramento , California cancelled its annual Independence Day parade because Murphy was to have been the grand marshal . In its place a memorial service at Capitol Park was attended mostly by veterans . He was buried at Arlington National Cemetery with full military honors on 7 June . The U.S. Army Band marched in front of six black horses that pulled the caisson with his flag @-@ draped casket from Fort Myer Chapel to the cemetery . Among the mourners at the cemetery were government dignitaries and multiple veterans groups . 
 As a result of legislation introduced by U.S. Congressman Olin Teague five months after Murphy 's death in 1971 , the Audie L. Murphy Memorial VA Hospital in San Antonio , now a part of the South Texas Veterans Health Care System , was dedicated in 1973 . VFW Post 5311 in Virginia worked for 3 years with the United States Forest Service for permission to erect a monument at the site of Murphy 's death . Made from a donated granite slab and carved by a stone cutter who volunteered his services , other expenses involved were paid for by Post 5311 . Members dug the road and cleared the area where the monument was dedicated on 10 November 1974 . 
 = All the Way ... A Decade of Song = 
 All the Way … A Decade of Song is the first English @-@ language greatest hits album by Canadian recording artist Celine Dion . Released by Sony Music Entertainment on November 12 , 1999 , it features nine previously released and seven new recordings . Dion worked on new songs mainly with David Foster . Other producers include Max Martin , Kristian Lundin , Robert John " Mutt " Lange , James Horner and Matt Serletic . 
 All the Way ... A Decade of Song garnered positive reviews from music critics . They praised the first uptempo single " That 's the Way It Is " and a ballad " If Walls Could Talk . " Some criticism was directed towards including a small number of hits and many new recordings . Despite that , the album became a commercial success throughout the world and peaked at number one in every major music market around the globe . All the Way ... A Decade of Song has sold 8 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , according to Nielsen SoundScan . It has also sold five million copies in Europe and shipped two million copies in Japan and one million in Canada . During the first two years of its release , the album had sold over seventeen million copies worldwide . 
 The lead single , " That 's the Way It Is " was well received by critics and became a commercial success around the world . The following singles were released in selected countries only and without any promotion from Dion , who was on her two @-@ year break from the music industry , they performed moderately on the charts . 
 = = Background = = 
 After ten years of standing in the spotlight , Celine Dion decided go on vacation . " I 'm looking forward to having no schedule , no pressure , to not caring about whether it 's raining or not , just visiting with family and friends , cooking at home , trying to seriously have a child . I want no pressure for a while , " she said . But before Dion embarked on her two @-@ year respite from the music industry beginning January 1 , 2000 , she prepared All the Way ... A Decade of Song to cap a ten @-@ year period in which she has sold over 100 million records worldwide . In the ' 90s , Dion has transformed herself from a regional Canadian success into one of the world 's most successful pop artists . In that time , she 's released seven English @-@ language albums , from 1990 's Unison to All the Way ... A Decade of Song , and six newly recorded French albums , picking up numerous awards , including five Grammys . 
 The process of putting together All the Way … A Decade of Song was laborious for all involved , from balancing the number of hits and new songs to ensuring that each of the latest tracks showed a new side of Dion . " We had hourly conversations , back and forth , about what the combination should be , " said John <unk> , the album 's co @-@ executive producer . " We wanted to make sure we had some new sounds and that we were able to go to new places . " Co @-@ executive producer Vito <unk> added : " The first idea was to record three new songs , then Dion said , ' Let 's go for five , ' her lucky number . But we had so many great songs coming in that we ended up recording nine . Out of that , we decided to go with seven . " 
 = = Content = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 All the Way ... A Decade of Song contains nine greatest hits ( ten on the Japanese version ) with seven new songs in one single @-@ disc package . Collaborators include Max Martin ; Robert John " Mutt " Lange ; James Horner and Will Jennings , who wrote " My Heart Will Go On " ; French songwriter / producer Luc <unk> ; Diane Warren ; and David Foster . The Jennings / Horner track " Then You Look at Me was also placed in December 1999 on the film soundtrack Bicentennial Man , starring Robin Williams ; and <unk> 's " Live ( for the One I Love ) , " which has been translated from its original French version " Vivre , " appeared in February 2000 on the French stage @-@ show album Notre @-@ Dame de Paris . 
 The first single , " That 's the Way It Is " is an optimistic uptempo song , co @-@ written and co @-@ produced by Max Martin , best known for his work with young pop artists . Other highlights on All the Way ... A Decade of Song include a remake of Roberta Flack 's " The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face " , which Dion has performed acoustically in her Let 's Talk About Love World Tour ; the Robert John " Mutt " Lange ballad " If Walls Could Talk " , with Shania Twain on background vocals ; the power ballad " I Want You to Need Me " from Diane Warren ; another , orchestrated power ballad " Then You Look at Me ; " and a song Dion and René Angélil got married to , " All the Way " , here in a virtual duet with Frank Sinatra . 
 Sony Music Entertainment released eight different versions of her greatest hits , tailored to Dion 's individual successes in North America , Europe , France , Australia / New Zealand , Asia , Japan , Latin America and Brazil . 
 = = = DVD = = = 
 In 2001 , Sony Music Entertainment released All the Way ... A Decade of Song & Video on DVD . It includes music videos for " If Walls Could Talk " and " Then You Look at Me " , which weren 't released as singles . It also contains two videos from the 1999 CBS television special , " All the Way " and " The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face " , and music videos for All the Way ... A Decade of Song singles : " That 's the Way It Is " , " Live ( for the One I Love ) " and " I Want You to Need Me . " The DVD also includes previous hits , some of them in live versions from the Live in Memphis concert . In late 2003 , Sony Music Entertainment released a combo of All the Way ... A Decade of Song CD and All the Way ... A Decade of Song & Video DVD in Europe and Australia . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 On October 7 , 1999 , Celine Dion taped her second CBS television special at the Radio City Music Hall in New York City . She performed : " Love Can Move Mountains " , " To Love You More " ( with Taro Hakase on violin ) , " That 's the Way It Is " ( with ' N Sync ) , " All the Way " ( virtual duet with Frank Sinatra ) , " The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face " and a medley of " Here We Are / Because You Loved Me / Conga " in duet with Gloria Estefan . The television special aired on November 22 , 1999 and was the second @-@ most @-@ watched program in its time slot , with an 8 @.@ 3 rating and a 14 share . Dion also performed " That 's the Way It Is " in various television and award shows in late 1999 , before taking a two @-@ year break from the music industry . On December 31 , 1999 , she performed her last concert at <unk> 's Molson Center , with guest Bryan Adams and a host of French @-@ Canadian singers . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " That 's the Way It Is " was released as the first single from the album in November 1999 . It reached number six on the US Billboard Hot 100 and became a top ten hit around the world . In February 2000 , " Live ( for the One I Love ) " was released as the second single in selected European countries and in March 2000 , " The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face " was issued as the next single in the United Kingdom , peaking at number nineteen . The second North American single , " I Want You to Need Me " , was released in April 2000 and reached number @-@ one on the Canadian Singles Chart . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 All the Way ... A Decade of Song garnered generally positive reviews from music critics . Michael Paoletta from Billboard gave it a very positive review , calling the album a reminder of why the decade has been Dion 's signature era – and why the future looks bright for her . According to him , regarding seven new songs , All the Way ... A Decade of Song is Dion 's most focused album yet , drawing on a team of collaborators that understands this artists 's strengths . Among the highlights Paoletta mentioned : the first single " That 's the Way It Is " , a <unk> uptempo number ; " I Want You to Need Me " , a consummate love song ripe for a second single ; " If Walls Could Talk ; " " Then You Look at Me " , a characteristically " roof @-@ raising , fan @-@ stoking " Dion anthem ; her " beyond @-@ the @-@ pale " duet with Frank Sinatra on " All the Way " ; and " The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face " , a remake that " affirms Dion 's ability to lay low and still scintillate . " 
 Chuck Taylor from Billboard also praised " That 's the Way It Is . " He wrote that Dion at last " ups the tempo with the irresistible " first single . According to Taylor , this new track , a joyful ode to holding the faith but allowing love to take its course when it 's ready , matches Dion with a new team of collaborators , consistent hitmakers : Max Martin , Kristian Lundin and Andreas Carlsson . " <unk> with a festive mandolin and a midtempo beat to bring new heights to her as @-@ ever splendid vocal , " this song is " destined to enrapture " top forty and AC the first time through , at last stripping away mainstream radio 's gripe that Dion is " too adult . " He said that , youthful and yet elegant , and glowing brightly with warmth , the song also represents a bold step forward for Martin , who is best known for his work with chart @-@ topping youth acts . All in all , " That 's the Way It Is " is " one of the most compelling radio releases yet " from " one of the core voices of the decade . " 
 Chuck Taylor also reviewed " I Want You to Need Me " and wrote that linking Dion and Diane Warren has always been about " as fine a fit as a trusty pair of Thom <unk> 's . " Between Warren 's " heart @-@ drenched " words and dramatic melody writing and Dion 's " potent vocals straight from <unk> , <unk> has never sounded so mighty . " According to him , for fans of Dion 's " high @-@ caliber " power ballads , this is truly among the best ever and a highlight on All the Way ... A Decade of Song . Longing for romantic attention , Dion sings , " I want you to need me , like the air you breathe / I want you to feel me , in everything / I want you to see me , in your every dream / The way that I taste you , feel you , breathe you , need you . " Taylor stated that Warren 's trusty melody is wholly natural and free @-@ flowing , while production from the usually rock @-@ oriented Matt Serletic is " sheer perfection . " It all peaks from the glorious midsection through to the end , where Dion delivers exactly what we 've come to expect : a crescendo as " spine @-@ tingling " as those first few times we heard " My Heart Will Go On . " 
 Although Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic gave the album four out of five stars , he criticized it for including seven new songs and just nine hits . According to him , if it had been a straight hits collection , with " That 's the Way It Is " and " If Walls Could Talk " added to the end , it would have been fine , but padding it with nearly a full album worth of new material hurts it . He also noticed that Dion 's first American hit , " Where Does My Heart Beat Now " , isn 't here , nor is her duet with Barbra Streisand , " Tell Him . " Erlewine stated that the best of the hits , like the Meat Loaf @-@ ian epic " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " and " My Heart Will Go On , " are certainly among the best adult contemporary songs of the decade . In comparison to the new material , he felt that the danceable " That 's the Way It Is " and the " pretty " ballad " If Walls Could Talk , " work , but he did not like " The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face " and " All the Way . " According to him , the remaining three new songs " aren 't bad , " but they 're not particularly memorable , especially compared to the hits . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 All the Way ... A Decade of Song debuted at number three on the US Billboard 200 with sales of 303 @,@ 000 copies , the second @-@ largest opener in Dion 's career at that time , exceeded only by the 334 @,@ 000 units that 1997 's Let 's Talk About Love spun in its first week . Thanks to Dion 's CBS television special , she earned a second @-@ week gain of 30 % ( 394 @,@ 000 copies ) and the third number @-@ one album of her career . The next week , All the Way ... A Decade of Song stayed at number one , selling another 328 @,@ 000 units . In the following week , it fell to number two with sales of 415 @,@ 000 copies . In the fifth week , it topped the chart again , selling 537 @,@ 000 units . All the Way ... A Decade of Song draw the biggest weekly sales in its sixth week when it sold 640 @,@ 000 copies , falling to number two . On the Billboard 's list of best @-@ selling records of 1999 in the US , All the Way ... A Decade of Song was placed at number thirteen with sales of 2 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 units . As of February 4 , 2016 , it has sold over 8 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 copies in the US . It was certified seven @-@ times Platinum by the RIAA . All the Way ... A Decade of Song is also the fourth best @-@ selling greatest hits album in the US in the Nielsen SoundScan era and the best @-@ selling greatest hits album by a female artist . According to Billboard , it became the 26th best @-@ selling album of the decade ( 2000 – 09 ) in the US . 
 In Canada , All the Way ... A Decade of Song debuted at number one . The album shipped one million copies and was certified Diamond by the CRIA . All the Way ... A Decade of Song was also successful in Japan where it peaked at number one and was certified two @-@ times Million by the RIAJ , denoting shipment of two million copies . Also in Australia , the album topped the chart for two weeks and was certified three @-@ times Platinum by the ARIA . In the United Kingdom , All the Way … A Decade of Song debuted at number one selling 74 @,@ 681 copies . It became one of five Dion albums to sell more than one million copies in the UK . As of October 2008 , the album has sold 1 @,@ 318 @,@ 223 units in the UK and was certified four @-@ times Platinum by the BPI . Also in Germany , the album entered the chart at number one spending six non @-@ consecutive weeks at the top . It was certified seven @-@ times Gold by the BVMI after it shipped 1 @,@ 050 @,@ 000 copies . Overall , it sold over five million copies in Europe and was certified five @-@ times Platinum by the IFPI . 
 All the Way … A Decade of Song topped the charts around the world and was certified multi @-@ platinum in various countries . During the first two years of its release , the album had sold over seventeen million copies globally . 
 = = Awards = = 
 All the Way ... A Decade of Song received the 2000 Japan Gold Disc Award for International Pop Album of the Year and " All the Way " , duet with Frank Sinatra , was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals at the 43rd Grammy Awards . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits taken from AllMusic . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Impossible Remixes = 
 Impossible Remixes is the fifth remix album by Australian singer and songwriter Kylie Minogue . It was released on 8 July 1998 by Mushroom Records . The album was materialized while on her Intimate and Live Tour ( 1998 ) and contains remixes from her sixth studio album Impossible Princess ( 1997 ) . Originally scheduled for a 1999 release , Mushroom released Impossible Remixes in Australia in July 1998 after releasing the UK counterpart Mixes ( 1998 ) earlier than its original date . 
 The cover sleeve for the album was shot by British photographer Simon Emmett ; Minogue had personally commended the cover sleeve for showing " a lot of heart " . Impossible Remixes received negative reviews from music critics , who viewed the release as tedious and the material as repetitive . Impossible Remixes is Minogue 's highest charting remix album in her native country , reaching 37 on the Australian ARIA Albums Chart . 
 = = Background = = 
 Impossible Remixes is Kylie Minogue 's fifth remix album . In November 1997 , Minogue released her sixth studio album Impossible Princess . Then in January 1998 , Minogue begun rehearsals on the low @-@ budget tour Intimate and Live . Minogue intended to only perform in Australia , but strong public demand in the United Kingdom prompt Minogue to tour there too . With tickets selling out instantly , more shows were announced in both Australia and the UK . Minogue started the tour in early June 1998 and confirmed that she would release " Cowboy Style " , the fourth single from the Impossible Princess album , and revealed plans of two remix albums , one for Australia and one for the UK . 
 In July 1998 , Deconstruction and Mushroom confirmed the release of two remix albums entitled Mixes and Impossible Remixes respectively . Deconstruction said the Mixes album would be released as a triple @-@ vinyl set and set the release date for the following year . However , fans voiced their concerns on expensive import prices for global shipping and with increasingly popular demand , Deconstruction scrapped the idea and released the remixes on a two @-@ set compact disc , and forward the triple vinyl at a later date . This allowed Deconstruction to release the album earlier and Mixes was released on August 3 , 1998 in the UK . Mushroom released Impossible Remixes on 8 July 1998 , but initial pressings were on sale two months earlier . 
 = = Material = = 
 The album shares majority of the tracks from Mixes and features remixes of three singles ; four remixes of " Breathe " , two remixes of " Did It Again " and one remix of " Some Kind of Bliss " , along with three remixes of Minogue 's promotional single " Too Far " . The remixes had all been previously featured in Minogue 's CD singles . Impossible Remixes features one remix that did not appear on Mixes , this being the " Breathe " TNT Club remix , a club commissioned edit of Tee 's Freeze Mix . All tracks were co @-@ written by Minogue , with additional song writing assistance by James Dean Bradfield , Dave Ball , Ingo Vauk , Steve Anderson and David Seaman . In 1997 , Minogue traveled to Los Angeles , California to re @-@ record her vocals for the " Breathe " remixes . 
 = = Artwork and sleeve = = 
 The cover sleeve was shot by English photographer Simon Emmett and designed by Andrew <unk> . The cover art of the album , as well as other promotion shoots , show Minogue sitting down and kneeling . After completing the shoot , Emmett was asked by Minogue to shoot the sleeve for her single " Cowboy Style " , and his most recent work with Minogue was shooting her on Glamour magazine in July 2012 . One of the shoot outtakes appeared on Minogue 's photo albums including Kylie / Fashion and on her 1997 extended play Other Sides . 
 In the photo book Kylie / Fashion , Emmett commented on the " Cowboy Style " and Impossible Remixes photo shoot ; : " There are no fashion constraints with Kylie ... Her natural poise and dynamism transcended all typical props and accessories . We 've made great use here of our easy rapport . " Minogue commended the photo shoot at the time , saying " So much of what I was doing at this time had a tiny budget so I brought a lot of pieces , including the pink glitter stick roll , from home [ ... ] It was a great , simple shoot with a lot of heart . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Impossible Remixes received negative reviews from music critics . Jenny Stanley @-@ Clarke , who wrote the biography Kylie : Naked , felt the release " seemed nothing more than to run out Kylie 's contractual obligation for a required third Deconstruction album . " She favoured the contributions of " high profiled " DJ 's . Brendan Swift from Allmusic awarded the compilation only one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , making this Minogue 's lowest scoring remix album and overall album on the website . In his review , he argued the material was not new and felt the release tedious and the material was repetitive ; he viewed the Razor @-@ n @-@ Go Remix of " Did it Again " as an example , despite highlighting it . In his extended review , he explained ; 
 Pint @-@ sized pop diva Kylie Minogue 's continued crossover from lightweight pop puppet to respected artist continued with the release of this , a compilation of remixed singles from the Impossible Princess album . [ Impossible Remixes ] walks an unrelenting line — with ten versions of four songs ( " Breathe " clocks in with the highest total at four versions ) , there 's not a lot of room for variation — and the repetition certainly makes for classic club fodder . This is the voice of the new Minogue doing dance as the faded remnants of the Stock , Aitken and Waterman patsy is left well and truly behind — she 's now the voice behind the DJs — and there 's plenty of their work on this double CD set to sink your teeth into [ ... ] Hardcore Minogue fans with a good pair of dancing shoes may find this gyrating repetition worthwhile ; general fans , however , may find the original Impossible Princess more accommodating . 
 Early pressings of Impossible Remixes helped the album debut at number thirty @-@ seven on the Australian Albums Chart on 26 July 1998 , the fourth highest debuting album that week . During its debut week , Minogue 's album Impossible Princess also charted at number nine . This became her highest and only remix album to chart in Australia and her second compilation album to chart . The album slipped to number thirty nine the next week , whereas Impossible Princess fell to eleven . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 All credits and personnel adapted from Impossible Remixes liner notes : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = John Bingham , 7th Earl of Lucan = 
 Richard John Bingham , 7th Earl of Lucan ( born 18 December 1934 ; presumed dead ) , commonly known as Lord Lucan , was a British peer suspected of murder who disappeared in 1974 . He was born into an Anglo @-@ Irish aristocratic family in Marylebone , the eldest son of George Bingham , 6th Earl of Lucan by his marriage to Kaitlin Dawson . An evacuee during the Second World War , Lucan returned to attend Eton College , and then from 1953 to 1955 served with the Coldstream Guards in West Germany . He developed a taste for gambling and , skilled at backgammon and bridge , became an early member of the Clermont Club . Although his losses often exceeded his winnings , he left his job at a London @-@ based merchant bank and became a professional gambler . He was known as Lord Bingham from April 1949 until January 1964 . 
 Once considered for the role of James Bond , Lucan was noted for his expensive tastes ; he raced power boats and drove an Aston Martin . In 1963 he married Veronica Duncan , with whom he had three children . When the marriage collapsed late in 1972 , he moved out of the family home at 46 Lower Belgrave Street , in London 's Belgravia , to a property nearby . A bitter custody battle ensued , which Lucan lost . He began to spy on his wife and record their telephone conversations , apparently obsessed with regaining custody of the children . This fixation , combined with his gambling losses , had a dramatic effect on his life and personal finances . 
 On the evening of 7 November 1974 , the children 's nanny , Sandra Rivett , was bludgeoned to death in the basement of the Lucan family home . Lady Lucan was also attacked ; she later identified Lucan as her assailant . As the police began their murder investigation , Lucan telephoned his mother , asking her to collect the children , and then drove a borrowed Ford Corsair to a friend 's house in Uckfield , East Sussex . Hours later , he left the property and was never seen again . The car was later found abandoned in Newhaven , its interior stained with blood and its boot containing a piece of bandaged lead pipe similar to one found at the crime scene . A warrant for Lucan 's arrest was issued a few days later , and in his absence the inquest into Rivett 's death named him as her murderer , the last occasion in Britain a coroner 's court was allowed to do so . 
 Lucan 's fate remains a fascinating mystery for the British public . Since Rivett 's murder , hundreds of reported sightings have been made in various countries around the world , although none have been substantiated . Despite a police investigation and huge press interest , Lucan has not been found and is presumed dead ; a death certificate was issued in 2016 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Richard John Bingham was born on 18 December 1934 at 19 Bentinck Street , Marylebone , London , the second child and elder son of George Bingham , 6th Earl of Lucan , an Anglo @-@ Irish peer , and his wife Kaitlin Elizabeth Anne Dawson . A blood clot found in her lung forced his mother to remain in a nursing home , so John , as he became known , was initially cared for by the family 's <unk> . Aged three years , he attended a pre @-@ prep school in Tite Street with his elder sister , Jane , but in 1939 , with war approaching , the two were taken to the relative safety of Wales . The following year , joined by their younger siblings , Sally and Hugh , the Lucan children travelled to Toronto , moving shortly thereafter to Mount Kisco , New York . They stayed for five years with multi @-@ <unk> Marcia Brady Tucker ; John was enrolled at The Harvey School and spent summer holidays away from his siblings at a summer camp in the Adirondack Mountains . 
 While in the U.S. , John and his siblings lived in grandeur and wanted for nothing , but on their return to England in February 1945 they were faced with the stark realities of wartime Britain . Rationing was still in force , their former home at Cheyne Walk had been bombed , and the house at 22 Eaton Square had had its windows blown out . Despite the family 's rich ancestry , the 6th Earl and his wife were agnostics and socialists and preferred a more austere existence than that offered by Tucker , an extremely wealthy Christian . For a time , John suffered nightmares and was taken to a psychotherapist . As an adult he remained an agnostic , but ensured his children attended Sunday school , preferring to give them a traditional childhood . 
 At Eton College , John developed a taste for gambling . He supplemented his pocket money with income from bookmaking , placing his earnings into a " secret " bank account , and regularly left the school 's grounds to attend horse races . Although according to his mother his academic record was " far from creditable " , he became Captain of Roe 's House , before leaving in 1953 to undertake his National Service . He became a second lieutenant in his father 's regiment , the Coldstream Guards , and was stationed mainly in Krefeld , West Germany . While there , he also became a keen poker player . 
 = = Career = = 
 On leaving the army in 1955 , Lucan joined a London @-@ based merchant bank , William Brandt 's Sons and Co . , on an annual salary of £ 500 ( equivalent to £ 11 @,@ 830 in 2015 ) . In 1960 he met Stephen Raphael , a rich stockbroker who was a skilled backgammon player . They holidayed together in the Bahamas , went water @-@ skiing , and played golf , backgammon and poker . Lucan became a regular gambler and an early member of John Aspinall 's Clermont gaming club , located in Berkeley Square . Although he often won at games of skill like bridge and backgammon , he also accumulated huge losses . On one occasion he lost £ 8 @,@ 000 , or about two @-@ thirds of the money he received annually from various family trusts . On another disastrous night at a casino he lost £ 10 @,@ 000 . That time his stockbroker uncle , John Bevan , helped him to pay the debt , and Lucan repaid his uncle two years later . 
 Lucan left Brandt 's in about 1960 , shortly after he had won £ 26 @,@ 000 playing chemin de fer . A colleague had been promoted before him , and he protested and then gave up his job , saying " why should I work in a bank , when I can earn a year 's money in one single night at the tables ? " He travelled to the US , where he played golf , raced powerboats , and drove his Aston Martin around the West Coast of the United States . He also visited his elder sister , Jane , and his former guardian , Marcia Tucker . On his return to England he moved out of his parents ' home in St John 's Wood and into a flat in Park Crescent . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 Lucan met his future wife , Veronica Duncan , early in 1963 . She was born in 1937 to Major Charles Moorhouse Duncan and his wife Thelma . Her father had died in a car accident while she was still very young , following which the family had moved to South Africa . Her mother remarried , and when her new step @-@ father became manager of a hotel in Guildford , the family returned to England . Along with her sister , Christina , she was educated at St Swithun 's School , Winchester , and after displaying a talent for art she went on to study at an art college in Bournemouth . The two sisters later shared a flat in London , where Veronica worked as a model and later as a secretary . Christina 's marriage to the rich William Shand @-@ Kydd introduced her to London high society , and it was at a golf @-@ club function in the country that Veronica and Lucan first met . 
 News of their engagement appeared in the Times and Telegraph newspapers on 14 October 1963 , and the two were married at Holy Trinity Brompton Church on 20 November . After a high society ceremony attended by , amongst other dignitaries , Princess Alice , Countess of Athlone , the couple honeymooned in Europe , travelling first class on the Orient Express . Lucan 's already embattled finances were given a welcome boost by his father , who provided him with a marriage settlement designed to finance a larger family home and any future additions to the Lucan family tree . Lucan repaid some of his creditors and leased number 46 Lower Belgrave Street , Westminster , redecorating it to suit Veronica 's tastes . Two months after the wedding , on 21 January 1964 , the 6th Earl of Lucan died of a stroke . In addition to a reputed £ 250 @,@ 000 inheritance , Lucan acquired his father 's titles : Earl of Lucan ; Baron Lucan of Castlebar ; Baron Lucan of Melcombe Lucan and Baronet Bingham of Castlebar . His wife became the Countess of Lucan . Their first child , Frances , was born on 24 October 1964 , and early the next year they employed a nanny , Lillian Jenkins , to look after her . Lucan tried to teach Veronica about gambling and traditional pursuits like hunting , shooting , and fishing . He bought her golf lessons , although she later gave up the sport . 
 Lucan 's daily routine consisted of breakfast at 9 : 00 am , coffee , dealing with the morning 's letters , reading the newspapers , and playing the piano . He sometimes jogged in the park and , while he had him , took his Doberman Pinscher for walks . Lunch at the Clermont Club was followed by afternoon games of backgammon . Returning home to change into evening dress , the earl typically spent the remainder of the day at the Clermont , gambling into the early hours , watched sometimes by Veronica . In 1956 , while still working at Brandt 's , he had written of his desire to have " £ 2m in the bank " , claiming that " motor @-@ cars , yachts , expensive holidays and security for the future would give myself and a lot of other people a lot of pleasure " . Although he was described by his friends as a shy and taciturn man , with his tall stature , " luxuriant guardsman 's moustache " and masculine pursuits , his exploits made him popular . His profligacy extended to hiring private aircraft to take his friends to the races , asking a car dealer he knew to source an Aston Martin <unk> coupé , drinking expensive Russian vodka and racing powerboats . In September 1966 he unsuccessfully screen tested for a part in Woman Times Seven , prompting him to automatically decline a later offer from film producer Cubby Broccoli , to screen test him for the role of James Bond . 
 As a professional gambler he was undoubtedly a skilled player , once rated amongst the world 's top ten backgammon competitors . He won the St James 's Club tournament and was Champion of the West Coast of America . He gained the moniker " Lucky " Lucan , but as his losses easily outweighed his winnings , in reality he was anything but lucky . He had interests in thoroughbred horses , although in 1968 he paid more in race entry fees than he received in winnings . Despite some arguments over money , his wife remained largely ignorant of his losses , retaining the use of accounts at Savile Row tailors and various Knightsbridge shops . Following the births of George ( b . 1967 ) and Camilla ( b . 1970 ) , she struggled with post @-@ natal depression . Lucan became increasingly involved in her mental well @-@ being and in 1971 took her for treatment at a psychiatric clinic in Hampstead , although she refused to be admitted . Instead , she agreed to home visits from a psychiatrist and a course of anti @-@ depressants . In July 1972 the family holidayed in Monte Carlo but Veronica quickly returned to England , leaving Lucan with their two elder children . The combined pressures of maintaining their finances , paying for Lucan 's gambling addiction and Veronica 's weakened mental condition took their toll on the marriage ; two weeks after a strained family Christmas in 1972 , Lucan moved into a small property in Eaton Row . 
 = = = Separation = = = 
 Some months later Lucan moved again , to a larger rented flat in nearby Elizabeth Street . Despite an early attempt by his wife at reconciliation , by that point all Lucan wanted from the marriage was custody of his children . In an effort to demonstrate that Veronica was unfit to look after them , he began to spy on his family ( his car was regularly seen parked in Lower Belgrave Street ) , later employing private investigators to perform the same task . Lucan also canvassed doctors , who explained that his wife had not " gone mad " , but was suffering from depression and anxiety . Lucan told his friends that nobody would work for Veronica ( she sacked the children 's long @-@ term nanny , Lillian Jenkins , in December 1972 ) . Of the series of nannies employed in the house , one , 26 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> Sawicka , was told by Veronica that Lucan had hit her with a cane and had , on one occasion , pushed her down the stairs . The countess apparently feared for her safety and told Sawicka not to be surprised " if he kills me one day . " 
 Sawicka 's time at the Lucan household ended late in March 1973 . While with two of the children near Grosvenor Place , she was confronted by Lucan and two private detectives . They told her that the children had been made wards of court and that she must release them into his custody , which she did . Frances was collected from school later in the day . Lady Lucan applied to the court to have the children returned , but concerned about the case 's complexity , the judge set a date for the hearing three months ahead , for June 1973 . To defend herself against Lucan 's claims about her mental state , Veronica booked herself a four @-@ day stay at the Priory Clinic in Roehampton . While it was acknowledged that she still required some psychiatric support , the doctors reported that there was no indication that she was mentally ill . Lucan 's case depended upon Veronica being unable to care for the children , but at the hearing , he was instead forced to defend his own behaviour toward her . After several weeks of witnesses and protracted arguments in camera , on the advice of his lawyers he conceded the case . Unimpressed by Lucan 's character , Mr Justice Rees awarded custody to Veronica . The earl was allowed access every other weekend . 
 Thus began a bitter dispute between the two , involving many of their friends and Veronica 's own sister . Lucan again began to watch his wife 's movements . He recorded some of their telephone conversations with a small Sony tape recorder and played excerpts to any friends prepared to listen . He also told them — and his bank manager — that Lady Lucan had been " spending money like water " . He continued to pay her £ 40 a week , although he may have cancelled their regular food order with Harrods . He delayed payment to the milkman and — knowing that Veronica was required by the court to employ a live @-@ in nanny — the childcare agency . With no income of her own , Veronica took a part @-@ time job in a local hospital . A temporary nanny , Elizabeth Murphy , was befriended by Lucan , who bought her drinks and asked her for information on his wife . He instructed his detective agency to investigate Murphy , looking for evidence that she was failing in her duty of care to his children . This they found , although he dispensed with the detective agency 's services when they presented him with bills amounting to several hundred pounds . Murphy was later hospitalised with cancer . Another temporary nanny , Christabel Martin , reported strange telephone calls to the house , some with heavy breathing and some from a man asking for non @-@ existent people . Following a series of temporary nannies , Sandra Rivett started work in late 1974 . 
 = = = Gambling = = = 
 Losing the court case proved devastating for Lucan . It had cost him an estimated £ 20 @,@ 000 and by late 1974 his financial position was dire . As he drank more heavily and started chain @-@ smoking , his friends began to worry . In drunken conversations with some of them , including Aspinall 's mother , Lady Osborne , and her son , Lucan discussed murdering his wife . Greville Howard later gave a statement to the police describing how Lucan had talked of how killing his wife might save him from bankruptcy , how her body might be disposed of in the Solent and how he " would never be caught " . Lucan borrowed £ 4 @,@ 000 from his mother and asked Marcia Tucker for a loan of £ 100 @,@ 000 . Having no luck there , he wrote to Tucker 's son , explaining how he wished to " buy " his children from Veronica ; the money was not forthcoming . He turned to his friends and acquaintances , asking anyone plausible to loan him money to fund his gambling addiction . The financier James Goldsmith guaranteed a £ 5 @,@ 000 overdraft for him , which for years remained unpaid . Lucan also applied to the discreet Edgware Trust . On request , he supplied details of his income , which was apparently around £ 12 @,@ 000 a year from various family trusts . He was required to provide a surety and received only £ 3 @,@ 000 of the £ 5 @,@ 000 he asked for . Much to their managers ' consternation , his four bank accounts were hugely overdrawn ; Coutts , £ 2 @,@ 841 ; Lloyds , £ 4 @,@ 379 ; National Westminster , £ 1 @,@ 290 ; Midland , £ 5 @,@ 667 . Even though by then he was playing for much lower stakes than had previously been the case , Lucan 's gambling remained completely out of control . Ranson ( 1994 ) estimates that between September and October 1974 alone , the earl ran up debts of around £ 50 @,@ 000 . 
 Despite these problems , from late October 1974 his demeanour appeared to change for the better . His best man , John Wilbraham , remarked that Lucan 's apparent obsession over regaining his children had diminished . While having dinner with his mother he cast aside talk of his family problems and turned instead to politics . On 6 November he met his uncle John , apparently in good spirits . Later that day he met 21 @-@ year @-@ old Charlotte <unk> Colquhoun , who said that " he seemed very happy , just his usual self , and there was nothing to suggest that he was worried or depressed " . He also dined at the Clermont with racing driver Graham Hill . At the time , casinos could open only between 2 : 00 pm and 4 : 00 am , so Lucan often gambled into the early hours of the morning . He took tablets to deal with his insomnia and therefore usually awoke around lunchtime . On 7 November though , he broke routine and called his solicitor early that morning , and at 10 : 30 am took a call from Colquhoun . They arranged to eat at the Clermont at about 3 : 00 pm , but Lucan failed to appear . Colquhoun drove past the Clermont and Ladbroke clubs , and past Elizabeth Street , but could not find his car anywhere . Lucan also failed to arrive for his 1 : 00 pm lunch appointment with artist Dominic Elwes and banker Daniel Meinertzhagen , again at the Clermont . 
 At 4 : 00 pm Lucan called at a chemist 's on Lower Belgrave Street , close to Veronica 's home , and asked the pharmacist there to identify a small capsule . It turned out to be <unk> 5 , a drug for the treatment of anxiety and depression . Lucan had apparently made several similar visits since he separated from his wife , although he never told the pharmacist where he got the drugs . At 4 : 45 pm he called a friend , literary agent Michael Hicks @-@ Beach , and between 6 : 30 pm and 7 : 00 pm met with him at his flat on Elizabeth Street . Lucan wanted his help with an article on gambling he had been asked to write for an Oxford University magazine . He drove Hicks @-@ Beach home for about 8 : 00 pm , not in his Mercedes @-@ Benz , but in " an old , dark and scruffy Ford " , possibly the Ford Corsair he borrowed from Michael Stoop several weeks earlier . At 8 : 30 pm he called the Clermont to check on a reservation for dinner with Greville Howard and friends . Howard had called him at 5 : 15 pm and asked if he wished to come to the theatre , but Lucan had declined and made the alternative suggestion to meet at the Clermont at 11 : 00 pm . He failed to arrive and did not answer his telephone when called . 
 = = Murder = = 
 = = = Sandra Rivett = = = 
 Sandra Eleanor Rivett was born on 16 September 1945 , the third child of Albert and Eunice <unk> . The family moved to Australia when she was two years old , but returned in 1955 . Sandra was a popular child , described at school as " intelligent , although she does not excel academically " . She worked for six months as an apprentice hairdresser before taking a job as a secretary in Croydon . Following a failed romance she became a voluntary patient at a mental hospital near Redhill , Surrey , where she was treated for depression . She became engaged to a builder named John and took a job as a children 's nanny for a doctor in Croydon . On 13 March 1964 , she gave birth to a boy named Stephen , but , as her relationship with John was failing , she returned home to live with her parents and considered giving the baby up for adoption . Her parents took on the responsibility and adopted him in May 1965 . Sandra later worked at an old people 's home , before moving to Portsmouth to stay with her elder sister . While there she met Roger Rivett ; the two married on 10 June 1967 in Croydon . Roger was serving as a Royal Navy able seaman and later worked as a loader for British Road Services , while Sandra worked part @-@ time at <unk> Orphanage in Purley . In summer 1973 he took a job on an Esso tanker , returning to their flat in Kenley a few months later by which time Sandra was employed by a cigarette company in Croydon . Their marriage collapsed in May 1974 when , suspicious of Sandra 's movements while he was away , Roger went to live with his parents . She was by then listed on the books of a Belgravia domestic agency and had been caring for an elderly couple in that district . A few weeks later she began to work for the <unk> . 
 Sandra normally went out with her boyfriend , John <unk> , on Thursday nights , but had decided to change her night off and thus , had seen him the previous day . The two last spoke on the telephone at about 8 : 00 pm on 7 November . After putting the younger children to bed , at about 8 : 55 pm she asked Veronica if she would like a cup of tea , before heading downstairs to the basement kitchen to make one . As she entered the room , she was bludgeoned to death with a piece of bandaged lead pipe . Her killer then placed her body into a canvas <unk> . Meanwhile , wondering what had delayed her nanny , Lady Lucan descended from the first floor to see what had happened . She called to Rivett from the top of the basement stairs and was herself attacked . As she screamed for her life , her attacker told her to " shut up " . Lady Lucan later claimed at that moment to have recognised her husband 's voice . The two apparently continued to fight ; she bit his fingers , and when he threw her face down to the carpet , managed to turn around and squeeze his testicles , causing him to release his grip on her throat and give up the fight . When she asked where Rivett was , Lucan was at first evasive , but eventually admitted to having killed her . Terrified , Lady Lucan told him she could help him escape if only he would remain at the house for a few days , to allow her injuries to heal . Lucan walked upstairs and sent his daughter to bed , then went into one of the bedrooms . When Veronica entered , to lie on the bed , he told her to put towels down first to avoid staining the bedding . Lucan asked her if she had any barbiturates and went to the bathroom to get a wet towel , supposedly to clean Veronica 's face . Lady Lucan realised her husband would be unable to hear her from the bathroom , and made her escape , running outside to a nearby public house , the Plumbers Arms . 
 Lucan may have called at the Chester Square home of Madelaine Florman ( mother of one of Frances 's school friends ) sometime between 10 : 00 pm and 10 : 30 pm . Alone in the house , Florman ignored the door , but shortly afterwards she received an incoherent telephone call and put the receiver down . Blood stains , which after forensic examination were found to be a mixture of blood groups A and B , were later discovered on her doorstep . Lucan certainly called his mother between 10 : 30 pm and 11 : 00 pm and asked her to collect the children from Lower Belgrave Street . According to the Dowager Countess , he spoke of a " terrible catastrophe " at his wife 's home . He told her that he had been driving past the house when he saw Veronica fighting with a man , in the basement . He had entered the property and found his wife screaming . The location from which he made this , and possibly the call to Florman , remains unknown . The police forced their way into Lady Lucan 's home and discovered Sandra Rivett 's body , before his wife was taken by ambulance to St George 's Hospital . Lucan drove the Ford Corsair 42 miles ( 68 km ) to Uckfield , in East Sussex , to visit his friends , the Maxwell @-@ Scotts . Susan Maxwell @-@ Scott 's meeting with Lucan was his last confirmed sighting . 
 = = = Investigation = = = 
 By the time Detective Chief Superintendent Roy Ranson arrived at Lower Belgrave Street early on Friday 8 November , the divisional surgeon had pronounced Sandra Rivett dead and forensic officers and photographers had been called to the property . Other than the front door , which the first two officers on the scene had kicked in , there was no sign of a forced entry . A blood @-@ stained towel was found in Veronica 's first @-@ floor bedroom . The area around the top of the basement staircase was heavily blood @-@ stained . A blood @-@ stained lead pipe lay on the floor . Pictures hanging from the staircase walls were askew and a metal banister rail was damaged . At the foot of the stairs , two cups and saucers lay in a pool of blood . Rivett 's arm protruded from the canvas sack , which lay in a slowly expanding pool of blood . The light fitting at the bottom of the stairs was missing its bulb ; one was noted nearby , on a chair . Blood was also found on various leaves in the adjoining rear garden . 
 Officers also searched 5 Eaton Row , into which Lucan had moved early in 1973 , and after interviewing his mother ( who had called to take the children to her home in St John 's Wood ) , his last address at <unk> Elizabeth Street . Nothing untoward was found , although on the bed , a suit and shirt lay alongside a book on Greek shipping millionaires , and Lucan 's wallet , car keys , money , driving licence , handkerchief and spectacles were on a bedside table . His passport was in a drawer and his blue Mercedes @-@ Benz parked outside , its engine cold and its battery flat . Ranson then visited Veronica Lucan at St George 's Hospital . Although heavily sedated , she was able to describe what had happened to her . A police officer was left to guard her , should her assailant return . Rivett 's body was taken to the mortuary , and a search was undertaken of all local basement areas and gardens , skips and open spaces . 
 After removing her corpse from the canvas sack and beginning the post mortem examination , pathologist Keith Simpson told Ranson he was certain that Rivett had been killed before her body was placed in the sack , and that in his opinion the lead pipe found at the scene could be the murder weapon . Her estranged husband , Roger , had an alibi for the night concerned , and was eliminated from the police 's enquiries . Other male friends and boyfriends were questioned and discounted as suspects . Her parents confirmed that Sandra had a good working relationship with Lady Lucan , and was extremely fond of the children . Meanwhile , Lucan had yet to make an appearance , and so his description was circulated to police forces across the country . Newspapers and television stations were told only that Lucan was wanted by the police for questioning . 
 Hours earlier , Lucan had again called his mother , at about 12 : 30 am . He told her that he would be in touch later that day , but declined to speak with the police constable who had accompanied her to her flat ; instead , he said he would call the police later that morning . Ranson discovered that Lucan had travelled to Uckfield when he was called by Ian Maxwell @-@ Scott , who told him that Lucan had arrived at his home a few hours after the murder , and spoken with his wife , Susan . While there , the earl had written two letters to his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Bill Shand @-@ Kydd , and posted them to his London address . Maxwell @-@ Scott also called Shand @-@ Kydd at his country house near Leighton Buzzard and told him about the letters , prompting the latter to immediately drive to London to collect them . After reading them , and noting that they were bloodstained , he took them to Ranson . 
 When asked why she did not immediately inform the police of Lucan 's presence , Susan Maxwell @-@ Scott said she had not seen any newspapers or television news , or listened to any radio broadcasts that might have warned her of the importance of his visit . Meanwhile , Lucan 's children were taken by their aunt , Lady Sarah Gibbs , to her home in <unk> , Northamptonshire , where they would remain for several weeks . On the day Veronica Lucan was discharged from hospital , a High Court hearing confirmed that the children could return to live with her . Repeated press intrusions later forced the family to move to a friend 's home in Plymouth . 
 The Ford Corsair that Lucan had been seen driving and whose details had the previous day been circulated across the country was found on Sunday in Norman Road , Newhaven , about 16 miles ( 26 km ) from Uckfield . In its boot was a piece of lead pipe covered in surgical tape , and a full bottle of vodka . The car was removed for forensic examination . Later statements from two witnesses suggest that it was parked there sometime between 5 : 00 am and 8 : 00 am on the morning of Friday 8 November . Its owner , Michael Stoop , also received a letter from Lucan , delivered to his club , the St James 's . However , Stoop threw the envelope away and it was therefore not possible to check its postmark to see where it had been sent from . 
 Ranson suspected a suicide , but a thorough search of Newhaven Downs was judged impossible . A partial search was made , using tracker dogs , although all that was found were the skeletal remains of a judge who had disappeared years earlier . Police divers searched the harbour , and a partial search using infra @-@ red photography was undertaken the following year , to no avail . A warrant for Lucan 's arrest , to answer charges of murdering Sandra Rivett , and attempting to murder his wife , was issued on Tuesday 12 November 1974 . Descriptions of his appearance , already issued to police forces across the UK , were then issued to Interpol . 
 = = = Forensics = = = 
 The forensic examination of the lead pipes found at the murder scene and in the Corsair 's boot revealed traces of blood on the pipe from 46 Lower Belgrave Street . This proved to be a mixture of Lady Lucan 's ( blood group A ) and Sandra Rivett 's ( B ) blood . Hair belonging to Veronica Lucan was also found on that pipe , but none belonging to Sandra Rivett . The pipe found inside the car had neither blood nor hair on it . Home Office scientists were unable to prove conclusively that both pipes were cut from the same , longer , piece of piping , although they thought it likely . The tape wrapped around both was similar , but those too could not be conclusively linked . The letters written to Bill Shand @-@ Kydd were stained with blood considered to be from both women . The letter to Michael Stoop had no blood on it , but it was later proven that the paper it was written on had been torn from a writing pad found in the Corsair 's boot . 
 An examination of the blood stains found inside 46 Lower Belgrave Street demonstrated that Rivett had been attacked in the basement kitchen , while Lady Lucan had been attacked at the top of the basement stairs . The bloodstains found inside the Ford Corsair were of the AB blood group ; the report concluded that this might have been a mixture of blood from both women . Hair similar to Lady Lucan 's was also found inside the car . 
 = = = Media reaction = = = 
 By the afternoon of Friday 8 November , the newspapers ' early editions carried photographs of the <unk> across their front pages , accompanied by headlines like " body in sack ... countess runs out screaming " , and " <unk> murder – earl sought " . A meeting that day at the Clermont , between John Aspinall , Daniel Meinertzhagen , Charles Benson , Stephen Raphael , Bill Shand @-@ Kydd and Dominic Elwes , became the cause of much press speculation . Meinertzhagen and Raphael later insisted that the gathering was just a rational discussion between concerned friends , keen to share anything they knew about what had happened , but the relationship between the police and Lucan 's social circle was strained ; some officers complained that an " Eton mafia " worked against them . Susan Maxwell @-@ Scott refused to add to her statement , and when Aspinall 's mother , Lady Osborne , was asked if she could help locate Lucan 's body , she replied " The last I heard of him , he was being fed to the tigers at my son 's zoo " , prompting the police to search the house and the animal cages there . They searched fourteen country houses and estates , including Holkham Hall and Warwick Castle , to no avail . Amidst concerns expressed by the Labour MP Marcus Lipton that some people were " being a bit snooty " with the police , Benson wrote a letter to The Times asking him to either identify those people or " kindly withdraw his remarks " . To their cost , Private Eye accused James Goldsmith of being at the Clermont meeting , when he was actually in Ireland . Dominic Elwes went to see Lady Lucan in hospital and was reportedly deeply shocked both by her appearance and her statement " Who 's the mad one now ? " Elwes was apparently unhappy at some of the negative press coverage of the countess , and was later ostracised by his friends for his part in an article critical of Lucan , which appeared in the Sunday Times Magazine . He committed suicide in September 1975 . 
 Rivett 's case made headlines around the world . Within days of the murder , newspapers reported on Veronica Lucan 's statement to the police , with claims that she had pretended to collude with her husband to ensure her safety . In January 1975 Veronica gave an exclusive interview to the Daily Express . She also appeared in a murder reconstruction , in the same newspaper , complete with posed photographs taken inside the house . 
 = = = Inquest = = = 
 The inquest into Sandra Rivett 's death opened on 13 November 1974 and was led by the Coroner for Inner West London , Gavin Thurston . Two witnesses were called to the courtroom , which was packed with reporters ; Roger Rivett , who confirmed that he had identified his wife 's body , and the pathologist , Keith Simpson , who confirmed that Rivett had died from being hit on the head with a blunt instrument . At Ranson 's request , the hearing was then adjourned . Further adjournments were made on 11 December 1974 and 10 March 1975 , before a full inquest was scheduled for 16 June 1975 . 
 The hearing began with the swearing @-@ in of the jury and introductions from various legal representatives , including a lawyer hired for Lucan by his mother . Thurston introduced the jury to the case and explained their duties . He had selected 33 witnesses to be called over the following few days , including Veronica Lucan , who each day wore a dark coat and white headscarf . Thurston questioned her on her relationship with Lucan , her marriage , her financial affairs , her employment of Rivett and what had happened on the night of the attack . The Dowager Countess 's QC attempted to ask Lady Lucan about the nature of their relationship , if she hated her husband , but Thurston ruled his line of questioning inadmissible . Woman Detective Constable Sally Blower , who had taken a statement from Frances on 20 November 1974 , read the young girl 's words to the court . Frances had heard a scream , and a few minutes later had watched as her mother ( blood on her face ) and father had entered the room . Her mother had then sent her to bed . She later heard her father calling for her mother , asking where she was , and watched as he left the bathroom and walked downstairs . She also described how Sandra Rivett did not normally work on Thursday nights . 
 The landlord of " The Plumbers Arms " described how Lady Lucan had entered his bar covered " head to toe in blood " before she fell into " a state of shock " . He claimed that she shouted " Help me , help me , I 've just escaped from being murdered " and " My children , my children , he 's murdered my nanny " , although no name was mentioned . Pathologist Keith Simpson outlined his post mortem examination , concluding that death was caused by " blunt head injuries " and " inhalation of blood " . He confirmed that the lead pipe found at the scene was most likely responsible for Rivett 's injuries , although some , to the left eye and mouth , he thought more likely to have been caused by punches from a clenched fist . The last person to confirm seeing Lucan alive , Susan Maxwell @-@ Scott , told the court that the earl looked " dishevelled " , and his hair " a little ruffled " . His trousers had a damp patch on the right hip . Lucan had told her that he was walking , or passing by the house when he saw Veronica being attacked by a man . He let himself in but slipped in a pool of blood at the bottom of the stairs . He told Maxwell @-@ Scott that the attacker ran off , and that Veronica was " very hysterical " and accused him of having hired a hitman to kill her . 
 Once the hearing had ended , Thurston made a summary of the evidence presented and told the jury their options . At 11 : 45 am , their foreman announced " Murder by Lord Lucan " . Lucan became the first member of the House of Lords to be named a murderer since 1760 , when Laurence Shirley , 4th Earl Ferrers , was hanged for killing his bailiff . He was also the last person to be committed by a coroner to a Crown Court for unlawful killing ; the coroner 's power to do so was removed by the Criminal Law Act 1977 . 
 Rivett 's body , which had been held for several weeks following the murder , was released to her family and cremated at Croydon crematorium on 18 December 1974 . A police spokesman cited Lady Lucan 's desire not to upset the family as a reason for her non @-@ attendance at the cremation . 
 = = = Lucan 's defence = = = 
 Lucan 's friends and family were critical of the inquest , which they felt offered a one @-@ sided view of events . His mother told reporters that it did not serve " any useful purpose at all " . Veronica 's sister , Christina , said she felt " great sadness and sorrow " at the verdict . Susan Maxwell @-@ Scott continued to press the earl 's claims of innocence and claimed to feel " awfully sorry " for the countess . However , as Lucan remained absent , his description of " a traumatic night of unbelievable coincidence " came only from the letters he authored and the people he spoke with soon after Rivett 's murder . While his fingerprints were not found at the scene , his assertions make no provision for the lead pipe discovered in the boot of the Ford Corsair , the claims by some that he discussed murdering his wife , or the lack of a viable suspect for the man he claimed to have seen fighting her . No sign of a forced entry was found , and officers attempting to demonstrate that Lucan could have seen into the basement kitchen , from the street , could only do so by stooping low to the pavement . The basement light was not working , making it even more difficult to see into the room ; its lightbulb ( which was tested and found to be in working order ) was found removed from its holder and left lying on a chair . Furthermore , Lady Lucan claimed not to have entered the basement that night , contradicting the earl 's version of events ; his wife 's account is supported by the forensic examination made of the blood splashes and stains around the property . Some traces of her blood were found in the basement , the rear garden and on the canvas sack used to store Rivett 's body , although this may have been due to contamination at the scene . The man Lucan claimed to have seen could not have left through the basement 's front door as it was locked , and the rear door led to a walled garden through which no trace of an escape was found . No signs that the man left by the ground level front door were discovered , and no witnesses reported seeing any such person near 46 Lower Belgrave Street . 
 In contrast to his defenders , the national press were almost unanimous in their condemnation of Lucan . Their leader @-@ writers ignored the threat of libel and identified him as Rivett 's killer . 
 = = Bankruptcy and estate = = 
