 Estimates of the Queen 's wealth vary , depending on whether assets owned by her personally or held in trust for the nation are included . Forbes magazine estimated her wealth at US $ 450 million in 2010 , but no official figure is available . In 1993 , the Lord Chamberlain said estimates of £ 100 million were " grossly overstated " . Jock Colville , who was her former private secretary and a director of her bank , Coutts , estimated her wealth in 1971 at £ 2 million ( the equivalent of about £ 25 million today ) . 
 = = Residences = = 
 The Sovereign 's official residence in London is Buckingham Palace . It is the site of most state banquets , investitures , royal christenings and other ceremonies . Another official residence is Windsor Castle , the largest occupied castle in the world , which is used principally at weekends , Easter and during Royal Ascot , an annual race meeting that is part of the social calendar . The Sovereign 's official residence in Scotland is the Palace of Holyroodhouse in Edinburgh . The monarch stays at Holyrood for at least one week each year , and when visiting Scotland on state occasions . 
 Historically , the Palace of Westminster and the Tower of London were the main residences of the English Sovereign until Henry VIII acquired the Palace of Whitehall . Whitehall was destroyed by fire in 1698 , leading to a shift to St James 's Palace . Although replaced as the monarch 's primary London residence by Buckingham Palace in 1837 , St James 's is still the senior palace and remains the ceremonial Royal residence . For example , foreign ambassadors are accredited to the Court of St James 's , and the Palace is the site of the meeting of the Accession Council . It is also used by other members of the Royal Family . 
 Other residences include Clarence House and Kensington Palace . The palaces belong to the Crown ; they are held in trust for future rulers , and cannot be sold by the monarch . Sandringham House in Norfolk and Balmoral Castle in Aberdeenshire are privately owned by the Queen . 
 = = Style = = 
 The present Sovereign 's full style and title is " Elizabeth the Second , by the Grace of God , of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of Her other Realms and Territories Queen , Head of the Commonwealth , Defender of the Faith " . The title " Head of the Commonwealth " is held by the Queen personally , and is not vested in the British Crown . Pope Leo X first granted the title " Defender of the Faith " to King Henry VIII in 1521 , rewarding him for his support of the Papacy during the early years of the Protestant Reformation , particularly for his book the Defence of the Seven Sacraments . After Henry broke from the Roman Church , Pope Paul III revoked the grant , but Parliament passed a law authorising its continued use . 
 The Sovereign is known as " His Majesty " or " Her Majesty " . The form " Britannic Majesty " appears in international treaties and on passports to differentiate the British monarch from foreign rulers . The monarch chooses his or her regnal name , not necessarily his or her first name – King George VI , King Edward VII and Queen Victoria did not use their first names . 
 If only one monarch has used a particular name , no ordinal is used ; for example , Queen Victoria is not known as " Victoria I " , and ordinals are not used for English monarchs who reigned before the Norman conquest of England . The question of whether numbering for British monarchs is based on previous English or Scottish monarchs was raised in 1953 when Scottish nationalists challenged the Queen 's use of " Elizabeth II " , on the grounds that there had never been an " Elizabeth I " in Scotland . In MacCormick v Lord Advocate , the Scottish Court of Session ruled against the plaintiffs , finding that the Queen 's title was a matter of her own choice and prerogative . The Home Secretary told the House of Commons that monarchs since the Acts of Union had consistently used the higher of the English and Scottish ordinals , which in the applicable four cases has been the English ordinal . The Prime Minister confirmed this practice , but noted that " neither The Queen nor her advisers could seek to bind their successors " . Future monarchs will apply this policy . 
 Traditionally , the signature of the monarch includes their regnal name but not ordinal , followed by the letter R , which stands for rex or regina ( Latin for king and queen , respectively ) . The present monarch 's signature is " Elizabeth R " . From 1877 until 1948 reigning monarchs added the letter I to their signatures , for imperator or <unk> ( emperor or empress in Latin ) , from their status as Emperor or Empress of India . For example , Queen Victoria signed as " Victoria RI " from 1877 . 
 = = Arms = = 
 The Royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom are " Quarterly , I and IV Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or [ for England ] ; II Or a lion rampant within a double tressure flory @-@ counter @-@ flory Gules [ for Scotland ] ; III Azure a harp Or stringed Argent [ for Ireland ] " . The supporters are the Lion and the Unicorn ; the motto is " Dieu et mon droit " ( French : " God and my Right " ) . Surrounding the shield is a representation of a Garter bearing the motto of the Chivalric order of the same name ; " Honi soit qui mal y pense " . ( Old French : " Shame be to him who thinks evil of it " ) . In Scotland , the monarch uses an alternative form of the arms in which quarters I and IV represent Scotland , II England , and III Ireland . The mottoes are " In Defens " ( an abbreviated form of the Scots " In My Defens God Me Defend " ) and the motto of the Order of the Thistle ; " Nemo me impune lacessit " . ( Latin : " No @-@ one provokes me with impunity " ) ; the supporters are the unicorn and lion , who support both the escutcheon and lances , from which fly the flags of Scotland and England . 
 The monarch 's official flag in the United Kingdom is the Royal Standard , which depicts the Royal Arms . It is flown only from buildings , vessels and vehicles in which the Sovereign is present . The Royal Standard is never flown at half @-@ mast because there is always a sovereign : when one dies , his or her successor becomes the sovereign instantly . 
 When the monarch is not in residence , the Union Flag is flown at Buckingham Palace , Windsor Castle and Sandringham House , whereas in Scotland the Royal Standard of Scotland is flown at Holyrood Palace and Balmoral Castle . 
 = 1995 American League West tie @-@ breaker game = 
 The 1995 American League West tie @-@ breaker game was a one @-@ game extension to Major League Baseball 's ( MLB ) 1995 regular season , played between the California Angels and Seattle Mariners to determine the winner of the American League 's ( AL ) West Division . The game was played on October 2 , 1995 , at the Kingdome in Seattle , Washington . The game was necessary after both teams finished the strike @-@ shortened 144 @-@ game season with identical win – loss records of 78 – 66 . Seattle won the game by a score of 9 – 1 , securing its first postseason berth in franchise history . 
 The game matched two highly unlikely teams : the Angels had not been to the postseason since 1986 , and had not finished above third place in the AL West since . On the other hand , the Mariners had never been to the postseason , and before 1995 only had two seasons with a winning percentage above .500 . With less than two months left in the 1995 regular season , the Angels held a comfortable lead in the AL West standings , 11 games ahead of the second @-@ place Texas Rangers and 13 games ahead of the third @-@ place Mariners . However , the Mariners mounted a late @-@ season comeback , coupled with a late @-@ season collapse by the Angels , to force the tie @-@ breaker . 
 After winning the tie @-@ breaker , the Mariners advanced to play the New York Yankees in the AL Division Series . They won the series in five games on an 11th @-@ inning double by Edgar Martínez in Game 5 . After advancing to the AL League Championship Series , they lost to the Cleveland Indians in six games . The Angels , meanwhile , did not earn a trip to the postseason until 2002 . 
 = = Line score and summary = = 
 As per normal MLB practice at the time , the home team for this game was determined by a series of coin tosses held on September 18 to determine home teams for all potential one @-@ game tiebreakers . All statistics compiled during the game were added to each player 's and / or team 's regular season statistics . The game was nationally televised on ESPN with Jon Miller and Joe Morgan making the call . 
 The first six innings of the game were largely a pitchers ' duel between Seattle staff ace Randy Johnson and California 's Mark Langston , the Mariners ' former staff ace who was traded to Montreal for Johnson in 1989 . Seattle put runners in scoring position in the first and fifth innings , but only scored one run in the fifth when Dan Wilson scored on a single by Vince Coleman . Johnson was perfect — that is , he allowed no runners to reach base — until the 6th inning when Rex Hudler singled but was stranded at second base . 
 In the seventh inning , Langston allowed a single to Mike Blowers , then allowed Tino Martinez on base via fielder 's choice , then hit Joey Cora to load the bases with two outs . Luis Sojo followed with a double to right field that glanced off of first baseman J. T. Snow 's glove and rolled under the Angels ' bullpen bench , scoring Blowers , Martinez , and Cora . Sojo himself scored on the play as a result of Langston 's throwing error , and Langston was replaced by relief pitcher Bob Patterson . 
 Now trailing by five runs , the Angels threatened again in the 8th inning with runners on second and third , but Hudler grounded out to end the threat . In the bottom of the 8th , the Mariners again had the bases loaded when Tino Martinez singled to score Edgar Martínez , followed by a Dan Wilson double that scored Jay <unk> and Blowers , and finally a sacrifice fly double play hit by Cora that scored Tino Martinez but got Wilson thrown out at third . Tony Phillips led off the 9th for the Angels with a home run to avoid a shutout , but Johnson retired the next three Angels hitters to record his sixth complete game and 18th win of the season . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Before 1995 = = = 
 Both teams entered the tiebreaker with long histories of frustration and disappointment . California had won the AL West division title on 3 occasions ( 1979 , 1982 , and 1986 ) , but failed to advance to the World Series each time . In particular , the Angels blew a 2 – 0 series lead in the best @-@ of @-@ five 1982 ALCS to the Milwaukee Brewers , and were one strike away from defeating the Boston Red Sox in Game 5 of the 1986 ALCS but ended up losing that game and the next two to lose the best @-@ of @-@ seven series that they had led 3 – 1 . They had not returned to the postseason since the 1986 loss . 
 Seattle , on the other hand , had only had two winning seasons since the franchise began play in 1977 ( 1991 and 1993 ) , and had never been to the postseason . The team had gone through three ownership changes in its first 15 years , its most recent coming in 1992 when a consortium led by Hiroshi Yamauchi , which owns the Mariners to the present day , bought the team from Jeff Smulyan , who had threatened to relocate the team as a consequence of its losing ways . 
 = = = 1995 season = = = 
 As a consequence of the 1994 – 95 Major League Baseball strike , the 1995 season started on April 25 , and was shortened to 144 games instead of the normal 162 . California took an early lead in the AL West standings and traded first place with Texas through May and June . They took the lead on July 2 , and held on to that lead throughout the rest of July and all of August . Seattle , meanwhile , spent most of June through August in third or fourth place . They would bottom out on August 2 , 13 games out of first place . 
 The Angels ' fortunes began to change when they were swept by Boston from August 21 – 23 , then after winning one game over Baltimore , went into a 9 @-@ game losing streak beginning August 25 . Seattle had an August record of 16 – 13 ( .552 ) , while California had an August record of 13 – 17 ( .433 ) . Seattle took second place on September 2 , with Texas in a losing streak it would never recover from . 
 Then in September , California went into a second 9 @-@ game skid from September 13 – 23 , allowing Seattle to take first place on September 22 in the middle of their own 7 @-@ game winning streak . California sank to 3 games out of first place with 5 games left in the season , but won those last 5 games — including a 4 @-@ game sweep of the Oakland Athletics — while Seattle lost 3 of their last 5 games , forcing the tiebreaker . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The Angels ' defeat in the tiebreaker marked a continuation of the team 's struggles at the time . It was the closest the Angels would come to reaching the postseason during their playoff drought that lasted from 1986 to 2002 , when they won the AL Wild Card and ultimately the World Series . 
 The game was a stepping stone in what is widely regarded in Seattle as the most memorable season in Mariners franchise history . Having secured their first ever postseason berth , the Mariners went on to play the New York Yankees in the first American League Division Series played under the present @-@ day format . They would defeat the Yankees in Game 5 of the ALDS , on the heels of Edgar Martínez ' game @-@ winning double , but ultimately were defeated by the Cleveland Indians in the American League Championship Series . 
 The game marked the beginning of the most successful era in Seattle franchise history , as they would go on to win AL West division championships again in 1997 and 2001 , and an AL Wild Card berth in 2000 . However , they failed to reach the World Series each time and remain one of two MLB franchises to never reach the Fall Classic , along with the Washington Nationals . 
 Off the field , the Mariners ' AL West championship as well as its memorable run in the postseason served as a catalyst for public funding for a new ballpark . Less than two weeks before the tiebreaker , the residents of King County , Washington ( whose county seat is Seattle ) voted against a sales tax increase to fund a new stadium , but shortly after their ALDS victory , the Washington State Legislature reconvened and approved a separate funding package for a new stadium . The new stadium , now called Safeco Field , opened in July 1999 . 
 The two franchises ' fortunes were reversed beginning in 2002 and continuing to the present day , as the Angels rose to the most successful era in their history by winning the aforementioned World Series and five division titles while the Mariners returned to the bottom of the division standings for most of those years ( the only exceptions being in 2002 and 2009 , when they finished a close third and 2003 and 2007 , when they finished second ) . 
 This game is also notable in that the storming of the field by Mariners fans following the recording of the last out represents the most recent major field invasion by team fans reacting to a victory . 
 = Æthelstan A = 
 " Æthelstan A " ( / <unk> / ) is the name given by historians to an unknown scribe who drafted charters ( or diplomas ) , by which the king made grants of land , for King Æthelstan of England between 928 and 935 . They are an important source for historians as they provide far more information than other charters of the period , showing the date and place of the grant , and having an unusually long list of witnesses , including Welsh kings and occasionally kings of Scotland and Strathclyde . 
 The " Æthelstan A " charters commence shortly after King Æthelstan conquered Northumbria in 927 , making him the first king to rule the whole of England . The diplomas give the king titles such as " King of the English " and " King of the Whole of Britain " , and this is seen by historians as part of a rhetoric which reflected his master 's claim for a new status , higher than previous West Saxon kings . 
 The diplomas are written in elaborate Latin known as the hermeneutic style , which became dominant in Anglo @-@ Latin literature from the mid @-@ tenth century and a hallmark of the English Benedictine Reform . Scholars vary widely in their views of his style , which has been described as " pretentious " and " almost impenetrable " , but also as " poetic " and " as enduringly fascinating as it is complex " . 
 " Æthelstan A " ceased to draft charters after 935 , and his successors returned to a simpler style , suggesting that he was working on his own rather than being a member of a royal scriptorium . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the death of Bede in 735 , Latin prose in England declined . It reached its lowest level in the ninth century , when few books and charters were produced , and they were of poor quality . King Æthelstan 's grandfather , Alfred the Great ( 871 – 899 ) embarked on an extensive programme to improve learning , and by the 890s the standard of Latin in charters was improving . Few charters survive from the reigns of Alfred and his son , Edward the Elder ( 899 – 924 ) , and none from 909 to 925 . Up to then charters had generally been plain legal documents , and King Æthelstan 's early diplomas were similar . 
 Until about 900 diplomas appear to have been drawn up in varying traditions and circumstances , but in later Anglo @-@ Saxon times ( c . 900 – 1066 ) charters can be more clearly defined . According to Simon Keynes : 
 In this period , a diploma can be characterised as a formal and symbolic record , in Latin , of an occasion when the king , acting in a royal assembly , and with the consent of the ecclesiastical and secular orders , created an estate of " bookland " at a specified place , and conveyed it on the privileged terms defined by the " book " , or diploma , to a named beneficiary . This act of establishing a particular estate as bookland , so that it could be held henceforth on these privileged terms , could be performed only by the king , in a royal assembly ; but the diploma itself served hereafter as the title @-@ deed for the land in question . It established that the land was to be held , with its appurtenances , free from the imposition of worldly burdens , with the exception of military service , bridge @-@ work and fortress @-@ work , and with the power to give it to anyone of its owner 's choosing . 
 = = Identity of " Æthelstan A " = = 
 In the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries there was a debate among historians as to whether late Anglo @-@ Saxon charters were produced by a royal chancery or by monasteries on behalf of beneficiaries . In the 1910s , W. H. Stevenson argued that charters in different areas of England were drawn up by the same hand , which would be unlikely if they were drawn up locally , supporting the case that the writers were royal clerks . The German scholar Richard <unk> followed this up in 1935 by examining original charters between 931 and 963 , and identified three scribes from their handwriting , who he called " Æthelstan A " , " Æthelstan C " and " Edmund C " . Other charters which only existed in copies he allocated to these and other scribes on the basis of their style . In 2002 Keynes listed twenty " Æthelstan A " charters , of which two are original and the rest copies . 
 The boundary clauses of the " Æthelstan A " charters were written in correct Old English , so it is unlikely that he was of foreign origin . The witness lists of the " Æthelstan A " charters consistently place Bishop Ælfwine of Lichfield in Mercia in a higher position than his rank warranted . King Æthelstan was probably brought up in Mercia , and in Sarah Foot 's view he was probably intimate with Ælfwine before King Edward 's death ; as Ælfwine disappeared from the witness lists at the same time as the " Æthelstan A " charters ended , she suggests that he may have been " Æthelstan A " . However , Keynes thinks it more likely " Æthelstan A " was a king 's priest from Mercia , who acquired his learning in a Mercian religious house and respected Ælfwine as a fellow Mercian ; that " Æthelstan A " entered Æthelstan 's service before he became king and was in permanent attendance on him . David Woodman also considers a Mercian origin likely , pointing out that some Mercian ninth @-@ century charters have borrowings from Aldhelm , an important source of " Æthelstan A " ' s style . Woodman also puts forward the alternative idea that " Æthelstan A " had a connection with Glastonbury Abbey in Wessex , which appears to have been a centre of learning at this time , and certainly housed many of the texts which informed " Æthelstan A " ' s idiosyncratic Latin style . 
 = = Significance of the charters = = 
 The first charter produced by " Æthelstan A " in 928 described the king as rex Anglorum , " king of the English " , the first time that title had been used . By 931 he had become " king of the English , elevated by the right hand of the Almighty to the throne of the whole kingdom of Britain " . Some charters were witnessed by Welsh kings , and occasionally by the kings of Scotland and Strathclyde , signifying acceptance of Æthelstan 's lordship . In Keynes 's view , it cannot be a coincidence that the charters commenced immediately after the conquest of Northumbria , and " Æthelstan A " ' s primary aim was to display the " grandeur of Æthelstan 's kingship " . Foot argues that the king 's inner circle quickly seized on the potential of the conquest for " ideological aggrandizement of the king 's public standing " . To Keynes , the diplomas " are symbolic of a monarchy invigorated by success , developing the pretensions commensurate with its actual achievements and clothing itself in the trappings of a new political order . " He sees the fifty years from 925 to 975 as " the golden age of the Anglo @-@ Saxon royal diploma " . 
 Before 928 charters had been produced in various ways , sometimes by royal priests , sometimes by other priests on behalf of the beneficiaries . " Æthelstan A " was solely responsible for the production of charters between 928 and 934 . King Æthelstan thus took unprecedented control over an important part of his functions . In 935 " Æthelstan A " shared the work with other scribes , and he then apparently retired . His charters have exceptionally long witness lists , with 101 names for a grant by the king to his thegn Wulfgar at Lifton in Devon in 931 , and 92 for a grant to Ælfgar at Winchester in 934 . The witness lists of King Æthelstan 's father and grandfather were much shorter , with the longest in Alfred the Great 's reign having only 19 names . In John Maddicott 's view the long lists in Æthelstan 's reign reflect a change of direction to larger assemblies . The king established a novel system , with his scribe travelling with him from meeting to meeting , and a uniform format of charters . The dating clause showed the regnal year , the indiction , the <unk> , and the age of the moon . In Keynes 's view : " Nothing quite like them had been seen before ; and they must have seemed magnificent , even intimidating , in their formality and their grandeur . " A unique feature is that three charters in favour of a religious community require it to sing a specified number of psalms for the king , indicating a particular interest in psalmody by the king or scribe . 
 Frankish annalists usually recorded a king 's location at Easter and Christmas , but this was not a practice of English chroniclers , and the only period in the tenth and eleventh centuries for which historians can construct a partial itinerary of the king 's movements is provided by the location of assemblies recorded in " Æthelstan A " ' s charters of 928 to 935 . Other charters rarely named the place of assembly , apart from a group in the 940s and early 950s known as the " alliterative " charters . 
 In 935 a new simplified format was introduced by other scribes , apparently while " Æthelstan A " was still active , and became the standard until the late 950s . This coincided with the disappearance of Wulfstan I , Archbishop of York from the witness lists , and greater prominence of the Bishops of London and Bishop of Winchester , and the new format may have reflected a change of outlook at court . As charters were no longer written in his distinctive style when he ceased producing them , it is likely he was working on his own rather than heading a royal scriptorium . 
 = = Style of the charters = = 
 The standard of Latin prose improved in the tenth century , especially after about 960 , when the leaders of the Benedictine reform movement adopted the elaborate and ornate style of Latin now called by historians the hermeneutic style . However , use of this style , influenced especially by Aldhelm 's De <unk> , dates back to King Æthelstan 's reign . " Æthelstan A " borrowed heavily from Aldhelm , although he would not copy whole sentences , only a word or a few words , incorporating them in a structure reminiscent of Aldhelm 's works . In Woodman 's view , " Æthelstan A " varied the language in each charter out of a delight in experimentation and to demonstrate his literary ability . 
 The florid style of seventh century Irish texts known as Hiberno @-@ Latin was influential on the Continent due to the work of Irish missionaries in Europe . Some works were known to English writers such as Aldhelm in the same century , but it is likely that " Æthelstan A " learnt of them from continental scholars such as Israel the Grammarian , who brought texts influenced by Hiberno @-@ Latin to King Æthelstan 's court . 
 Woodman states that : " whilst it is true that the main impetus for the literary revival of Latin prose occurred from the mid @-@ tenth century , the beginnings of this style of Latin can actually be found rather earlier and in the most unlikely of places . In fact it is diplomas of the 920s and 930s that are the first to display this distinctive Latin in its most exuberant form . " According to Scott Thompson Smith " Æthelstan A " ' s diplomas " are generally characterised by a rich <unk> style with aggressively literary proems and anathemas , ostentatious language and imagery throughout , decorative rhetorical figures , elaborate dating clauses , and extensive witness lists . These are clearly documents with stylistic ambitions . " Few listeners would have understood them when they were read out at royal assemblies . In Charter S 425 of 934 , the second of the two originals to survive , " Æthelstan A " wrote ( in Smith 's translation ) : 
 The wanton fortune of the deceiving world , not lovely with the milky @-@ white radiance of unfading lilies but odious with the galling bitterness of woeful corruption , raging with venomous jaws tears with its teeth the sons of fetid flesh in the vale of tears ; although with its smiles it may be alluring to the unfortunate , it brazenly leads down to the lowest depths of <unk> <unk> unless the offspring of the High @-@ Thunderer should intervene . And so because that ruinous [ fortune ] mortally fades away in its failing , one must especially hasten to pleasant fields of ineffable joy where the angelic music of hymnal jubilation and the mellifluous scent of blooming roses are sensed as sweet beyond measure by good and blessed noses and heard by ears as the delights of musical instrument without end . 
 In S 416 of 931 , the first original to survive , after the boundary clause in Old English , he reverted to Latin for the anathema against anyone who set aside the charter : 
 If , however , God forbid , anyone swollen with diabolic spirit should be tempted to diminish or annul this brief document of my arrangement and confirmation , let him know that on the final and great day of judgment , when the archangel 's shrill trumpet rings out , when graves burst open by themselves and give up the bodies now revived , when every element trembles , with the traitor Judas , who is called " son of perdition " by the Sower 's merciful Offspring , he is to perish in eternal confusion within the hungry flames of unspeakable torments . 
 Some scholars are not impressed . Michael Lapidge describes " Æthelstan A " ' s style as " pretentious " , and according to <unk> Gretsch the diplomas 
 are composed in almost impenetrable Latin . Their proems consist of long convoluted sentences , parading an ostentatious display of Greek and glossary @-@ based vocabulary and containing numerous unmistakable verbal reminiscences of Aldhelm 's writings . Nothing similar had previously been attempted in Anglo @-@ Saxon diplomatic and although , later in the tenth century , other charters affecting the hermeneutic style were composed , the ferocious lexical and syntactical difficulties of these Æthelstan charters were never to be surpassed . 
 On the other hand , <unk> describes " Æthelstan A " ' s style as having a " poetic quality " , and Woodman describes him as an " author of no little genius , a man who not only overhauled the legal form of the diploma but also had the ability to write Latin that is as enduringly fascinating as it is complex . " In Woodman 's view : " Never before had the royal diploma 's rhetorical properties been exploited to such a degree and it seems no coincidence that these documents appeared following King Æthelstan 's momentous political conquest of the north in 927 . " 
 = = List of charters = = 
 Keynes listed the " Æthelstan A " charters in Table XXVII of his Atlas of Attestations . The charters are in the script called " Square minuscule ( ' Phase II ' ) " , with a Latin text and the boundary clause in the vernacular . 
 = = = Charters = = = 
 = B 'Day Anthology Video Album = 
 B 'Day Anthology Video Album is the first video album by American recording artist Beyoncé . It features thirteen music videos for songs from her second studio album , B 'Day ( 2006 ) and its deluxe re @-@ release ( 2007 ) . It was released by Columbia Records exclusively through Wal @-@ Mart stores on April 3 , 2007 alongside the deluxe album , but was later serviced to other retailers . Beyoncé shot nine videos for the album , and four pre @-@ filmed videos were also included . B 'Day Anthology Video Album has been certified double @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . Outside of North America , the album featured as a bonus disc to the B 'Day Deluxe Edition . The " Still in Love ( Kissing You ) " video was the subject of a copyright infringement lawsuit , therefore only initial pressings of the album contain its video . 
 = = Background = = 
 Beyoncé said that she filmed B 'Day Anthology Video Album because she " always wanted to do a video album " so that her fans would not have to log on to YouTube to watch her music videos , but could instead play them via DVD . Beyoncé knew what the videos ' choreography would be before the filming began . She also planned her hairstyles , outfits and make @-@ up . Beyoncé wanted each video to look different , and therefore she used different film techniques , fashion and styling . B 'Day Anthology Video Album contains thirteen music videos and behind the scenes footage . The videos for " Déjà Vu " , " Ring the Alarm " , " Irreplaceable " and " Listen " had been shot prior to the album 's filming . The other nine videos were filmed in a two @-@ week period . B 'Day Anthology Video Album contains music videos for all of the songs from the standard issue of B 'Day except for " Resentment " . It also includes videos for " Beautiful Liar " , " Flaws and All " and " Still in Love ( Kissing You ) " , which featured only on the deluxe edition . According to Vibe , the thirteen videos on B 'Day Anthology Video Album gave Beyoncé the record of the most music videos released in a twelve @-@ month period . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 B 'Day Anthology Video Album was released by Columbia Records exclusively through Wal @-@ Mart on April 3 , 2007 , the same day that the B 'Day Deluxe Edition was released . The video album was made available to other retailers on June 19 , 2007 . Outside of North America , the video album was featured as the second disc on the deluxe edition of B 'Day albeit without the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage . Irreemplazable , an EP featuring Spanish @-@ language recordings , was included as the bonus disc in the United States . Prior to its release , copies of the videos were ripped from an advance album and leaked onto the internet in MP4 form . Beyoncé promoted the album by appearing on television shows Today and The Early Show , while television channel VH1 Soul aired several of its videos . B 'Day Anthology Video Album debuted at number twenty @-@ four on the US Top Music Videos chart of April 28 , 2007 , and has been certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting the shipment of 200 @,@ 000 copies . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine criticized the music videos for the songs on B 'Day Anthology Video Album , writing that " none of them are anything special , though most will please narrow @-@ minded fans " . 
 = = = Copyright infringement lawsuit = = = 
 Beyoncé covered Des 'ree 's song " Kissing You " for the deluxe edition of B 'Day and retitled it " Still in Love ( Kissing You ) " . She filmed a video of the song for B 'Day Anthology Video Album ; however one of the conditions set out by Des 'ree 's publishers , the Royalty Network , was that Beyoncé did not release the song in video form . The Royalty Network filed a copyright infringement lawsuit against the involved parties seeking US $ 150 @,@ 000 in damages . Infringing copies of B 'Day Anthology Video Album were recalled in April 2007 , and in October 2007 the lawsuit was dismissed with prejudice . Later copies of the album did not contain " Still in Love ( Kissing You ) " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Note 
 The length of each of these music videos includes a five @-@ second bumble bee introduction , except for " Green Light " , which is listed as a continuation of " Kitty Kat " and therefore has no introduction . The credits and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes features also do not have introductions . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Source : 
 = Kathleen O 'Kelly @-@ Kennedy = 
 Kathleen O 'Kelly @-@ Kennedy ( born 21 June 1986 ) is a 4 @.@ 0 point Australian wheelchair basketball player who plays forward @-@ centre . She was part of the bronze medal @-@ winning Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team at the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing . 
 Active in fund raising from an early age , O 'Kelly @-@ Kennedy took a group of children with missing limbs to the 2000 Paralympic Games in Sydney , where she saw the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Gliders , in action for the first time , and was inspired to take up wheelchair basketball . She entered the University of Illinois on a half @-@ scholarship in 2005 , and won three US National Championships with its Women 's team . 
 By 2006 , she was part of the Gliders team that finished fourth at the World Wheelchair Basketball Championship in Amsterdam in 2006 . She played professionally in Italy in 2010 @-@ 11 with Sassari and with Elecom Roma in 2011 @-@ 12 . Although not selected for the Gliders team that played at the 2012 Summer Paralympic Games in London , she won a Bronze Medal with Elecom Roma in the Men 's European Championships that year and returned to the Gliders line up for the Osaka Cup in 2013 and for the 2013 Asian Qualifiers in Thailand for the World Championships to be held in Canada on 19 @-@ 29 June 2014 . 
 = = Personal = = 
 O 'Kelly @-@ Kennedy was born on 21 June 1986 . At birth one of her legs was shorter than the other , and her right foot was amputated when she was eighteen months old . She attended Melbourne Rudolf Steiner School and Luther College in the outer @-@ eastern Melbourne suburb of Croydon . She has regularly represented the Royal Children 's Hospital on television and in newspapers for the Good Friday Appeal . In 2000 , she was involved in fund raising to take a group of children with missing limbs to the 2000 Paralympic Games in Sydney , where they became a cheer squad . In Sydney , she saw the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Gliders , in action for the first time . 
 She later founded a charitable organisation , Set No Limits and in 2013 helped establish the Red Dust Heelers Healing thru Wheeling program which has a focus on connecting Indigenous young people with disability to sport , education , employment and lifestyle opportunities . She has modelled for Vertically Blessed , a clothing company , and has gone by a number of nicknames , including Kat , Kitty , Blondie and Felix . 
 = = Wheelchair basketball = = 
 O 'Kelly @-@ Kennedy is a 4 point player who plays Centre / Forward . She had played junior ' stand up ' basketball but after the Sydney games she was persuaded to try wheelchair basketball by family friend and Wheelchair Basketball Legend , Kevin Coombs and Paralympic athletic champions Don Elgin and Tim Matthews , who became her mentors . She joined the Victorian Women 's Wheelchair Basketball Team ( development ) in 2001 , and represented the state at the National Junior Basketball Championships in Ballarat , Victoria , in 2002 . This was also the year she became a member of the Victorian Women 's Wheelchair Basketball Team . In 2003 , O 'Kelly @-@ Kennedy became part of the Australian Development Team , and participated in her first overseas tournament , in New Zealand . She was part of the Victorian team at the National Junior Championships , Adelaide , and travelled to Toronto , Canada , for the Spitfire Tournament . She represented Australia for the first time at the Tri @-@ Nation Tournament in the United States in 2003 . 
 After O 'Kelly @-@ Kennedy graduated from high school in 2004 , she received an offer of a half @-@ scholarship to University of Illinois , where she was coached by Mike Frogley . She was also awarded a scholarship from the Victorian Institute of Sport in 2006 and 2007 . She went on to win three US National Championships with the University of Illinois team , in 2006 , 2007 and 2008 . In one game she scored a career high of 42 points . 
 In 2006 , O 'Kelly @-@ Kennedy was part of the national team at the Roosevelt Tournament in Warm Springs , Georgia , and was then at the World Wheelchair Basketball Championship in Amsterdam in 2006 , where Australia finished fourth . She was part of the Gliders ' line up at the Osaka Cup in 2007 , where the Gliders finished second , at the Asia Pacific Beijing Qualifications Tournament in Sydney in 2007 , where the Gliders finished first , and at the Friendly Games held alongside that tournament , in which the Gliders finished second . She was also part the Gliders line up at the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , where the Gliders defeated Japan in the bronze medal game , 53 – 47 . 
 O 'Kelly @-@ Kennedy was recruited by Italian Men 's Professional League reigning champions , <unk> Elecom Roma , for the 2011 – 12 season , winning the Bronze Medal at the 2011 @-@ 12 European Championships in Turkey . 
 O 'Kelly @-@ Kennedy played for the Stacks <unk> Bears in the Women 's National League in 2012 , scoring a competition @-@ rare triple double in the Preliminary Final . In 2013 she played again with the Bears , with the team earning consecutive runner @-@ up medals . In February 2013 she also returned to the National team for the 2013 Osaka Cup , where the Gliders successfully defended the title they had won in 2008 , 2009 , 2010 and 2012 , and for the Asian Qualifiers in Bangkok in November 2013 . 
 = Warfare in early modern Scotland = 
 Warfare in early modern Scotland includes all forms of military activity in Scotland or by Scottish forces , between the adoption of new ideas of the Renaissance in the early sixteenth century and the military defeat of the Jacobite movement in the mid @-@ eighteenth century . In the late Middle Ages , Scottish armies were assembled on the basis of common service , feudal obligations and money contracts of bonds of manrent . In 1513 these systems produced a large and formidable force , but in the mid @-@ sixteenth century there were difficulties in recruitment . Individuals were expected to provide their own equipment , including axes and pole arms . Highland troops often brought bows and two @-@ handed swords . Heavy armour was abandoned after the Flodden campaign . Highland lords tended to continue to use lighter chainmail and ordinary highlanders dressed in the plaid . The crown took an increasing role in the supply of equipment . The pike replaced the spear and the Scots began to covert from the bow to gunpowder firearms . Feudal heavy cavalry were replaced with light horse , often drawn from the Borders . James IV established a gun foundry in 1511 and gunpowder weaponry fundamentally altered the nature of castle architecture . In the 1540s and 1550s , Scotland was given a defended border of earthwork forts and additions to existing castles . 
 There were attempts to create royal naval forces in the fifteenth century . James IV founded a harbour at Newhaven and a dockyard at the Pools of Airth . He acquired a total of 38 ships including the Great Michael , at that time the largest in Europe . Scottish ships had some success against privateers , accompanied the king on his expeditions to the islands , and intervened in Scandinavia and the Baltic , but were sold after the Flodden campaign . Scottish naval efforts subsequently relied on privateering captains and hired merchantmen . Despite truces with England there were periodic outbreaks of a guerre de course . James V built a new harbour at Burntisland in 1542 . The chief use of naval power in his reign were a series of expeditions to the Isles and France . The Union of Crowns in 1603 ended conflict with England , but England 's foreign policy opened up Scottish shipping to attack . In 1626 a squadron of three ships were bought and equipped for protection and there were marque fleets of privateers . In 1627 , the Royal Scots Navy and privateers participated in the major expedition to Biscay . The Scots also returned to West Indies and in 1629 took part in the capture of Quebec . 
 In the early seventeenth century large numbers of Scots took service in foreign armies involved in the Thirty Years ' War . As armed conflict between the Covenanter regime in Scotland and Charles I in the Bishops ' Wars became likely , many mercenaries returned home , including experienced leaders like Alexander and David Leslie and these veterans played an important role in training recruits . Covenanter armies intervened in the Civil Wars in England and Ireland . Scottish infantry were generally armed with a combination of pike and shot , but individuals may have had weapons including bows and polearms . Most cavalry were probably equipped with pistols and swords , but may have included lancers . Royalist armies , like those led by James Graham , Marquis of Montrose ( 1643 – 44 ) and in Glencairn 's rising ( 1653 – 54 ) , were mainly composed of conventionally armed infantry with pike and shot . Montrose 's forces were short of heavy artillery suitable for siege warfare and had only a small force of cavalry . During the Bishops ' Wars , Scottish privateers took English prizes . After the Covenanters allied with the English Parliament they established two patrol squadrons for the Atlantic and North Sea coasts , known collectively as the " Scotch Guard " . The Scottish navy was unable to withstand the English fleet that accompanied the army led by Cromwell that conquered Scotland in 1649 – 51 and Scottish ships and crews were split up among the Commonwealth fleet . During the English occupation , more fortresses in the style of the trace italienne were built . 
 At the Restoration , infantry regiments and a few troops of horse were established and there were attempts to found a national militia on the English model . The standing army was mainly employed in the suppression of Covenanter rebellions and the guerrilla war undertaken by the Cameronians in the East . Pikemen became less important and after the introduction of the socket bayonet disappeared altogether , while matchlock muskets were replaced by the more reliable flintlock . On the eve of the Glorious Revolution the standing army in Scotland was about 3 @,@ 250 men . The Scots were drawn into King William II 's continental wars . Scottish seamen received protection against arbitrary impressment , but a fixed quota of conscripts for the Royal Navy was levied from the sea @-@ coast burghs . There were now Royal Navy patrols in Scottish waters even in peacetime . Scottish privateers played a major part in the Second Anglo @-@ Dutch War . In the 1690s a fleet of five ships was established for the Darien Scheme , and a professional navy of three warships to protect local shipping . After the Act of Union in 1707 , these vessels were transferred to the Royal Navy . At the Union , the standing army was seven units of infantry , two of horse and one troop of Horse Guards , besides varying levels of fortress artillery . As part of the British Army , Scottish regiments took part in a series of wars on the European continent . The first official Highland regiment to be raised for the British army was the Black Watch in 1740 , but the growth of Highland regiments was delayed by the 1745 Jacobite Rebellion . The bulk of Jacobite armies were made up of Highlanders , serving in clan regiments . The Jacobites often started campaigns poorly armed , but arms became more conventional as the rebellions progressed . 
 = = Sixteenth century = = 
 = = = Royal armies = = = 
 In the later Middle Ages , Scottish armies were still largely assembled on the basis of common service and feudal obligations , with the addition of troops maintained by money contracts of bonds or bands of manrent . Common service theoretically called all men between the ages of 16 and 60 for a maximum of 40 days in one year . Such troops were expected to serve at their own expense and to bring their own supplies , a factor that severely limited the ability of Scottish armies to take part in sustained campaigning . Feudalism had been introduced to Scotland in the twelfth century , meaning that knights held castles and estates in exchange for service , providing troops on a 40 @-@ day basis , particularly heavily armed noble cavalry . Bonds of manrent were similar to English indentures of the same period , used to retain more professional troops , particular men @-@ at @-@ arms and archers . Scotland relied on these systems longer than was the case in England . In practice , forms of service tended to blur and overlap , and major Scottish lords continued to bring contingents from their kindred . In 1513 for the Flodden campaign these systems were successful in producing a large and formidable force , but in the religious and politically divided mid @-@ sixteenth century there is evidence that the authorities were experiencing increasing difficulty in recruitment . 
 A series of musters or <unk> , between two and four times a year , checked that potential soldiers maintained suitable equipment . Individuals were expected to equip themselves for war according to their estates . Instructions given to sheriffs in 1513 indicated that gentlemen were expected to muster in plate armour , while common soldiers were to come in jacks and <unk> . After the disaster at Flodden there seems to have been a deliberate abandonment of plate armour by the nobility , perhaps because of the difficulties it created in handling a pike , and by 1547 many noblemen were virtually indistinguishable from the majority of troops . Highland lords continued to use lighter chainmail and ordinary highlanders dressed in the plaid , leaving their lower legs naked . In place of a jack , they often had a patchwork linen garment , covered with wax or pitch . 
 Weapons included various forms of axes and pole arms , including spears , the Lochaber axe , Leith axe and Jedburgh stave . Highland troops often brought bows , two @-@ handed swords ( <unk> mór ) and axes . The crown took an increasing role in the supply of equipment . There were attempts to replace polearms with longer pikes of 15 @.@ 5 feet ( 5 m ) to 18 @.@ 5 feet ( 6 m ) in the later fifteenth century , in emulation of successes over mounted troops in the Netherlands and Switzerland , but this does not appear to have been successful until the eve of the Flodden campaign in early sixteenth century . By the mid @-@ sixteenth century the pike had emerged as the most important infantry weapon in Scottish armies . Modelling themselves on Swiss and German infantry , Scottish tactics tended to focus on rapidly engaging the enemy , particularly necessary to counter the advantage enjoyed by the English in missile power . 
 Like most European nations the Scots in this period began to covert from the bow to gunpowder firearms . Handguns were present in Scottish armies in small numbers from the fifteenth century and there are increasingly frequent references to handguns and arquebus in records . An account of the Scottish vanguard at Haddon Rig in 1542 suggests that half the troops were missile men and half of those were arquebusiers . Equal proportions of missile to melee troops seems to have been an aim of Scottish commanders for most of the century , although it was not always possible in the field . The main source of firearms were the French , who seem to have extensively rearmed the Scottish after the English invasions of the Rough Wooing . 
 The English enjoyed a marked superiority over the Scots in cavalry , particularly with the resurgence of heavy cavalry with their use of demi @-@ lancers . The feudal heavy cavalry had begun to disappear from Scottish armies after Bannockburn in 1314 . It was limited by the shortage of suitable horses . James V imported great horses and mares from Denmark in an attempt to improve the quality of Scottish breading stock . In the mid @-@ sixteenth century the Scots still lacked sufficient heavy cavalry . In their place they fielded relatively large numbers of light horse , often drawn from the Borders and usually wearing jacks of leather or mail , mounted on small horses and using light lances . As firearms became available they began to field relatively large numbers of mounted arquebusiers . 
 = = = Artillery and siege warfare = = = 
 James IV brought in experts from France , Germany and the Netherlands and established a gun foundry in 1511 . Edinburgh Castle had a house of artillery where visitors could see cannon cast for what became a formidable train , allowing him to send cannon to France and Ireland and to quickly subdue Norham Castle in the Flodden campaign . However , his 18 heavy artillery pieces had to be drawn by 400 oxen and slowed the advancing Scots army , proving ineffective against the longer @-@ range and smaller @-@ calibre English guns at the Battle of Flodden Field . 
 Gunpowder weaponry fundamentally altered the nature of castle architecture from the mid @-@ fifteenth century , with existing castles being adapted to allow the use of gunpowder weapons by the incorporation of " keyhole " gun ports , platforms to mount guns and walls being modified to resist bombardment . Ravenscraig , Kirkcaldy , begun about 1460 , is probably the first castle in the British Isles to be built as an artillery fort , incorporating " D @-@ shape " bastions that would better resist cannon fire and on which artillery could be mounted . In the period of French intervention in the 1540s and 1550s , at the end of the Rough Wooing , Scotland was given a defended border of a series of earthwork forts and additions to existing castles . These included the erection of single bastions at Edinburgh , Stirling and Dunbar ; the creation of the Scots ' Dike on the western end of the border ; trace italienne fortresses at Leith , Inchkeith and <unk> ; work was also begun at Jedburgh and plans made for works at Kelso . The most aggressive move was a fortified artillery park at Eyemouth , only 6 miles ( 10 km ) from the English border stronghold of Berwick . 
 = = = Royal navy = = = 
 There were various attempts to create royal naval forces in the fifteenth century . James IV put the enterprise on a new footing , founding a harbour at Newhaven in May 1504 , and two years later ordering the construction of a dockyard at the Pools of Airth . The upper reaches of the Forth were protected by new fortifications on Inchgarvie . The king acquired a total of 38 ships for the Royal Scottish Navy , including the Margaret , and the carrack Michael or Great Michael . The latter , built at great expense at Newhaven and launched in 1511 , was 240 feet ( 73 m ) in length , weighed 1 @,@ 000 tons , had 24 cannon , and was , at that time , the largest ship in Europe . Scottish ships had some success against privateers , accompanied the king in his expeditions in the islands and intervened in conflicts in Scandinavia and the Baltic . In the Flodden campaign the fleet consisted of 16 large and 10 smaller craft . After a raid on Carrickfergus in Ireland , it joined up with the French and had little impact on the war . After the disaster at Flodden the Great Michael , and perhaps other ships , were sold to the French . The king 's ships disappeared from royal records after 1516 and Scottish naval efforts would rely on privateering captains and hired merchantmen during the minority of James V. In the Italian War of 1521 – 26 , in which England and Scotland became involved on opposing sides , the Scots had six men @-@ of @-@ war active attacking English and Imperial shipping and they blockaded the Humber in 1523 . Although prizes were taken by Robert Barton and other captains , the naval campaign was sporadic and indecisive . 
 James V entered his majority in 1524 . He did not share his father 's interest in building a navy , relying on French gifts such as the Salamander , or captured ships like the English Mary Willoughby . Scotland 's shipbuilding remained largely at the level of boat building and ship repairs and fell behind the Low Countries which led the way into semi @-@ industrialised ship building . Despite truces between England and Scotland there were periodic outbreaks of commerce raiding in the 1530s with at least four of a known six men @-@ at @-@ war were royal naval vessels on the Scottish side . James V built a new harbour at Burntisland in 1542 , called ' Our Lady Port ' or ' New Haven , ' described in 1544 as having three blockhouses with guns and a pier for great ships to lie in a dock . The chief use of naval power in his reign were a series of expeditions to the Isles and France . In 1536 the king circumnavigated the Isles , embarking at <unk> in Fife and landing Whithorn in Galloway . Later in the year he sailed from Kirkcaldy with six ships including the 600 ton Mary Willoughby , and arrived at Dieppe to begin his courtship of his first wife Madeleine of Valois . After his marriage he sailed from Le Havre in the Mary Willoughby to Leith with four great Scottish ships and ten French . After the death of Queen Madeleine , John Barton , in the Salamander returned to France in 1538 to pick up the new prospective queen , Mary of Guise , with the <unk> and Mary Willoughby . In 1538 James V embarked on the newly equipped Salamander at Leith and accompanied by the Mary Willoughby , the Great Unicorn , the Little Unicorn , the Lion and twelve other ships sailed to Kirkwall on Orkney . Then he went to Lewis on the West , perhaps using the newly compiled charts from his first voyage known as Alexander Lindsay 's Rutter . 
 Scottish privateers and pirates preyed on shipping in the North Sea and off the Atlantic coast of France . Scotland 's Admiralty court judged whether a captured ship was a lawful prize and dealt with the recovery of goods . As the court was entitled to a tenth of the value of a prize , it was a profitable business for the admiral . The privateers Andrew and Robert Barton were still using their letters of reprisal of 1506 against the Portuguese in 1561 . The <unk> operated down the east coast of Britain from Leven and the Firth of Forth , while others used the French Channel ports such as Rouen and Dieppe or the Atlantic port of Brest as bases . During the Rough Wooing in 1542 , the Mary Willoughby , the Lion , and the Salamander under the command of John Barton , son of Robert Barton , attacked merchants and fishermen off Whitby . They later blockaded a London merchant ship called the Antony of Bruges in a creek on the coast of Brittany . In 1544 Edinburgh was attacked by an English marine force and burnt . The Salamander and the Scottish @-@ built Unicorn were captured at Leith . The Scots still had two royal naval vessels and numerous smaller private vessels , but would have to rely on privateers until the re @-@ establishment of a royal fleet in the 1620s . When , as a result of the series of international treaties , the emperor Charles V declared war upon Scotland in 1544 , the Scots were able to engage in a highly profitable campaign of privateering that lasted six years and the gains of which probably outweighed the losses in trade with the Low Countries . They also operated in the West Indies from the 1540s , joining the French in the capture of <unk> in 1567 . English and Scottish naval warfare and privateering broke out sporadically in the 1550s . In 1559 , English captain William Winter was sent north with 34 ships and dispersed and captured the Scottish and French fleets , leading to the eventual evacuation of the French from Scotland , and a successful coup of the Protestant Lords of the Congregation . Scottish and English interests were re @-@ aligned and the naval conflict subsided . 
 = = Early seventeenth century = = 
 = = = Royal and marque fleets = = = 
 After the Union of Crowns in 1603 conflict between Scotland and England ended , but Scotland found itself involved in England 's foreign policy , opening up Scottish shipping to attack . In the 1620s , Scotland found herself fighting a naval war as England 's ally , first against Spain and then also against France , while simultaneously embroiled in undeclared North Sea commitments in the Danish intervention in the Thirty Years ' War . In 1626 a squadron of three ships were bought and equipped at a cost of least £ 5 @,@ 200 sterling , to guard against privateers operating out of Spanish @-@ controlled Dunkirk and other ships were armed in preparation for potential action . The acting High Admiral John Gordon of Lochinvar organised at least three marque fleets of privateers . It was probably one of Lochinvar 's marque fleets that was sent to support the English Royal Navy defending Irish waters in 1626 . In 1627 , the Royal Scots Navy , and accompanying contingents of burgh privateers , participated in the major expedition to Biscay . The Scots also returned to the West Indies , with Lochinvar taking French prizes and founding the colony of Charles Island . In 1629 two squadrons of privateers led by Lochinvar and William Lord Alexander , sailed for Canada , taking part in the campaign that resulted in the capture of Quebec from the French , which was handed back after the subsequent peace . 
 = = = Covenanter armies = = = 
 In the early seventeenth century relatively large numbers of Scots took service in foreign armies involved in the Thirty Years ' War , with 20 – 30 @,@ 000 in Swedish service , a Scots brigade in the Netherlands , and 5 – 6 @,@ 000 raised for Danish service in the period 1626 – 27 , 11 @,@ 000 for France and large numbers in the armies of eastern Europe , including German states , Poland and Russia . As armed confrontation between Scotland and the Charles I looked increasingly likely from 1637 , the Standing Committee of the Tables began to function as a war council . It appointed two lairds in every parish to draw up lists of men suitable for military service , arms and the names of Scots serving abroad so that they could be recalled . Three commissioners were appointed in each shire , two residing in Edinburgh and another remaining in the locality , where presbyteries appointed commissioners to communicate instructions to the parishes . Hundreds of Scots mercenaries returned home from foreign service , including experienced leaders like Alexander and David Leslie . These veterans played an important role in training the parish recruits . Nobles were able to raise regiments , which usually bore their name as colonel , and they could appoint company commanders , but the lieutenant colonel and sergeant major of the regiment , and the lieutenant and sergeant of each company , were to be professional soldiers . The returning soldiers also brought expertise in fortification and trace <unk> fortifications were added at Leith , Burntisland and Greenock . They would play a major role in the siege of Edinburgh in 1650 . 
 The appointment of Leslie as field marshal avoided a contest between inexperienced nobles for leadership and his reputation made the service by Scottish mercenaries in Covenanter armies more likely . He became an ex <unk> member of the Tables , enabling him to influence policy and take part in issuing dispatches . Although producing a relatively large and efficiently organised army , it was hastily assembled , and short of money and supplies . The Covenanting regime had to make assessments on parishes and relied on loans from Edinburgh merchants , making a long campaign difficult to sustain . In the view of historian James Scott Wheeler , the first Covenanter army was " marginally trained , irregularly armed , poorly paid and badly supplied " , but it proved sufficient to the task . 
 Between the two Bishops ' Wars the Covenanters maintained one regiment of infantry and many of their officers who had drilled the local militias on half pay . The <unk> were now armed with firearms purchased in the Netherlands . The Tables were replaced with a committee of estates , with wide @-@ ranging powers , and kept to same system of commissioners . One in four able bodied men were able to muster when mobilisation began for renewed confrontation in 1640 . The army was paid for by more loans and a new national tax known as the " tenth " or " tenth penny " . These systems would form the basis of the Covenanter armies that operated in Ireland , intervened in the First Civil War ( 1642 – 46 ) in England on the side of Parliament and subsequently , and less successfully , on the side of the king in the Second ( 1648 – 49 ) and Third Civil Wars ( 1649 – 51 ) . 
 Scottish infantry were generally armed , as was almost universal in Western Europe , with a combination of pike and shot . Pikes were theoretically 16 feet ( 5 m ) long , but were often shortened by a foot or two to make them more manageable , this had disastrous <unk> at the Battle of <unk> ( 1646 ) , where the Confederate Irish defeated the Scots because they possessed longer pikes . Musketeers were mainly armed with matchlock muskets , with some firelocks ( probably mainly reserved for troops defending the baggage and ammunition ) and there were a handful of troops that brought more accurate rifled guns . Continental experience tended to increasingly emphasise firepower over melee and this was reflected in the greater proportions of shot to pike , usually in proportions of three to two . Scottish armies may also have had individuals with weapons including bows , Lochaber axes , and <unk> as recruits who lacked pike and shot were told to report with these . Most cavalry were probably equipped with pistols and swords , although there is some evidence that they included lancers . 
 Royalist armies , like those led by James Graham , Marquis of Montrose ( 1643 – 44 ) and in Glencairn 's rising ( 1653 – 54 ) were mainly composed of conventionally armed infantry with pike and shot . Montrose 's army also included a contingent of Irish Confederate troops and Scottish recruits from Highland clans hostile to the Clan Campbell , under the under leadership of Alasdair Mac Colla . Glencairn 's rising gained some support from Lowland Scottish lords and at its height had 3 @,@ 500 infantry and 1 @,@ 500 cavalry . The forces under Montrose 's command reached about the same numbers of infantry , but were short of heavy artillery suitable for siege warfare and had only a small force of cavalry , about 300 , supplied from the estate of the Earls of Huntly . 
 = = = Covenanter navies = = = 
 During the Bishops ' Wars the king attempted to blockade Scotland , disrupting trade and the transport of returning troops from the continent . The king planned amphibious assaults from England on the east coast and from Ireland to the west , but they failed to materialise . Scottish privateers took English prizes and the Covenanters planned to fit out Dutch ships with Scottish and Dutch crews to join the naval war effort . After the Covenanters allied with the English Parliament they established two patrol squadrons for the Atlantic and North Sea coasts , known collectively as the " Scotch Guard " . These patrols guarded against Royalist attempts to move men , money and munitions and raids on Scottish shipping , particularly from ships based in Wexford and Dunkirk . They consisted mainly of small English warships , controlled by the Commissioners of the Navy based in London , but it always relied heavily on Scottish officers and revenues , and after 1646 , the West Coast squadron became much more a Scottish force . The Scottish navy was unable to withstand the English fleet that accompanied the army led by Cromwell that conquered Scotland in 1649 – 51 . The Scottish ships and crews were divided among the Commonwealth fleet . 
 = = = Fortifications = = = 
 During the English occupation of Scotland under the Commonwealth , fortresses in the style of the trace italienne were built . These were polygonal in plan with triangular bastions , as at Ayr , Inverness and Leith . Twenty smaller forts were built as far away as Orkney and Stornoway . Control of the Highlands was secured by strongpoints at Inverlocky and Inverness . These were built at a massive cost in money and manpower . The citadel at Inverness , begun in 1652 and using stone shipped from as far away as Aberdeen , had cost £ 50 @,@ 0000 when it was still unfinished by 1655 . Inverlochy had a garrison of 1 @,@ 000 and from 1654 became the centre for a new administrative region of Lochaber , made up of three of the most remote and lawless shires . 
 = = Later seventeenth century = = 
 = = = Restoration army = = = 
 At the Restoration the Privy Council established a force of an unknown number of infantry regiments and a few troops of horse . The Commonwealth fortresses were abandoned , but garrisons were placed in Edinburgh , Stirling , Dumbarton and Blackness castles . There were attempts to found a national militia on the English model . The standing army was mainly employed in the suppression of Covenanter rebellions and the guerilla war undertaken by the Cameronians in the East . Units included a regiment of foot guards , later known as the Scots Guards and Le Regiment of Douglas , formed and serving in France since 1633 , it returned , eventually became the Royal Regiment of Foot . Pikemen became less important in the late seventeenth century and after the introduction of the socket bayonet , a process complete by 1702 , disappeared altogether , while matchlock muskets were replaced by the more reliable flintlock . Three troops of Scots Dragoons were raised in 1678 and another three were added to make The Royal Regiment of Scots Dragoons in 1681 . On the eve of the Glorious Revolution the standing army in Scotland was about 3 @,@ 000 men in various regiments and another 268 veterans in the major garrison towns , at an annual cost of about £ 80 @,@ 000 . After the Glorious Revolution the Scots were drawn into King William II 's continental wars , beginning with the Nine Years ' War in Flanders ( 1689 – 97 ) . 
 = = = Restoration navy = = = 
 Although Scottish seamen received protection against arbitrary impressment onto English men @-@ of @-@ war under Charles II , a fixed quota of conscripts for the Royal Navy was levied from the sea @-@ coast burghs during the second half of the seventeenth century . Royal Navy patrols were now found in Scottish waters even in peacetime , such as the small ship @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line HMS Kingfisher , which bombarded Carrick Castle during the Earl of Argyll 's rebellion in 1685 . Scotland went to war against the Dutch and their allies in the Second ( 1665 – 67 ) and Third Anglo @-@ Dutch Wars ( 1672 – 74 ) as an independent kingdom . Scottish captains , at least 80 and perhaps 120 , took letters of marque , and privateers played a major part in the naval conflict of the wars . 
 By 1697 the English Royal Navy had 323 warships , while Scotland was still dependent on merchantman and privateers . In the 1690s , two separate schemes for larger naval forces were put in motion . As usual , the larger part was played by the merchant community rather than the government . The first was the Darien Scheme to found a Scottish colony in Spanish controlled America . It was undertaken by the Company of Scotland , who created a fleet of five ships , including the Caledonia and the St. Andrew , built or chartered in Holland and Hamburg . It sailed to Isthmus of Darien in 1698 , but the venture failed and only one ship returned to Scotland . In the same period it was decided to establish a professional navy for the protection of commerce in home waters during the Nine Years ' War , with three purpose @-@ built warships bought from English shipbuilders in 1696 . These were the Royal William , a 32 @-@ gun fifth rate , and two smaller ships , the Royal Mary and the Dumbarton Castle , each of 24 guns and generally described as frigates . After the Act of Union in 1707 , the Scottish Navy merged with that of England and the three vessels of the small Royal Scottish Navy were transferred to the Royal Navy . 
 = = Early eighteenth century = = 
 = = = Royal army = = = 
 By the time of the act of Union , the Kingdom of Scotland had a standing army of seven units of infantry , two of horse and one troop of Horse Guards , besides varying levels of fortress artillery in the garrison castles of Edinburgh , Dumbarton , and Stirling . Their role was of such importance that the Scots Parliament forced Queen Anne to give royal assent to the controversial 1704 Act of Security by threatening to withdraw Scottish forces back out of the Confederate armies . The new British Army created by the Act of Union in 1707 incorporated existing Scottish regiments , such as the Scots Guards , The Royal Scots 1st of Foot , King 's Own Scottish Borderers 25th of Foot , The Cameronians 26th of Foot , Scots Greys and the Royal Scots Fusiliers 21st of Foot . The new armed forces were controlled by the War Office and Admiralty from London . During this period , Scottish soldiers and sailors were instrumental in supporting the expansion of the British Empire and became involved in international conflicts , including the War of the Spanish Succession ( 1702 – 13 ) , the Quadruple Alliance ( 1718 – 20 ) , wars with Spain ( 1727 – 29 ) and ( 1738 – 48 ) and the War of the Austrian Succession ( 1740 – 48 ) . The first official Highland regiment to be raised for the British army was the Black Watch , the 43rd ( later 42nd ) regiment , in 1740 . It marked the beginning of a major role for Highlanders within the British military structure , but the growth of Highland regiments was delayed by the 1745 Jacobite Rebellion and would not begin in earnest until the late 1750s . 
 = = = Jacobite armies = = = 
 The bulk of Jacobite armies were made up of Highlanders , serving in clan regiments . They were 70 per cent of the forces in the 1715 rebellion and over 90 per cent of those in 1745 . Most were forced to join by their clan chiefs , landlords or feudal superiors and desertion was a major problem during campaigns . The Jacobites suffered from a lack of trained officers . A typical clan regiment was made up of a small minority of gentlemen ( tacksmen ) who would bear the clan name . The clan gentlemen formed the front ranks of the unit and were more heavily armed than their impoverished tenants who made up the bulk of the regiment . Because they served in the front ranks , the gentlemen suffered higher proportional casualties than the common clansman . The Jacobites often started campaigns poorly armed . In the rising of 1745 , at the Battle of Prestonpans , some only had swords , Lochaber axes , pitchforks and scythes , but arms tended to become more conventional as the campaigns progressed . Only officers and gentlemen were equipped with a broadsword , <unk> and pistol . After the Battle of Culloden in 1746 , the Hanoverian commander the Duke of Cumberland reported that there were 2 @,@ 320 firelocks recovered from the battlefield , but only 190 broadswords . 
 = 1949 Pacific hurricane season = 
 The 1949 Pacific hurricane season was the first hurricane season in the Eastern Pacific hurricane database . Six tropical cyclones were known to have existed during the season , of which the first formed on June 11 and the final dissipated on September 30 . Another tropical cyclone had formed within the basin in 1949 , but was included in the Atlantic hurricane database , had it been classified operationally in the Eastern Pacific basin , would have tallied the overall season to seven tropical cyclones . In addition , there were two tropical cyclones that attained hurricane status , but none of them reached major hurricane intensity ( Category 3 or higher on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale ) . Tropical Storm Three threatened the Baja California Peninsula , while an unnumbered hurricane crossed into the Atlantic , later becoming the 1949 Texas hurricane . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 Tropical cyclones were recorded in the Eastern Pacific best track database for the first time in 1949 . Although official records began in the Eastern Pacific during this year , the season saw the first officially recorded Atlantic @-@ Pacific crossover tropical cyclone . This season was also beginning of a cool phase for the Pacific Decadal Oscillation . 
 Only six tropical cyclones were observed in the Eastern Pacific during this season , which is well below the 1949 – 2006 average of 13 per year . Of the six tropical cyclones , two only attained hurricane status . In addition , none of the tropical cyclones became a major hurricane , which is Category 3 or greater on Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . Although it is an oddity for no major hurricanes to occur during a season since the satellite era began , nearly all hurricane seasons during this time period lacked a major hurricane . However , it is likely that other tropical cyclones in the Eastern Pacific basin in 1949 went operationally unnoticed , due to lack of modern technology such as satellite imagery . In addition to the six tropical cyclones , another tropical cyclone developed in the Eastern Pacific basin , but was included in the Atlantic basin hurricane database , rather than the Eastern Pacific . Most of the seven tropical cyclones did not differentiate in intensity during the duration , with the exception of Hurricane Six . The first two tropical cyclones of the season formed in quick succession in during mid @-@ June , however , the months of July and August went dormant in terms of tropical cyclogenesis . The last five tropical cyclones , including the additional storm , also developed in a quick sequence , all of which forming from in a span of 17 days . By October 1 , all tropical cyclonic activity had completely ceased . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 The first tropical storm of the season formed 75 mi ( 120 km ) south @-@ southwest of Puerto Vallarta on June 11 . Tropical Storm One headed out to sea without intensifying further than 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . Heading west @-@ northwestward , the storm dissipated on July 12 , centered roughly halfway between Socorro Island and Cabo San Lucas . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Two = = = 
 Tropical Storm Two was first observed 440 mi ( 705 km ) southwest of Zihuatanejo on June 16 . While remaining far west of the Mexican coast , Two peaked as a 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) tropical storm . No change in intensity occurred , and the tropical storm dissipated southwest of Baja California at 1200 UTC June 23 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Three = = = 
 After no tropical cyclone activity in July and August , the third tropical storm formed offshore of southwestern Mexico on September 3 . Like the previous two tropical cyclone , this storm had a peak of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , and did not intensify further . Tropical Storm Three headed northwestward , and began paralleling the coast of Baja California . On September 8 , Tropical Storm Three turned abruptly south @-@ southwestward , and dissipated by the next day . The outer rainbands of this system were expected to bring squally weather over the Baja California Peninsula ; instead , this storm turned away without causing any impact . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 The first hurricane of the season developed on September 9 while located 160 mi ( 260 km ) east @-@ southeast of Socorro Island , and tied Hurricane Six as the strongest tropical cyclone of the season . The hurricane slowly turned northward , and made landfall in Baja California Sur with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) on September 11 . Hurricane Six dissipated over Baja California about 10 hours later . Since Four was expected to bring high waves and rough seas to Southern California , all marine operates and other interests in the region were alerted . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Five = = = 
 The fifth tropical storm was observed offshore of Mexico , on September 17 . Tropical Storm Five had no change in intensity past a 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) tropical storm , similar to Tropical Storms One , Two , and Three . While paralleling the coast of Mexico , Tropical Storm Five passed only 75 mi ( 120 km ) southwest of Manzanillo . The tropical storm curved northwestward on September 18 , and headed out to sea . The system dissipated 135 mi ( 215 km ) west @-@ southwest of Islas Marías on September 19 . 
 = = = Unnumbered tropical depression = = = 
 In addition to the six tropical cyclones in the basin , another system September 27 , although it was not included with the records in the East Pacific , the storm had been listed as Hurricane Ten in the Atlantic basin . Forming south of El Salvador , the tropical depression traveled slowly north . Failing to intensify past a beyond depression status , the system made landfall near the border of Guatemala and El Salvador on September 28 . Moving inland , the storm did not weaken as it crossed through Guatemala and Mexico . The system quickly strengthened once over the Bay of Campeche , becoming a tropical storm . After entering the bay , the storm intensified into a hurricane , and eventually made landfall in Texas as a Category 2 hurricane . This hurricane was the first officially recorded Atlantic @-@ Pacific crossover tropical cyclone . Overall , monetary losses totaled $ 10 million ( 1949 USD ) and two deaths were attributed to the storm . 
 = = = Hurricane Six = = = 
 A tropical depression was first observed 300 mi ( 485 km ) southeast of Socorro Island on September 29 . The depression rapidly intensified , and was a Category 1 hurricane only twelve hours after being first observed . Peaking as an 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) Category 1 hurricane , Hurricane Six tied Hurricane Four as the strongest tropical cyclone of the season . After reaching its peak intensity , Hurricane Six rapidly weakened , and passed 70 mi ( 125 km ) southeast of Socorro Island with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Further weakening occurred , and the storm had dissipated on September 30 . 
 = Arnold Fothergill = 
 Arnold James Fothergill ( 26 August 1854 – 1 August 1932 ) was an English professional cricketer who played first @-@ class cricket for Somerset and the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) in a career which spanned from 1870 until 1892 . A left @-@ arm fast @-@ medium pace bowler , he appeared for England in two Test matches in 1889 . 
 Fothergill began his career as a club professional in the north east of England . He joined Somerset as one of their first professionals in 1880 , but was forced to miss most of 1881 while he qualified for the county . He was the most productive bowler for the county in their first two years of first @-@ class cricket , but the emergence of E. W. Bastard , and later Ted Tyler and Sammy Woods , limited his opportunities with the club . He joined the ground staff at Lord 's Cricket Ground in 1882 , and played for the MCC until 1892 , also appearing at Lord 's for representative sides . 
 In the English winter of 1888 – 89 , he was chosen to tour South Africa with the MCC , and played in two matches which were later designated as Test matches , though Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack described them as been " arguably not even first @-@ class . " He took 119 first @-@ class wickets during his career , of which eight came in his two Tests . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Arnold James Fothergill was born on 26 August 1854 in Newcastle upon Tyne , Northumberland . He began his cricket career with Northumberland Cricket Club , a private club which was a precursor to the county team . He appeared as a professional for the side from 1870 until 1879 , during which time he was also employed by Benwell High Cross Cricket Club in 1870 and 1871 , and Manchester Cricket Club in 1879 , before moving to Somerset in 1880 . 
 = = Somerset professional = = 
 = = = Second @-@ class cricket = = = 
 Somerset County Cricket Club was founded in 1875 , and although they initially struggled financially , Fothergill and Alfred Brooks were employed as the club 's first professionals in 1880 . Fothergill played his first recorded match for the county in July of that year , facing a team of sixteen men from Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , taking thirteen wickets in the match . Throughout 1880 , he was regularly Somerset 's leading wicket @-@ taker in their matches ; he collected five wickets in an innings against the Marylebone Cricket Club twice , Hertfordshire , and Leicestershire . In 1881 , Fothergill was included in the Somerset team to face Kent in Bath . The Kent captain , Richard Thornton objected to Fothergill 's presence , correctly pointing out that he was not qualified to play for Somerset . As a result , Fothergill was removed from the side , and did not appear for the side in county cricket again that season , while he served his qualification . He did appear once for the county , against the MCC , taking four wickets in the first innings , and scoring 47 runs as an opening batsman . 
 = = = First @-@ class cricket = = = 
 In 1882 , Fothergill joined the ground staff at Lord 's Cricket Ground , and made his first @-@ class debut for the MCC against Derbyshire in May . Bowling unchanged in the first innings , he claimed five wickets for 31 runs , and then scored the highest score of his first @-@ class career , 74 runs , in a large victory for his side . The following month , he featured for Somerset in what is generally considered to be their first match of the first @-@ class cricket , against Lancashire . Somerset were heavily beaten in the match , during which Fothergill took three wickets and scored three runs . That summer , he was selected to appear for the professional " Players " against the amateur " Gentlemen " in the prestigious annual fixture at Lord 's , in which he had little impact as the Gentlemen won by eight wickets . In all , Fothergill played fourteen first @-@ class matches in 1882 , claiming 44 wickets at an average of 22 @.@ 02 , and taking five wickets in an innings twice . He was Somerset 's leading wicket @-@ taker during the season , taking twice as many wickets as the next most effective bowler , Charles Winter . 
 Fothergill 's first match in 1883 was in a representative match , playing for the South against the North . The South , for whom Fothergill was the only player to score double figures in each innings , lost the match . He then played exclusively with the MCC until the end of July , when Somerset 's fixtures began . Having collected five wickets in an innings for the MCC against Oxford University , Fothergill repeated the feat twice that season for Somerset , taking five for 23 against Gloucestershire , and then achieving his best first @-@ class bowling figures of six for 43 against Hampshire . In the latter match , he also took four wickets in the second innings , giving him ten wickets in the match , the only occasion he achieved the feat in first @-@ class cricket . He played one further match towards the end of the 1883 season , against that year 's " Champion County " , Nottinghamshire . The MCC won the game by 121 runs ; in the first innings , Fothergill was not required to bowl as Nottinghamshire were bowled out for 23 , with six players scoring ducks , and he took five for 30 in the second innings . Fothergill was once more Somerset 's leading wicket @-@ taker during 1883 , taking 27 of his 37 first @-@ class wickets for the county that year . His bowling average of 14 @.@ 72 was his best during an English season . 
 During the following season , Fothergill only appeared once for Somerset , in match against Kent early in the season . He took four for 87 in the match , which was his final first @-@ class appearance for the county . Fothergill was again selected to play for the South against the North , but bowled just three overs in the match , without taking a wicket . The remainder of his notable appearances that season were made for the MCC , though few were considered first @-@ class . He performed well in matches against Wiltshire and Leicestershire , taking eleven wickets in each match , including seven for 62 in the second innings against Leicestershire , but neither match had first @-@ class status . In 1885 , he enjoyed his best match for the South , taking four wickets in each innings as the North were defeated by nine wickets . The majority of his cricket from 1884 until 1886 was made for the MCC , although he did appear four times in 1886 for Somerset , which had been stripped of its first @-@ class status . In contrast , in 1887 and 1888 , he played almost exclusively for the county , appearing just three times for the MCC . Somerset , who had relied on the bowling of Fothergill in the early 1880s , were spearheaded by E. W. Bastard , Ted Tyler and Sammy Woods in the late 1880s , and Fothergill was rarely needed to bowl many overs . Despite this , he was presented with a bat during 1888 , a reward usually given to batsmen who had scored a century . 
 = = Test cricketer = = 
 During the English winter of 1888 – 89 , the MCC sent a touring team to South Africa . Organised by Major Gardner Warton , the original itinerary only featured " odds " matches , in which an 11 @-@ player MCC team faced opposition sides including 15 , 18 or 22 players , depending on their perceived strength . In his book , A History of Cricket , Harry Altham describes that the quality of the touring party " was about that of a weak county . " Fothergill was selected as part of the side , despite not having played a first @-@ class match since May 1887 . The majority of the wickets during the tour were taken by Lancashire 's spinner , Johnny Briggs , who took almost 300 , but Fothergill was heavily used as a bowler , and claimed 119 wickets at an average of 6 @.@ 89 . Altham suggests that the ease of the touring side 's victories justifies the selection of a comparatively weak side . As the tour continued , there were calls for an even @-@ strength contest , with the English side facing an 11 @-@ player South African side . Two such matches were arranged , but were considered no different from the other matches during the tour , being advertised as Major Warton 's XI v South Africa XI . The matches were later granted Test match status , although Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack commented that , " it was never intended , or considered necessary , to take out a representative English team for a first trip to the Cape . " 
 In the first Test , Fothergill opened the bowling with Briggs , and bowled economically , conceding 15 runs from his 24 four @-@ ball overs . He only took one wicket in the innings , and was noted more for his batting later in the day . Having bowled South Africa out for 84 , England rallied from 103 for nine due to a 45 @-@ run partnership for the tenth wicket between Fothergill and Basil Grieve . Batting at number eleven , Fothergill scored 32 runs , second only to opening batsman Bobby Abel . In South Africa 's second innings , Fothergill was used as first @-@ change bowler , and took four wickets for 19 , his best figures in the two Test matches . South Africa scored 129 runs before being bowled out , and England scored the 67 runs required for victory with a day of the match remaining . 
 England dominated the second Test , largely due to the bowling of Briggs . Batting first , England scored 292 runs , of which Abel contributed 120 . Fothergill claimed the first South African wicket , Albert Rose @-@ Innes at the end of the first day , but only claimed two more in the match , as Briggs took fifteen wickets on the second day to help England to an innings and 202 @-@ run victory . 
 Fothergill 's two Test appearances were the only ones of his career , and were also his final first @-@ class matches . In all , he took 119 first @-@ class wickets at an average of 18 @.@ 18 . His highest score was the 74 runs he scored on his debut . 
 = = Later life and career = = 
 After returning from South Africa , Fothergill played occasionally for the MCC , and three further times for Somerset , but with little merit . He made his final appearance for Somerset in 1889 , against Staffordshire ; he took 157 wickets for the county in total , of which 57 came in first @-@ class matches . His last match for the MCC was three years later , against Llandudno Cricket Club . In his obituary , Wisden suggest that he returned to Tyneside at the end of his professional cricket career . He died in Sunderland on 1 August 1932 . 
 = Death and state funeral of Raúl Alfonsín = 
 Raúl Alfonsín was the president of Argentina from 1983 to 1989 . He died on March 31 , 2009 , aged 82 . He had lung cancer and died at his home ; a massive candlelight vigil took place in the vicinity of it . Vice president Julio Cobos , the acting president at the time , arranged three days of national mourning and a state funeral at the Palace of the Argentine National Congress . Alfonsín was seen by 40 @,@ 000 people and the senior politicians of the country ; people from other countries also voiced their respect for him . A military escort took his coffin to the La Recoleta Cemetery , and left him at the pantheon for the veterans of the Revolution of the Park . 
 = = Health and death = = 
 Alfonsín had lung cancer for almost a year before his death , which led to pneumonia . His medic Alejandro Sandler explained that his health had worsened at several points , which were followed by brief recoveries . In his last days he was visited by vice president Julio Cobos and monsignor Justo Laguna , who gave him the Anointing of the Sick . He received home care , as Sandler preferred him to stay with his family . The president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner was out of the country and phoned several times ; Ricardo Alfonsín called her at 17 : 00 and informed her of his father 's health . He died on March 31 , 2009 , at 20 : 30 ; Sandler announced it at 21 : 03 . Alfonsín was sleeping at the moment , next to his family . Cobos was the first politician to arrive at his home . 
 = = Funeral = = 
 When the first news of the death of Alfonsín were released , the vicinity of his house at the Santa Fe avenue was filled by hundreds of people , who started a Candlelight vigil . The multitude included friends , neighbors and political supporters . The politicians Felipe Solá and Ricardo Gil <unk> attended the meeting as well . The balconies of nearby houses were filled with flowers and banners . 
 The president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner was out of the country at the moment , and although she arranged an early return , she could not return to the country in time for the funeral . As a result , the vice president Julio Cobos arranged the state funeral of Alfonsín , alongside Eduardo Fellner ( president of the Chamber of deputies ) and José <unk> ( acting president of the Senate ) . His widow , former First Lady of Argentina María Lorenza Barreneche , was unable to attend her husband 's public state funeral due to her own declining health . 
 As a former Argentine president , his body was displayed at the Blue Hall of the Palace of the Argentine National Congress . He also set three days of national mourning , from March 31 to April 2 . Daniel Scioli , governor of the Buenos Aires Province ( birthplace of Alfonsín ) , also announced a provincial mourning . Almost a thousand people attended , and at some moments they sung the Argentine National Anthem . 
 The people were allowed to enter to the Congress on April 1 , 10 : 00 . Initially , it was intended to keep the Congress open until 20 : 00 , but the number of people attending it forced to delay it for the morning of April 2 . The event was attended by the former presidents Carlos Menem , Fernando de la Rúa , Eduardo Duhalde and Néstor Kirchner , all the members of the Supreme Court of Argentina , mayor Mauricio Macri , governor Daniel Scioli , the president of Uruguay Tabaré Vázquez and several other politicians . The Congress was visited by almost 40 @,@ 000 people . It was the largest state funeral in Argentina since the death of Juan Perón in 1974 . 
 There was a ceremony afterwards with speeches from politicians from Alfonsín 's tenure and from the Kirchner administration . The ceremony was aired in <unk> nacional . It was followed by a mass given by José María <unk> , archbishop of Santa Fe . Finally , a procession in the Callao Avenue with a military escort took the corpse to the La Recoleta Cemetery . People threw flowers to the coffin , fly Argentine and radical flags , and sung the national anthem . He was left in the pantheon for the veterans of the Revolution of the Park , until he got a special one for himself . 
 Twenty @-@ two Argentine bishops at the Holy See held a mass for Alfonsín as well . It was at the <unk> of St. John Lateran , and was attended by the Argentine ambassador Juan Pablo Cafiero , the Italian monsignor Giuseppe <unk> and the Argentine monsignor Guillermo Karcher . The bishops met Pope Benedict XVI the following day . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 The living former presidents of Argentina sent their condolences for Alfonsín . Carlos Menem said that his death was a great loss for democracy . He also wrote an editorial for the La Nación newspaper , titled " Un viejo <unk> <unk> a un <unk> " ( Spanish : An old adversary salutes a friend ) , mirroring the famous quotation of the radical leader Ricardo Balbín during the funeral of Perón . Fernando de la Rúa said that " he fought all his life for politics and democracy . He raised up the values of democracy . Respect and affection were always present in him " . Eduardo Duhalde described him as a family friend , and said Argentina lost a great man . Néstor Kirchner praised the trial of the Juntas . He also received condolences of José <unk> , Patricio Aylwin and Julio María Sanguinetti , contemporary presidents of Brazil , Chile and Uruguay . The governments of Brazil , Chile , Colombia , France , Mexico , Paraguay , Peru , Spain , United States and Uruguay also sent messages of condolences . 
 Ricardo López Murphy , minister of economy of president Fernando de la Rúa , said that Alfonsín was " the man who fought for our democracy and the strengthening of institutions , during a time of conflicts and polarizations that our society was merged into " . Cristian <unk> , legislator of the Republican Proposal , said that " Alfonsín was the main actor of the return of democracy to Argentina . He was a <unk> of work , responsibility and patriotism " . Gerardo Morales said that " when we were young in 1983 and sang ' we are life , we are peace ' , it was more than a slogan , it was a synthesis of our hopes : do not suffer more persecutions , live in democracy , in freedom and peace . We were part of the collective project led by Alfonsín " . Elisa <unk> pointed that she had political disputes with him , but respected him nonetheless . Julio César <unk> , judge of the trial of the juntas , hoped that Alfonsín would be remembered as a great democrat . Daniel Scioli , governor of the Buenos Aires province , praised that he died with a complete peace of mind . Mauricio Macri , mayor of Buenos Aires , considered that he must have died in peace , after fulfilling his goals . 
 = Baseball Hall of Fame balloting , 2010 = 
 Elections to the Baseball Hall of Fame for 2010 proceeded according to rules enacted in 2001 and revised in 2007 . As always the Baseball Writers ' Association of America ( BBWAA ) voted by mail to select from a ballot of recent players ; one player was elected . In keeping with the 2007 reform , one Veterans Committee convened to consider a ballot of managers and umpires , another to consider a ballot of executives ; one manager and one umpire were elected . 
 A Veterans Committee election to select from older players had been held in the 2009 cycle . The next election for players whose careers began in 1943 or later was scheduled for the 2011 class of inductees while the next for pre @-@ 1943 players was scheduled for the 2014 class . 
 However , a reform of the Veterans Committee ( s ) was announced in July 2010 . Henceforth long @-@ retired players and all non @-@ playing personnel will be considered on a single ballot , with the ballot restricted by the " Era " in which candidates made their greatest contributions . The next Veterans Committee elections , held in December 2010 as part of the 2011 induction cycle , considered only figures from what the Hall calls the " Expansion Era " — 1973 and later . Candidates from the " Golden Era " ( 1947 – 1972 ) were considered in the balloting for 2012 , and candidates from the " Pre @-@ Integration Era " ( 1871 – 1946 ) will be considered in the balloting for 2013 . Subsequently the same three committee meetings will occur in rotation . 
 Andre Dawson , Doug Harvey , and Whitey Herzog were selected as members of the Baseball Hall of Fame . 
 = = BBWAA election = = 
 The BBWAA was again authorized to elect players active in 1990 or later , but not after 2004 ; the ballot included candidates from the 2009 ballot who received at least 5 % of the vote but were not elected , along with selected players , chosen by a screening committee , whose last appearance was in 2004 . All 10 @-@ year members of the BBWAA were eligible to vote . 
 Results of the 2010 election by the BBWAA were announced on January 6 . The ballot consisted of 26 players , including 11 candidates returning from the 2009 ballot ( a record low , displacing the previous year 's record of 13 ) . 
 539 ballots were cast ( including five ballots which supported no candidates ) , with 405 votes required for election . A total of 3 @,@ 057 individual votes were cast , an average of 5 @.@ 67 per ballot . Those candidates who received less than 5 % of the vote will not appear on future BBWAA ballots , but may eventually be considered by the Veterans Committee . 
 Candidates who were eligible for the first time are indicated here with a † . The candidate who received at least 75 % of the vote and was elected is indicated in bold italics ; candidates who have since been selected in subsequent elections are indicated in italics . The candidates who received less than 5 % of the vote , thus becoming ineligible for future BBWAA consideration , are indicated with a * . 
 The newly @-@ eligible candidates included 11 All @-@ Stars , who were selected a combined total of 51 times – a notable decrease from 2009 , when 22 All @-@ Stars became eligible . Among the first @-@ ballot candidates were 12 @-@ time All @-@ Stars Roberto Alomar and Barry Larkin , 7 @-@ time All @-@ Star Edgar Martínez , and 5 @-@ time All @-@ Stars Andrés Galarraga and Fred McGriff . With respect to major end @-@ of @-@ season awards , the new field contained one Cy Young Award winner ( Pat Hentgen ) , one MVP ( Larkin ) and one Rookie of the Year ( Eric Karros ) . Alomar won ten Gold Gloves at second base ( the most for any second baseman ) . Robin Ventura received six at third base . Larkin holds the record for most Silver Slugger Awards by a shortstop ( nine ) . Edgar Martínez is tied for the record for most Outstanding Designated Hitter Awards ( with David Ortiz ) at five ( the award has since been renamed the Edgar Martínez Award ) . 
 Players who were eligible for the first time who were not included on the ballot were : Paul Abbott , Andy Ashby , Danny Bautista , Darren Bragg , Brian Boehringer , Dave Burba , Greg <unk> , Mike Fetters , Brook Fordyce , Karim García , Tom Goodwin , Ricky Gutiérrez , Jimmy Haynes , Sterling Hitchcock , Curt <unk> , <unk> Manzanillo , Brent Mayne , Mark McLemore , Scott Service , Chris Stynes , Scott Sullivan , Todd Van Poppel , John Vander Wal , Fernando Viña , and Turk Wendell . 
 For the first time in the history of BBWAA voting , two players fell shy of election by fewer than 10 votes . <unk> , on the ballot for the 13th time , fell 5 votes shy ; he gained 62 votes from his 2009 total . Alomar fell 8 votes short in his first appearance on the ballot , and received the highest percentage ever for a first @-@ time candidate who was not elected at that time . Both would be elected in 2011 . 
 = = Veterans Committee elections = = 
 The Veterans Committee election process was revised in July 2007 . With the 2007 rules changes , the composite ballot was split into two separate ballots — one for managers and umpires and the other for executives . Also , the voting membership of the Committee , which previously included all living members of the Hall , was reduced to include just a handful of those members , plus additional executives and sportswriters . Voting for both the managers / umpires and executives ballots , which now takes place prior to inductions in even @-@ numbered years , began with the 2008 class of inductees , when two managers and three executives were elected . To be eligible , managers and umpires must be retired for at least five years , or for at least six months if they are age 65 or older , while executives must be either retired or at least age 65 . 
 A Historical Overview Committee of sportswriters appointed by the BBWAA 's Board of Directors met to develop a ballot of 10 managers and umpires . The managers / umpires list was then submitted to a panel composed of Hall of Fame members , executives and veteran media members for a final vote . A separate ballot of 10 executives was developed by a panel including executives , players and writers , which was the same committee which finally voted in that area . The final ballots were released in November 2009 . Each panel member was allowed to vote for up to four individuals on each ballot , and each candidate who received 75 % of the vote from either panel was elected ; therefore , a maximum of five inductions were possible from each ballot . Voting was conducted at baseball 's winter meetings in Indianapolis on December 6 , 2009 , with the results announced the next day ; as was the case with the 2008 class of inductees , the Committee met to discuss the candidates , although the previous three elections had been conducted by mail . 
 = = = Managers / umpires ballot = = = 
 The ballot for managers and umpires included eight managers ( designated M ) and two umpires ( designated U ) , with 12 votes required for election . Candidates who received at least 75 % of the vote were elected . Those that were inducted are indicated in bold italics . 
 In contrast with the 2008 election , voters made less of an effort to vote for as many candidates as they were allowed . While at least 58 of the permitted 64 individual votes were cast in 2008 , the number of known individual votes cast in this election was 48 of the possible 64 . ( Vote totals for the five trailing candidates were announced as " less than 3 " , or 0 to 2 . ) Seven of the candidates had been on the preceding ballot in 2008 , with Grimm , Kelly , and O 'Neill appearing for the first time and umpire Cy Rigler dropping off the ballot . Four candidates were living when the final results were announced — Harvey ( age 79 ) , Herzog ( 78 ) , Johnson ( 66 ) , and Kelly ( 59 ) . 
 The election committee , which was announced on the same day as the ballot , included : 
 Hall of Famers : Jim Bunning , Tommy Lasorda , Eddie Murray , Phil Niekro , Tony Pérez , Robin Roberts , Ryne Sandberg , Ozzie Smith , Billy Williams , Dick Williams 
 Executives : Jim Frey , Roland <unk> , Bob Watson 
 Media : Tim Kurkjian , Jack O 'Connell , Tom Verducci 
 Of the 16 members of the election committee , 11 voted for the class of 2008 . The five new voters were all Hall of Famers — Murray , Roberts , Sandberg , Smith , and 2008 inductee Dick Williams . Because of the changes announced for future elections , this was the last meeting of this particular committee . 
 Of the ten candidates for election , Doug Harvey and Whitey Herzog received the 75 % needed to garner induction . 
 = = = Executives ballot = = = 
 On the executives ballot , 9 votes were required for election ; no candidates were elected . 
 As with the other committee , voters in this election made less of an effort to vote for as many candidates as allowed than in the 2008 election . The number of individual votes cast went down to a greater degree than in the managers / umpires balloting — only 28 of the possible 48 individual votes were known to have been cast in this election , compared to 44 in the 2008 voting . ( Vote totals for the six trailing candidates were announced as " less than 3 " , or 0 to 2 . ) 
 Of the 10 candidates , six ( Fetzer , <unk> , Kauffman , McHale , Miller , and Paul ) were holdovers from the 2008 ballot . Autry , Breadon , and Ruppert appeared on the ballot for the first time ; White , who was on the 2007 composite ballot but was not on the 2008 ballot , returned for 2010 . Buzzie Bavasi , who died in the intervening period , was on the 2008 ballot but not the 2010 ballot . Two candidates were living when the results were announced — Miller , age 92 , and White , age 75 . 
 The election committee , which was announced on the same day as the ballot , included : 
 Hall of Famers : Robin Roberts , Tom Seaver 
 Executives : 
 Retired : John Harrington 
 Active : Jerry Bell , Bill DeWitt , Bill Giles , David Glass , Andy MacPhail , John Schuerholz 
 Media : Rick Hummel , Hal McCoy , Phil Pepe 
 Of the 12 members of the election committee , eight voted for the class of 2008 . The new voters were Hall of Famers Roberts and Seaver , executive Schuerholz , and sportswriter Pepe . As with the managers / umpires voting committee , this was the final meeting for the executives voting committee because of the voting changes announced in July 2010 . 
 = = J. G. Taylor Spink Award = = 
 The J. G. Taylor Spink Award has been presented by the BBWAA at the annual summer induction ceremonies since 1962 . It recognizes a sportswriter " for meritorious contributions to baseball writing " . The recipients are not members of the Hall of the Fame , but instead are featured in a permanent exhibit at the National Baseball Museum . 
 Three final candidates , selected by a three @-@ member BBWAA committee , were named on July 14 , 2009 at Busch Stadium in St. Louis in conjunction with All @-@ Star Game activities : Bill Madden , national baseball columnist for the New York Daily News , Bob Elliott of the Toronto Sun and Joe <unk> , retired from the Boston Herald . All 10 @-@ year members of the BBWAA were eligible to cast ballots in voting conducted by mail in November . 
 On December 8 at baseball 's winter meetings , Madden was announced as the recipient . Madden , who started his career in 1969 with United Press International before joining the Daily News in 1978 , received 226 votes out of the 452 ballots cast , with Elliott receiving 149 votes and <unk> receiving 76 ; one blank ballot was submitted . 
 = = Ford C. Frick Award = = 
 The Ford C. Frick Award has been presented at the induction ceremonies annually since 1978 to a broadcaster . Recipients are not considered to be members of the Hall , but are permanently recognized in an exhibit at the museum . After the 2007 changes to the Veterans Committee , the winner ( if living ) is no longer an automatic member of that body . To be eligible , an active or retired broadcaster must have a minimum of 10 years of continuous major league broadcast service with a ball club , a network , or a combination of the two . 
 Ten finalists were announced in January 2010 . In accordance with guidelines established in 2003 , seven were chosen by a committee composed of the living recipients , along with additional broadcasting historians and columnists . Three additional candidates were selected from a list of candidates through results of voting by fans conducted in December 2009 on the Hall 's Facebook page . The recipient was announced in February following a vote by the same committee which selected the first group of finalists . They based the selection on the following criteria : longevity ; continuity with a club ; honors , including national assignments such as the World Series and All @-@ Star Games ; and popularity with fans . 
 Jon Miller , radio announcer for the San Francisco Giants , television play @-@ by @-@ play announcer for ESPN Sunday Night Baseball and regular @-@ season and postseason announcer on ESPN Radio , was announced as the 2010 Ford C. Frick Award winner on February 2 , 2010 . Beginning his career in 1974 with the Oakland Athletics , he is best known for his radio work with the Baltimore Orioles from 1983 through 1996 , and the Giants from 1997 to the present . Before joining ESPN in 1990 , he worked with NBC from 1986 through 1989 . He also worked with The Baseball Network . 
 = History of Harvard Extension School = 
 The history of the Harvard Extension School dates back to its founding in 1910 by Abbott Lawrence Lowell . From the beginning , the Harvard Extension School was designed to serve the educational interests and needs of the greater Boston community , but has since extended its academic resources to the public , locally , nationally , and internationally . 
 Growing out of the Lowell Institute , it first became the Commission on University Extension in cooperation with other Boston @-@ area universities , and then eventually became a Harvard @-@ only institution . Early students were able to earn an Associate in Arts degree , which was the equivalent of a bachelor 's degree but which did have a residency requirement . That was later renamed an Adjunct in Arts before finally settling on a bachelor 's degree . The first graduate degree was awarded in 1980 . 
 The Harvard Extension School has been a leader in distance education , offering courses on the radio and television , and even ob board Navy ships . Online education began in the mid @-@ 1980s , and in 2012 the school partnered with <unk> to expand its reach . After 100 years , an estimated 500 @,@ 000 students have taken courses at the Extension School . 
 = = Lowell Institute = = 
 John Lowell , Jr . , a wealthy Boston businessman , became gravely ill during a camel trip across the Egyptian desert and wrote his will on the banks of the Nile River in Cairo . He died on March 4 , 1836 , shortly after arriving in Bombay , India , and his will was executed back in Boston . In it , he set aside half his fortune to be used for " the maintenance and support of Public Lectures to be delivered in said Boston upon philosophy , natural history , and the arts and sciences ... for the promotion of the moral and intellectual and physical instruction or education of the citizens of the said city of Boston . Lowell also directed that lectures be given " on the natural religion showing its conformity to that of our Savior , " " on the historical and internal evidences in favor of Christianity , " and " avoiding all disputed points of faith and ceremony " by directing the lecturers " to the moral doctrines of the Gospel . " 
 The lectures were supposed to be free for those of limited means , and for those who could afford to attend more " abstruse " or " erudite " lectures , the maximum charge was to be no more than the value of two bushels of wheat . In an equally egalitarian measure , the lectures were specifically open to women as well as to men . Some of the " most notable intellectual figures of America and Europe " lectured as part of the program . 
 When the Lowell Institute , the foundation formed to sponsor the lectures , opened in 1839 the initial value of the fund was $ 250 @,@ 000 , or $ 5 @,@ 309 @,@ 180 in 2012 dollars . Annual interest on corpus of $ 18 @,@ 000 , or $ 382 @,@ 260 @.@ 96 in 2012 dollars . By 1897 the fund had more than $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in it , with an annual income of more than $ 50 @,@ 000 . The Institute was to be headed by a single trustee , and one preferably a male descendant of Lowell 's grandfather . The first trustee , John Amory Lowell , administered the trust for more than forty years . According to the terms of the will , each year 10 % of the earnings must be turned into non @-@ expendable capital . 
 = = Early years = = 
 = = = Establishment of the University Extension = = = 
 The lack of an endowment was one reason why Harvard President Charles William Eliot declined to begin a continuing education program in 1902 . " I would strongly disapprove of starting the proposed institute without an endowment , " Eliot said . " It should not be dependent on other institutions . " At a meeting of the Boston City Club in 1909 , A. Lawrence Lowell said that John Lowell , Jr. had wanted found a " popular university " and that in order to fulfill that vision it had to be connected to an already existing educational institution . 
 When A. Lawrence Lowell succeeded his father as trustee of the Lowell Institute in 1900 , he was already a trustee at both Harvard and MIT . He reorganized the lectures first as the School for Industrial <unk> at MIT , and then later renamed it the Lowell Institute School " under the auspices of MIT . " The first year of the School had courses in " the higher branches " of mathematics , and the second year was devoted to theory and practice . Between 30 and 50 men graduated from the program each year . 
 In 1907 the Lowell Institute School began offering courses at Harvard , and the a course on literature had to turn people away because the largest hall Harvard had could only seat 300 persons . Most classes , taught by " the best Harvard professors , " had roughly 20 students , and at " the end of the course the same examination is taken " that Harvard College students would take . 
 Two years later , in 1909 , A. Lawrence Lowell was elected president of Harvard . As president , A. Lawrence Lowell wanted to serve the " many people in our community , who have not been to college , but who have the desire and the aptitude to profit by so much of a college education as , amid the work of earning their living , they are able to obtain . " 
 James Hardy Ropes , the Extension 's first dean , said that " our aim will be to give the young people of Boston who have heretofore been prevented from securing a college education the same instruction they would receive were they undergraduates at Harvard . " He added that " many persons who wish that they had a college education will be able to get gradually an effective substitute for <unk> some respects more effective than the ordinary college education because of the greater eagerness and maturity of such students . " Students under 20 were not permitted , unless they had been graduated from high school , but adults were not required to have a high school diploma . 
 In the spring of 1910 , a few months before the first students would enroll , A. Lawrence Lowell wrote to the Boston School Department asking which courses the University Extension could offer that the School Department would accept as qualifications for a teaching position at Boston Latin or one of the other high schools in the city . In September of that year the School Committee voted to accept the Extension 's Associate of Arts degree as sufficient to teach in a high school . It was noted that elementary school teachers could take the courses in the evenings and qualify for a better paying high school teaching position . The same was true for other young workers as well , Ropes said . 
 When the University Extension was announced it garnered major media coverage in <unk> the Boston Globe declared the Extension program to be " one of the hopeful signs of the <unk> democratization of education , " congratulating the Extension for " the fine opportunities offered to those who hunger and thirst after knowledge . " 
 = = = Early courses and professors = = = 
 Classes , which were " identical with the regular classes offered by Harvard professors , " began at the end of September 1910 . It offered , according to the Boston Globe , " an opportunity for an education ... such has never been obtainable hitherto . " 
 Unlike a similar program at Columbia University , the University Extension courses were taught by " the most experienced teachers that can be secured . " In 1938 there were 28 professors for Commission faculties , including 11 full professors . Early faculty included Charles Townsend Copeland , Theodore Spenser , B.J. Whiting , William Yandell Elliot , Payton S. Wild Jr . , William Langer , Oscar <unk> , Kenneth B. Murdoch , Perry Miller , William <unk> Hocking , Raphael Demos , John Kenneth Galbraith , Frank M. Carpenter . In 1953 there were still 28 professors , and each was paid an extra stipend to teach the classes in addition to their regular course load . 
 Early courses included classes on English literature , principles of economics , psychology , and applied and experimental electricity , with laboratory experiments . It total there were 19 courses offered during the evenings , late afternoons , and Saturdays . A. Lawrence Lowell believed that it was more important to have high quality courses than to offer a larger number of courses , and that there should be a good deal of variety from year to year . In early years business courses were also offered in conjunction with the Chamber of Commerce , but these were not designed to be part of a degree program . 
 They were " all of the same grade as college courses , involving much the same work , tested by examinations , " and would demand " the same amount of work required of a regular college student . " A. Lawrence Lowell said that " there is no use in a university 's trying to run a kindergarten for the public . The teachers are not fitted for such work . Their object should be to give the public the advantage of those riches which exist within their own walls . " 
 The Boston Globe opined that the early program of courses was " a comprehensive course of study ... which should attract the young men and women of metropolitan Boston who deprived though various circumstances of the opportunity to go to college . " The first year of courses saw 863 students enroll , with 395 of them earning certificates . A. Lawrence Lowell , as both president of Harvard and trustee of the Lowell Institute , saw the University Extension as " a trust for the community , for the public , and we are nothing but a successive series of servants to the public . " 
 Ropes ' goal was " to supply a thorough university training to those who have previously been denied one and supply it at a very low figure " while " provid [ ing ] technical or culture instruction for persons who are unable to spend four years in college . " Courses in 1920 cost $ 5 for a one @-@ hour course , $ 10 for a two @-@ hour course , and $ 15 for a three @-@ hour course . The prices were designed to be low enough that " it would not be considered an impediment to anyone who really wanted such instruction " and all courses were offered after working hours . Beginning in 1919 , students were required to be present for 75 % of classes to earn credit . 
 Despite falling revenue due to the Great Depression , A. Lawrence Lowell insisted in 1931 that the will of John Lowell , Jr prevented courses from costing more than two bushels of wheat . As a result , a half year course cost could no more than $ 5 , and a full course no more than $ 10 . Some courses cost as little as $ 2 @.@ 50 . However , increases in salaries required additional funding . To avoid an increase in tuition and the cut in Lowell Institute funding that would follow , an exam fee of $ 5 was added for those who wished to earn a certificate . These prices remained in effect at least into the 1950s . 
 When the National University Extension Association was created in 1915 , Harvard was a charter member . Several years later , when Arthur F. Whittem took over as dean of University Extension , it comprised the Summer School of Arts and Sciences and of Education , the Commission on Extension Courses , and the Special Students office . Several years after retiring , President Lowell wrote that the Extension courses " have given a service to the public ... which seems to me of the utmost importance . " 
 = = = Commission on University Extension = = = 
 The popularity of the courses convinced A. Lawrence Lowell that they should be taken in a more systematic approach . He thus organized a Commission on University Extension with representatives from Harvard , Boston University , Boston College , MIT , Simmons College , Tufts University , Wellesley College , and the School of the Museum of Fine Arts . Members of the Commission were required to be the president of the university , or an executive there . The Commission also received financial support from the Boston Chamber of Commerce , and it was at a meeting of the Education Committee of the Chamber that the Commission 's creation was announced . Courses taken at the Boston Normal School also once counted for credit . 
 While the Commission was formed in 1910 , it " had already lost some of its vitality by the time Dean Ropes retired as chairman in 1922 , and when A. Lawrence Lowell stepped down as president of Harvard in 1933 the Commission had " lost most of its viability as a consortium , " though it still existed in name . From that time forward " it functioned mainly as an umbrella for a program that was run by University Extension at Harvard . " 
 In 1975 the Commission finally stopped functioning , and the University Extension began as a self @-@ sufficient program . The Lowell Institute continued to give a contribution , though instead of paying for operating costs it was used to fund scholarships for local high school students and faculty to take courses . 
 = = Growth of the Extension = = 
 From the beginning of the Commission , Harvard , Tufts and Wellesley all awarded an Associate in Arts degree , which was designed to be equivalent to a bachelor 's degree but did not require an entrance exam or residency at any of the various colleges . It was designed to be " an appropriate reward really within the reach of persons unable " to attend a traditional college program . In 1912 , two years after the Extension program began , nine students were pursuing a degree through it . Two students , John Coulson and Ellen M. <unk> , earned the degree in the first year it was offered , 1913 . According to Ropes , there is then " in operation in Boston a kind of extension college , giving courses which lead to an adequately guarded degree , and administered by the joint action of the neighboring colleges . " 
 During the 1920s professors from Boston and Harvard Universities left the confines of their campuses and traveled to teach courses offsite . While they were primarily aimed at teachers , courses were offered wherever 40 or more students expressed an interest . Professors traveled on a weekly basis to places around New England and as far away as Yonkers , New York . 
 In 1933 the Connecticut legislature considered and passed a bill allowing junior colleges to award associate degrees for two years study . In the 23 years that the University Extension had been in existence , 120 people had already earned an associate degree from Harvard for four years worth of work . A. Lawrence Lowell , upon hearing this news , was " uncharacteristically impassioned " and asked Dean Whitten , " What is the proper word for a person from whom his good name has been <unk> ? For thou art that man . Read the enclosed and you will see that the name of Associate in Arts has been degraded , probably beyond recovery , by wicked , thievish , and otherwise disreputable institutions . " 
 So as to differentiate itself from the lesser degrees being offered elsewhere , President Lowell decided to " invent a new degree which may retain its dignity until somebody by imitation steals it . " On May 8 , 1933 a new degree of Adjunct in Arts was created , and women were allowed to receive it at Harvard , not just at Radcliff College . 
 The Depression had an impact on both enrollment figures of the University Extension and the finances of the Lowell Institute , which necessitated cuts in the number of courses offered . During the post @-@ War era , however , the number of courses offered and enrollments were on the rise , including 12 consecutive years between 1951 and 1963 . 
 In 1936 , a survey found that 56 % of students that year had never attended college before . A similar study in 1952 found that more than half had a profession , notably teaching , more than half had at least two years of college , and 75 % enrolled out of general interest . In 1938 another survey found that 64 % of all Extension graduates went on to do graduate work , a figure much higher than the number of graduates from the College . A total of 60 graduate degrees were awarded to alumni , as were six Ph.D 's . 
 In 1958 , courses cost about $ 200 each , and in 1963 , students could earn a Harvard degree for roughly $ 1 @,@ 000 . This was , according to Dean Reginald H. Phelps , " a bargain that simply can not be matched anywhere in the field of education . " Adding to the value , study spaces , conferences rooms , library facilities , and a dining hall were set up in Lehman Hall for students in 1964 . In addition , there was a television lounge were students could watch the WGBH programs . 
 = = = Television and radio = = = 
 Harvard Extension was a pioneer in distance education . Beginning on December 5 , 1949 , courses were offered on the Lowell Institute 's new radio station . New Englanders could go to college six nights a week at 7 : 30 in their living rooms simply by tuning into courses on psychology , world history , and economics . The first course on radio was by Peter A. Bertocci of Boston University . For 30 years he taught Extension courses , with never fewer than 100 students . He often over 300 students per course and once had over 400 . Over the years Bertocci had at least 7 @,@ 000 Extension students , " surely a record in the annals of Extension at Harvard . " 
 The radio courses proved to be so successful that when the television station WGBH went on the air in October 1951 they began broadcasting an Extension class every weekday at 3 : 30 and 7 : 30 . The first course , offered by Robert G. Albion , was on European Imperialism on Monday and Thursday evenings . In the late 1960s , three of the televised courses were offered in the Deer Island Prison . Students who watched the courses on television could attend six " conferences " and take a mid @-@ term and a final exam at Harvard in order to gain credit for the class . The television classes continued at least through the 1970s . 
 = = = United States Navy = = = 
 In 1960 the United States Navy approached Harvard about adapting the television courses that had been broadcast on WGBH for use on Polaris submarines . A two @-@ year program , known as the Polaris University Extension Program , was developed with WGBH producing five to six courses a year in engineering , math , physics , foreign languages , and electives . Lab courses and in class instruction were provided to the submariners when the subs were in port . Those who finished the course received a certificate of completion . 
 Eventually the program spread to surface ships as well , being rechristened as the Program for Afloat College Education ( PACE ) , and it " proved to be an effective and practical means of education for hundreds of Navy men . " By 1963 – 64 there were 17 courses , with plans to have 32 within a few years , and 90 sailors enrolled . Just a year later , in 1964 – 65 , there was 440 sailors taking courses , and in 66 @-@ 67 there were 803 sailors enrolled . 
 By the time it ended in 1972 – 73 , there were 5 @,@ 903 registrations by Navy men in 40 classes . The Navy had anticipated huge enrollments , but the Vietnam War made it difficult for men to find the time to study . Additionally , the courses offered were weighted towards the sciences while classes in the humanities proved much more popular . 
 Occasionally , instruction was provided while the ships were at sea . During the 1967 " spring crisis in the Middle East , " the Navy paid for five instructors to go to the Mediterranean to teach on the deck of the USS Little Rock ( CL @-@ 92 ) . In February 1968 , five instructors were flown by the Navy to Antarctica to teach at McMurdo Base . 
 = = Late 20th century = = 
 By the 50th anniversary of the University Extension in 1960 , more than 1 @,@ 400 courses had been offered and there had been more than 85 @,@ 000 enrollments . While the vast majority of classes were held on the Harvard campus , a few in the late 1960s were offered at MIT and BU , as well as at the Old South Meeting House . At this time non @-@ credit courses cost between $ 15 and $ 25 , and courses for credit cost between $ 20 and $ 35 . 
 In the 1970s the University realized it had a problem retaining employees , so it began the Tuition Assistance Plan ( TAP ) . In the first year 238 employees took advantage . By 1982 it was 834 students , with 37 degree candidates . The program effectively solved the retention problem . In 1978 a survey found that the majority of students had a family income of less than $ 15 @,@ 000 , which was less than the national average of $ 16 @,@ 000 . 
 On the occasion of the 50th anniversary of his 1930 graduation from Harvard College , Phelps said of all his administrative duties at Harvard he " found Extension the most rewarding . Partly , this was , no doubt , because I could run a rising program with practically no interference ; partly it was the feeling that a second chance in education for people passed by in the normal run of school and college is one of the finest aspects of American education ; and partly it was the chance to establish and maintain friendly relations thorough our programs with black people in Boston , who would otherwise have not have had any contact with Harvard . " 
 Graduates in 1982 went on to Harvard Law , Harvard Business School , Harvard Graduate School of Education , the Kennedy School of Government , and top others . In 1983 – 84 the library moved to Sever Hall and saw a doubling of usage to nearly 30 @,@ 000 student visits with 13 @,@ 000 reserve books being circulated . Since the mid @-@ 1990s , academic and career services have been provided " that most traditional students receive , ensuring the education is commensurate . " The Division of Continuing Education was created in 1985 , the same year that the Extension School was officially established as a formal school . 
 In 1992 the Indian Computer Academy opened in Bangalore , India , a joint venture between the Extension School and an Indian businessman with offices in Bombay ( India ) , and Dedham , Massachusetts . The program at the Academy was designed to consist of one year of full @-@ time study leading to Certificate in Applied Sciences . From the beginning , the principals in India were treating it like a for @-@ profit venture , and financially it was a failure . Harvard pulled out in 1994 , but not before approximately 150 students were educated in the two years of operation . 
 Roy J. Glauber , a future Nobel Prize winner , began teaching the core curriculum physics course to Extension students in 1985 . The course was designed for advanced high school students and their teachers . Over 150 students and teachers from 42 schools in the Greater Boston area took part the first year , and thousands more took part in the years to come . 
 = = Early 21st century = = 
 A proposal before the Faculty of Arts and Science in 2009 and 2010 to rename the school and the degrees offered was not accepted . A committee , led by Professor of Computer Science Harry R. Lewis , proposed renaming the school the " Harvard School of Continuing and Professional Studies , " and to drop the words " in Extension Studies " from degrees , so that the School would offer Bachelor of Arts and Master of Arts degrees . Some faculty objected , saying that those degrees were already offered by the College and the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences . 
 After 100 years , an estimated 500 @,@ 000 students have taken courses at the Extension School . 
 = = Degree development = = 
 There were 452 degree recipients in the 58 years between 1910 and 1968 , and 481 in the 39 between 1969 and 2008 . Including certificates , there have been 12 @,@ 464 graduates in Extension 's history . In 2013 there were 163 undergraduate degree earners , the largest class to date , bringing the total to 5 @,@ 415 graduates . As of 2009 , the five most popular graduate programs are in government , biology , psychology , history , and English , accounting for 75 % of graduates . 
 By 1953 , undergraduate degree holders went on to earn 16 Master of Arts degrees , 11 Masters of Education , one Bachelor of Sacred Theology , and five Doctors of Philosophy . Since the founding , there have been 250 students who earned an undergraduate degree at the Extension School and then an advanced degree at Harvard , including 30 doctorates . Approximately 10 % of ALM graduates have gone on to doctorates , including 16 at Harvard . There have been 328 AA and AB degrees awarded to employees since TAP was started in 1978 , 105 <unk> , and 166 certificates . 
 Given the success students had as early as 1953 in continuing their education after earning a degree from the Extension School , Phelps said , " it would seem , therefore , that the Extension courses and the degree for which they count are each year fulfilling the educational purpose for which they were originally established . " 
 While there has never been an entrance exam and fees were kept as low as possible to allow as many as possible to enroll , only .18 % have ever earned a degree . Including certificate earners , 2 @.@ 5 % have graduated . Today more degrees are awarded each year than were awarded in the first 50 years combined . 
 = = = Undergraduate = = = 
 From 1913 to 1933 , students had to take 17 courses in order to earn an Associate 's ( equivalent of a Bachelor 's ) degree . The University Extension had been awarding Adjunct in Arts degrees since 1933 , but in 1960 a new Bachelor of Arts in Extension Studies was created to replace it . To earn one required meeting same standards as were required for a Bachelor of Arts degree from Harvard College , but it was designed for specifically for adult learners . In 1971 an associate degree was established , and the following year bachelor 's degrees were awarded with honors . 
 In 1963 the first bachelor 's degrees were first awarded to 14 people students , the largest class yet , and the total number of graduates rose to 299 . This number would grow to 1 @,@ 000 in 1976 , and in 1982 the graduating class rose to more than 100 students for the first time . 
 Throughout the 1950s and 1960s the University Extension was strictly a liberal arts program with no intention of offering professional programs . In 1971 , however , it was recognized that " our charter is too narrow , our staff too small " for what the world needed in that day and age , and a committee was appointed by President Derek Bok to review the " structure and purpose of Extension . " 
 To meet the needs of the community , the University Extension was stretched from a traditional liberal arts program to " a community vocational arm of the University " with programs specifically designed for residents of Cambridge and Roxbury , as well as an Urban Studies program and a teacher training program . Upon his retirement in 1975 Phelps remarked that " with community needs in mind , Extension has moved a long way from the traditional path , " but that " we need to reach far more of the poor than we do . " 
 = = = Graduate = = = 
 In 1980 the first master 's degree ( ALM ) was awarded . The next year restrictions were lifted on the degree , and 741 students enrolled in the program . Demands of the labor market meant new initiatives in professional studies had to grow along with the traditional liberal arts programs . A graduate Certificate of Advanced Study was established in 1977 for a full year of study in humanities , social sciences , or natural sciences . Due to the success of the ALM , however , this certificate was phased out after 1985 . 
 The certificate 's success prompted the creation of a Certificate of Special Studies in Administration and Management in 1980 for students with a bachelor 's degree but no prior training in business or management . In 2007 it became an ALM in Management , which soon became the most popular program at the Extension School . 
 To meet the growing need for biotech industry staff in the Boston area , a Certificate of Advanced Studies in Applied Sciences was established in 1982 . In 1986 a Certificate of Public Health was launched , and first award to a Greek pharmacist in 1987 . This was followed in 1989 by a Certificate in Museum Studies . In time museum studies would become a master 's degree concentration and the certificate was discontinued . The Certificate in Publishing and Communications was created in 1995 , and the ALM in Information Technology was established in 1996 . 
 In 2001 – 02 a pilot program was created to address the shortage of qualified math teachers in the Boston Public Schools . One in five middle and high school math teachers , for a total of 86 Boston teachers , took 117 classes . This led to the creation of an ALM in Mathematics for Teaching 2004 . A Certificate in Technologies of Education was created in 2000 – 01 which grew to become an ALM in Educational Technologies in 2005 – 06 . Also beginning in 2004 , <unk> could be earned in biotechnology or environmental management . The following year the ALM in Journalism , the first journalism degree offered at Harvard , was established . 
 = = = Pre @-@ medical program = = = 
 A pre @-@ med program was established at the Extension School in 1980 . Two years later , in 1982 , five students applied to medical school , and 3 were accepted at the University of Massachusetts , Tufts University , and New York University . Of the 19 students who applied to medical schools in 1985 , 15 were admitted , including two women to Harvard Medical School . 
 All 27 graduates who applied to medical school in 1989 were accepted , including three to Harvard Medical School and nine to the University of Massachusetts . Five years later , 90 % of students were accepted to medical school , including 5 to Harvard . Only one in three were accepted nationwide . The Health Careers Program has sponsored nearly 1 @,@ 000 students for admission to medical school since it was started in 1979 – 80 , and more than 845 were accepted . This 85 % success rate far exceeds the national acceptance rate of 35 % . 
 = = Online education = = 
 The Extension School developed its online <unk> Project in the 1980s . In 1984 , a calculus course was offered via voice @-@ data modem , kicking off its online education effort . In 1988 a joint venture was developed with Beijing Normal University on a five @-@ week course on artificial intelligence . It was taught in Harvard Square at nights , and the Chinese students simultaneously took the class in what was the morning for them . 
 After the Extension School became a self @-@ sufficient program and the Commission disbanded , the Lowell Institute funding was no longer used for direct operating costs and was instead turned into a scholarship fund for local high school students and teachers . In 1997 – 98 , nearly 100 students , most of them high school students in far flung places such as Alaska or Hawaii , were taking one of six different calculus courses online . Their schools did not offer the course , and the Lowell Scholarships allowed them to take it at a greatly reduced rate . Beginning in 1997 , courses were also being videotaped and then put online within 36 hours for distance students to view . 
 By 2000 online courses had evolved from an experiment to " an established academic program , " and in 2001 there were 25 online courses with 2 @,@ 200 student enrollments . In 2003 , the program had expanded to 36 online courses , including six from Harvard College , and in by 2004 there were 43 , including a Harvard College course on US @-@ Europe relations taken simultaneously by Extension students , Harvard graduate and undergraduate students , and students at Institut d 'Etudes <unk> de Paris . 
 In 2005 courses became available as podcasts downloadable on iTunes , and in 2006 – 07 there were 100 courses available online . Going online allowed professors to target their classes to specific audiences , such as Latino school teachers or museum professionals in certain regions , and by 2008 more than 25 % of the online courses were Harvard College classes . 
 A $ 1 million grant was awarded in 2005 to build a 6 @,@ 000 sq ft " of immerse , collaborative learning environments in five classrooms plus a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art control room . " They went online in 2007 and allowed " greatly enhanced opportunities for pedagogical experimentation . " This experimentation and research would be continued with the creation of <unk> in 2012 . 
 In 2007 @-@ 8 there were more than 7 @,@ 700 course registrations in online classes , including 4 @,@ 000 from students who never came to campus for class . 108 classes were offered , including 29 Harvard College classes taught by senior Harvard faculty . In 2013 it was ranked the second @-@ best university for online education . 
 = = Deans = = 
 James Hardy Ropes , Chairman of Commission on Extension Courses , Dean of University Extension , 1910 – 1922 
 Arthur F. Whittem , Chairman of Commission on Extension Courses , Director of University Extension , 1922 – 1946 
 George W. Adams , Chairman of Commission on Extension Courses , Director of University Extension , 1946 – 1949 
 Reginald H. Phelps , Chairman of Commission on Extension Courses , Director of University Extension , 1949 – 1975 
 Michael Shinagel , Director of Continuing Education and University Extension , 1975 – 1977 , and Dean of Continuing Education and University Extension , 1977 – 2013 
 Huntington D. Lambert , Dean of Continuing Education and University Extension , 2013 – present 
 = Personal ( album ) = 
 Personal is the debut studio album by the American vocal group Men of Vizion . It was released on June 18 , 1996 via Michael Jackson 's record label , MJJ Music , after a demo tape was played to him by producer Teddy Riley . The album has been described as a " sumptuous blend " of vocal R & B and " 90s production techniques " , that alternates between smooth ballads and new jack swing . 
 Personal received mixed reviews from music critics , with some critics noting similarities between the group and Boyz II Men . Some critics felt as if the material was unmemorable versions of Boyz II Men songs , while others felt that Personal was highly different from the music at the time . The album only managed to chart in the United States , where it peaked at 14 on the Billboard Heatseekers Albums , 29 on the Billboard R & B Albums and 186 on the Billboard Top 200 . Two singles were released to promote the album : " House Keeper " and " Do Thangz " . The former was a commercial success , peaking at number 13 on the U.S. Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks and at 67 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 . 
 = = Development and composition = = 
 Composed of George Spencer III , Corley Randolph , Desmond T. Greggs , Brian L. <unk> and lead singer Prathan " Spanky " Williams , Men of Vizion were formed in the early 1990s in Brooklyn , New York . Their vocal R & B harmonies impressed American entertainer Michael Jackson , who signed the group to his record label , MJJ Music , after a demo tape was played to him by producer Teddy Riley in 1993 . Greggs told Billboard magazine that the band is " here to prove that intimate songwriting in R & B is coming back " . He concluded by stating that the band was writing songs " that everyone will understand " . 
 Personal is a " sumptuous blend " of vocal R & B and " 90s production techniques " , that alternates between smooth ballads and new jack swing . The album incorporates all of the band 's beliefs and emotions , from love , romance and sensitivity . " House Keeper " is a story of reversal of the traditional roles that men and women play in relationships . The rest of the album " rolls along similarly " , with the songs " Forgive Me " , " Joyride " and " Do Thangz " , a mid @-@ tempo song on which the group pay homage to the females in their lives . A cover of The Jackson 5 's 1977 hit single " Show You the Way to Go " is included on the album . The cover was originally recorded and released on the soundtrack of the 1995 film Money Train . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Originally set for release on May 14 , 1996 , Personal was released by MJJ Music , 550 Music and Epic Records on June 18 . The album debuted at 186 on the Billboard Top 200 for the chart issued on July 6 . It exited the chart the following week , to re @-@ enter at the same position for the chart issued on July 20 . The album spent a total of four weeks in the chart , before its exit on the week of August 10 . Personal debuted at its peak position of 29 on the U.S. Billboard R & B Albums on the chart issued on July 6 . Spending a total of ten weeks on the R & B Albums chart , the album received its final position of 87 on the chart issued on September 7 . Personal debuted at 14 on U.S. Billboard Heatseekers Album chart on the chart issued on July 6 . It dropped to 16 in the following week , before moving back to the 14th position on July 20 , where it stayed for a second week . The album exited the Heatseekers Album chart on the week of September 7 , spending a total of nine weeks on it . 
 " House Keeper " was released as the lead single from the album on April 9 , 1996 . To promote the single , tying in with the song 's lyric play on reversed gender roles , the group performed track dates at " ladies only " functions . The trek was sponsored by major @-@ market radio stations . The song peaked at number 13 on the U.S. Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks and at 67 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 . An accompanying music video for " House Keeper " was directed by Jesse Vaughan . " Do Thangz " was released as the second , and final , single from the album on October 8 , 1996 . It peaked at number 53 on the U.S. Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks . An accompanying music video for the song was directed by Lionel C. Martin . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Darryl Scipio of Vibe stated unlike " today 's masculine R & B " that is " laden with jokers who sing of little but <unk> ' girls — and then of keeping it on the down @-@ low " , Personal doesn 't use " wordy descriptions of sex to get you in the mood to dance " . Scipio stated that all 12 songs on the album feature " tight , bouncy production " and that all the members of the group sing confidently ; " there are no weak vocals here " . He cited " House Keeper " and " Personal " as having the most soul , " but the rest stand solidly " . He concluded his review of the album by stating that : " These visionaries are definitely a sound for sore ears " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic compared the group and the musical style of Personal to that of Boyz II Men . Erlewine stated that where Boyz II Men have first @-@ rate professional songwriters and producers , Men of Vizion merely have " competent hacks " , which means that " no matter how hard the group tries , they can 't make any of these songs memorable " . Jai Henry of The Daily Cougar commented that although at times they sound " a little too much " like Blackstreet , Men of Vizion " definitely have their own sound " . 
 Jean A. Williams of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times remarked that while the group demonstrates " good , strong and genuine vocal ability " on the album , what they need is " something to set them apart from the proliferation of male harmony groups of the R & B / soul persuasion " . Williams complimented the group 's cover of " Show You the Way to Go " as a " nice effort " but called " House Keeper " derivative . Ray Marcano of the Dayton Daily News wrote that the album 's ballads - especially " That 's Alright " and " When You Need Someone " - have " terrific melodies and wonderful hooks that will easily keep listeners ' attention " . Marcano was , however , critical of the group 's indistinct harmonies and said their vocals need to be " a bit sharper " . Jerome Cannon of the Chattanooga Times Free Press complimented Men of Vizion 's harmonies on " It 's Alright " and said that what caught his attention about the album was that the group were " not caught up in what every other new male group is trying to do , and that is to imitate Boyz II Men " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " That 's Alright " ( Prathan Williams ) – 5 : 35 
 " Instant Love " ( Teddy Riley , Prathan Williams , Chauncey Hannibal , Rodney Jerkins ) – 5 : 41 
 " House Keeper " ( Teddy Riley , Sherri Blair , George Spencer III ) – 4 : 33 
 " When You Need Someone " ( Prathan Williams ) – 6 : 47 
 " Forgive Me " ( Prathan Williams ) – 5 : 44 
 " Personal " ( Bob Kirschner , Y. Babatunde , Prathan Williams , Sydney Joseph , Jr . ) – 6 : 33 
 " Joyride " featuring Tasha Scott ( Alexander <unk> ) – 4 : 30 
 " You Told Me You Loved Me " ( Prathan Williams , Bob Kirschner , Y. Babatunde ) – 5 : 47 
 " Do Thangz " ( Teddy Riley , Sherri Blair , Chris Smith , Menton Smith ) – 5 : 02 
 " Show You the Way to Go " ( Kenny Gamble , Leon Huff ) – 5 : 28 
 " It 's Only Just a Dream " ( Teddy Riley , Sherri Blair , Prathan Williams , George Spencer III , Corley Randolph ) – 4 : 44 
 " Night and Day " ( Teddy Riley , Corley Randolph , Desmond Greggs , Leon Sylvers IV ) – 4 : 34 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for Personal adapted from AllMusic . 
 = Cyathus = 
 Cyathus is a genus of fungi in the Nidulariaceae , a family collectively known as the bird 's nest fungi . They are given this name since they resemble tiny bird 's nests filled with " eggs " , structures large enough to have been mistaken in the past for seeds . However , these are now known to be reproductive structures containing spores . The " eggs " , or peridioles , are firmly attached to the inner surface of this fruit body by an elastic cord of mycelia known as a funiculus . The 45 species are widely distributed throughout the world and some are found in most countries , although a few exist in only one or two locales . Cyathus stercoreus is considered endangered in a number of European countries . Species of Cyathus are also known as splash cups , which refers to the fact that falling raindrops can knock the peridioles out of the open @-@ cup fruit body . The internal and external surfaces of this cup may be ridged longitudinally ( referred to as plicate or striate ) ; this is one example of a taxonomic characteristic that has traditionally served to distinguish between species . 
 Generally considered inedible , Cyathus species are saprobic , since they obtain nutrients from decomposing organic matter . They usually grow on decaying wood or woody debris , on cow and horse dung , or directly on humus @-@ rich soil . The life cycle of this genus allows it to reproduce both sexually , with meiosis , and asexually via spores . Several Cyathus species produce bioactive compounds , some with medicinal properties , and several lignin @-@ degrading enzymes from the genus may be useful in bioremediation and agriculture . Phylogenetic analysis is providing new insights into the evolutionary relationships between the various species in Cyathus , and has cast doubt on the validity of the older classification systems that are based on traditional taxonomic characteristics 
 = = History = = 
 Bird 's nest fungi were first mentioned by Flemish botanist Carolus Clusius in Rariorum plantarum historia ( 1601 ) . Over the next couple of centuries , these fungi were the subject of some controversy regarding whether the peridioles were seeds , and the mechanism by which they were dispersed in nature . For example , the French botanist Jean @-@ Jacques Paulet , in his work Traité des champignons ( 1790 – 3 ) , proposed the erroneous notion that peridioles were ejected from the fruit bodies by some sort of spring mechanism . The genus was established in 1768 by the Swiss scientist Albrecht von Haller ; the generic name Cyathus is Latin , but originally derived from the Ancient Greek word <unk> , meaning " cup " . The structure and biology of the genus Cyathus was better known by the mid @-@ 19th century , starting with the appearance in 1842 of a paper by Carl Johann Friedrich Schmitz , and two years later , a monograph by the brothers Louis René and Charles Tulasne . The work of the <unk> was thorough and accurate , and was highly regarded by later researchers . Subsequently , monographs were written in 1902 by Violet S. White ( on American species ) , Curtis Gates Lloyd in 1906 , Gordon Herriot Cunningham in 1924 ( on New Zealand species ) , and Harold J. Brodie in 1975 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Species in the genus Cyathus have fruit bodies ( peridia ) that are vase- , trumpet- or urn @-@ shaped with dimensions of 4 – 8 mm wide by 7 – 18 mm tall . Fruit bodies are brown to gray @-@ brown in color , and covered with small hair @-@ like structures on the outer surface . Some species , like C. striatus and C. setosus , have conspicuous bristles called setae on the rim of the cup . The fruit body is often expanded at the base into a solid rounded mass of hyphae called an emplacement , which typically becomes tangled and entwined with small fragments of the underlying growing surface , improving its stability and helping it from being knocked over by rain . 
 Immature fruit bodies have a whitish membrane , an epiphragm , that covers the peridium opening when young , but eventually dehisces , breaking open during maturation . Viewed with a microscope , the peridium of Cyathus species is made of three distinct layers — the <unk> , meso- , and ectoperidium , referring to the inner , middle , and outer layers respectively . While the surface of the ectoperidium in Cyathus is usually hairy , the endoperidial surface is smooth , and depending on the species , may have longitudinal grooves ( striations ) . 
 Because the basic fruit body structure in all genera of the Nidulariaceae family is essentially similar , Cyathus may be readily confused with species of Nidula or Crucibulum , especially older , weathered specimens of Cyathus that may have the hairy ectoperidium worn off . It distinguished from Nidula by the presence of a funiculus , a cord of hyphae attaching the peridiole to the endoperidium . Cyathus differs from genus Crucibulum by having a distinct three @-@ layered wall and a more intricate funiculus . 
 = = = Peridiole structure = = = 
 Derived from the Greek word <unk> , meaning " small leather pouch " , the peridiole is the " egg " of the bird 's nest . It is a mass of basidiospores and glebal tissue enclosed by a hard and waxy outer shell . The shape may be described as lenticular — like a biconvex lens — and depending on the species , may range in color from whitish to grayish to black . The interior chamber of the peridiole contains a hymenium that is made of basidia , sterile ( non @-@ reproductive ) structures , and spores . In young , freshly opened fruit bodies , the peridioles lie in a clear gelatinous substance which soon dries . 
 Peridioles are attached to the fruit body by a funiculus , a complex structure of hyphae that may be differentiated into three regions : the basal piece , which attaches it to the inner wall of the peridium , the middle piece , and an upper sheath , called the purse , connected to the lower surface of the peridiole . In the purse and middle piece is a coiled thread of interwoven hyphae called the funicular cord , attached at one end to the peridiole and at the other end to an entangled mass of hyphae called the hapteron . In some species the peridioles may be covered by a tunica , a thin white membrane ( particularly evident in C. striatus and C. crassimurus ) . Spores typically have an elliptical or roughly spherical shape , and are thick @-@ walled , hyaline or light yellow @-@ brown in color , with dimensions of 5 – 15 by 5 – 8 µm . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Fruit bodies typically grow in clusters , and are found on dead or decaying wood , or on woody fragments in cow or horse dung . Dung @-@ loving ( coprophilous ) species include C. stercoreus , C. costatus , C. <unk> , and C. pygmaeus . Some species have been collected on woody material like dead herbaceous stems , the empty shells or husks of nuts , or on fibrous material like coconut , jute , or hemp fiber woven into matting , sacks or cloth . In nature , fruit bodies are usually found in moist , partly shaded sites , such as the edges of woods on trails , or around lighted openings in forests . They are less frequently found growing in dense vegetation and deep mosses , as these environments would interfere with the dispersal of peridioles by falling drops of water . The appearance of fruit bodies is largely dependent upon features of the immediate growing environment ; specifically , optimum conditions of temperature , moisture , and nutrient availability are more important factors for fruit rather than the broad geographical area in which the fungi are located , or the season . Examples of the ability of Cyathus to thrive in somewhat inhospitable environments are provided by C. striatus and C. stercoreus , which can survive the drought and cold of winter in temperate North America , and the species C. helenae , which has been found growing on dead alpine plants at an altitude of 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) . 
 In general , species of Cyathus have a worldwide distribution , but are only rarely found in the arctic and subarctic . One of the best known species , C. striatus has a circumpolar distribution and is commonly found throughout temperate locations , while the morphologically similar C. poeppigii is widely spread in tropical areas , rarely in the subtropics , and never in temperate regions . The majority of species are native to warm climates . For example , although 20 different species have been reported from the United States and Canada , only 8 are commonly encountered ; on the other hand , 25 species may be regularly found in the West Indies , and the Hawaiian Islands alone have 11 species . Some species seem to be endemic to certain regions , such as C. novae @-@ <unk> found in New Zealand , or C. crassimurus , found only in Hawaii ; however , this apparent endemism may just be a result of a lack of collections , rather than a difference in the habitat that constitutes a barrier to spread . Although widespread in the tropics and most of the temperate world , C. stercoreus is only rarely found in Europe ; this has resulted in its appearance on a number of Red Lists . For example , it is considered endangered in Bulgaria , Denmark , and Montenegro , and " near threatened " in Great Britain . The discovery of a Cyathus species in Dominican amber ( C. dominicanus ) suggests that the basic form of the bird 's nest fungi had already evolved by the Cretaceous era and that the group had diversified by the mid @-@ Cenozoic . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 The life cycle of the genus Cyathus , which contains both haploid and diploid stages , is typical of taxa in the basidiomycetes that can reproduce both asexually ( via vegetative spores ) , or sexually ( with meiosis ) . Like other wood @-@ decay fungi , this life cycle may be considered as two functionally different phases : the vegetative stage for the spread of mycelia , and the reproductive stage for the establishment of spore @-@ producing structures , the fruit bodies . 
 The vegetative stage encompasses those phases of the life cycle involved with the germination , spread , and survival of the mycelium . Spores germinate under suitable conditions of moisture and temperature , and grow into branching filaments called hyphae , pushing out like roots into the rotting wood . These hyphae are homokaryotic , containing a single nucleus in each compartment ; they increase in length by adding cell @-@ wall material to a growing tip . As these tips expand and spread to produce new growing points , a network called the mycelium develops . Mycelial growth occurs by mitosis and the synthesis of hyphal biomass . When two homokaryotic hyphae of different mating compatibility groups fuse with one another , they form a dikaryotic mycelia in a process called plasmogamy . <unk> for mycelial survival and colonization a substrate ( like rotting wood ) include suitable humidity and nutrient availability . The majority of Cyathus species are saprobic , so mycelial growth in rotting wood is made possible by the secretion of enzymes that break down complex polysaccharides ( such as cellulose and lignin ) into simple sugars that can be used as nutrients . 
 After a period of time and under the appropriate environmental conditions , the dikaryotic mycelia may enter the reproductive stage of the life cycle . Fruit body formation is influenced by external factors such as season ( which affects temperature and air humidity ) , nutrients and light . As fruit bodies develop they produce peridioles containing the basidia upon which new basidiospores are made . Young basidia contain a pair of haploid sexually compatible nuclei which fuse , and the resulting diploid fusion nucleus undergoes meiosis to produce basidiospores , each containing a single haploid nucleus . The dikaryotic mycelia from which the fruit bodies are produced is long lasting , and will continue to produce successive generations of fruit bodies as long as the environmental conditions are favorable . 
 The development of Cyathus fruit bodies has been studied in laboratory culture ; Cyathus stercoreus has been used most often for these studies due to the ease with which it may be grown experimentally . In 1958 , E. Garnett first demonstrated that the development and form of the fruit bodies is at least partially dependent on the intensity of light it receives during development . For example , exposure of the <unk> mycelium to light is required for fruit to occur , and furthermore , this light needs to be at a wavelength of less than 530 nm . Continuous light is not required for fruit body development ; after the mycelium has reached a certain stage of maturity , only a brief exposure to light is necessary , and fruit bodies will form if even subsequently kept in the dark . Lu suggested in 1965 that certain growing conditions — such as a shortage in available nutrients — shifts the fungus ' metabolism to produce a hypothetical " photoreceptive precursor " that enables the growth of the fruit bodies to be stimulated and affected by light . The fungi is also positively phototrophic , that is , it will orient its fruit bodies in the direction of the light source . The time required to develop fruit bodies depends on a number of factors , such as the temperature , or the availability and type of nutrients , but in general " most species that do fruit in laboratory culture do so best at about 25 ° C , in from 18 to 40 days . " 
 = = Spore dispersal = = 
 Like other bird 's nest fungi in the Nidulariaceae , species of Cyathus have their spores dispersed when water falls into the fruit body . The fruit body is shaped so that the kinetic energy of a fallen raindrop is redirected upward and slightly outward by the angle of the cup wall , which is consistently 70 – 75 ° with the horizontal . The action ejects the peridioles out of the so @-@ called " splash cup " , where it may break and spread the spores within , or be eaten and dispersed by animals after passing through the digestive tract . This method of spore dispersal in the Nidulariaceae was tested experimentally by George Willard Martin in 1924 , and later elaborated by Arthur Henry Reginald Buller , who used Cyathus striatus as the model species to experimentally investigate the phenomenon . Buller 's major conclusions about spore dispersal were later summarized by his graduate student Harold J. Brodie , with whom he conducted several of these splash cup experiments : 
 Raindrops cause the peridioles of the Nidulariaceae to be thrown about four feet by splash action . In the genus Cyathus , as a peridiole is jerked out of its cup , the funiculus is torn and this makes possible the expansion of a mass of adhesive hyphae ( the hapteron ) which clings to any object in the line of flight . The momentum of the peridiole causes a long cord to be pulled out of a sheath attached to the peridiole . The peridiole is checked in flight and the jerk causes the funicular cord to become wound around stems or entangled among plant hairs . Thus the peridiole becomes attached to vegetation and may be eaten subsequently by herbivorous animals . 
 Although it has not been shown experimentally if the spores can survive the passage through an animal 's digestive tract , the regular presence of Cyathus on cow or horse manure strongly suggest that this is true . Alternatively , the hard outer casing of peridioles ejected from splash cups may simply disintegrate over time , eventually releasing the spores within . 
 = = Bioactive compounds = = 
 A number of species of Cyathus produce metabolites with biological activity , and novel chemical structures that are specific to this genus . For example , cyathins are diterpenoid compounds produced by C. helenae , C. africanus and C. earlei . Several of the cyathins ( especially cyathins B3 and C3 ) , including <unk> compounds from C. striatus , show strong antibiotic activity . <unk> diterpenoids also stimulate nerve growth factor synthesis , and have the potential to be developed into therapeutic agents for neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer 's disease . Compounds named <unk> , isolated from the mycelial liquid culture of C. stercoreus , have significant antioxidant activity , as do the compounds known as <unk> , also from C. stercoreus . Various sesquiterpene compounds have also been identified in C. bulleri , including <unk> ( derived from humulene ) , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 Various Cyathus species have antifungal activity against human pathogens such as Aspergillus fumigatus , Candida albicans and Cryptococcus neoformans . Extracts of C. striatus have inhibitory effects on NF @-@ κB , a transcription factor responsible for regulating the expression of several genes involved in the immune system , inflammation , and cell death . 
 = = Human uses = = 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Species in the Nidulariaceae family , including Cyathus , are considered inedible , as they are " not sufficiently large , fleshy , or odorous to be of interest to humans as food " . However , there have not been reports of poisonous alkaloids or other substances considered toxic to humans . Brodie goes on to note that two Cyathus species have been used by native peoples as an aphrodisiac , or to stimulate fertility : C. limbatus in Colombia , and C. microsporus in Guadeloupe . Whether these species have any actual effect on human physiology is unknown . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> is a complex polymeric chemical compound that is a major constituent of wood . Resistant to biological decomposition , its presence in paper makes it weaker and more liable to discolor when exposed to light . The species C. bulleri contains three lignin @-@ degrading enzymes : lignin peroxidase , manganese peroxidase , and laccase . These enzymes have potential applications not only in the pulp and paper industry , but also to increase the digestibility and protein content of forage for cattle . Because <unk> can break down phenolic compounds they may be used to detoxify some environmental pollutants , such as dyes used in the textile industry . C. bulleri laccase has also been genetically engineered to be produced by Escherichia coli , making it the first fungal laccase to be produced in a bacterial host . C. pallidus can biodegrade the explosive compound RDX ( <unk> @-@ 1 @,@ 3 @,@ 5 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 @,@ 3 @,@ 5 @-@ <unk> ) , suggesting it might be used to decontaminate munitions @-@ contaminated soils . 
 = = = Agriculture = = = 
 Cyathus olla has been investigated for its ability to accelerate the decomposition of stubble left in the field after harvest , effectively reducing pathogen populations and accelerating nutrient cycling through mineralization of essential plant nutrients . 
 = = Infrageneric classification = = 
 The genus Cyathus was first subdivided into two infrageneric groups ( i.e. , grouping species below the rank of genus ) by the Tulasne brothers ; the " <unk> " group had fruit bodies with inner surfaces folded into pleats ( plications ) , while the " olla " group lacked plications . Later ( 1906 ) , Lloyd published a different concept of infrageneric grouping in Cyathus , describing five groups , two in the <unk> group and five in the olla group . 
 In the 1970s , Brodie , in his monograph on bird 's nest fungi , separated the genus Cyathus into seven related groups based on a number of taxonomic characteristics , including the presence or absence of plications , the structure of the peridioles , the color of the fruit bodies , and the nature of the hairs on the outer peridium : Olla group : Species with a tomentum having fine flattened @-@ down hairs , and no plications . 
 C. olla , C. africanus , C. badius , C. canna , C. <unk> , C. <unk> , C. earlei , C. hookeri , C. microsporus , C. minimus , C. pygmaeus 
 <unk> group : Species with conspicuous , long , downward @-@ pointing hairs , and a smooth ( non @-@ plicate ) inner peridium . 
 C. pallidus , C. <unk> 
 Triplex group : Species with mostly dark @-@ colored peridia , and a silvery white inner surface . 
 C. triplex , C. setosus , C. sinensis 
 <unk> group : Species with tomentum hairs clumped into tufts or mounds . 
 C. gracilis , C. intermedius , C. crassimurus , C. <unk> 
 <unk> group : Species with non @-@ plicate peridia , shaggy or wooly outer peridium walls , and dark to black peridioles . 
 C. stercoreus , C. pictus , C. <unk> 
 <unk> group : Species with plicate internal peridial walls , hairy to shaggy outer walls , dark to black peridioles , and large , roughly spherical or ellipsoidal spores . 
 C. poeppigii , C. crispus , C. limbatus , C. <unk> , C. costatus , C. <unk> , C. <unk> @-@ brunneus 
 <unk> group : Species with plicate internal peridia , hairy to shaggy outer peridia , and mostly elliptical spores . 
 C. striatus , C. annulatus , C. <unk> , C. bulleri , C. <unk> , C. ellipsoideus , C. helenae , C. montagnei , C. nigro @-@ albus , C. novae @-@ <unk> , C. pullus , C. rudis 
 = = = Phylogenetic analysis = = = 
 The 2007 publication of phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequence data of numerous Cyathus species has cast doubt on the validity of the morphology @-@ based infrageneric classifications described by Brodie . This research suggests that Cyathus species can be grouped into three genetically related clades : 
 ollum group : C. africanus ( type ) , C. africanus f. <unk> , C. <unk> , C. <unk> , C. <unk> , C. hookeri , C. <unk> , C. olla , C. olla f. anglicus , and C. olla f. <unk> . 
 striatum group : C. annulatus , C. crassimurus , C. helenae , C. poeppigii , C. <unk> , C. setosus , C. stercoreus , and C. triplex . 
 pallidum group : C. <unk> , C. olla f. lanatus , C. <unk> , and C. pallidus . 
 This analysis shows that rather than fruit body structure , spore size is generally a more reliable character for segregating species groups in Cyathus . For example , species in the ollum clade all have spore lengths less than 15 µm , while all members of the pallidum group have lengths greater than 15 µm ; the striatum group , however , cannot be distinguished from the pallidum group by spore size alone . Two characteristics are most suited for distinguishing members of the ollum group from the pallidum group : the thickness of the hair layer on the peridium surface , and the outline of the fruit bodies . The tomentum of <unk> species is thick , like felt , and typically aggregates into clumps of shaggy or woolly hair . Their crucible @-@ shaped fruit bodies do not have a clearly differentiated stipe . The exoperidium of <unk> species , in comparison , has a thin tomentum of fine hairs ; fruit bodies are funnel @-@ shaped and have either a constricted base or a distinct stipe . 
 = Bovidae = 
 Bovidae is the biological family of cloven @-@ hoofed , ruminant mammals that includes bison , African buffalo , water buffalo , antelopes , gazelles , sheep , goats , muskoxen , and domestic cattle . A member of this family is called a bovid . Consisting of 143 extant species and 300 known extinct species , the family Bovidae consists of eight major subfamilies apart from the disputed Peleinae and Pantholopinae . The family evolved 20 million years ago , in the early Miocene . 
 The bovids show great variation in size and pelage colouration . Excepting some domesticated forms , all male bovids have two or more horns , and in many species females possess horns , too . The size and shape of the horns vary greatly , but the basic structure is always one or more pairs of simple bony protrusions without branches , often having a spiral , twisted or fluted form , each covered in a permanent sheath of keratin . Most bovids bear 30 to 32 teeth . 
 Most bovids are diurnal . Social activity and feeding usually peak during dawn and dusk . Bovids typically rest before dawn , during midday , and after dark . They have various methods of social organisation and social behaviour , which are classified into solitary and gregarious behaviour . Bovids use different forms of vocal , olfactory , and tangible communication . Most species alternately feed and ruminate throughout the day . While small bovids forage in dense and closed habitat , larger species feed on high @-@ fiber vegetation in open grasslands . Most bovids are polygynous . Mature bovids mate at least once a year and smaller species may even mate twice . In some species , neonate bovids remain hidden for a week to two months , regularly nursed by their mothers ; in other species , neonates are followers , accompanying their dams , rather than tending to remain hidden . 
 The greatest diversities of bovids occur in Africa . The maximum concentration of species is in the savannas of eastern Africa . Other bovid species also occur in Europe , Asia , and North America . Bovidae includes three of the five domesticated mammals whose use has spread outside their original ranges , namely cattle , sheep , and goats . Dairy products such as milk , butter , and cheese are manufactured largely from domestic cattle . Bovids also provide leather , meat , and wool . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name " Bovidae " was given by the British zoologist John Edward Gray in 1821 . The word " Bovidae " is the combination of the prefix <unk> ( originating from Latin bos , " ox " , through Late Latin bovinus ) and the suffix -idae . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The family Bovidae is placed in the order Artiodactyla ( which includes the even @-@ toed ungulates ) . It includes 143 extant species , accounting for nearly 55 % of the ungulates , and 300 known extinct species . 
 Molecular studies have supported monophyly in the family Bovidae ( a monophyletic group of organisms comprises an ancestral species and their descendants ) . The number of subfamilies in Bovidae is disputed , with suggestions of as many as ten and as few as two subfamilies . However , molecular , morphological and fossil evidence indicates the existence of eight distinct subfamilies : Aepycerotinae ( consisting of just the impala ) , Alcelaphinae ( <unk> , hartebeest , wildebeest and relatives ) , Antilopinae ( several antelopes , gazelles , and relatives ) , Bovinae ( cattle , buffaloes , bison and other antelopes ) , Caprinae ( goats , sheep , ibex , serows and relatives ) , Cephalophinae ( duikers ) , Hippotraginae ( addax , oryx and relatives ) and Reduncinae ( reedbuck and kob antelopes ) . In addition , three extinct subfamilies are known : <unk> ( mid @-@ Miocene ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) and the subfamily <unk> , which contains <unk> ( mid @-@ Miocene ) . 
 In 1992 , Alan W. Gentry of the Natural History Museum , London divided the eight major subfamilies of Bovidae into two major clades on the basis of their evolutionary history : the Boodontia , which comprised only the Bovinae , and the Aegodontia , which consisted of the rest of the subfamilies . <unk> have somewhat primitive teeth , resembling those of oxen , whereas <unk> have more advanced teeth like those of goats . 
 A controversy exists about the recognition of Peleinae and <unk> , comprising the genera Pelea and Pantholops respectively , as subfamilies . In 2000 , American biologist George Schaller and palaeontologist Elisabeth Vrba suggested the inclusion of Pelea in Reduncinae , though the grey <unk> , the sole species of Pelea , is highly different from kobs and reduncines in morphology . Pantholops , earlier classified in the Antilopinae , was later placed in its own subfamily , Pantholopinae . However , molecular and morphological analysis supports the inclusion of Pantholops in Caprinae . 
 Below is a cladogram based on <unk> et al . ( 1997 ) and Gentry et al . ( 1997 ) 
 = = Evolution = = 
 = = = Early Miocene and before = = = 
 In the early Miocene , bovids began diverging from the cervids ( deer ) and giraffids . The earliest bovids , whose presence in Africa and Eurasia in the latter part of early Miocene ( 20 Mya ) has been ascertained , were small animals , somewhat similar to modern gazelles , and probably lived in woodland environments . <unk> , the earliest known bovid , weighed 18 kg ( 40 lb ) and was nearly the same in size as the Thompson 's gazelle . Early in their evolutionary history , the bovids split into two main clades : Boodontia ( of Eurasian origin ) and Aegodontia ( of African origin ) . This early split between Boodontia and Aegodontia has been attributed to the continental divide between these land masses . When these continents were later rejoined , this barrier was removed , and either group expanded into the territory of the other . The tribes Bovini and Tragelaphini diverged in the early Miocene . Bovids are known to have reached the Americas in the Pleistocene by crossing the Bering land bridge . 
 The present genera of Alcelaphinae appeared in the Pliocene . The extinct <unk> genus <unk> , that was the same in size as the hartebeest , is believed to have come into being in the Pliocene , but became extinct in the middle Pleistocene . Several genera of Hippotraginae are known since the Pliocene and Pleistocene . This subfamily appears to have diverged from the Alcelaphinae in the latter part of early Miocene . The Bovinae are believed to have diverged from the rest of the Bovidae in the late Oligocene . The Boselaphini became extinct in Africa in the early Pliocene ; their latest fossils were excavated in <unk> ( South Africa ) and <unk> ( Kenya ) . 
 = = = Middle Miocene = = = 
 The middle Miocene marked the spread of the bovids into China and the Indian subcontinent . According to Vrba , the radiation of the subfamily Alcelaphinae began in the latter part of middle Miocene . The Caprinae tribes probably diverged in the early middle Miocene . The <unk> emerged in the middle Miocene , and seem to have been replaced by other bovids and cervids in Eurasia . The earliest fossils of the antilopines are from the middle Miocene , though studies show the existence of the subfamily from the early Miocene . Speciation occurred in the tribe Antilopini during the middle or upper Miocene , mainly in Eurasia . Tribe Neotragini seems to have appeared in Africa by the end of Miocene , and had become widespread by the Pliocene . 
 = = = Late Miocene = = = 
 By the late Miocene , around 10 Mya , the bovids rapidly diversified , leading to the creation of 70 new genera . This late Miocene radiation was partly because many bovids became adapted to more open , grassland habitats . The Aepycerotinae first appeared in the late Miocene , and no significant difference in the sizes of the primitive and modern impala has been noted . Fossils of <unk> , a tribe of Caprinae , in Africa date back to the late Miocene . The earliest <unk> fossils date back to the late Miocene , and were excavated from sites such as <unk> and Awash Valley . The first African fossils of Reduncinae date back to 6 @-@ 7 Mya . Reduncinae and Peleinae probably diverged in the mid @-@ Miocene . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 All bovids have the similar basic form - a snout with a blunt end , one or more pairs of horns ( generally present on males ) immediately after the oval or pointed ears , a distinct neck and limbs , and a tail varying in length and <unk> among the species . Most bovids exhibit sexual dimorphism , with males usually larger as well as heavier than females . Sexual dimorphism is more prominent in medium- to large @-@ sized bovids . All bovids have four toes on each foot – they walk on the central two ( the hooves ) , while the outer two ( the dewclaws ) are much smaller and rarely touch the ground . 
 The bovids show great variation in size : the gaur can weigh as much as 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) and stands 2 – 3 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 9 @.@ 8 ft ) high at the shoulder . The water buffalo can be even heavier , and weigh 1 @,@ 200 kg ( 2 @,@ 600 lb ) , though it is shorter than the gaur , being at most 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) tall . The royal antelope , in sharp contrast , is only 25 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) tall and weighs at most 3 kg ( 6 @.@ 6 lb ) . The klipspringer , another small antelope , stands 45 – 60 cm ( 18 – 24 in ) at the shoulder and weighs just 10 – 20 kg ( 22 – 44 lb ) . 
 Differences occur in pelage colouration , ranging from a pale white ( as in the Arabian oryx ) to black ( as in the black wildebeest ) . However , only the intermediate shades , such as brown and reddish brown ( as in the reedbuck ) , are commonly observed . In several species , females and juveniles exhibit a light @-@ coloured coat , while those of males darken with age . As in the wildebeest , the coat may be marked with prominent or faint stripes . In some species such as the addax , the coat colour can vary by the season . Scent glands and sebaceous glands are often present . 
 Some species , such as the gemsbok , sable antelope , and Grant 's gazelle , are camouflaged with strongly disruptive facial markings that conceal the highly recognisable eye . Many species , such as gazelles , may be made to look flat , and hence to blend into the background , by countershading . The outlines of many bovids are broken up with bold disruptive colouration , the strongly contrasting patterns helping to delay recognition by predators . However , all the Hippotraginae ( including the gemsbok ) have pale bodies and faces with conspicuous markings . The zoologist Tim Caro describes this as difficult to explain , but given that the species are diurnal , he suggests that the markings may function in communication . Strongly contrasting leg colouration is common only in the Bovidae , where for example Bos , Ovis , <unk> and gemsbok have white stockings . Again , communication is the likely function . 
 Excepting some domesticated forms , all male bovids have horns , and in many species , females , too , possess horns . The size and shape of the horns vary greatly , but the basic structure is a pair of simple bony protrusions without branches , often having a spiral , twisted , or fluted form , each covered in a permanent sheath of keratin . Although horns occur in a single pair on almost all bovid species , there are exceptions such as the four @-@ horned antelope and the Jacob sheep . The unique horn structure is the only unambiguous morphological feature of bovids that distinguishes them from other <unk> . A high correlation exists between horn morphology and fighting behaviour of the individual . For instance , long horns are intended for wrestling and fencing , whereas curved horns are used in ramming . Males with horns directed inwards are monogamous and solitary , while those with horns directed outwards tend to be polygynous . These results were independent of body size . 
 Male horn development has been linked to sexual selection , Horns are small spikes in the monogamous duikers and other small antelopes , whereas in the polygynous , they are large and elaborately formed ( for example in a spiral structure , as in the giant eland ) . Thus , to some extent , horns depict the degree of competition among males in a species . However , the presence of horns in females is likely due to natural selection . The horns of females are usually smaller than those of males , and are sometimes of a different shape . The horns of female bovids are believed to have evolved for defence against predators or to express territoriality , as nonterritorial females , which are able to use crypsis for predator defence , often do not have horns . Females possess horns only in half of the bovid genera , and females in these genera are heavier than those in the rest . Females use horns mainly for stabbing . 
 = = = Anatomy = = = 
 In bovids , the third and fourth metapodials are combined into the cannon bone . The ulna and fibula are reduced , and fused with the radius and tibia , respectively . Long scapulae are present , whereas the clavicles are absent . Being ruminants , the stomach is composed of four chambers : the rumen ( 80 % ) , the omasum , the reticulum , and the abomasum . The ciliates and bacteria of the rumen ferment the complex cellulose into simpler fatty acids , which are then absorbed through the rumen wall . Bovids have a long small intestine ; the length of the small intestine in cattle is 29 – 49 m ( 95 – 161 ft ) . Body temperature fluctuates through the day ; for instance , in goats the temperature can change slightly from nearly 37 ° C ( 99 ° F ) in the early morning to 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) in the afternoon . Temperature is regulated through sweating in cattle , whereas goats use panting for the same . The right lung , consisting of four to five lobes , is around 1 @.@ 5 times larger than the left , which has three lobes . 
 = = = Dentition = = = 
 Most bovids bear 30 to 32 teeth . While the upper incisors are absent , the upper canines are either reduced or absent . Instead of the upper incisors , bovids have a thick and tough layer of tissue , called the dental pad , that provides a surface to grip grasses and foliage . They are hypsodont and <unk> , since the molars and premolars are low @-@ crowned and crescent @-@ shaped cusps . The lower incisors and canines project forward . The incisors are followed by a long toothless gap , known as the diastema . The general dental formula for bovids is 0 @.@ 0 @.@ 2 @-@ 3 @.@ 33 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 3 . Most members of the family are herbivorous , but most duikers are omnivorous . Like other ruminants , bovids have four @-@ chambered stomachs , which allow them to digest plant material , such as grass , that cannot be used by many other animals . Ruminants ( and some others like kangaroos , rabbits , and termites ) are able to use micro @-@ organisms living in their guts to break down cellulose by fermentation . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 The bovids have various methods of social organisation and social behaviour , which are classified into solitary and gregarious behaviour . Further , these types may each be divided into territorial and nonterritorial behaviour . Small bovids such as the klipspringer , oribi , and steenbok are generally solitary and territorial . They hold small territories into which other members of the species are not allowed to enter . These antelopes form monogamous pairs . Many species such as the dik @-@ dik use pheromone secretions from the preorbital glands and sometimes dung , as well , to mark their territories . The offspring disperse at the time of adolescence , and males need must acquire territories prior to mating . The bushbuck is the only bovid that is both solitary and not territorial . This antelope hardly displays aggression , and tends to isolate itself or form loose herds , though in a favourable habitat , several bushbuck may be found quite close to one another . 
 Excluding the <unk> ( duikers ) , tragelaphines ( spiral @-@ horned antelopes ) and the neotragines , most African bovids are gregarious and territorial . Males are forced to disperse on attaining sexual maturity , and must form their own territories , while females are not required to do so . Males that do not hold territories form bachelor herds . Competition takes place among males to acquire dominance , and fights tend to be more rigorous in limited rutting seasons . With the exception of migratory males , males generally hold the same territory throughout their lives . In the waterbuck , some male individuals , known as " satellite males " , may be allowed into the territories of other males and have to wait till the owner grows old so they may acquire his territory . Lek mating , where males gather together and competitively display to potential mates , is known to exist among <unk> , kobs , and <unk> . The tragelaphines , cattle , sheep , and goats are gregarious and not territorial . In these species , males must gain absolute dominance over all other males , and fights are not confined to territories . Males , therefore , spend years in body growth . 
 = = = Activity = = = 
 Most bovids are diurnal , although a few such as the buffalo , bushbuck , reedbuck , and grysbok are exceptions . Social activity and feeding usually peak during dawn and dusk . The bovids usually rest before dawn , during midday , and after dark . Grooming is usually by licking with the tongue . Rarely do antelopes roll in mud or dust . Wildebeest and buffalo usually wallow in mud , whereas the hartebeest and topi rub their heads and horns in mud and then smear it over their bodies . Bovids use different forms of vocal , olfactory , and tangible communication . These involve varied postures of neck , head , horns , hair , legs , and ears to convey sexual excitement , emotional state , or alarm . One such expression is the flehmen response . Bovids usually stand motionless , with the head high and an intent stare , when they sense danger . Some like the impala , kudu , and eland can even leap to heights of a few feet . Bovids may roar or grunt to caution others and warn off predators , which include lion , tiger , brown bear , crocodile , dhole , Komodo dragon , spotted hyena , and cougar . Bovids such as gazelles stot or <unk> in response to predators , making high leaps on stiff legs , indicating honestly both that the predator has been seen , and that the stotting individual is strong and not worth chasing . 
 In the mating season , rutting males bellow to make their presence known to females . <unk> roar during male @-@ male fights , and male <unk> force air through their noses , producing a roar to deter rival males and attract females . Mothers also use vocal communication to locate their calves if they get separated . During fights over dominance , males tend to display themselves in an erect posture with a level muzzle . 
 Fighting techniques differ amongst the bovid families and also depend on their build . While the hartebeest fight on knees , others usually fight on all fours . Gazelles of various sizes use different methods of combat . Gazelles usually box , and in serious fights may clash and fence , consisting of hard blows from short range . Ibex , goat and sheep males stand upright and clash into each other downwards . Wildebeest use powerful head butting in aggressive clashes . If horns become entangled , the opponents move in a circular manner to unlock them . <unk> will ram into each other at high speeds . As a rule , only two bovids of equal build and level of defence engage in a fight , which is intended to determine the superior of the two . Individuals that are evidently inferior to others would rather flee than fight ; for example , immature males do not fight with the mature bulls . Generally , bovids direct their attacks on the opponent 's head rather than its body . The S @-@ shaped horns , such as those on the impala , have various sections that help in ramming , holding , and stabbing . Serious fights leading to injury are rare . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Most bovids alternately feed and ruminate throughout the day . While those that feed on concentrates feed and digest in short intervals , the roughage feeders take longer intervals . Only small species such as the duiker browse for a few hours during day or night . Feeding habits are related to body size ; while small bovids forage in dense and closed habitat , larger species feed upon high @-@ fiber vegetation in open grasslands . <unk> exhibit different feeding strategies . While Bovinae species graze extensively on fresh grass and diffused forage , Cephalophinae species ( with the exception of Sylvicapra ) primarily consume fruits . Reduncinae and Hippotraginae species depend on unstable food sources , but the latter are specially adapted to arid areas . Members of Caprinae , being flexible feeders , forage even in areas with low productivity . Tribes Alcelaphini , <unk> , and <unk> have high proportions of monocots in their diets . On the contrary , Tragelaphini and Neotragini ( with the exception of Ourebia ) feed extensively on dicots . No conspicuous relationship exists between body size and consumption of monocots . 
 = = = Sexuality and reproduction = = = 
 Most bovids are polygynous . In a few species , individuals are monogamous , resulting in minimal male @-@ male aggression and reduced selection for large body size in males . Thus , sexual dimorphism is almost absent . Females may be slightly larger than males , possibly due to competition among females for the acquisition of territories . This is the case in duikers and other small bovids . The time taken for the attainment of sexual maturity by either sex varies broadly among bovids . Sexual maturity may even precede or follow mating . For instance the impala males , though sexually mature by a year , can mate only after four years of age . On the contrary <unk> sheep females may give birth to offspring even before they have gained sexual maturity . The delay in male sexual maturation is more visible in sexually dimorphic species , particularly the reduncines , probably due to competition among males . For instance , the blue wildebeest females become capable of reproduction within a year or two of birth , while the males become mature only when four years old . 
 All bovids mate at least once a year , and smaller species may even mate twice . Mating seasons occur typically during the rainy months for most bovids . As such , breeding might peak twice in the equatorial regions . The sheep and goats exhibit remarkable seasonality of reproduction , in the determination of which the annual cycle of daily photoperiod plays a pivotal role . Other factors that have a significant influence on this cycle include the temperature of the <unk> , nutritional status , social interactions , the date of parturition and the lactation period . A study of this phenomenon concluded that goats and sheep are short @-@ day breeders . Mating in most sheep breeds begins in summer or early autumn . Mating in sheep is also affected by melatonin , that advances the onset of the breeding season ; and thyroxine , that terminates the breeding season . Estrus lasts for at most a day in bovids , with the exception of bovines and tragelaphines . Except the hartebeest and the topi , all bovids can detect estrus in females by testing the urine using the vomeronasal organ . Once the male is assured that the female is in estrus , he begins courtship displays ; these displays vary greatly from the elaborate marches among gregarious species to the fervent licking of female genitalia among solitary species . Females , initially not receptive , ultimately mates with the male which has achieved dominance over others . <unk> is expressed by permission for mounting by the male and setting aside the tail by the female . Copulation generally takes a few seconds . 
 <unk> period varies among bovids - while duiker gestation ranges from 120 to 150 days , gestation in African buffalo ranges from 300 to 330 days . Usually , a single offspring is born ( twins are less frequent ) , and it is able to stand and run by itself within an hour of birth . In monogamous species , males assist in defending their young , but that is not the case in polygynous species . Most newborn calves remain hidden for a week to two months , regularly nursed by their mothers . In some bovid species the neonates start following about their mothers immediately or within a few days , as in the impala . Different bovids have different strategies for defence of juveniles . For instance , while wildebeest mothers solely defend their young , buffaloes exhibit collective defence . Weaning might occur as early as two months ( as in royal antelope ) or as late as a year ( as in muskox ) . 
 = = = Lifespan = = = 
 Most wild bovids live for 10 to 15 years . Larger species tend to live longer ; for instance , American bison can live up to 25 years and gaur up to 30 years . The mean lifespan of domesticated individuals is nearly ten years . For example , domesticated goats have an average lifespan of 12 years . Most wild bovids live between 10 and 15 years , with larger species tending to live longer . Usually males , mainly in polygynous species , have shorter lifespans than females . This can be attributed to several reasons : early dispersal of young males , aggressive male @-@ male fights , vulnerability to predation ( particularly when males are less agile , as in kudu ) , and malnutrition ( being large in size , the male body has high nutritional requirements which may not be satisfied ) . Richard Despard Estes suggested that females mimic male secondary sexual characteristics like horns to protect their male offspring from dominant males . This feature seems to have been strongly selected to prevent male mortality and imbalanced sex ratios due to attacks by aggressive males and forced dispersal of young males during adolescence . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Most of the diverse bovid species occur in Africa . The maximum concentration is in the savannas of eastern Africa . Depending on their feeding habits , several species have radiated over large stretches of land , and hence several variations in dental and limb morphology are observed . <unk> inhabit the equatorial rainforests , sitatunga , and lechwe occur near swamps , eland inhabit grasslands , springbok and oryx occur in deserts , bongo and anoa live in dense forests , and mountain goats and takin live at high altitudes . A few bovid species also occur in Europe , Asia , and North America . Only two tribes of Bovidae - Antilopini and <unk> - are found outside the African continent . Sheep and goats are found primarily in Eurasia , though the Barbary sheep and the ibex form part of the African fauna . The muskox is confined to the arctic tundra . Several bovid species have been domesticated by human beings . The domestication of goats and sheep began 10 thousand years ago , while cattle were domesticated about 7 @.@ 5 thousand years ago . 
 = = Interaction with humans = = 
 = = = Domesticated animals = = = 
 The domestication of bovids has contributed in shifting the dependence of human beings from hunting and gathering to agriculture . The Bovidae include three of the five domesticated mammals whose use has spread outside their original ranges , namely cattle , sheep , and goats ; all are from Eurasia , and are now found across the world . The other two species are the horse and pig . Other large bovids that have been domesticated but which remain within the ranges of their wild ancestors are the domestic buffalo ( from the Indian water buffalo ) , yak , zebu ( from the gaur or Indian aurochs ) and Bali cattle ( from the banteng ) . 
 The earliest evidence of cattle domestication is from 8000 BC , suggesting that the process began in Cyprus and the Euphrates basin . 
 = = = Animal products = = = 
 Dairy products such as milk , butter , ghee , yoghurt , buttermilk and cheese are manufactured largely from domestic cattle , though the milk of sheep , goat , yak , and buffalo is also used in some parts of the world and for gourmet products . For example , buffalo milk is used to make mozzarella in Italy and <unk> <unk> dessert in India , while sheep milk is used to make blue Roquefort cheese in France . Beef is an excellent source of zinc , selenium , phosphorus , iron , and B vitamins . Bison meat is lower in fat and cholesterol than beef , but has a higher protein content . 
 <unk> leather is tough and durable , with the additional advantage that it can be made into leathers of varying thicknesses - from soft clothing leather to hard shoe leather . While goat and cattle leather have a wide variety of use , sheepskin is suited only for clothing purposes . Wool from Merino hoggets is the finest and most valuable . Merino wool is 3 – 5 in ( 7 @.@ 6 – 12 @.@ 7 cm ) long and very soft . Coarse wools , being durable and resistant to <unk> , are used for making tough garments and carpets . 
 Bone meal is an important fertilizer rich in calcium , phosphorus , and nitrogen , effective in removing soil acidity . <unk> horns have been used as drinking vessels since antiquity . 
 = = = In human culture = = = 
 Bovidae have featured in stories since at least the time of Aesop 's fables from Ancient Greece around 600 BC . Fables by Aesop include The Crow and the Sheep , The Frog and the Ox , and The Wolf and the Lamb . The mythological creature Chimera , depicted as a lion , with the head of a goat arising from its back , and a tail that might end with a snake 's head , was one of the offspring of Typhon and Echidna and a sibling of such monsters as Cerberus and the <unk> Hydra . The sheep , synonymous with the goat in Chinese mythology , is the eighth animal of the Chinese zodiac , and a symbol of filial piety . 
 = = Classification = = 
 <unk> <unk> 
 = = = Subfamily Aepycerotinae = = = 
 Tribe <unk> 
 Genus Aepyceros 
 Impala , A. melampus 
 = = = Subfamily Alcelaphinae = = = 
 Tribe Alcelaphini 
 Subtribe <unk> 
 Genus Alcelaphus 
 Hartebeest , A. buselaphus 
 Genus <unk> 
 <unk> , B. <unk> 
 Genus Connochaetes 
 Black wildebeest , C. gnou 
 Blue wildebeest , C. taurinus 
 Genus <unk> † 
 Genus <unk> † 
 Genus <unk> † 
 Genus <unk> † 
 Genus <unk> † 
 Genus <unk> † 
 Subtribe <unk> 
 Genus Damaliscus 
 <unk> , D. <unk> 
 <unk> , D. <unk> 
 Bangweulu <unk> , D. <unk> 
 Common <unk> , D. lunatus 
 Genus <unk> † 
 Genus <unk> † 
 = = = Subfamily Antilopinae = = = 
 Tribe Antilopini 
 Genus Ammodorcas 
 Dibatag A. clarkei 
 Genus Antidorcas 
 Springbok A. marsupialis 
 Genus Antilope 
 <unk> A. <unk> 
 Genus <unk> 
 Mongalla gazelle E. <unk> 
 Red gazelle E. <unk> † 
 Red @-@ fronted gazelle E. <unk> 
 Thomson 's gazelle E. thomsoni 
 Heuglin 's gazelle E. <unk> 
 Genus Gazella 
 G. <unk> † 
 Arabian gazelle G. arabica † 
 <unk> or Indian gazelle G. <unk> 
 Queen of Sheba 's gazelle G. <unk> † 
 Dorcas gazelle G. <unk> 
 Mountain gazelle G. gazella 
 Saudi gazelle G. <unk> † 
 Speke 's gazelle G. spekei 
 Cuvier 's gazelle G. cuvieri 
 <unk> gazelle or slender @-@ horned gazelle G. <unk> 
 <unk> gazelle G. <unk> 
 Genus <unk> 
 <unk> L. <unk> 
 Genus <unk> 
 Dama gazelle N. dama 
 Grant 's gazelle N. granti 
 <unk> 's gazelle N. soemmerringii 
 Genus <unk> 
 <unk> P. <unk> 
 Goa P. <unk> 
 Przewalski 's gazelle P. przewalskii 
 Tribe <unk> 
 Genus Saiga 
 Saiga S. tatarica 
 Tribe Neotragini 
 Genus Dorcatragus 
 Beira D. megalotis 
 Genus Madoqua 
 Günther 's dik @-@ dik M. guntheri 
 Kirk 's dik @-@ dik M. kirkii 
 Silver dik @-@ dik M. <unk> 
 Salt 's dik @-@ dik M. <unk> 
 Genus Neotragus 
 Bates 's pygmy antelope N. batesi 
 Suni N. moschatus 
 Royal antelope N. pygmaeus 
 Genus Oreotragus 
 Klipspringer O. oreotragus 
 Genus Ourebia 
 Oribi O. ourebi 
 Genus Raphicerus 
 <unk> R. campestris 
 Cape grysbok R. melanotis 
 Sharpe 's grysbok R. <unk> 
 = = = Subfamily Bovinae = = = 
 Tribe Boselaphini 
 Genus Tetracerus 
 Four @-@ horned antelope , T. quadricornis 
 Genus Boselaphus 
 <unk> or blue bull , B. <unk> 
 Tribe Bovini 
 Genus Bubalus 
 Water buffalo , B. bubalis 
 Wild Asian water buffalo , B. <unk> 
 Lowland anoa , B. <unk> 
 Mountain anoa , B. <unk> 
 Tamaraw , B. mindorensis 
 Cebu tamaraw , B. <unk> † 
 Genus Bos 
 <unk> , B. primigenius † 
 <unk> , B. javanicus 
 Gaur , B. <unk> 
 <unk> , B. frontalis 
 Yak , B. <unk> 
 B. <unk> † 
 Domestic cattle , B. taurus 
 Domestic zebu , B. indicus 
 <unk> , B. <unk> 
 Genus <unk> 
 <unk> , P. <unk> 
 Genus Syncerus 
 African buffalo , S. caffer 
 Genus Bison 
 American bison , B. bison 
 Wisent , B. bonasus 
 Steppe wisent , B. priscus † 
 Ancient bison , B. antiquus † 
 Long @-@ horned bison , B. latifrons † 
 Genus <unk> † 
 Giant buffalo , P. antiquus † 
 Tribe <unk> 
 Genus Tragelaphus 
 Bongo , T. eurycerus 
 Greater kudu , T. strepsiceros 
 <unk> , T. scriptus 
 <unk> , T. sylvaticus 
 Lesser kudu , T. imberbis 
 Mountain nyala , T. buxtoni 
 Nyala , T. angasii 
 Sitatunga , T. <unk> 
 Genus Taurotragus 
 Common eland , T. oryx 
 Giant eland , T. derbianus 
 = = = Subfamily Caprinae = = = 
 Tribe <unk> 
 Genus <unk> 
 Takin , B. <unk> 
 Genus <unk> 
 <unk> , O. moschatus 
 Tribe <unk> 
 Genus <unk> 
 Barbary sheep , A. <unk> 
 Genus <unk> 
 Arabian tahr , A. <unk> 
 Genus Capra 
 West Caucasian tur , C. <unk> 
 <unk> , C. falconeri 
 Wild goat , C. aegagrus 
 Domestic goat , C. aegagrus hircus 
 Alpine ibex , C. ibex 
 Nubian ibex , C. <unk> 
 Spanish ibex , C. pyrenaica 
 Siberian ibex , C. sibirica 
 Walia ibex , C. <unk> 
 Genus <unk> 
 Himalayan tahr , H. <unk> 
 Genus Ovis 
 <unk> , O. ammon 
 Domestic sheep , O. aries 
 American bighorn sheep , O. canadensis 
 Dall or <unk> sheep , O. dalli 
 European mouflon , O. <unk> 
 Snow sheep , O. <unk> 
 <unk> , O. orientalis 
 Genus <unk> 
 Nilgiri tahr , N. <unk> 
 Genus <unk> 
 <unk> ( Himalayan blue sheep ) , P. <unk> 
 Dwarf blue sheep , P. <unk> 
 Tribe <unk> 
 Genus Capricornis 
 Japanese serow , C. crispus 
 Sumatran serow , C. <unk> 
 Taiwan serow , C. swinhoei 
 Chinese serow , C. <unk> 
 Red serow , C. rubidus 
 Himalayan serow C. thar 
 Genus <unk> 
 Red goral , N. baileyi 
 Chinese goral , N. griseus 
 Grey goral , N. goral 
 Long @-@ tailed goral , N , caudatus 
 Genus <unk> 
 Mountain goat , O. americanus 
 Genus <unk> 
 Pyrenean chamois , R. pyrenaica 
 Chamois , R. <unk> 
 = = = Subfamily Cephalophinae = = = 
 Genus Cephalophus 
 Abbott 's duiker , C. <unk> 
 Ader 's duiker , C. <unk> 
 Bay duiker , C. dorsalis 
 Black duiker , C. niger 
 Black @-@ fronted duiker , C. <unk> 
 Brooke 's duiker , C. brookei 
 Harvey 's duiker , C. <unk> 
 Jentink 's duiker , C. jentinki 
 Ogilby 's duiker , C. <unk> 
 Peters 's duiker , C. <unk> 
 Red @-@ flanked duiker , C. <unk> 
 Red forest duiker , C. natalensis 
 Ruwenzori duiker , C. <unk> 
 <unk> 's duiker , C. <unk> 
 White @-@ bellied duiker , C. leucogaster 
 White @-@ legged duiker C. <unk> 
 Yellow @-@ backed duiker , C. <unk> 
 Zebra duiker , C. zebra 
 Genus Philantomba 
 Blue duiker , P. monticola 
 Maxwell 's duiker , P. <unk> 
 Walter 's duiker , P. walteri 
 Genus Sylvicapra 
 Common duiker , S. <unk> 
 = = = Subfamily Hippotraginae = = = 
 Genus Hippotragus 
 Roan antelope , H. equinus 
 Sable antelope , H. niger 
 <unk> , H. leucophaeus † 
 Genus Oryx 
 East African oryx , O. <unk> 
 Scimitar oryx , O. dammah 
 <unk> , O. gazella 
 Arabian oryx , O. leucoryx 
 Genus Addax 
 Addax , A. nasomaculatus 
 = = = Subfamily Pantholopinae = = = 
 Genus Pantholops ( also classified under Caprinae ) 
 Tibetan antelope , P. <unk> 
 = = = Subfamily Peleinae = = = 
 Genus Pelea ( also classified under Reduncinae ) 
 Grey <unk> , P. capreolus 
 = = = Subfamily Reduncinae = = = 
 Genus Kobus 
 <unk> lechwe , K. <unk> 
 Waterbuck , K. ellipsiprymnus 
 Kob , K. kob 
 <unk> , K. <unk> 
 Nile lechwe , K. <unk> 
 <unk> , K. <unk> 
 Genus Redunca 
