 Southern reedbuck , R. <unk> 
 Mountain reedbuck , R. <unk> 
 Bohor reedbuck , R. redunca 
 = Clem Hill = 
 Clement " Clem " Hill ( 18 March 1877 – 5 September 1945 ) was an Australian cricketer who played 49 Test matches as a specialist batsman between 1896 and 1912 . He captained the Australian team in ten Tests , winning five and losing five . A prolific run scorer , Hill scored 3 @,@ 412 runs in Test cricket — a world record at the time of his retirement — at an average of 39 @.@ 21 per innings , including seven centuries . In 1902 , Hill was the first batsman to make 1 @,@ 000 Test runs in a calendar year , a feat that would not be repeated for 45 years . His innings of 365 scored against New South Wales for South Australia in 1900 – 01 was a Sheffield Shield record for 27 years . The South Australian Cricket Association named a grandstand at the Adelaide Oval in his honour in 2003 and he was inducted into the Australian Cricket Hall of Fame in 2005 . 
 A short and stocky left @-@ handed batsman , Hill had a crouched , somewhat awkward stance . He gripped the bat low on the handle , playing with a strong bottom hand . His batting style was nonetheless attractive and effective and he was especially strong on the leg side and when cutting . Able to score quickly when required , he was also recognised for his patience and strong defence . Hill normally batted at No. 3 and , along with his contemporary Victor Trumper , he was a mainstay of the Australian batting line @-@ up in the early years of the 20th century . Hill had a strong throwing arm and was an excellent outfielder . He was a popular team @-@ mate and captain , respected for his directness , honesty and cheerfulness . 
 He played his first first @-@ class cricket match for South Australia while still a schoolboy , aged 16 . By the time he was 19 , he had been included in the Australian team touring England in 1896 , where he made his Test match début . At the Melbourne Cricket Ground two years later , Hill scored 188 ; his maiden Test century and still the highest score in Ashes Tests by a player under 21 . He was named one of Wisden Cricketers of the Year in 1899 , despite missing half the English season due to illness . In the 1901 – 02 season , Hill was dismissed in consecutive innings for 99 , 98 and 97 . In total he was dismissed between 90 and 99 five times in Test cricket . In 1903 – 04 , Hill was at the centre of a riot at the Sydney Cricket Ground after he was adjudged run out in a Test match against England . With Roger Hartigan he still holds the Australian Test record partnership for the eighth wicket — 243 , made against England at the Gabba in Brisbane in 1907 – 08 . 
 Hill had a strained relationship with Australian cricket authorities . He turned down an invitation to tour England in 1909 due to his unhappiness with the contract terms offered . Despite this , he was appointed Test captain in 1910 – 11 for the series against South Africa . His Test cricket career ended in controversy after he was involved in a brawl with cricket administrator and fellow Test selector Peter McAlister in 1912 . He was one of the " Big Six " , a group of leading Australian cricketers who boycotted the 1912 Triangular Tournament in England when the players were stripped of the right to appoint the tour manager . The boycott effectively ended his Test career . After retiring from cricket , Hill worked in the horse racing industry as a stipendiary steward and later as a handicapper for races including the Caulfield Cup . Hill died in 1945 aged 68 when thrown from a tram in Melbourne in a traffic accident . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hill was born in 1877 in Adelaide , South Australia , to Henry John Hill ( known as John ) and his wife Rebecca , née Saunders , and grandson of Henry Hill MHA . Clem was one of eight sons and eight daughters in a family that was heavily involved in cricket . His father scored a century ( 102 not out ) for North Adelaide against the touring Kent County Cricket Club , reportedly the first century scored at the Adelaide Oval . Six other brothers played for South Australia and in 1912 – 13 there were several instances of three Hill brothers in the same representative team . 
 Clem 's father was prominent in the Methodist Church and sent Clem to be educated at Prince Alfred College , the local Methodist school . " Inter @-@ collegiate " matches , the annual fixtures against rivals St Peter 's College , were fiercely contested . Hill played his first inter @-@ collegiate match at the age of 13 , keeping wicket and batting at number ten . His hands suffered from keeping wicket to the fast bowling of future Test team @-@ mate Ernie Jones , leading to a decision to concentrate on batting . At 16 , he scored 360 in the inter @-@ collegiate match , a schoolboy record , bettering the mark made earlier by Joe Darling . Despite this , a school sportsmaster threatened to leave him out of the School XI ( cricket team ) if he continued to play the risky hook shot . 
 Hill made his first @-@ class cricket début in March 1893 while still a schoolboy , just nine days past his 16th birthday . Included in the South Australian team to play Western Australia at the Adelaide Oval , he failed to score a run ; he was dismissed for a duck in the first innings and was 0 not out in the second as South Australia won by 10 wickets . In the 1894 – 95 season , at 17 years of age , he played the touring English team led by A.E. Stoddart , scoring 20 in his only innings in the match . 
 Later the same season , Hill became a regular member of the South Australian team , making his Sheffield Shield debut against Victoria . Batting at number nine , he scored only 21 but the manner in which he made them saw the Australian Test wicket @-@ keeper Jack Blackham declare the discovery of another great batsman . The English team returned to the Adelaide Oval and this time Hill scored his maiden first @-@ class century , 150 not out , against quality bowlers including Tom Richardson and Bobby Peel . So good was the quality of Hill 's batting that when he reached his century a cab driver spectator , sitting on his cab , " cheered end clapped so much [ he ] fell through the roof of the vehicle " . 
 In his first season of regular first @-@ class cricket , Hill scored 335 runs in nine innings at an average of 47 @.@ 85 . 
 Hill was also a talented Australian rules footballer and played for the South Adelaide Football Club during the 1890s and early 1900s . 
 = = Test cricket = = 
 = = = Selection and early career = = = 
 Hill topped the averages for South Australia in the 1895 – 96 season , scoring 371 runs in seven innings . An Australian team to tour England in 1896 was selected towards the end of the season and Hill was not included . A disappointed Hill responded by scoring 206 against New South Wales , who were captained by an Australian selector , Tom Garrett . Experienced cricket watchers were impressed with Hill 's ability at such a young age to control the strike , scoring 154 from his side 's last 197 runs . Following this performance , public demand saw the selectors draft the 19 @-@ year @-@ old Hill into the touring squad . 
 Hill was one of four batsmen touring England for the first time ; Joe Darling , Frank Iredale and Harry Donnan were the others . All four scored more than 1 @,@ 000 runs for the tour with Hill scoring 1 @,@ 196 runs at an average of 27 @.@ 81 . According to Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack , Hill " was a brilliant success " and his batting on good wickets during the tour was " first rate " . Hill made his Test début in the First Test at Lord 's . Australia collapsed in the first innings to be all out for 53 with Hill bowled by George Lohmann for one . England made 292 runs in reply but the second innings saw an Australian fightback . The captain , Harry Trott ( 143 ) , was partnered by Syd Gregory ( 103 ) to help Australia to a score of 347 , setting England 109 runs to win . Hill failed again scoring only five , bowled this time by Jack Hearne . Rain made England 's task a little more difficult but they were able to make the runs for the loss of only four wickets . Hill played in the remaining two Tests , but managed to score only 30 runs in the series . Australia lost the series and the Ashes by two Tests to one . 
 The next Ashes series was held in 1897 – 98 with Stoddart again assembling an English team to tour Australia . The team included players such as K.S. Ranjitsinhji and George Hirst . The touring team 's first match on arrival was against South Australia and Hill batted well , scoring exactly 200 . The First Test was played in Sydney and a minor controversy ensued when officials abandoned the first day 's play due to earlier heavy rain without consulting the two captains . The delay did not seem to affect the English who batted first and scored 551 , including centuries by Ranjitsinhji and Archie MacLaren . The Australians were forced to follow @-@ on after making 237 . Batting again , Hill scored 96 but England managed to win the match by nine wickets . The Second Test was played in Melbourne and Australia fought back , winning by an innings and 55 runs with Hill scoring 58 . Another innings victory in the Third Test in Adelaide saw Australia leading the series two Tests to one . 
 The teams returned to Melbourne for the Fourth Test . England started the match brilliantly , reducing Australia to 6 / 58 on a pitch that assisted the bowlers . Hill , aged just 20 , was watching at the non @-@ striker 's end as the wickets fell . Hugh Trumble came to join him and together they began to rescue the Australian innings . When Hill reached his maiden Test century , he had scored all but 42 of his side 's runs . Hill played balls pitched outside leg stump particularly well and drove beautifully throughout the innings . At the tea interval , Hill , feeling refreshed , mentioned to Trumble that he thought he would " have a go at them now " . The experienced Trumble cautioned Hill , replying " You young devil , you have to stop there . Go along as you have been doing . " Hill and Trumble made 165 runs batting together , still a record for a seventh wicket partnership in Ashes Tests . Hill was 182 not out at the end of the day 's play , the highest first @-@ day innings against England in Australia , and leaving the ground was greeted by a barrage of photographers . After a rest day , Hill added only six more runs before being dismissed at last by Hearne . His innings remains the highest in Ashes Tests by a player under 21 . Batting for 294 minutes he gave only the one chance at dismissal . The journalist and former Test player Tom Horan wrote " Hill 's innings will be talked of when the smallest boy who saw it will be white with the snows of time . " Australia won the Test by 8 wickets to recover the Ashes . That summer , Hill scored 1 @,@ 196 runs in 19 innings including five centuries , the first Australian to score 1 @,@ 000 runs in a home season . 
 = = = Consolidation = = = 
 During the Australian team 's tour of England in 1899 , Hill required surgery to remove a growth in his nose . The after @-@ effects of the operation were more serious than expected ; Hill lost an alarming amount of weight and strength and missed around half of the tour . Before this , Hill was recognised by Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack as the best of the Australian batsmen that English summer . He scored 301 runs in three Tests at an average of 60 @.@ 20 , and was named as one of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year . His best performance of the series was in the Second Test at Lord 's . Hill scored 135 , sharing a partnership of 82 with Victor Trumper , who was playing only his second Test match . Trumper went on to score 135 not out . Hill , who was dropped by Ranjitsinhji fielding at slip when he had made 119 , batted for 4 hours and hit 17 boundaries . Australia won the Test , the only one to have a definite result , by 10 wickets and retained the Ashes . 
 In 1900 – 01 , Hill made a then record Sheffield Shield score for South Australia against New South Wales at the Adelaide Oval . He batted for 8 hours and 35 minutes for 365 , including 35 boundaries . The record stood for 27 years until beaten by Bill Ponsford . Hill averaged more than 100 runs for the season . England returned to contest the Ashes in 1901 – 02 , under the captaincy of Archie MacLaren . The English team was weakened by the unavailability of players such as Ranjitsinhji , Hirst , C.B. Fry and Wilfred Rhodes . The surprise selection was Sydney Barnes , who had played most of his cricket in the Lancashire League . Repeating the result of the series three years earlier , Australia lost the First Test but won the next four comfortably to retain the Ashes . Hill was the leading run scorer in the series , with 521 runs including 99 , 98 and 97 in successive innings . He is still the only person to achieve this most unusual feat . 
 Hill was the victim of bad luck during this sequence of scores between 90 and 99 . At Melbourne during the New Years Test he scored 99 ; the first time a batsman was dismissed one run short of a century in Test cricket . In the first innings in the next Test in Adelaide , having scored 98 , Hill was caught by Johnny Tyldesley who was standing on the bicycle track surrounding the oval . Tyldesley attempted to call Hill back but Hill declined , saying the captains had agreed that the fence was the boundary , not the track . Under modern laws , he would have been not out and the shot would count as six runs , allowing him his century . In the second innings , Hill 's poor luck continued . He chopped down on a ball when 97 and then , to his horror , saw the ball rolling back towards his stumps . He attempted to hit the ball away from the stumps but accidentally knocked the leg bail and was out , bowled . The English writer , Simon Wilde , has described this sequence as an " unparalleled spell of <unk> ' neurosis " . 
 Hill visited England for a third time in 1902 with the Australian team who won their fourth successive Test series . In the process the Australians " beat the records of all their predecessors in the country " by losing only two of 39 matches during the tour . For the second time , Hill scored more than 1 @,@ 000 runs in an English summer ; 1 @,@ 534 at an average of 31 @.@ 95 including four centuries . Rain affected the first two Test matches at Edgbaston and Lord 's and both teams moved to Sheffield without a win . 
 The Third Test , the only Test match played at Bramall Lane , saw Hill play one of his finest innings on a poorly prepared pitch that made batting difficult . Australia batted first and could only score 194 , Barnes taking 6 wickets for 49 runs . In return Monty Noble and Jack Saunders bowled England out for 145 and Australia led by 49 runs on the first innings . When Reggie Duff was dismissed in the second innings , Hill joined Trumper at the wicket . The pair scored 60 runs in half an hour before Trumper was out , caught by the wicket @-@ keeper . He was followed quickly by the captain , Darling , out for a duck . Syd Gregory was the next batsman and with Hill added 107 runs in only 67 minutes . In semi @-@ darkness and facing fast and accurate bowling on a poor pitch , Hill pushed on to reach his century after 115 minutes of batting . He had given two difficult chances , one at slip when 74 and in the outfield at 77 before he was caught by MacLaren from the bowling of Jackson for 119 . Australia won the Test by 143 runs . The final two Tests were thrillers . Australia won the Fourth Test at Old Trafford by a mere three runs with Trumble taking ten wickets for the match . England won the Fifth and final Test at The Oval by one wicket . Chasing 263 , England were 5 / 48 when Gilbert Jessop began an extraordinary display of hitting , scoring a century in only 75 minutes to help England to victory . Of Hill 's form during the tour , Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack said " Clement Hill played many fine innings , his best performance being in the Test match at Sheffield , but , even allowing for the soft wickets , I do not think he was so great a batsman as in 1899 . " 
 On the return trip to Australia , the touring team stopped in South Africa to play three Tests , the first Tests between the two nations . Hill was the most successful Australian batsman in the series , scoring 327 runs at an average of 81 @.@ 75 . In the First Test he made 145 when Australia was in trouble after following @-@ on , an innings described in Wisden as " marred by very few mistakes " . In the Third Test , Hill batted through much of the Australian first innings to make 91 not out . Australia won the Test by ten wickets and the series two Tests to nil . 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 For the first time under the auspices of the Marylebone Cricket Club , an English team travelled to Australia for the 1903 – 04 season to contest the Ashes . Contrary to expectations before the tour , the English won the series and the Ashes three Tests to two . Hill trailed Trumper and Noble in the series averages , making 276 runs at 27 @.@ 60 without ever getting to 100 in an innings . In the First Test , Hill was at the centre of what Wisden described as a " very regrettable and indeed disgraceful [ crowd ] demonstration " . Batting with Trumper , Hill had run well past the stumps at the bowler 's end for a fourth run . The English return gave the Australian pair an opportunity for an overthrow . Hill had to run the entire length of the pitch . Albert Relf at mid @-@ on gathered and threw to the wicket @-@ keeper , Dick Lilley who removed the bails and appealed for the run out . Umpire Bob Crockett gave Hill out . Hill could not believe the decision as the ball had passed behind him when he slid his bat to make his ground . The crowd were also convinced that Hill was not out and began to hoot , chanting " Crock ! , Crock ! , Crock ! " Bottles were thrown onto the surrounding cycle track and the English captain Plum Warner threatened to take his team from the ground . At the end of the day , Crockett required a police escort when leaving the ground . Hill 's best performance of the series was at his home town , Adelaide , in the Third Test . Hill scored 88 before being dismissed by Ted Arnold , caught by the wicket @-@ keeper . Australia won the Test by 216 runs . 
 Hill toured England for the last time with the 1905 Australian team . The Test series was dominated by what was seen as uninspired cricket with England retaining the Ashes two Tests to nil . The Australian batting suffered from a lack of steadiness and Hill was one of the Australians criticised by Wisden that season ; " [ Hill ] would certainly have met with more consistent success if he had retained his old self @-@ control . He was somewhat indiscriminate in hitting at the off @-@ ball , and many a time his impatience cost him his wicket . " However Wisden praised his fielding , saying " Trumper , Hill , and Hopkins did any amount of fine work in the deep field " . 
 The Australians recovered the Ashes from the 1907 – 08 English team , winning the series four Tests to one . England were hit by the loss of their captain , Arthur Jones who contracted an illness that threatened to develop into pneumonia , causing him to miss the first three Tests . Hill , batting with team @-@ mate Roger Hartigan playing his first Test match , set a record in the Third Test in Adelaide . Suffering from influenza and unable to field in the English first innings , Hill joined Hartigan at the fall of the seventh wicket . During his innings , Hill vomited beside the pitch and had to quickly leave the field several times . The pair managed to bat on and take the match into a fourth day . Hartigan , whose leave from work had expired , was relieved to receive a telegram from his employer : " Stay as long as you are making runs . " When Hartigan was dismissed for 116 , the pair had together made 243 for the eighth wicket — still an Australian Test record . With Sammy Carter , Hill continued before finally dismissed by Jack Crawford for 160 , after 5 hours and 19 minutes of batting . At the end of his innings Hill was close to collapse but his efforts assisted his team defeat the English by 245 runs . 
 = = = Captain = = = 
 Australia were due to tour England to contest the Ashes in 1909 . Hill , along with other senior players , was fighting against a proposal to move the management of international tours away from the players to the new Australian Board of Control for International Cricket Matches . Hill by now was a team selector and strongly opposed the selection in the team of 40 @-@ year @-@ old Peter McAlister , who Hill claimed " was past his best " and " not suited to English conditions " . McAlister was also a member of the selection panel and was able to secure a majority for his selection . Hill accused his fellow selectors of conspiracy and said he had " decided to wash his hands of the affair " and that " he did not consider that the best men had been chosen " . Hill 's relationship with McAlister would remain fractious . Hill was also a delegate on the Board of Control , representing the South Australian Cricket Association ( SACA ) . At the Board meeting in February 1909 to set the terms to be offered to the players selected for the tour , the SACA delegates were outvoted on every point . Hill declined to accept the terms offered . Since his marriage in 1905 , Hill had spent considerable time away from his wife with his commitments during two Test series against England and this may have also influenced his decision not to tour . 
 When Hill returned to the Test team it was as captain for a series against the visiting South Africa national cricket team in 1910 – 11 . The South Africans , led by Aubrey Faulkner , had a novel bowling attack consisting of several googly bowlers , such as Bert Vogler , Reggie Schwarz and Faulkner himself and the chinaman bowler Charlie " Buck " Llewellyn . The South Africans started the tour well , defeating a South Australian team unable to handle the unusual bowling approach . Hill , after consulting with other players , settled on a strategy of hitting the bowlers off their length with aggressive batting . Hill showed the way in the First Test at Sydney , scoring his first 100 runs in 98 minutes . In a partnership with Warren Bardsley , the pair scored 224 runs in only two hours . After just 3 hours and 20 minutes at the crease , he was dismissed for 191 ; his highest Test score . Australia won the Test by an innings and 114 runs . Australia won the Second Test in Melbourne after bowling the South Africans out for 80 in their second innings , but the South Africans fought back to win the Third Test in Adelaide by 38 runs . Australia won the Fourth Test by 508 runs after being sent in to bat by South Africa , who hoped to trap them on a rain @-@ affected wicket . The Australians managed to end the first day 's play at 8 / 317 to avoid the trap and win the Test . In the second innings , Hill hit another century ( 100 ) in only 100 minutes , with Wisden noting that he " play [ ed ] especially well " . Australia won the final Test and the series four Tests to one . 
 = = = Brawl and boycott = = = 
 Hill 's Test career ended in controversy amid another dispute with the Board of Control . He was once again appointed captain of the Australian team against an English side captained by Johnny Douglas in 1911 – 12 . The English team included bowlers of the calibre of Barnes and Frank Foster and , after losing the first Test in Sydney , won all four remaining Tests to secure the Ashes . Hill had a lean season with the bat , managing 274 runs at an average of 27 @.@ 40 . The England bowlers were clearly superior to the Australian batsmen ; Trumper was the only Australian to score a century during the Tests . While this series took place , the Board of Control made plans to usurp the commonly accepted right of the players to appoint the team manager when touring England . In response , a group of senior players , including Hill , threatened to withdraw from the next tour , to take place in 1912 , unless their choice , Frank Laver , was appointed . 
 Matters came to a head when Hill sent a telegram to fellow selector , Peter McAlister , urging the inclusion of the New South Wales all @-@ rounder Charlie Macartney in the team for the Fourth Test in Melbourne . The reply from McAlister — a member of the Board of Control who still bore some animosity towards Hill from past comments — to Hill 's request was " ... Still opposed to Macartney 's inclusion . If Iredale ( another selector ) agrees with you as to Macartney 's inclusion , I favour yourself standing down not <unk> . " Hill saw the offer to remove himself from the team as sore provocation and his team @-@ mates scorned the suggestion . Australia lost the Third Test by seven wickets . Macartney wrote later , " Persistent ill @-@ feeling seriously affected the morale of the side . " At a meeting held after the Test , the Board of Control rejected the players ' petition and declared that the manager would be appointed by the Board alone . At a " special meeting " two weeks later , the Board appointed George Crouch from Queensland to the position of tour manager . 
 The following day , 3 February 1912 , the selection committee met in Sydney to decide the team for the Fourth Test . It was the first time Hill and McAlister had met since the exchange of telegrams . The pair exchanged insults with McAlister sharply criticising Hill 's captaincy . Hill retorted , " In England , Armstrong wouldn 't play under you . Did you ever win any except second rate games ? " 
 McAlister replied , " I am a better captain than Trumper , Armstrong and yourself put together . You are the worst captain I have ever seen . " Hill then warned McAlister to stop insulting him but McAlister repeated the remark . Losing control , Hill struck McAlister a blow across the face . The two then grappled for around ten minutes . Blood was drawn , staining their clothes and splashing on the other men present , Iredale and secretary Sydney Smith . At one stage , fearing that one or both combatants would fall through the window and onto the street , Smith grabbed hold of Hill 's coat @-@ tails . The fight ended with a bloody McAlister lying on the floor and Hill , unmarked , standing over him . Hill told Smith he could no longer work with McAlister . Smith then asked Hill to put his resignation in writing and the Board accepted it that evening . 
 The crowds at the Melbourne and Sydney Tests gave Hill three cheers when he arrived at the wicket . When Hill reached the batting crease in his last Test at Sydney , the umpire Bob Crockett said " there were tears in his eyes " . An in camera investigation into the fracas took place ; the Board 's only comment on the meeting was to report that it had been " satisfactorily settled " . Hill was then offered an invitation to take part in the 1912 Triangular Tournament in England . Hill declined the invitation , along with Warwick Armstrong , Trumper , Carter , Noble and Vernon Ransford , who collectively became known as the " Big Six " . He never played Test cricket again . 
 = = = Retirement and legacy = = = 
 At the age of 43 , Hill returned to first @-@ class cricket for one match to assist in its re @-@ establishment in Australia after the Great War . In support of the benefits of some former colleagues , he played in a further two first @-@ class matches with his best score of 66 coming in a game against Victoria . His last match was for an Australian XI against New South Wales played to support Bill Howell 's benefit . 
 In all Tests , Hill scored 3 @,@ 412 runs at an average just under 40 runs per innings and including seven centuries . When he retired he had scored more runs in Test cricket than any other player ; a record he held for 12 years until surpassed by Jack Hobbs . In 1902 Hill was the first to score 1 @,@ 000 Test runs in a calendar year ; the next to do so was Denis Compton 45 years later in 1947 . Prolific in Australian state cricket as well , he headed the South Australian first @-@ class averages on ten occasions between 1895 – 96 and 1910 – 11 . In successive innings in 1909 – 10 he scored 175 against Victoria in Adelaide , 205 against New South Wales and 185 against Victoria in Melbourne . He was the only Australian to score more than 17 @,@ 000 runs in the period before pitches were protected from rain . In club cricket he averaged more than 100 runs for the season on three occasions . 
 In 2003 , the South Australian Cricket Association named the new southern grandstand at the Adelaide Oval the " Clem Hill Stand " in recognition of his contribution to South Australian cricket . Hill was inducted into the Australian Cricket Hall of Fame in 2005 . 
 = = Outside cricket = = 
 Hill served an engineering apprenticeship at the government workshops in Islington . On retirement from cricket , however , Hill began a career in horse racing administration . He was employed as a stipendiary steward with the South Australian Jockey Club and the Adelaide Racing Club and in 1937 he was appointed handicapper for the Victoria Amateur Turf Club ( VATC ) in Melbourne . At the VATC he was responsible for setting the weights for the Caulfield Cup , one of Australia 's richest and most prestigious horse races . He served in this role for six years before poor health saw him take a less demanding role at the Geelong Racing Club . 
 Hill married Florence " Florrie " Hart , granddaughter of William Hart <unk> in Tasmania in 1905 . The couple settled in Adelaide and raised two daughters , Lesley and Brenda . When he took up his role with the VATC , Hill and his family moved to Toorak , an eastern suburb of Melbourne . In 1945 , Hill was thrown from a tram in a traffic accident on busy Collins Street in inner Melbourne . He was taken to Royal Melbourne Hospital and died there soon after aged 68 . His body was returned for burial at North Road Cemetery in the Adelaide suburb of Nailsworth . 
 = = Style and personality = = 
 Short and stocky , Hill was a gifted batsman who could score quickly when required . Wisden described Hill as a " specially brilliant batsman on hard pitches " . He had an awkward crouched stance , gripping the bat low on the handle . This limited his forward reach and power and reduced his effectiveness when driving but he compensated for this with quick footwork . Hill 's strong bottom hand and his keen eye allowed him to play the cut shot cleanly and with confidence and to hit powerfully on the leg side . He preferred batting against fast bowling rather than slow and medium pace bowlers and he was a fearless exponent of the hook shot . Hill had a tendency to get out in the " nervous nineties " , being dismissed six times between 90 and 99 in Test matches . This included a sequence in the 1901 – 02 series against England of 99 , 98 and 97 in successive innings . 
 While able to drive hard to the off or straight , usually with the ball kept down , Clem Hill scored chiefly on the leg side by skilful strokes perfectly timed and placed , the way in which he turned straight balls clear of fieldsmen being exceptional . Brilliant square and late cutting made Hill delightful to watch and in defence his style claimed admiration while his patience was unlimited 
 An excellent fielder in the deep , Hill had a powerful throwing arm . During a match at Leeds during the 1902 tour of England , he threw a ball from near the boundary , knocking down the stumps at one end and rebounding to hit the stumps the other end . During the same tour at Old Trafford , Hill made a catch that Wisden claimed " will never be forgotten by [ those present ] " . A Dick Lilley hit to square leg looked likely to clear the boundary . Hill himself said he raced 25 yards ( 23 m ) for it with a view simply to save a boundary . In the event , he ran round ' close to the boundary ' from his position at long on , aided by the wind seemingly holding up the ball to take the catch low down in front of the pavilion in his outstretched hands ; one that Wisden said " few fieldsmen would have thought worth attempting " . 
 Hill was a man of high ideals and was popular with his fellow players . Pelham Warner commented on his pleasant nature and Robert Trumble , an author and son of Hugh Trumble , recalled him as honest , direct and without guile . An anecdote told about Hill had him hitting a low shot into shadows where Warren Bardsley was fielding . He completed one run and then asked the umpire if the ball had been caught . The shadow made it impossible for the umpire to see , so Hill then asked Bardsley , " Did you catch it ? " When Bardsley replied in the affirmative , Hill immediately walked to the pavilion . When England won four Tests in a row in 1911 – 12 , Hill managed to retain the confidence of his players . Frank Iredale wrote that Hill was a cheery skipper whose men were happy under his leadership . Despite breaking many records , Hill showed little awareness of them . When watching Jack Hobbs break his record for the most runs in Test cricket at Headingley in 1926 , it was Hobbs ' wife sitting nearby who had to remind Hill that the record was previously his . 
 = Homework ( Daft Punk album ) = 
 Homework is the debut studio album by the French electronic music duo Daft Punk , released on 7 January 1997 by Virgin Records and Soma Quality Recordings . The album revived house music and departed from the Eurodance formula . The duo produced the tracks without plans to release an album . After working on projects that were intended to be separate singles over five months , they considered the material good enough for an album . 
 Homework 's success brought worldwide attention to French house music . Homework charted in 14 different countries , peaking at number 3 on the French Albums Chart , number 150 on the United States Billboard 200 and at number 8 on the UK Albums Chart . By February 2001 , the album had sold more than two million copies worldwide and received several gold and platinum certifications . Overall , Homework received positive critical response . The album features singles that had significant impact in French house and global dance music scenes , including the U.S. Billboard Hot Dance / Club Play number @-@ one singles " Da Funk " and " Around the World " , the latter of which reached number 61 on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 In 1993 , Thomas Bangalter and Guy @-@ Manuel de Homem @-@ Christo presented a demo of their electronic music to DJ Stuart Macmillan at a rave at EuroDisney . The contents of the cassette were released on the single " The New Wave " on 11 April 1994 , by Soma Quality Recordings , a Scottish techno and house label co @-@ founded in 1991 by MacMillan 's band Slam . Daft Punk returned to the studio in May 1995 to record " Da Funk " , which was released later that year alongside " Rollin ' & Scratchin ' " under the Soma label . 
 The increasing popularity of Daft Punk 's singles led to a bidding war among record labels , resulting in the duo 's signing to Virgin Records in 1996 . Their departure was noted by Richard Brown of Soma , who affirmed that " we were obviously sad to lose them to Virgin but they had the chance to go big , which they wanted , and it 's not very often that a band has that chance after two singles . We 're happy for them . " Virgin re @-@ released " Da Funk " with the B @-@ side " Musique " in 1996 , a year before releasing Homework . Bangalter later stated that the B @-@ side " was never intended to be on the album , and in fact , ' Da Funk ' as a single has sold more units than Homework , so more people own it anyways [ sic ] than they would if it had been on the album . It is basically used to make the single a double @-@ feature . " The album was mixed and recorded in Daft Punk 's studio , Daft House in Paris . It was mastered by Nilesh Patel at the London studio The Exchange . 
 Bangalter stated that " to be free , we had to be in control . To be in control , we had to finance what we were doing ourselves . The main idea was to be free . " Daft Punk discussed their method with Spike Jonze , director of the " Da Funk " music video . He noted that " they were doing everything based on how they wanted to do it . As opposed to , ' oh we got signed to this record company , we gotta use their plan . ' They wanted to make sure they never had to do anything that would make them feel bummed on making music . " Although Virgin Records holds exclusive distribution rights over Daft Punk 's material , the duo still owns their master recordings through their Daft Trax label . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Daft Punk produced the tracks included in Homework without a plan to release an album . Bangalter stated , " It was supposed to be just a load of singles . But we did so many tracks over a period of five months that we realized that we had a good album . " The duo set the order of the tracks to cover the four sides of a two @-@ disc vinyl LP . De Homem @-@ Christo remarked , " There was no intended theme because all the tracks were recorded before we arranged the sequence of the album . The idea was to make the songs better by arranging them the way we did ; to make it more even as an album . " The name Homework , Bangalter explained , relates to " the fact that we made the record at home , very cheaply , very quickly , and spontaneously , trying to do cool stuff . " 
 " Daftendirekt " is an excerpt of a live performance recorded in Ghent , Belgium ; it served as the introduction to Daft Punk 's live shows and was used to begin the album . The performance took place at the first I Love Techno , an event co @-@ produced by Fuse and On the Rox on 10 November 1995 . Janet Jackson sampled " Daftendirekt " on her song " So Much Betta " , which was included in her tenth studio album , Discipline , in 2008 . Homework 's following track , " <unk> 83 @.@ 7 FM " , is a tribute to FM radio in the US . The next song , " Revolution 909 " is a reflection on the French government 's stance on dance music . 
 " Revolution 909 " is followed by " Da Funk " , which carries elements of funk and acid music . According to Andrew Asch of the Boca Raton News , the song 's composition " relies on a bouncy funk guitar to communicate its message of dumb fun . " Bangalter expressed that " Da Funk " ' s theme involved the introduction of a simple , unusual element that becomes acceptable and moving over time . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine complimented the song as " unrelenting " , and Bob <unk> of Westnet called it " a beautiful meeting of Chic ( circa " Good Times " , sans vocals ) and the 90s form of electronica . " The song appeared on the soundtrack for the 1997 film The Saint and was placed at number 18 on Pitchfork Media 's " Top 200 Tracks of the 1990s " list . " <unk> " combines elements of gospel music and house music . The duo considered " Fresh " to be breezy and light with a comical structure . Ian Mathers of Stylus Magazine criticized the song , stating that it " doesn 't feel like the beach just because of the lapping waves heard in the background . " 
 The single " Around the World " carries influences of Gershon Kingsley 's hit " Popcorn " . Its music video was directed by the Academy Award @-@ winning French filmmaker Michel Gondry , who compared the track 's bassline to that of " Good Times " by Chic . Chris Power of BBC Music named it " one of the decade 's catchiest singles " . He stated that it was " a perfect example of Daft Punk 's sound at its most accessible : a post @-@ disco boogie bassline , a minimalist sprinkling of synthetic keyboard melody and a single , naggingly insistent hook . " Ian Mathers of Stylus Magazine commented that " there is no way you 'd want to have a Homework without ' Around The World ' . " The track " Teachers " is a tribute to several of Daft Punk 's house music influences , including future collaborators Romanthony , DJ Sneak and Todd Edwards . The song " Oh Yeah " features DJ <unk> and DJ Crabbe . " Indo Silver Club " features a sample of " Hot Shot " by Karen Young . Prior to its inclusion on Homework , " Indo Silver Club " was released as a single on the Soma Quality Recordings label in two parts . The single lacked an artist credit in the packaging and was thought to have been created by the nonexistent producers Indo Silver Club . The final track , " Funk Ad " , is a reversed clip of " Da Funk " . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Homework features singles that had significant impact in the French house and global dance music scenes . The first single from the album , " Alive " , was included as a B @-@ side on the single " The New Wave " , which was released in April 1994 . The album 's second single was " Da Funk " ; it was initially released in 1995 by Soma and was re @-@ released by Virgin Records in 1996 . It became the duo 's first number @-@ one single on the Billboard Hot Dance / Club Play chart . The song reached number seven on British and French charts . The third single , " Around the World " , was a critical and commercial success , becoming the second number @-@ one single on the Billboard Hot Dance / Club Play chart , as well as reaching number 11 in Australia , number five in the United Kingdom and number 61 on the Billboard Hot 100 . In October 2011 , NME placed " Around the World " at number 21 on its list of " 150 Best Tracks of the Past 15 Years " . The album 's fourth single was " Burnin ' " ; it was released in September 1997 and peaked at number 30 in the UK . The final single from Homework was " Revolution 909 " . It was released in February 1998 and reached number 47 in the UK and number 12 on the Billboard Hot Dance / Club Play chart . 
 In 1999 , the duo released a video collection featuring music videos of tracks and singles from the album under the name of D.A.F.T. : A Story About Dogs , Androids , Firemen and Tomatoes . Although its title derives from the appearances of dogs ( " Da Funk " and " Fresh " ) , androids ( " Around the World " ) , firemen ( " Burnin ' " ) , and tomatoes ( " Revolution 909 " ) in the videos , a cohesive plot does not connect its episodes . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Daft Punk wanted the majority of pressings to be on vinyl , so only 50 @,@ 000 albums were initially printed in CD format . After its release , overwhelming sales of Homework caused distributors to accelerate production to satisfy demand . The album was distributed in 35 countries worldwide , peaking at number 150 on the Billboard 200 . Homework first charted on the Australian Albums Chart on 27 April 1997 ; it remained there for eight weeks and peaked at number 37 . In France , the album reached number three and stayed on the chart for 82 weeks . In 1999 , it reached Gold status in France for selling more than 100 @,@ 000 copies . On 11 July 2001 , the album was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America , indicating sales of 500 @,@ 000 copies in the US . By October 1997 , the album had sold 220 @,@ 000 copies worldwide , although Billboard reported that , according to Virgin Records , two million copies had been sold by February 2001 . By September 2007 , 605 @,@ 000 copies had been sold in the United States . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Homework 's success brought worldwide attention to French progressive house music , and drew attention to French house music . According to The Village Voice , the album revived house music and departed from the Euro dance formula . In the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die , critic Alex Rayner stated that Homework tied the established club styles to the " burgeoning eclecticism " of big beat . He contended that it served as a proof that " there was more to dance music than pills and keyboard presets . " Clash described Homework as an entry point of accessibility for a " burgeoning movement on the cusp of splitting the mainstream seam . " In 2009 , Brian Linder of IGN described Homework as the duo 's third @-@ best album . He catalogued as a " groundbreaking achievement " the way they used their unique skills to craft the house , techno , acid and punk music styles into the record . Hua Hsu of eMusic agreed , applauding Homework for how it captured a " feeling of discovery and exploration " as a result of " years of careful study of the finest house , techno , electro and hip @-@ hop records . " David Browne , writing in Entertainment Weekly , stated that the duo knew how to use " their playful , hip @-@ hopping ambient techno " to craft the album . He named Homework the " ideal disco for androids " . Sean Cooper of AllMusic called the album " an almost certain classic " and " essential " . 
 Chris Power of BBC Music compared Homework 's " less @-@ is @-@ more " approach to compression 's use as " a sonic tribute " to the FM radio stations that " fed Daft Punk 's youthful obsessions . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine wrote that " while a few tracks are more daft than deft , " more recent <unk> like The Avalanches could never exist without " Da Funk " . Ian Mathers of Stylus Magazine noted that " there 's a core of <unk> classic work on Homework , hidden among the merely good , and when you 've got such a classic debut hidden in the outlines of the epic slouch of their debut , it 's hard not to get frustrated . " Rolling Stone awarded the album three stars out of five , commenting that " the duo 's essential , career @-@ defining insight is that the problem with disco the first time around was not that it was stupid but that it was not stupid enough . " Rolling Stone ranked Homework at the top on their list of " The 30 Greatest EDM Albums of All Time " while affirming that Daft Punk 's debut " is pure synapse @-@ tweaking brilliance . " According to Scott Woods of The Village Voice , " Daft Punk [ tore ] the lid off the [ creative ] sewer " with the release of Homework . Ryan Schreiber of Pitchfork Media awarded it 7 @.@ 6 out of 10 . He stated that " Homework provides sixteen whole tracks of modern @-@ day boom box bass n ' drum and unlike your science project , it doesn 't require a lot of intricate calculations to figure out how it works . " In his view , " It sounds like an Atari 2600 on a killing spree . " By contrast , Robert Christgau of The Village Voice cited " Da Funk " as a " choice cut " , indicating " a good song on an album that isn 't worth your time or money " . Darren <unk> from Drop @-@ D Magazine also gave a negative review , stating that " Homework is the work of a couple of DJs who sound amateurish at best . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All music composed by Thomas Bangalter and Guy @-@ Manuel de Homem @-@ Christo . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = AACS encryption key controversy = 
 A controversy surrounding the AACS cryptographic key arose in April 2007 when the Motion Picture Association of America and the Advanced Access Content System Licensing Administrator , LLC ( AACS LA ) began issuing cease and desist letters to websites publishing a 128 @-@ bit ( 16 @-@ byte ) number , represented in hexadecimal as 09 F9 11 02 9D 74 E3 5B D8 41 56 C5 63 56 88 C0 ( commonly referred to as 09 F9 ) , a cryptographic key for HD DVDs and Blu @-@ ray Discs . The letters demanded the immediate removal of the key and any links to it , citing the anti @-@ circumvention provisions of the United States Digital Millennium Copyright Act ( DMCA ) . 
 In response to widespread Internet postings of the key , the AACS LA issued various press statements , praising those websites that complied with their requests as acting in a " responsible manner " , warning that " legal and technical tools " were adapting to the situation . 
 The controversy was further escalated in early May 2007 , when aggregate news site Digg received a DMCA cease and desist notice and then removed numerous articles on the matter and banned users <unk> the information . This sparked what some describe as a digital revolt or " cyber @-@ riot " , in which users posted and spread the key on Digg , and throughout the Internet en masse , thereby leading to a Streisand effect . The AACS LA described this situation as an " interesting new twist " . 
 = = Background = = 
 <unk> is a base @-@ 16 numeral system used in the fields of computer programming and mathematics . The key is an ordinary number most widely known by its hexadecimal representation ; in decimal notation , it is 13 @,@ 256 @,@ 278 @,@ 887 @,@ 989 @,@ 457 @,@ 651 @,@ 018 @,@ 865 @,@ 901 @,@ 401 @,@ 704 @,@ 640 . 
 Because the encryption key may be used as part of circumvention technology forbidden by the DMCA , its possession and distribution has been viewed as illegal by the AACS , as well as by some legal professionals . Since it is a 128 @-@ bit numerical value , it was dubbed an illegal number . Opponents to the expansion of the scope of copyright criticize the idea of making a particular number illegal . 
 Commercial HD DVDs and Blu @-@ ray Discs integrate copy protection technology specified by the AACS LA . There are several interlocking encryption mechanisms , such that cracking one part of the system does not necessarily crack other parts . Therefore , the " 09 F9 " key is only one of many parts that are needed to play a disc on an unlicensed player . 
 The AACS system can be used to revoke a key of a specific playback device , after it is known to have been compromised , as it has for WinDVD . The compromised players can still be used to view old discs , but not newer releases without encryption keys for the compromised players . If other players are then cracked , further revocation would lead to legitimate users of compromised players being forced to upgrade or replace their player software or firmware in order to view new discs . Each playback device comes with a binary tree of secret device and processing keys . The processing key in this tree , a requirement to play the AACS encrypted discs , is selected based on the device key and the information on the disc to be played . As such , a processing key such as the " 09 F9 " key is not revoked , but newly produced discs cause the playback devices to select a different valid processing key to decrypt the discs . 
 = = Timeline of AACS cracking = = 
 = = = 2006 = = = 
 On December 26 , 2006 , a person using the alias muslix64 published a utility named BackupHDDVD and its source code on the DVD decryption forum at the website Doom9 . BackupHDDVD can be used to decrypt AACS protected content once one knows the encryption <unk> muslix64 claimed to have found title and volume keys in main memory while playing HD DVDs using a software player , and that finding them is not difficult . 
 = = = 2007 = = = 
 On January 1 , 2007 , muslix64 published a new version of the program , with volume key support . On January 12 , 2007 , other forum members detailed how to find other title and volume keys , stating they had also found the keys of several movies in RAM while running WinDVD . 
 On or about January 13 , a title key was posted on <unk> in the form of a riddle , which was solved by entering terms into the Google search engine . By converting these results to hexadecimal , a correct key could be formed . Later that day , the first cracked HD DVD , Serenity , was uploaded on a private torrent tracker . The AACS LA confirmed on January 26 that the title keys on certain HD DVDs had been published without authorization . 
 <unk> forum user <unk> found and published the " 09 F9 " AACS processing key on February 11 : 
 Nothing was hacked , cracked or even reverse engineered <unk> : I only had to watch the " show " in my own memory . No debugger was used , no binaries changed . 
 This key is not specific to any playback device or DVD title . <unk> forum user <unk> claimed on March 4 to have revealed <unk> 's PowerDVD 's key , and that it was the key in use by <unk> . 
 The AACS LA announced on April 16 that it had revoked the decryption keys associated with certain software high @-@ definition DVD players , which will not be able to decrypt AACS encrypted disks mastered after April 23 , without an update of the software . 
 On May 17 , one week before any discs with the updated processing key had reached retail , claims were reported of the new keys having been retrieved from a preview disc of The Matrix Trilogy . On May 23 , the key 45 5F E1 04 22 CA 29 C4 93 3F 95 05 2B 79 2A B2 was posted on Edward <unk> 's Freedom to Tinker Blog and confirmed a week later by <unk> on Doom9 as the new processing key ( MKB v3 ) . 
 = = = 2008 = = = 
 In August , two new processing keys were posted : 
 F1 90 A1 E8 17 8D 80 64 34 94 39 4F 80 31 D9 C8 , for MKB v4 , and 
 7A 5F 8A 09 F8 33 F7 22 1B D4 1F A6 4C 9C 79 33 , which appeared to work with MKB <unk> , MKB <unk> and MKB <unk> discs . 
 = = = 2009 = = = 
 In March , two additional processing keys were posted : 
 C8 72 94 CE 84 F9 CC EB 59 84 B5 47 EE C1 8D 66 , for MKB <unk> 
 45 2F 6E 40 3C DF 10 71 4E 41 DF AA 25 7D 31 3F , for MKB <unk> 
 While individual discs have been decrypted containing media key block version 17 , processing keys for versions past 10 have not yet been released to the public . 
 Many more later keys were discovered , but most were not released publicly , probably because that would make them easier to revoke . 
 = = DMCA notices and Digg = = 
 As early as April 17 , 2007 , AACS LA had issued DMCA violation notices , sent by Charles S. Sims of <unk> Rose . Following this , dozens of notices were sent to various websites hosted in the United States . 
 On May 1 , 2007 , in response to a DMCA demand letter , technology news site Digg began closing accounts and removing posts containing or alluding to the key . The Digg community reacted by creating a flood of posts containing the key , many using creative ways of semi @-@ directly or indirectly inserting the number , such as in song or images ( either representing the digits pictorially or directly representing bytes from the key as colors ) or on merchandise . At one point , Digg 's " entire homepage was covered with links to the HD @-@ DVD code or anti @-@ Digg references . " Eventually the Digg administrators reversed their position , with founder Kevin Rose stating : 
 But now , after seeing hundreds of stories and reading thousands of comments , you 've made it clear . You 'd rather see Digg go down fighting than bow down to a bigger company . We hear you , and effective immediately we won 't delete stories or comments containing the code and will deal with whatever the consequences might be . 
 = = = Legal opinions = = = 
 Lawyers and other representatives of the entertainment industry , including Michael Ayers , an attorney for Toshiba Corporation , expressed surprise at Digg 's decision , but suggested that a suit aimed at Digg might merely spread the information more widely . 
 If you try to stick up for what you have a legal right to do , and you 're somewhat worse off because of it , that 's an interesting concept . 
 The American Bar Association 's <unk> published a discussion of the controversy , in which Eric Goldman at Santa Clara University 's High Tech Law Institute noted that the illegality of putting the code up is questionable ( that Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act may protect the provider when the material itself is not copyrighted ) , although continuing to allow posting of the key may be " risky " , and entertainment lawyer Carole Handler noted that even if the material is illegal , laws such as the DMCA may prove ineffective in a practical sense . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In a response to the events occurring on Digg and the call to " Spread this number " , the key was rapidly posted to thousands of pages , blogs and <unk> across the Internet . The reaction was an example of the Streisand effect . 
 Intellectual property lawyer Douglas J. <unk> noted , " People are getting creative . It shows the futility of trying to stop this . Once the information is out there , cease @-@ and @-@ desist letters are going to infuriate this community more . " Outside the Internet and the mass media , the key has appeared in or on T @-@ shirts , poetry , songs and music videos , illustrations and other graphic artworks , tattoos and body art , and comic strips . 
 On Tuesday afternoon , May 1 , 2007 , a Google search for the key returned 9 @,@ 410 results , while the same search the next morning returned nearly 300 @,@ 000 results . On Friday , the BBC reported that a search on Google shows almost 700 @,@ 000 pages have published the key , despite the fact that on April 17 , the AACS LA sent a DMCA notice to Google , demanding that Google stop returning any results for searches for the key . 
 Widespread news coverage included speculation on the development of user @-@ driven websites , the legal liability of running a user @-@ driven website , the perception of acceptance of DRM , the failure as a business model of " secrecy based businesses ... in every aspect " in the Internet era , and the harm an industry can cause itself with harshly @-@ perceived legal action . 
 In an opposing move , Carter Wood of the National Association of Manufacturers said they had removed the " Digg It " <unk> from their weblog . 
 Until the Digg community shows as much fervor in attacking intellectual piracy as attacking the companies that are legitimately defending their property , well , we do not want to be promoting the site by using the " Digg It " feature . 
 Media coverage initially avoided quoting the key itself . However , several US @-@ based news sources have run stories containing the key , quoting its use on Digg , though none are known to have received DMCA notices as a result . Later reports have discussed this , quoting the key . Current TV broadcast the key during a Google Current story on the Digg incident on May 3 , 2007 , displaying it in full on screen for several seconds and placing the story on the station website . 
 Wikipedia , on May 1 , 2007 , locked out the page named for the number " to prevent the former secret from being posted again . The page on HD DVD was locked , too , to keep out The Number . " This action was later reversed . 
 = = = AACS LA reaction = = = 
 On May 7 , 2007 , the AACS LA announced on its website that it had " requested the removal solely of illegal circumvention tools , including encryption keys , from a number of web sites " , and that it had " not requested the removal or deletion of any ... discussion or commentary " . The statement continued , " AACS LA is encouraged by the cooperation it has received thus far from the numerous web sites that have chosen to address their legal obligations in a responsible manner . " BBC News had earlier quoted an AACS executive saying that bloggers " crossed the line " , that AACS was looking at " legal and technical tools " to confront those who published the key , and that the events involving Digg were an " interesting new twist " . 
 = Talk ( song ) = 
 " Talk " is a song by British alternative rock band Coldplay . Built around a motif from Kraftwerk 's 1981 song " Computer Love " , it was written by all members of the band and appeared on their third album , X & Y. In the United States , the song entered at number 86 on the Billboard Hot 100 and elsewhere in the world its success varied . It peaked at number one in the Netherlands ' Dutch Top 40 , becoming the band 's first number one single there . 
 The song received positive reviews , with critics noting the music 's sound and memorable lyrics . Both the song and its " Thin White Duke " remix were nominated for the 2007 Grammy Awards , the latter of which won in the category of Best Remixed Recording , Non @-@ Classical . 
 = = Background = = 
 Coldplay had difficulties with the recording sessions for months , as to the sound of the track . They were skeptical in deciding to add " Talk " to the final track listing of X & Y. During the recording sessions , which had seen the band scrap huge amounts of material , the song was left out when they sent early versions of the album to its record label , Parlophone . The song , however , made it to the track list , after it was properly mixed . 
 When asked about the development of the song by NME.com , vocalist Chris Martin said , " From that version , [ a version that NME.com heard , while visiting the band in the studio ] we went and did a whole other version of it . A whole other song . What happened with the song ' Talk ' is that it was all going great and then someone said ' That should be the first single ' and we all just freaked out and scrapped it all . [ ... ] We ’ ve just mixed it and it sounds great . I think we ’ ve had such pain getting to that place , I ’ m not sure anyone quite knows what to do with it anymore . When we heard it mixed properly , it sounded mega . " 
 The band received permission from the electronic music German band Kraftwerk to use the main riff from its song " Computer Love " ( German : <unk> ) , from its 1981 studio album Computer World ( German : <unk> ) , for " Talk " , replacing Kraftwerk 's synthesizers with guitars . In a track @-@ by @-@ track interview given by the band on X & Y , bassist Guy Berryman reported that in response to the band 's request , Kraftwerk founding member Ralf Hütter " said something like , ' Yes , you can use it , and thank you very much for asking my permission , unlike that bastard Jay @-@ Z ' . " 
 The band recorded three separate versions of the single ; the one recorded on X & Y was based on an early cut of the song . A newer version of the track – with a different set of lyrics – was leaked onto the internet in early 2005 . The track was originally intended to be a B @-@ side for the song " Speed of Sound " , before becoming the last addition to X & Y 's track listing . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The track includes a hypnotic pace , with Will Champion adding a metronomic beat to the drums . The song features the synthesizer melody from Kraftwerk 's " Computer Love " . It also adds a chiming note to more abrasive riffs during the breakdown near the end of the song . 
 In the fourth line of the second verse , Martin sings with a trace of irony : " Or write a song nobody had sung / Or do something that 's never been done . " In the third line of the third verse , Martin alludes to fear , but changes to joy : " Tell me how do you feel ? / Well I feel like they 're talking in a language I don 't speak / And they 're talking it to me . " In the fifth verse , Martin summarises about an individual who is lost and trying to discover the unknown : " So you don 't know where you 're going / But you want to talk / And you feel like you 're going where you 've been before / You 'll tell anyone who will listen but you feel ignored . " 
 According to Josh Tyrangiel of Time magazine , the meaning to " Talk " is based on how Martin " wants to teach us how to feel better about ourselves , and his lessons have the moral superiority disguised as sensitivity that marked Bono 's mighty mullet period . " Tyrangiel interpreted the lyrics , " Are you lost or incomplete / Do you feel like a puzzle , you can 't find your missing piece / Tell me how you feel " , with Martin begging in the song . 
 = = Release = = 
 Coldplay released " Talk " in the UK and US on 19 December 2005 as the album 's third single . The single was pressed with two B @-@ sides : " Gravity " and " Sleeping Sun " . 
 " Talk " peaked at number 10 in the UK Singles Chart on 31 December 2005 . The song charted at number 86 on the Billboard Hot 100 and reached number five on the Billboard Hot Modern Rock Tracks in 2005 . The song was released early in the Netherlands , thus charting in the Dutch Top 40 . It reached number one the closing week of 2005 . The band performed the song live at the 2005 MTV Europe Music Awards in Lisbon , Portugal , the 2006 Juno Awards in Halifax , Nova Scotia , and the 2006 Grammy Awards in Los Angeles , California . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critics were positive towards the song . In the PopMatters review of the album , critic Adrian Begrand wrote : " It 's the excellent , and much talked @-@ about ' Talk ' that has the band showing tremendous creativity , delving straight into mid- ' 70s krautrock , and piecing together a gorgeous pop song . " Bud Scoppa of Paste magazine wrote : " ' Talk ' stands out as an anthem in an album full of them . " Dan Tallis of the BBC noted that the track was " fantastic " and " positively gargantuan " . Jonathan Keefe of Slant magazine wrote : " ' Talk ' is given one of the album 's most memorable melodies , but its impact is reduced by the song 's structure , in which the lead guitar echoes Martin 's vocal melody after every line , so that melody becomes tiresome well before the first chorus hits . " Despite " Talk " ' s positive reception , Martin has stated that Berryman dislikes it , and thus they no longer perform the song live . 
 The song was remixed by Jacques Lu Cont , with the title " Talk ( Thin White Duke Mix ) " . The song by Lu Cont won the coveted Best Remixed Recording , Non @-@ Classical award at the 2007 Grammy Awards . " Talk " was also nominated for a Grammy award in the category of Best Rock Performance by a duo or Group with Vocals . 
 The song was also used as the basis of a downloadable hoax track titled " Talk to David " produced as an April Fools ' Day prank by the British newspaper The Guardian . This featured lyrics purporting to give support to Conservative opposition party leader David Cameron . The song was featured heavily in the season two CSI : NY episode " <unk> " , in which the character Danny Messer plays the song as a ringtone on his cell phone . The band 's American record label , Capitol Records , paid for promotional consideration to place the song in the episode and for the character to talk about Coldplay . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Talk " was helmed by director / photographer Anton Corbijn . Filming of the video took place on 5 and 6 November 2005 at Ealing Studios , London , just before the band began their tour , Twisted Logic . The black @-@ and @-@ white clip invokes a B movie science fiction theme , with imagery ranging from a flying saucer to 3D glasses . The main plot line of the music video features the band as astronauts landing on an alien planet , where they re @-@ activate a dormant robot , who eventually eats them and their spaceship as they are attempting to fly away . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Chris Martin – vocals , electric guitar 
 Jonny Buckland – electric guitar 
 Guy Berryman – bass guitar 
 Will Champion – drums , backing vocals 
 = = = Additional musicians = = = 
 Chris Tumbling , Richard George , Gregory Warren Wilson , Laura Melhuish – violins 
 Susan Dench , Peter Lale – viola 
 Anne Lines – cello 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = = Netherlands = = = 
 A special three part single was released over three weeks in December featuring live tracks recorded at the <unk> in 2005 . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Romney Literary Society = 
 The Romney Literary Society ( also known as the Literary Society of Romney ) existed from January 30 , 1819 , to February 15 , 1886 , in Romney , West Virginia . Established as the Polemic Society of Romney , it became the first organization of its kind in the present @-@ day state of West Virginia , and one of the first in the United States . The society was founded by nine prominent men of Romney with the objectives of advancing literature and science , purchasing and maintaining a library , and improving educational opportunities . 
 The society debated an extensive range of scientific and social topics , often violating its own rules which banned religious and political subjects . Even though its membership was relatively small , its debates and activities were frequently discussed throughout the Potomac Highlands region , and the organization greatly influenced trends of thought in the Romney community and surrounding areas . 
 The society 's library began in 1819 with the acquisition of two books ; by 1861 , it had grown to contain approximately 3 @,@ 000 volumes on subjects such as literature , science , history , and art . The organization also sought to establish an institution for " the higher education of the youth of the community . " In 1820 , as a result of this initiative , the teaching of the classics was introduced into the curriculum of Romney Academy , thus making the institution the first school of higher education in the Eastern Panhandle . In 1846 , the society constructed a building which housed the Romney Classical Institute and its library , both of which fell under the society 's supervision . The institute was administered by noted Presbyterian Reverend William Henry Foote . Following a dispute with the society , Foote founded a rival school in Romney , known as the Potomac Seminary , in 1850 . 
 The Romney Literary Society and the Romney Classical Institute continued to grow in influence until the onset of the American Civil War in 1861 . The contents of the society 's library were plundered by Union Army forces , and only 400 of the library 's volumes could be recovered following the war 's end in 1865 . Reorganized in 1869 , the society took a leading role in Romney 's civil development during Reconstruction . Between 1869 and 1870 , it completed construction of Literary Hall , where the society held meetings and reassembled its library . The organization used its influence to secure the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind for the town of Romney , and offered the school its former Romney Classical Institute campus . The schools opened on September 29 , 1870 . Interest in the society waned during its final years , and its last recorded meeting was held in 1886 . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 The Romney Literary Society was organized on January 30 , 1819 , by nine prominent men of Romney in the office of Dr. John Temple , a reputable physician in the community . The society was formed with the purpose " of taking into consideration the propriety of financing a Society , having for its object the advancement of Literature and Science , the purchase of a Library by and for the use of its members ; and their further improvement by discussing before the Society such questions as shall be selected under its directors . " With its establishment , the Romney Literary Society became the first organization of its kind in the present @-@ day state of West Virginia , and one of the first in the United States . The nine men at the society 's first meeting were Thomas Blair , David Gibson , James P. Jack , Samuel Kercheval , Jr . , Nathaniel Kuykendall , Charles T. Magill , James M. Stephens , John Temple , and William C. Wodrow . According to historian Hu Maxwell , these men elected Kuykendall as chairman and Magill as secretary of a committee which was charged with the drafting of a constitution for the society . 
 On February 4 , 1819 , the committee delivered its draft of the constitution and the society adopted the document , which provided that the organization should be known as the Polemic Society of Romney . The society 's constitution also specified that the officers should consist of a president , secretary , and treasurer , each of whom was to be selected by a ballot vote . The constitution further stipulated that each member was to pay dues of 50 cents per month , and that the society had the authority to levy further financial contributions from its members as it deemed necessary . The funds collected were to cover the society 's operating costs , and the remaining funds were to be used in purchasing books for the library . Under the constitution , the society 's meetings were to be held weekly . Following each meeting 's business session , a debate or other literary exercises were to be held consisting of topics of general interest of the members . No political or religious discussions were to take place during the debates unless they were of an abstract nature or in general terms . Profane language and " spirituous liquors " were also forbidden from the society 's meetings , with each offense being punishable with a fine of one dollar . The society 's first elected officers were Charles T. Magill as president , William C. Wodrow as secretary , and John Temple as treasurer . 
 = = Early debates = = 
 The society 's next meeting was held on February 13 , 1819 in the old Hampshire County Courthouse , where the first matter for debate was " Resolved : That a representative should be governed by instructions from his constituents . " Following the debate , the decision was rendered in favor of the affirmative . The second meeting , which was held on February 19 of that year at the Romney Academy , debated the question , " Is an education acquired at the public school or [ is ] a private tutor to be preferred ? " and the society favored the public school . At this second meeting , the first money appropriated by the society was paid to the doorkeeper for a sum of 25 cents . Also at this second meeting , the treasurer was instructed to purchase a book for use by the secretary , three candlesticks , one pair of <unk> , and three pounds of candles . On February 26 , the society argued the question , " Is a system of banking advantageous to a community ? " The debate ended under the decision that a system of banking was advantageous . The following meeting on March 6 debated a question far more psychological in nature , which was an abstract question of religion : " Can the human mind , by its own reflection , arrive at the conclusion that the soul is immortal ? " The society decided in the negative . The society also debated and decided in the negative the question , " Is a protective tariff detrimental to the interests of the country ? " 
 One of the society 's more spirited debates occurred in May 1822 over the question , " Is it to the interest of the people of Hampshire to encourage the canalling of the Potomac ? " While no records of the arguments survive , the society decided that the canalling of the Potomac River would be detrimental to the interests of Hampshire County . The debate took place before the construction of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal along the Maryland shore of the Potomac River to the north of Hampshire County . The society 's consensus was that a canal on the Potomac would destroy the business of teamsters who hauled merchandise from the east along the Northwestern Turnpike . For this reason , the society and local population of Romney also objected to the construction of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad . To ensure confidentiality , the society passed a bylaw that enforced a fine of five dollars on any member who published either his own or another member 's speeches delivered before the society . As a result of this bylaw , no speeches were ever published . The society adopted a new constitution in 1824 . 
 = = Growth and influence = = 
 Over the first ten years of the society 's existence , the organization grew in membership and held meetings at least twice a month , and usually four times a month . The society debated an extensive range of subjects including scientific , religious , political , and social topics , often violating the constitution 's rules banning religious and political subjects . The society 's debates were often acrimonious and regularly spilled beyond the confines of the meetings and into the community . Between January 30 , 1819 and January 22 , 1830 , the society 's membership rolls reached 52 members ; although as few as 15 members attended the bimonthly meetings , and no more than 17 members were ever present at a meeting . 
 Even though the Romney Literary Society 's membership was relatively small , its debates and activities were frequently discussed throughout the Potomac Highlands region . For this reason , the society greatly influenced trends of thought in the Romney community and surrounding areas . No records of the society 's proceedings , works , or membership enrollments spanning the period between January 22 , 1830 and 1861 are extant . During this period , the society counted among its members Angus William McDonald , John Baker White , and Robert White . 
 = = Library collection = = 
 In order to fulfill one of its primary purposes of establishing a library for its members , the Romney Literary Society gradually began to acquire volumes for such a use . The society 's library began with the April 23 , 1819 appropriation for the purchase of two books : Plutarch 's Parallel Lives and Emer de Vattel 's The Law of Nations . On July 2 , 1819 , the balance of available funds in the treasurer 's account was two dollars and forty @-@ six cents , but by October 23 , there were sufficient funds to purchase the following volumes : Charles Rollin 's Ancient History , Lewis ' Roman History , and William Robertson 's History of the Reign of Charles the Fifth . 
 No more volumes were purchased until the end of 1820 , when the society acquired the works of Livy , Tacitus , and John Marshall 's Life of Washington . Three months later , the society purchased a bookcase for its growing collection . In April 1821 , the society further expanded its library with the acquisitions of Nathaniel Hooke 's Roman History , from the Building of Rome to the Ruin of the Commonwealth , the works of Herodotus , Travels in Greece , Modern Europe , David Ramsay 's History of the United States , and the works of Benjamin Franklin . 
 In 1821 , the Virginia General Assembly passed an act incorporating the organization as the " Library Society of Romney . " The society found the assembly 's charter unsatisfactory , as it specified several changes to the organization that the society had not asked for , including the change in its name . The members regarded their society as a " literary " society and not a " library " one . The society requested that the assembly amend its charter , and after several delays and debates over the new charter , the Virginia General Assembly passed a new act on February 4 , 1823 , in which the organization was rebranded as " The Literary Society of Romney . " The society maintained this long form name throughout the duration of its existence , although it was locally known as the " Romney Literary Society . " 
 Within the span of ten years , the society 's small library grew to contain approximately 3 @,@ 000 volumes on literature , science , history , and art . These were bound in <unk> and stamped with the seal of the society . The minutes from the society 's bimonthly meetings listed the books purchased and the methods by which they were acquired . According to the Federal Writers ' Project in their Historic Romney 1762 – 1937 ( 1937 ) , the book selections and their acquisition " indicate that these men possessed real literary judgment and business ability . " 
 By resolutions of the society , the use of the library was for the society 's members , and was further extended to " ministers of the gospel of all denominations gratis . " Certain citizens of Romney were also granted access to the library , and enjoyed similar privileges as its members . 
 = = Academic patronage = = 
 From the organization 's foundation , the Romney Literary Society gradually began to recognize that the local subscription school systems provided only elementary and often fragmentary education and no longer satisfied the academic needs of the Romney community . The society periodically engaged in lengthy deliberations on which theories of educational advancement and popular education were preferable . Shortly after its establishment , the society commenced a movement to establish an institution for " the higher education of the youth of the community . " In 1820 , as a result of this initiative , the teaching of the classics was introduced into the curriculum of Romney Academy , thus making the institution the first school of higher education in the Eastern Panhandle . Under the guidance , leadership , and strict discipline of Dr. Henry Johnston , Romney Academy became widely renowned for its courses in " higher classics . " His successor and society member William Henry Foote introduced courses in theology , and the school 's enrollment grew to include students preparing for ministry . As the school became more renowned in the South Branch Potomac River valley , pupils came from further and further away . Thomas and Samuel Mulledy were among the early instructors at the academy , both of whom later served as presidents of Georgetown University in Washington , D.C. 
 By 1831 , Romney Academy had outgrown its facilities in the old stone school building behind the Hampshire County Courthouse . To remedy this , the society instituted a campaign to raise funds for a new school building . On January 6 , 1832 , the Virginia General Assembly authorized the society to raise an endowment of $ 20 @,@ 000 in a lottery for educational purposes . Following a ten @-@ year lapse , the society made arrangements with James Gregory of Jersey City and Daniel McIntyre of Philadelphia to finance a lottery " for raising a sum of money not exceeding twenty thousand dollars , for the purpose of erecting a suitable building for their accommodation , the purchase of library and Philosophical apparatus . " The lottery was to be conducted over a period of ten years , and sums of $ 750 , $ 1 @,@ 000 , and $ 1 @,@ 500 were to be raised in semiannual installments . The society was successful in raising funds , and in 1845 the society solicited bids for the construction of a new building to house both the academy , the society , and the society 's library . The society also used the lottery funds to pay for books for the academy . 
 On February 12 , 1844 , the Virginia General Assembly passed an act authorizing the society to denote the balance of the moneys raised by the lottery to the Romney Academy . The assembly further enacted another legislative act on December 12 , 1846 , authorizing the Romney Literary Society to " establish at or near the town of Romney a Seminary of Learning for the instruction of youth in various branches of science and literature ; and the Society map appropriate to the same such portion of the property which it now has or may acquire , as it may deem expedient . " That same year , a new brick neoclassical building was constructed east of Romney , and the society , its library , and Romney Academy relocated to the new facility . The second story of the new building was utilized by the society , with one hall for meetings and the other hall for the society 's library . According to Maxwell , " few schools in the state of Virginia at that time had access to better libraries . " The new institute building and grounds cost the society about $ 8 @,@ 000 . Following its move to the new building , the academy was reorganized as the Romney Classical Institute and its activities fell under the supervision of the society . The institute was operated under the principalship of Foote from 1846 until 1849 . 
 In 1849 , the society presented a new code and system of bylaws for the government of the Romney Classical Institute , which reserved to the society the power to appoint assistant teachers , fix the amount of salaries , and provide the conditions and manners of payment and reimbursement . Foote differed with the society over these matters , and he ultimately declined to accept the new bylaws and resigned his leadership position in October 1849 ; in 1850 , he established a rival institution known as the Potomac Seminary . Rather than falling under the patronage of the society , Foote 's new institution fell under the control of the Presbyterian church . Following Foote 's departure , the society selected Professor E. J. Meany to head the Romney Classical Institute . Despite the schism , the society also provided financial support from the lottery to the Potomac Seminary . 
 According to a " catalogue of the members and library " published on June 1 , 1849 , there were 20 registered members on the rolls who paid $ 3 each per year to the society 's library fund ; there were also eight library members who were admitted under certain regulations of the society and who paid the same fees . Members who had use of the library were provided keys and were allowed access to the library at any time . The town 's clergymen and the principal of the Romney Classical Institute were the only non @-@ members who were extended privileges to the library . The 1849 " catalogue " listed Alfred P. White as the society 's librarian and E. J. Meany remained the principal of the institute . After 1853 , the society possessed a permanent fund of $ 12 @,@ 000 , which yielded $ 720 per year , one half of which was devoted to the support of the Romney Classical Institute . 
 = = American Civil War and hiatus = = 
 The Romney Literary Society and the Romney Classical Institute flourished and continued to grow in importance and influence until the onset of the American Civil War in 1861 . Following the war 's outbreak , many of the society 's members and the institute 's professors and older students joined the Confederate States Army and marched to war . During the war , the society suffered extensive losses . The Romney Classical Institute building and its library were considered legitimate plunder by Union Army forces . The society 's library was emptied and three @-@ fourths of its volumes were either scattered or destroyed . The most valuable of these volumes were never recovered following the war 's end . Its records of proceedings between 1830 and 1861 , the period during which the society engaged in most of its notable literary and philanthropic works , were also destroyed during the war . 
 Following the war 's end , only 400 out of the library 's nearly 3 @,@ 000 volumes could be recovered , with only 200 of those books remaining on the library 's shelves . Between 10 and 20 of the library 's recovered volumes only contained three to four of their original books . The value of the recovered volumes was degraded , as many were damaged or broken . The society members that returned home to Romney were too war @-@ weary to revive the society when they discovered the ruins of the Romney Classical Institute and its library , which had been an expensive endeavor to accumulate and took almost a half @-@ century of labor to amass . The Romney Classical Institute was not restored and was in effect disestablished on account of the war . 
 = = Revival = = 
 Following the war , the residents of Romney set about repairing public buildings and reestablishing the town 's antebellum institutions , including the Romney Literary Society . The society remained on a hiatus until May 15 , 1869 when a meeting was held by nine members , as only nine original members had responded to the call for reorganization . These nine members tasked with rebuilding the society were James L. Armstrong , David Entler , William Harper , John C. Heiskell , Andrew Wodrow Kercheval , Samuel R. Lupton , James Parsons , Alfred P. White , and Robert White . These men sought to collect what remained of the library 's books and engaged in a campaign to recruit new members , which resulted in the enrollment of 20 younger men over a period of a few years . Many of the men who had been members in 1861 had died during the war , and the recruitment of new members was essential to the revival of the society . Among the new members elected between 1869 and 1886 were John Collins Covell , Samuel Lightfoot Flournoy , Henry Bell Gilkeson , Howard Hille Johnson , and Christian Streit White . The society , with renewed vigor , took a lead role in Romney 's civil development during the Reconstruction Era . 
 Between 1869 and 1870 , the society completed construction of a new two @-@ story brick building on Lot 56 at the corner of West Main and North High Streets known as Literary Hall , where it could hold its meetings and reassemble the remaining volumes from its original library . Literary Hall was built upon the former location of the shuttered Bank of the South Branch of the Potomac . In addition to the 400 volumes that were initially recovered following the war , the society recovered several more volumes from its original library , and set about purchasing new books ; the restored library was reopened with about 700 volumes . 
 = = West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind = = 
 Around the time of the society 's reorganization in 1869 , the state of West Virginia considered the establishment of a school for the deaf and the blind . The society resolved to secure the new state institution for Romney . On April 12 , 1870 , the society passed a resolution by which the members agreed to deed , free of cost , the buildings and grounds of the Romney Classical Institute . 
 On April 20 , 1870 , the society sent Andrew Wodrow Kercheval and Robert White as representatives to the then @-@ state capital Wheeling to present their formal offer of " the grounds and buildings of the Romney Classical Institute ... to the Board of Regents , free of debt , and in good repair " on the condition that the proposed school be located in Romney . Clarksburg and Parkersburg also made offers of potential campuses to the state . The offer was made to the Board of Regents of the West Virginia Institute for the Deaf , Dumb , and Blind , as it was then known , and the society 's proposal was accepted by the regents after a brief period of deliberation . The society 's offer was the only one that included a building upon the grounds . 
 It was discovered by the society that in order to follow through with their proposition , it was necessary to raise more than $ 1 @,@ 000 , which was ostensibly a difficult task during the Reconstruction Era in Romney . On July 11 , 1870 , the Board of Regents passed a resolution necessitating the subscription of between $ 1 @,@ 200 and $ 1 @,@ 300 to facilitate the transaction . One hundred and eighteen individuals and firms responded to the board 's request with a total subscription of $ 1 @,@ 383 @.@ 60 . To make good on its offer , the society also made an appropriation of $ 320 on July 11 for the purpose of repairing and restoring the former Romney Classical Institute and grounds so that they were satisfactory before they were transferred to the regents . Shortly thereafter , the old institute building and 15 acres ( 6 @.@ 1 ha ) of property were formally transferred to the state of West Virginia . 
 On September 29 , 1870 , the institute , which was later known as the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind , opened its doors in the old Romney Classical Institute building with 25 deaf and five blind students . Following its disestablishment in 1916 , the adjacent Potomac Academy ( formerly Potomac Seminary ) grounds were also incorporated into the campus of the Schools for the Deaf and Blind . 
 = = Final years = = 
 During a period of ten years spanning from 1870 to 1880 , much of Romney 's intellectual life centered on Literary Hall . During this time , the society met only occasionally and there were no records of meetings between March 1872 and April 1878 . The post @-@ war period of revival was short @-@ lived , as the death of the older members caused interest in the society to wane . The society 's meetings occurred less often , and the last recorded meeting of the society was held on February 15 , 1886 . During the society 's second existence , Literary Hall was used as a meeting space by the Freemasons and the Order of the Eastern Star , and the organizations continued to inhabit the hall following the society 's disestablishment until its 1974 purchase by attorney Ralph Haines . Also a local historian , Haines restored Literary Hall and used it as his law office and museum . Literary Hall was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on May 29 , 1979 and , as of 2004 , it is occasionally open to the public . The society 's remaining records , dating as early as 1819 , remain on display there . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In describing the efforts of the Romney Literary Society , historian Hu Maxwell , in his History of Hampshire County , West Virginia From Its Earliest Settlement to the Present ( 1897 ) , stated that " the work accomplished by these few energetic citizens of Romney is astonishing . " Maxwell further asserted , " No other one thing in the history of the town has had such lasting results for good . " The society left many lasting impacts upon the town of Romney during its existence and beyond , which included the foundation of a library ; the academic and financial support and patronage of the Romney Academy , Romney Classical Institute , and the Potomac Seminary ; the civic leadership during the Reconstruction Era ; and the influence and assistance in securing the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind . According to Maxwell , without the efforts of the society , the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind could not have been secured for Romney , and would have likely been located elsewhere in the state . 
 = Start All Over = 
 " Start All Over " is a pop @-@ rock song performed by American recording artist Miley Cyrus . It was released as the second and final single of Cyrus ' debut album Meet Miley Cyrus , the second disc of the dual album Hannah Montana 2 : Meet Miley Cyrus . A live version is available on Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus : Best of Both Worlds Concert and as a karaoke in Cyrus 's karaoke series . The song was originally written by Fefe Dobson , who passed the song to Cyrus , as she did not desire to include it on Sunday Love . The up @-@ tempo song has prominent pop rock characteristics and is lyrically about having a second chance in a romantic relationship . 
 The song garnered low commercial outcomes for Cyrus in several countries , compared to those of her previous single from Meet Miley Cyrus , " See You Again " . Those countries include Australia , Canada , and the United States . The song reached its highest international peak in the Australian Singles Chart , at number 41 . A video to " Start All Over " premiered on the Disney Channel , which received a MuchMusic Video Award nomination . The music video features Cyrus performing the song in the streets , and also includes her in a <unk> setting . Cyrus performed the song at several venues ; it was most notably performed in 2007 and 2008 the Best of Both Worlds Tour , as the opening number for her performances as herself . Cyrus again performed " Start All Over " once she embarked on the 2009 Wonder World Tour . The song , along with " Fly on the Wall " and " Who Owns My Heart " are the only singles released by Cyrus that haven 't been certified at least platinum in the United States . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 The song was written and recorded by Canadian recording artist Fefe Dobson for her unreleased second album Sunday Love . Dobson explained on an August 2009 interview with MTV News , 
 " I wrote a song , she dug it , and she sang it . But I didn 't want it for my record . It just wasn 't right for me , and I just felt like it was better for someone else , and she does a great job on it . I was really impressed . She sounded great . I 'm actually happier she did it than I did it . " 
 Dobson sings background vocals , along with Anne Preven , on Cyrus ' version of the song . Among other personnel are : Paul Bushnell for bass guitar , Scott Cutler and David <unk> for electric guitar , Josh Freese for drums and Jeff Turzo for keyboard . The song has an extreme use of pop rock , meanwhile still incorporating teen pop and dance @-@ pop . It is set in common time with a moderately fast tempo of 150 beats per minute . The song is written in a key of G major . Cyrus ' vocals spans one octave , from G3 to B4 . The song has the following chord progression , Dm7 — Am — G5 . In an interview with Access Hollywood on the set of the music video , Cyrus mentioned that the song was involved with romance and " the guy that I 'm supposed to ' start all over ' " . Lael Loewenstein , writing for Variety , stated that " Breakout " and " Start All Over " " touch on the theme of self @-@ reinvention " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Start All Over " ' s debut appearance on Hot Digital Songs led to charting in the Billboard Hot 100 . For the week ending January 18 , 2008 , " Start All Over " debuted and peaked in the Hot 100 at number 68 . That same week , the song debuted and peaked at number 57 on the discontinued Pop 100 . For the week ending January 26 , the song ascended to number 50 on Hot Digital Songs , but failed to ascend in the Hot 100 and Pop 100 ; that week was its last on the three charts . The song garnered similar commercial outcomes in other nations . For the week ending February 23 , 2008 in the Canadian Hot 100 , the song charted at number 93 , falling from the chart the week after . In the Australian Singles Chart , issue dated July 14 , " Start All Over " debuted at number 50 . In its second week , ending August 11 , 2009 , the song moved up to number 41 , where it peaked , and fell from the top 50 after five weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 On an exclusive interview with Access Hollywood , Cyrus spoke in regards to the music video for the song , directed by Marc Webb . She said , " I wanted something crazy that no one else has done and like really random because this song is kinda random . " Shot on November 16 , 2007 in a suburban area of Los Angeles , California , the video included fifty background dancers , such as a middle school teacher . Cyrus said the concept was , " I 'm singing and dancing and like rocking out and I have no idea where these people come from . " People on stilts , scuba divers , even a teacher in the background . The portion of the music video in which she enters the " carnival @-@ like " scene drew influences from the 1950s and Hairspray . Another concept she further explained was the appearance of a man in a " prom @-@ setting . " Cyrus said , " Here it 's gonna be the guy that I 'm supposed to ' start all over ' and we 're at prom , so I 'm just [ ... ] not like in a dress or anything . So , it 's random . It 's like everything is happening all at once . " The ending of the music video , she explained , was when she went back to " where [ she ] belongs " after a day of " torture . " 
 The video commences with Cyrus , in pajamas , turning off a nightlight and falling asleep . When she wakes up , Cyrus finds herself on her bed , in a skate ramp ; she is wearing a white T @-@ shirt , a black vest , red pants and black boots . Meanwhile , skaters are using the ramp , Cyrus stands and performs the song in a confused manner . She then enters a school bus , occupied by businessmen and businesswomen , which she exits through the back emergency door . Throughout the rest of the video Cyrus is seen exploring a " carnival @-@ like " setting , while dancing . Several random figures make appearances , such as astronauts , scuba divers , Middle School teachers , and cowboys . A large , star @-@ patterned falls and reveals a concert stage where Cyrus performs the song along with a band . In the conclusion of the video , Cyrus is woken up by an alarm clock and a printer prints stills from what occurred throughout the music video . The music video to " Start All Over " was first seen on the Disney Channel on December 19 , 2007 . It became digitally available , via iTunes Store , on January 29 , 2008 . In 2008 , the video received a MuchMusic Video nomination for Best International Artist Video , but lost to Rihanna 's video for " Don 't Stop the Music . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On December 31 , 2007 , Cyrus performed the song along with " G.N.O. ( Girl 's Night Out ) " and " We Got the Party , " a duet with the Jonas Brothers , on the 2008 episode special of Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve with Ryan Seacrest . " Start All Over " was then most notably performed on Cyrus ' first headlining tour , the Best of Both Worlds Tour . On the tour , the song served as the opening number for the portion of songs that Cyrus performed as herself . The song was proceeded by the interlude from the opening act : first leg by the Jonas Brothers , ( " Year 3000 " ) second leg by Aly & A.J. ( " Rush " ) and third leg by Everlife . During the performances , Cyrus wore a gray metallic jacket , a white T @-@ shirt and black leggings . It begun with Cyrus emerging from the bottom of the stage and then roaming around the stage to perform the song . Cyrus ' performance of " Start All Over " during the tour was received from mixed to average reviews by critics . Maitland McDonagh of TV Guide magazine stated that Cyrus ' return after the Brothers was an up @-@ beat " vague rocker @-@ chick grab . " A promotional music video from these live performances were made to promote the Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus : Best of Both Worlds Concert film . 
 On June 7 , 2009 at the twentieth annual A Time for Heroes Celebrity Carnival , Cyrus performed the song , coupled with " 7 Things , " " Breakout , " " The Climb , " " The Driveway , " " Fly on the Wall , " " These Four Walls " and " See You Again . " <unk> by " Breakout , " it is second on the set list of her current and first international concert tour , the Wonder World Tour . In these performances , Cyrus wears black boots , skimpy black shorts and tank top . Throughout most of " Start All Over , " Cyrus maintains on the construction carts that were used on the end of opening number . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Hurricane Gil ( 1983 ) = 
 Hurricane Gil was the first of several tropical cyclones to affect Hawaii during the 1983 Pacific hurricane season . Gil originated from a tropical depression that developed near Clipperton Island on July 23 . Steadily intensifying , it attained tropical storm status six hours later and was upgraded to a hurricane on July 26 . After attaining peak intensity on July 27 , Gil encountered cooler sea surface temperatures and began to weaken . Moving west @-@ northwest , the weakening system also accelerated and on July 31 , was downgraded to a tropical depression . However , Gil began to re @-@ intensify on August 1 , becoming a tropical storm again later that day . Initially expected to veer north of Hawaii , it continued west @-@ northwest and began to approach the Hawaiian group on August 3 . While passing through the island group , Gil reached its secondary peak intensity . Subsequently , Gil began to weaken once again as it threatened the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands . After passing through the islands , Gil was downgraded to a tropical depression on August 5 . Several hours later , the storm dissipated . The remnants of the storm moved into the West Pacific late on August 6 and were last noted the next morning while passing south of Midway Island . 
 Due to fears of a repeat of Hurricane Iwa , which devastated the island group the previous year , officials issued many tropical cyclone warnings and watches while seven shelters were opened , though few people actually used these shelters . On Oahu , a power outage was reported , affecting 2 @,@ 400 customers . Jellyfish also stung 50 people . Locally heavy rainfall and rough seas led to minor damage while strong winds lead to extensive damage on the north side of the island . On Maui and Kauai , minor flooding , as well , though damage was minimal . Offshore , one person is presumed to have died in a shipwreck . In a separate shipping incident , three crewmen were slightly injured . The remnants of Gil later affected the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands , where near @-@ gale force winds were measured . Throughout the state , damage was minimal . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The seventh tropical cyclone of the season originated from a tropical depression that developed during the afternoon hours of July 23 about 200 mi ( 320 km ) north of Clipperton Island . Due to light wind shear and warm ocean temperatures , the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center ( EPHC ) upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Gil at 0000 UTC on July 24 . Gil was briefly expected to re @-@ curve and approach Baja California Sur , but this never materialized . Gil subsequently began to intensify ; on 0000 UTC July 25 , the EPHC reported that Gil had intensified into a strong tropical storm , with winds of 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) . Roughly 24 hours later , the storm was upgraded into a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale . Early on July 27 , the storm attained its peak intensity of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) . Despite turning west @-@ northwest , Hurricane Gil maintained hurricane intensity until 1200 UTC July 29 when the storm began to encounter cooler waters . By 0000 UTC July 31 , Gil was downgraded a tropical depression . 
 Despite a well @-@ defined atmospheric circulation , Gil was still a tropical depression when it entered Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's ( CPHC ) warning zone on August 1 . The circulation gradually became better defined moved as the low moved west @-@ northwest over a pool of slightly warmer waters west of 140th meridian west ; later that day , the CPHC reportedly re @-@ upgraded Gil into a tropical storm . Meanwhile , the storm was forecast to pass north of the U.S. State of Hawaii . Gil accelerated while approaching the Hawaiian Island group . On August 2 , Gil was situated roughly 300 mi ( 485 km ) east of the island chain . Gil re @-@ strengthened slightly ; on August 3 , the tropical cyclone reached its secondary peak wind speed of 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) . Late on August 4 , Tropical Storm Gil made its closest approach to Oahu , passing 20 mi ( 30 km ) north of Kahuku Point . 
 While passing through the archipelago , an Hurricane Hunter aircraft recorded winds of 45 to 50 mph ( 70 to 80 km / h ) ; however , the CPHC held the intensity of storm at 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) due to calm surface winds . By this time , the strongest winds of the storm were situated north of the center . After clearing the main Hawaiian island chain , Gil began to approach the Hawaiian Leeward Island group . Continuing west @-@ northwest , Gil passed very close to French Frigate Shoals on August 4 as a marginal tropical storm . Early on August 5 , the system was downgraded into a tropical depression while centered 145 mi ( 235 km ) west of Tern Island . Later that day , Tropical Depression Gil degenerated into a trough about 300 mi ( 485 km ) west @-@ northwest of Tern Island . The remnants of the storm crossed the International Dateline late on August 6 . It then passed 150 mi ( 240 km ) south of Midway Island while still producing deep convection . The remains of Gil were last noted in the West Pacific basin early on August 7 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Due to fears of a repeat of Hurricane Iwa , advisories and warnings for the main Hawaiian Islands were issued by meteorologists and Civil Defense Authorities , who had been criticized for the lack of warning prior to Iwa 's near @-@ landfall . Gale warnings were issued for a much of the islands ( except for the Big Island ) , but on August 2 , these warnings were discontinued for all islands except for Kauai . High surf advisories were also issued . Furthermore , seven shelters were opened as a precaution . Due to the threat of high waves , residents were warned to be ready to evacuate from low @-@ lying areas . 
 Tropical Storm Gil was the first tropical cyclone to threaten Hawaii since Hurricane Iwa during did the 1982 Pacific hurricane season , which devastated the region . Due to heavy rains , a couple of people sought shelter in <unk> High School on the island . Jellyfish stung 50 tourists along two beaches in Oahu , they were treated by life guards and none required hospitalization ; the jellyfish were thought to have been residing there due to the storm . In addition , one beach on Oahu was closed because of high surf , and swimmers were asked to stay out of the water near Waikiki . Locally gusty winds were recorded on Oahu . On the northern part of the island , 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) winds were reported , resulting in extensive damage in some areas , but slight damage to others . A minor power outage on the island briefly left 2 @,@ 400 customers without electricity . In Maui , the outer rainbands of Hurricane Gil brought heavy precipitation , leading to minor flooding . Although winds were calm , locally heavy showers occurred over Kauai . Rough surf pounded the northeastern facing beaches of that island , as well as the northeastern side of Oahu . A sea level pressure of 1 @,@ 011 mb ( 29 @.@ 9 inHg ) was also recorded . Overall , damage from Gil was minimal and less than expected . Later in the season , the state was affected by Tropical Storm Narda and threatened by Hurricane Raymond . 
 Offshore , several ships were affected by the storm . Most notably , a 19 ft ( 5 m ) catamaran , ironically named Hurricane , went missing after leaving Long Beach on July 20 . Gil likely sunk this ship . The vessel had a crew of two , one of which was presumed to have died during the storm . However , as the ship lacked radio equipment , this death remains unconfirmed . In addition to the above , the 30 @-@ foot ship Adad also got caught into the storm 72 hours after leaving Kauai . Storm surge from all sides nearly sunk the vessel and all three people on board sustained minor injuries , one of which sprained his wrist . After passing the main islands of Hawaii , Gil approached the Leeward Island group . Tropical Storm Gil passed just south of French Frigate Shoals on August 4 as a minimal tropical storm . Winds were light , gusting to 32 mph ( 51 km / h ) . Meanwhile , a peak pressure of 1 @,@ 014 mb ( 29 @.@ 9 inHg ) was reported . 
 = One Direction = 
 One Direction ( commonly abbreviated as 1D ) are an English @-@ Irish pop boy band based in London , composed of Niall Horan , Liam Payne , Harry Styles , Louis Tomlinson , and previously , Zayn Malik until his departure from the band on 25 March 2015 . The group signed with Simon Cowell 's record label Syco Records after forming and finishing third in the seventh series of the British televised singing competition The X Factor in 2010 . Propelled to international success by social media , One Direction 's four albums , Up All Night ( 2011 ) , Take Me Home ( 2012 ) , Midnight Memories ( 2013 ) and Four ( 2014 ) topped charts in most major markets , and generated hit singles including " What Makes You Beautiful " , " Live While We 're Young " , and " Story of My Life " . Their fifth studio album , Made in the A.M. , was released in November 2015 . 
 Their awards include six Brit Awards , four MTV Video Music Awards , eleven MTV Europe Music Awards , seven American Music Awards ( including Artist of the Year in 2014 and 2015 ) , and 27 Teen Choice Awards , among many others . According to Nick Gatfield , the chairman and chief executive of Sony Music Entertainment UK , One Direction represented a $ 50 million business empire by June 2012 . They were proclaimed 2012 's " Top New Artist " by Billboard . According to the Sunday Times Rich List , by April 2013 , they had an estimated personal combined wealth of £ 25 million ( $ <unk> ) making them the second @-@ wealthiest musicians in the UK under 30 years of age . In 2014 , Forbes listed them the second @-@ highest earning celebrities under 30 , with the group earning an estimated $ 75 million from June 2013 to June 2014 . In June 2015 , Forbes listed their earnings at $ 130 million for the previous twelve months , and ranked them the fourth highest earning celebrities in the world . 
 After the release of Four , One Direction became the first band in the U.S. Billboard 200 history to have their first four albums debut at number one . Their third album , Midnight Memories , was the biggest @-@ selling album worldwide of 2013 despite being released in late November . The band 's Where We Are Tour in support of Midnight Memories and Four , was the highest @-@ grossing concert tour in 2014 , and the highest @-@ grossing tour ever by a vocal group , generating $ 282 million . In 2014 , Billboard named One Direction Artist of the Year . The band is temporarily on a hiatus that began in January 2016 , which is expected to last around 18 months . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 2010 – 11 : The X Factor = = = 
 In 2010 , Niall Horan , Zayn Malik , Liam Payne , Harry Styles , and Louis Tomlinson auditioned as solo candidates for the seventh series of the British televised singing competition The X Factor . They failed to progress to the " Boys " category at " judges ' houses " but were put together to form a five @-@ piece boy band at Wembley Arena , in London , England , in July 2010 , during the " bootcamp " stage of the competition , thus qualifying for the " Groups " category . Nicole Scherzinger , a guest judge , and Simon Cowell have both claimed to have come up with the idea of forming the band . In 2013 , Cowell said that it " took him 10 minutes to put them together as a group " . Subsequently , the group got together for two weeks to get to know each other and to practice . Styles came up with the name One Direction . For their qualifying song at " judges ' houses " , and their first song as a group , One Direction sang an acoustic version of " Torn " . Cowell later commented that their performance convinced him that they " were confident , fun , like a gang of friends , and kind of fearless as well . " Within the first four weeks of the live shows , they were his last act in the competition . The group quickly gained popularity in the UK . 
 One Direction finished in third place and immediately after the final , their song " Forever Young " , which would have been released if they had won The X Factor , was leaked onto the internet . Shortly afterwards it was confirmed that One Direction had been signed by Cowell to a reported £ 2 million Syco Records record contract . Recording for their debut album began in January 2011 , as they flew to Los Angeles to work with RedOne , a record producer . A book licensed by One Direction , One Direction : Forever Young ( Our Official X Factor Story ) , was published by HarperCollins in February 2011 , subsequently topping The Sunday Times Best Seller list . The same month , the boy band and other contestants from the series participated in the X Factor Live Tour . During the tour , the group performed for 500 @,@ 000 people throughout the UK . After the tour concluded in April 2011 , the group continued working on their debut album . Recording took place in Stockholm , London and Los Angeles , as One Direction worked with producers Carl Falk , Savan Kotecha , Steve Mac , and Rami Yacoub , among others . 
 = = = 2011 – 12 : Up All Night = = = 
 Released in September 2011 , One Direction 's debut single , " What Makes You Beautiful " , reached number one on the UK Singles Chart , after becoming the most pre @-@ ordered Sony Music Entertainment single in history . Subsequent singles , " Gotta Be You " and " One Thing " , peaked in the UK Singles Chart top ten . In November 2011 , they signed a record deal with Columbia Records in North America . Steve Barnett , the co @-@ chairman of Columbia Records , said it was not a difficult decision to sign One Direction ; " I just thought there was a void , and maybe they could seize and hold it . " " What Makes You Beautiful " was released in the United States in February 2012 , where it debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 28 , becoming the highest debut for a British act since 1998 . It has sold over 4 million copies in the U.S. Upon arrival in the U.S. in February 2012 , One Direction embarked on a radio promotion spree , as well as their first North American concert tour as an opening act for Big Time Rush . They made their first U.S. television appearance on The Today Show , at the Rockefeller Center ; an estimated 15 @,@ 000 fans descended on the plaza . Critically commended for its appeal to the teenage audience , One Direction 's first studio album , Up All Night , was released globally in early 2012 . It became the UK 's fastest @-@ selling debut album of 2011 , and topped the charts in sixteen countries . The album bowed atop the Billboard 200 chart , making One Direction the first British group in US chart history to enter at number one with their debut album . They were inducted into the Guinness World Records as a result . Up All Night also became the first album by a boy band to sell 500 @,@ 000 digital copies in the U.S. and , by August 2012 , had sold over 3 million copies worldwide . 
 In April 2012 , an American band that went by the same name filed a trademark infringement lawsuit . According to the lawsuit , the U.S. band had been using the name since 2009 , recorded two albums and filed an application to register the trademark name in the U.S. in February 2011 . The U.S. band said they were entitled to three times the profits made by the UK band , as well as compensatory damages in excess of US $ 1million . The lawsuit claimed that Syco and Sony Music " chose to ignore the plaintiff 's rights and wilfully infringed them " after they realised in early 2011 that the two bands shared the same name . Syco Records subsequently counter @-@ sued , suggesting the U.S. group was trying to make money from One Direction 's success and that the boy band was the first to use the name in U.S. interstate commerce . The BBC reported in September 2012 that the UK group won the legal dispute over the right to keep using their band name ; the U.S. band changed its name to Uncharted Shores . The change of name was announced in a joint statement that also noted both groups were happy with the outcome . 
 In December 2011 , One Direction embarked on their first headlining UK concert tour , the Up All Night Tour . In early 2012 , they announced Australasian and North American legs of the concert tour , with dates from April to July 2012 . The tour , comprising 62 shows , was met with positivity both critically and commercially . A recording of a concert from the tour , Up All Night : The Live Tour , was released in May 2012 . In addition to the DVD topping the charts in twenty @-@ five countries , its global sales had exceeded 1 million copies by August 2012 . One Direction 's first book to be licensed in America , Dare to Dream : Life as One Direction , published in the United States in May 2012 , topped The New York Times Best Seller list . In June 2012 , Nick Gatfield , the chairman and chief executive officer of Sony Music Entertainment UK , stated how he expects One Direction to represent a $ 100 million business empire over 2013 . Gatfield was quoted as saying , " What you might not know about One Direction is that they already represent a $ 50 million business and that 's a figure we expect to double next year " . In August 2012 , the group 's record sales exceeded 8 million singles , 3 million albums , and 1 million DVDs , and they performed " What Makes You Beautiful " at the 2012 Summer Olympics closing ceremony in London , which represented the handover to Rio de Janeiro as the host of the 2016 Summer Olympics . One Direction were the biggest winners of the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards winning their three nominations on 6 September 2012 , including Best New Artist . 
 = = = 2012 – 13 : Take Me Home = = = 
 One Direction 's second studio album , Take Me Home , was released in November 2012 . Take Me Home was written in groups and has an average of just under five songwriters per track . Savan Kotecha , Rami Yacoub , and Carl Falk , who composed One Direction 's hits " What Makes You Beautiful " and " One Thing " , spent six months in Stockholm developing songs for the album , and were able to shape melodies around their tones . One Direction began recording the album in May 2012 , in Stockholm at Kinglet Studios . The album cover artwork features the group surrounding a traditional British K2 red telephone box , a familiar sight on the streets of the UK . Take Me Home garnered mixed reviews from music critics . There was praise for its quality of production , while it was criticised for its generic , rushed nature . The album 's lead single , " Live While We 're Young " , released in September 2012 , reached the top ten in almost every country it charted in and recorded the highest one @-@ week opening sales figure for a song by a non @-@ U.S. artist in the U.S. The album and its second single , " Little Things " , both debuted at number one in the UK simultaneously ; something that One Direction became the youngest act in British chart history to achieve . Take Me Home sold 540 @,@ 000 copies in its first week in the US , debuted atop the Billboard 200 , and topped the charts in more than thirty @-@ four other countries . Additionally , Up All Night and Take Me Home were the number three and number four best @-@ selling albums of 2012 globally , each album selling over 5 million units worldwide . 
 One Direction performed " Little Things " at the 2012 Royal Variety Performance in the presence of Queen Elizabeth II , and headlined a sold @-@ out show at New York City 's Madison Square Garden on 3 December 2012 . In February 2013 , One Direction released a cover version of " One Way or Another " and " Teenage Kicks " , " One Way or Another ( Teenage Kicks ) " , as the 2013 Comic Relief single . As part of their involvement with the UK charity , One Direction travelled to Ghana to volunteer at a children 's hospital , visit a school and make donations . 
 The Official Charts Company revealed that One Direction had sold 2 @,@ 425 @,@ 000 records in the UK by February 2013 . One Direction embarked on their second concert tour in February 2013 , the Take Me Home Tour . The concert tour consists of over 100 shows in Europe , North America and Australasia . Ticket sales reached 300 @,@ 000 within a day of release in the UK and Ireland , which included a six @-@ date sell @-@ out at London 's The O2 Arena . In the Australian and New Zealand markets , tickets grossed US $ 15 @.@ 7 million , with all 190 @,@ 000 tickets being sold for the eighteen shows to be held . The tour received critical acclaim from music critics who praised the band 's live vocals and their performance abilities and was a commercial success , selling 1 @,@ 635 @,@ 000 tickets from 134 shows . 
 = = = 2013 – 14 : Midnight Memories and This Is Us = = = 
 One Direction : This Is Us , a 3D documentary and concert film about the group directed by Morgan Spurlock and produced by Spurlock , Ben Winston , Adam Milano and Simon Cowell , was released by TriStar Pictures on 30 August 2013 . The film features the song " Best Song Ever " , released on 22 July 2013 . " Best Song Ever " was the lead single of the group 's third studio album Midnight Memories . The film was a box office success , topping the UK and US box offices and grossing over $ 60 million worldwide , and became the fourth highest grossing concert movie . " Best Song Ever " broke the 24 @-@ Hour Vevo Record with 10 @.@ 9 million views on YouTube ( this was the second time the band held the record with " Live While We 're Young " attaining 8 @.@ 2 million views on 20 September 2012 ) . On 16 May 2013 , the band announced their first stadium tour , the Where We Are Tour , which began in April 2014 . On 30 May 2013 , the band announced a partnership with Office Depot on a limited @-@ edition capsule collection of back to school supplies . They also confirmed that a portion of the proceeds from the alliance would go toward an anti @-@ bullying educational program intended to promote kinder behaviour in schools . 
 On 23 November 2013 , in support of Midnight Memories , the band participated in " 1D Day " , a day dedicated to One Direction fans . The day constituted of a landmark 7 @.@ 5 hour socially interactive YouTube live @-@ stream featuring live band performances , celebrity guests including , Simon Cowell , Cindy Crawford , Piers Morgan , Jerry Springer and many more . The event was unique not only because of its long runtime but the unprecedented use of social media whereby fans got to participate in the show interact directly with the band via Google + Hangout . 
 Midnight Memories was released globally on 25 November 2013 . It debuted at number one in the UK and in the US , making them the first group to debut at number one on the Billboard 200 with its first three albums , and the second to reach the top after The Monkees in 1967 . The album was described by the band as edgier and as having a " slightly rockier tone " than their previous efforts . " Story of My Life " was revealed as the second single of the album with each member posting a photo from their childhood . To promote the album , the band performed on both the American and British versions of The X Factor . 
 In December 2013 , One Direction broke yet another UK sales record with the DVD and Blu @-@ ray release of their 3 @-@ D concert film This is Us . Nearly 270 @,@ 000 copies of the film were sold in the UK within three days of its release , beating the record previously set by Michael Jackson 's This Is It in 2010 by 10 @,@ 000 copies . The group was named Top Global artists of 2013 by the IFPI because of strong digital downloads , physical albums , on @-@ demand streams , and music videos . 
 = = = 2014 – 15 : Four and Malik 's departure = = = 
 On 21 July , One Direction announced One Direction : Where We Are - The Concert Film , a film which documents 28 June and concert of 29 June <unk> that took place in San Siro Stadium during their Where We Are Tour . After the announcement , the band announced the film will also have a limited 10 – 11 October 2014 international cinema release before its home media release in November 2014 . The group also released an autobiography book titled Who We Are on 25 September 2014 . 
 On 8 September , One Direction announced their fourth studio album to be titled Four , set to be released on 17 November 2014 . As part of the announcement , one of the songs from the album , " Fireproof " was released for free download for 24 hours on their official website . " Steal My Girl " , the album 's lead single , was released on 29 September , and the music video was released on 24 October . The second single from the album , " Night Changes " , was released on 14 November , three days before the album 's release . Four was released on 17 November , topping the Billboard 200 and the UK Album Chart . 
 On 22 November , Paul Higgins , the group 's tour manager who has been with them since its formation , parted ways with the band . The band confirmed at the BBC Music Awards that following the success of Four , they had hopes to continue to go " somewhere else " on their fifth album . In support of Midnight Memories and Four , the band 's Where We Are Tour was the highest grossing concert tour in 2014 , and the highest @-@ grossing tour ever by a vocal group , generating $ 282 million . 
 On 25 March 2015 , the band released a statement announcing Malik 's departure . They say that they were angry at first because of Zayn Malik 's departure . The group made their first official public appearance as a four piece on The Late Late Show with James Corden on 14 May , where they confirmed that they would continue working without a new fifth member . 
 = = = 2015 – 16 : Made in the A.M. and hiatus = = = 
 On 31 July 2015 , the group released " Drag Me Down " without promotional material or announcement . The single is the first single from their fifth studio album , Made in the A.M. , and the first material released by the group after Malik 's departure . Following the release , it was revealed that the group would going on hiatus in 2016 to take a break . On 22 September , the title for the fifth studio album , Made in the A.M. , was officially announced along with promotional single " Infinity " being released . The group began to reveal the track listing on their Snapchat stories to which it was later confirmed on iTunes . The album was released on 13 November . At the 2015 American Music Awards on 22 November , One Direction won the award for Artist of the Year for the second year in succession . Louis Tomlinson later confirmed that the break would be around 18 months . On 13 December , One Direction performed on The X Factor final . Their last televised performance as a group , before their hiatus , was on Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve on 31 December 2015 . 
 On 13 January 2016 , Us Weekly published a report claiming that the group 's hiatus would become a permanent split , with a " source " citing that each of the four remaining group members did not renew their contracts following the completion of the On the Road Again Tour in October 2015 . Representatives for the group denied said @-@ report in a statement to Billboard , stating , " nothing has changed regarding hiatus plans for the group , and all will be revealed in due time from the band members ' own mouths . " In February , it was confirmed that Harry Styles had left the group 's management and may begin a solo career path . In June , it was confirmed that Styles had signed a solo recording contract , with several reports claiming the deal to be worth $ 80 million for three albums . In July , Payne announced that he has signed a solo recording contract with Capitol Records . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 One Direction 's debut studio album , Up All Night ( 2011 ) , is predominantly a pop music record , containing elements of teen pop , dance @-@ pop , pop rock , with electropop and rock influences . Digital Spy 's Robert Copsey described the album as a " collection of PG pop rock with killer choruses " , while The New York Times considered it " full of easy rock @-@ inflected pop , blithe and sometimes clever . " Jason Lipshutz of Billboard acknowledged that the album demonstrates an originality in sound that was " necessary for the revitalization of the boy band movement " . The songs " One Thing " and " What Makes You Beautiful " were particularly noted for the genres of power pop and pop rock , for their " powerhouse " guitar riffs and " forceful " choruses . 
 Their second studio album , Take Me Home ( 2012 ) , is characterised by rock @-@ inherited pop , prominent electric guitar riffs , bright synthesisers , a homogeneous sound and message , and the pitch @-@ correcting software Auto @-@ Tune . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian interpreted its signature sound as a " peppy , synth @-@ bolstered take on early @-@ 80s new @-@ wave pop , heavy on clipped rhythms and chugging guitars , " which , he said , is at least an improvement on the substitute contemporary R & B " that was once the grim lot of the boyband . " Jon Caramanica , writing in The New York Times , considered the album " far more mechanical " than their debut album , although noted that it is sonically and lyrically similar . The album 's lyricism speaks of falling in love , unrequited love , the insistence that flaws are what make a person unique , commitment , jealousy and longing for past significant others . 
 Erica Futterman for Rolling Stone favoured their live acoustic performances as both showing , " Horan 's ability to play guitar , as well as One Direction 's admirable live vocals . There was no need to worry about a backing track or a bum note , a pleasant realization at a pop show . " Herald Sun 's Cameron Adams opined that One Direction have " strong pop voices " . Melody Lau of the National Post wrote , " It 's easy to get lost in inherent appeal of their perfectly coiffed dos and almost @-@ too @-@ put @-@ together preppy style but somewhere in the midst of all the love @-@ struck squeals of teenage girls are guys who can actually sing and , to a certain extent , entertain . " Jane Stevenson of the portal site Canoe concurred : " What I didn 't really prepare myself for was that they all can actually sing in concert . " Chris Richards , writing in The Washington Post , dissented from the approval : " As the five traded couplets , it was tough to imagine a future Justin Timberlake , Ricky Martin or Bobby Brown emerging from the pack . No one voice stood out . " Mike Wass of Idolator felt One Direction 's " surprisingly accomplished effort " of Kings of Leon 's " Use Somebody " proved that One Direction are " more than capable " of evolving their sound . 
 Their third album Midnight Memories ( 2013 ) is a pop rock record , a slight departure from the band 's original teen pop sound . Liam Payne called Midnight Memories a " slightly rockier and edgier " album than their previous material . The album is heavily influenced by 80 's rock and folk music and briefly integrates elements of dubstep , notably in " Little White Lies " . The album 's lyrical themes primarily revolve around love , heartbreak and sexual intercourse . Many critics praised its lyrical depth and musical composition , as well as the group 's level of involvement in the production process . 
 Their fourth album Four ( 2014 ) was released on 17 November 2014 . Payne once again claimed that the album would be " edgier " and that the group had written most of the songs for it ; Horan came up with the name of the album , commemorating the fact that it is One Direction 's fourth record to date and that it has been four years since the band 's formation . Signifying a further maturation of their pop sound , the album 's first single , Steal My Girl , was dubbed by Billboard as " no What Makes You Beautiful , but its Coldplay @-@ like piano pop could be a good direction " , and that the band was " not entirely ready to let go of its bubble @-@ gum days " . Rolling Stone described the record as " saturated with retro vibes " ; its songs " split the difference between big , splashy Eighties pop rock and more elegant Seventies flavours - a very pesky <unk> @-@ snapper move that 's not so far from what Haim 's hit Days Are Gone did last year . " 
 = = Charity work = = 
 In 2011 , the band performed on the BBC 's Children in Need 2011 charity telethon , helping raise over 26 million pounds . In 2012 they extended their involvement with Children in Need as they opened the telecast with a performance of their single " Live While We 're Young " . The group said it was " incredible " to be involved in the charity event as it was something that they had " always watched as children " . 
 In February 2013 , One Direction released " One Way or Another ( Teenage Kicks ) " ( a medley of " One Way or Another " and " Teenage Kicks " ) as the 2013 single for the UK 's other major charity telethon Comic Relief . For ITV 's Santa charity Christmas campaign , they filmed a set of pleas to their fans and the general public , asking them to donate £ 2 . The band have made numerous other appearances for charitable causes , including the 2011 Pride of Britain Awards where they presented 13 @-@ year @-@ old quadruple amputee Danielle Bailey the Child of Courage award at her school assembly , and the 2014 Royal Variety Performance where they played in front of Prince William and Catherine at the London Palladium . 
 In September 2012 , Niall Horan organised an event to raise money for Irish Autism Action and another charity , called Temporary Emergency Accommodation Mullingar , based in his hometown . Due to overwhelming demand to participate in the fundraising , the ticket website for the event broke down . Horan 's brother Greg commented on the website crash , saying that " there were 500 tickets and they were all snapped up pretty quick " . 
 In 2013 , band members Liam Payne and Harry Styles partnered with <unk> , a leading cancer charity in order to help raise money for cancer research . As ambassadors of the charity , the duo collaborated to offer the chance for one fan and a friend to win an evening out with them in return for a donation to the charity as part of an exclusive " # <unk> & Harry " global campaign . They had originally set a goal of raising $ 500 @,@ 000 and ended up raising $ 784 @,@ 984 . <unk> later added that this amount would allow them to " complete funding of their Hodgkin 's lymphoma trial , in the hope of offering a much brighter future to thousands of children and young people affected by this form of disease . " One Direction were named the most charitable in 2013 behind Taylor Swift by social change organization <unk> 
 In 2014 , One Direction donated £ 600 @,@ 000 for the Stand up to Cancer campaign by giving portions of their ticket sales revenues from their Where We Are Tour . On 15 November 2014 , One Direction joined the charity group Band Aid 30 along with other British and Irish pop acts , recording the latest version of the track " Do They Know It 's Christmas ? " at Sarm West Studios in Notting Hill , London , to raise money for the 2014 Ebola crisis in Western Africa . 
 = = Image = = 
 Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph , in an article on One Direction 's success in North America , notes that Americans had left a gap in the market and it took the prominence of Justin Bieber to demonstrate that there still was a market for " clean cut , wholesome , whiter @-@ than @-@ white , middle class parent friendly pop : cute boys advocating puppy love . And what could be better than one cute boy , if not five ? " One Direction have been described as sparking a resurgence in the interest in boy bands , and as forming part of a new " British Invasion " in the United States . Bill Werde , a representative of Billboard magazine , commented , " There 's a lot of possibility here , there 's a lot of upside , that level of talent with those kinds of looks , it 's really a perfect storm for a massive , massive successful phenomenon . " 
 Sonny Takhar , the chief executive officer of Syco Records , attributes the breakthrough to the power of social media . " Sometimes you feel the song 's the star , but it 's not like that here – it 's the act , " he said . " It 's a real moment . Social media has become the new radio , it 's never broken an act globally like this before . " Will Bloomfield , the group 's manager , added , " These guys live online , and so do their fans . " Their management employs a social media team and the members all tweet themselves , " which helps create the illusion that they couldn 't be any closer to their fans , " according to Caspar Llewellyn Smith , writing for The Guardian . One Direction 's Twitter account had amassed 10 million followers by February 2013 , with the account gaining followers at an average of 21 @,@ 000 per day . In an approach pioneered by The Beatles each member is known for his feature ; Horan is " the cute one " , Malik is " the quiet and mysterious one " , Payne is " the sensible one " , Styles is " the charming one " and Tomlinson is " the funny one " . Horan commented on One Direction as a boy band , " People think that a boy band is air @-@ grabs and [ being ] dressed in all one colour . We 're boys in a band . We 're trying to do something different from what people would think is the typical kind of boy band . We 're trying to do different kinds of music and we 're just trying to be ourselves , not squeaky clean . " Leah Collins , writing for the National Post , remarked that One Direction had succeeded on the latter front , " For the most part , that just means the group presents themselves as typical , goofy and uncensored teenage boys – posting jokey YouTube videos , for instance , or boozing at awards shows . " Writing for The Observer , Kitty Empire opined , " One Direction fulfil a great many boy band prerequisites ( looks , soppy lyrics , tune @-@ grasp , fame @-@ lust ) but their lack of routines points to the subtle digressions afoot here " . 
 = = Members = = 
 Current 
 Niall Horan ( 2010 – present ) 
 Liam Payne ( 2010 – present ) 
 Harry Styles ( 2010 – present ) 
 Louis Tomlinson ( 2010 – present ) 
 Former 
 Zayn Malik ( 2010 – 15 ) 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Up All Night ( 2011 ) 
 Take Me Home ( 2012 ) 
 Midnight Memories ( 2013 ) 
 Four ( 2014 ) 
 Made in the A.M. ( 2015 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 The X Factor series 7 ( finalists ) 
 Up All Night : The Live Tour 
 One Direction : This Is Us 
 One Direction : Where We Are - The Concert Film 
 = = Concert tours = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 One Direction has received five BRIT Awards — winning their first with " What Makes You Beautiful " for Best British Single at the 2012 BRIT Awards , three NME awards , two Kids ' Choice Awards , and four MTV Video Music Awards , among other awards . One Direction won 27 awards from 29 they have been nominated for at the Teen Choice Awards . One Direction also won two American Music Awards out of their two nominations for Favorite Pop / Rock Album and Favorite Pop / Rock Band / Duo / Group , respectively . 
 = = Publications = = 
 One Direction : Forever Young , HarperCollins ( 17 February 2011 ) ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 00 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 One Direction : The Official Annual 2012 , HarperCollins ( 1 September 2011 ) ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 00 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 Dare to Dream : Life as One Direction , HarperCollins ( 15 September 2011 ) ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 00 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 One Direction : Where We Are : Our Band , Our Story : 100 % Official , HarperCollins ( 19 November 2013 ) ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 00 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 = Minnesota State Highway 7 = 
 Minnesota State Highway 7 , or Trunk Highway 7 , ( MN 7 , TH 7 ) is a state highway in Minnesota , which runs from its intersection with MN 28 near Beardsley and continues east to its terminus with MN 100 and County Road 25 ( CR 25 ) in St. Louis Park . The highway runs east – west for approximately 194 @.@ 2 miles ( 312 @.@ 5 km ) through mostly rural farmland in the central part of the state . On its western end , it is part of the Minnesota River Scenic Byway where it runs northwest – southeast along the Minnesota River and associated lakes near the border with the adjoining state of South Dakota . For roughly 24 miles ( 39 km ) of its route , it runs concurrently with U.S. Highway 59 ( US 59 ) between Appleton and Montevideo . In Montevideo , the highway turns to the east cutting across the state . It passes through several small towns before entering the Twin Cities metropolitan area . In the metro area , MN 7 follows an expressway through several suburbs before terminating in St. Louis Park . Two different segments have been listed on the National Highway System , system of roads considered important to the country . 
 The highway was first designated along a series of roads between Appleton and Minneapolis around 1933 . At first these roads were a mixture of gravel and bitumen surfaces , the latter a forerunner of today 's asphalt . Within the first year or so , the western end was extended to terminate MN 7 in the Ortonville area . In 1958 , the highway was extended to its modern western terminus at Beardsley by replacing another trunk highway . The section that is now an expressway in the Twin Cities was expanded by the 1950s , and the whole highway was paved in a hard @-@ surface by the end of that decade . The highway was truncated in the Twin Cities to its current eastern terminus in the 1980s . The scenic byways designations were applied at the state and federal levels in 1995 and 2002 , respectively . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Legally , MN 7 is defined as several different constitutional and legislative routes in state law . The highway follows roadways defined as parts of constitutional routes 12 and 40 in Minnesota Statutes § 161 @.@ 114 . The remainder of the highway follows all , or part , of legislative routes 119 , 147 , 148 , 304 , and 319 in the Minnesota Statutes § 161 @.@ 115 . The highway is not marked with these routes number along the actual highway . The route of MN 7 between Ortonville and Montevideo along with the segment between I @-@ 494 and MN 100 in the Twin Cities have been listed on the National Highway System , a system of roads important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . Like other trunk highways in the state , MN 7 is maintained by the Minnesota Department of Transportation ( Mn / DOT ) . According to the department , up 12 @,@ 000 vehicles a day used the highway outside of the Twin Cities , and up to 55 @,@ 000 vehicles traveled the highway daily in the metro area in 2010 . 
 = = = Beardsley to Montevideo = = = 
 The highway starts at an intersection with MN 28 on the eastern edge of Beardsley and heads south . From here , MN 7 passes through farm fields before turning southeasterly along the shore of Big Stone Lake . The lake is the source of the Minnesota River and forms the Minnesota – South Dakota state line in Big Stone County . The highway in this area is also a part of the Minnesota River Valley Scenic Byway , a National Scenic Byway and a Minnesota State Scenic Byway . The road turns eastward along a bend in the lake near the community of Foster before running further inland around Big Stone Lake State Park . Past the park , MN 7 curves to the south along the shore and continues to Ortonville . The highway follows 2nd Street through town along the lake shore and through residential neighborhoods . South of the end of the lake , MN 7 merges with US 12 , and the two highways run concurrently for about a couple blocks . South of town , MN 7 merges onto US 75 and the combined highway runs along the Minnesota River . The roadway also runs parallel to a line of the BNSF Railway used by the Twin Cities and Western Railroad in the area . East of the Big Stone National Wildlife Refuge and the town of Odessa , US 75 and the scenic byway turn south to cross the river , separating from MN 7 which continues along the northern banks of the river . 
 Near the town of Correll , MN 7 follows the northern shore of Marsh Lake to Appleton . The highway turns due east along Logan Avenue to enter town . MN 7 follows both US 59 and MN 119 in a triple concurrency on along <unk> Street through town . At the intersection with Minnesota Street near the Swift County Fairgrounds , US 59 / MN 7 turns southeasterly separating from MN 119 . The highway then continues southeasterly running inland from Lac qui Parle through farm country to the town of Milan . There it crosses to the south side of the railroad before intersecting MN 40 and exiting town . In Watson , the scenic byway route rejoins MN 7 and follows it south to Montevideo . On the southern edge of the city , MN 7 turns northward , separating from US 59 and joining MN 29 . 
 = = = Montevideo to Hutchinson = = = 
 Continuing northward in Montevideo , the highway turns back to the east between J. Harley Smith and Lagoon parks . MN 29 separates at the intersection between Washington Avenue and 8th Street , and MN 7 continues eastward on Washington through residential areas . The avenue passes the hospital before leaving town . The street name attached to the highway in rural Chippewa County is 50th Street as MN 7 runs due east through farm country . The highway crosses another line of the BNSF Railway and MN 23 in Clara City before meandering southwesterly to follow 60th Street near <unk> . East of this unincorporated community , the highway crosses into <unk> County . The highway follows 195th Avenue through the southern part of the county , passing through the communities of <unk> and Lake Lillian . In between , it passes south of <unk> where it intersects US 71 . 
 The next county along the course of MN 7 is Meeker County . Running due east through farmlands in the southern area of that county , the highway intersects MN 4 in Cosmos and passes through Cedar Mills . Just east of Cedar Mills , MN 7 crosses into McLeod County and merges with MN 22 . The combined highway turns southeasterly toward Hutchinson . On the west side of town , the roadway crosses Campbell Lake and follows an arm of the lake through the downtown area . The highway passes several parks before coming to an intersection with MN 15 and exiting the business district for residential neighborhoods . MN 22 separates from MN 7 east of Hutchinson , and the latter highway continues eastward . 
 = = = Hutchinson to St. Louis Park = = = 
 In rural eastern McLeod County , MN 7 jogs to the north around Silver Lake in the city of the same name . Northeast of Lester Prairie , the highway crosses into Carver County . This area is also rural farm country as the roadway bypasses New Germany and Mayer to the north . Near the latter community , MN 7 intersects MN 25 which provides a connection to both Mayer and the city of Watertown . North of <unk> , the roadway begins to meander southeasterly through an area dotted with several lakes and crosses into the western edge of the Twin Cities metropolitan area . 
 After briefly passing through Hennepin County in the communities of St. Bonifacius and <unk> , MN 7 crosses back into Carver County . In the city of Victoria the highway rounds the southern end of Lake Minnetonka . As MN 7 begins to turn back northeasterly , it crosses into western Hennepin County at <unk> . The highway widens out to a four @-@ lane divided highway near the intersection with MN 41 . This divided highway has a partial interchange with Mill Street in Excelsior near the St. Albans Bay of Lake Minnetonka . This area transitions into a full suburban residential area by the time the highway crosses into Minnetonka . The highway passes north of the campus for Minnetonka High School near the intersection with County Road 101 ( CR 101 ) . Access to MN 7 through the area is restricted to major intersections only for the most part , making the highway an expressway rather than a true freeway . While still in Minnetonka , MN 7 passes through a cloverleaf interchange with Interstate 494 ( I @-@ 494 ) which is one half of the Twin Cities ' beltway . Immediately adjacent to the cloverleaf is another interchange for CR 60 ( Baker Road ) . The expressway continues northeasterly through the suburb of Hopkins before crossing into St. Louis Park . 
 The western edge of St. Louis Park is marked by the interchange with US 169 . The area immediately adjacent to MN 7 in this suburb is filled with commercial properties on either side of access roads . East of Louisiana Avenue , the highway is parallel to a line of the Twin Cities and Western Railroad . There is another interchange for <unk> Avenue before MN 7 meets , and terminates at , the interchange for MN 100 near the Peavey – <unk> Experimental Concrete Grain Elevator , the country 's first concrete grain elevator . The expressway continues east for approximately another mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) as CR 25 . 
 = = History = = 
 First authorized in 1933 – 34 , MN 7 ran between Appleton and the Twin Cities . At the time , the highway was under construction between Ortonville and Appleton . From its junction with MN 119 , MN 7 was a gravel road southeasterly to Montevideo before turn east on a bituminous surface to Clara City . From there east to the <unk> area , the highway was gravel , and the remainder was bituminous . No sections at the time were paved in asphalt . The segment from Appleton northwesterly to Odessa was completed by the early part of 1935 connecting the highway to US 75 . By 1952 , the highway had been expanded to four lanes between Excelsior and the Twin Cities . In 1958 , the highway was extended northwesterly along US 75 from Odessa to Ortonville and continuing on to Beardsley . The highway between Beardsley and Ortonville had been MN 103 since the 1930s . 
 The route was completely paved by 1959 , the last section to be paved with at least bitumen was along the former MN 103 northwest of Ortonville . MN 7 used to extend into downtown Minneapolis until 1965 , where it terminated at its intersection with Washington Avenue ( old US 52 ) . From 1965 to either 1987 or 1988 , the eastern terminus was located at the intersection of Lake Street and France Avenue in Minneapolis ; the part , about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) long , between the interchange with MN 100 and the intersection of Lake Street and France Avenue is now called County Road 25 . In 1995 , the section between MN 28 and the southern US 75 junction was named a Minnesota State Scenic Byway ; it was also made a National Scenic Byway on June 13 , 2002 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Free ( OSI album ) = 
 Free is the second album by American progressive rock band OSI , released by InsideOut Music on April 21 , 2006 . 
 Guitarist Jim Matheos and keyboardist and vocalist Kevin Moore decided to work on a follow @-@ up to Office of Strategic Influence after the two found they both had holes in their schedules . Drummer Mike Portnoy returned as a session musician rather than a full band member . Joey Vera replaced Sean Malone on bass guitar . 
 Free was met with generally positive critical reception . Critics noted that the album was different from its predecessor , focusing more on Moore 's keyboards than Matheos ' guitars . Portnoy 's drumming received praise ; Moore 's vocals received mixed reactions . A remix EP entitled re : free was released on October 24 , 2006 , featuring remixes of three tracks from Free . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the first OSI album , Office of Strategic Influence , was released in 2003 , Jim Matheos and Kevin Moore returned to their respective projects . Matheos released the album <unk> and toured with Fates Warning . Moore moved from Costa Rica to Istanbul , Turkey . In 2004 , he released the third Chroma Key album , Graveyard Mountain Home , and wrote the soundtrack ( released as Ghost Book ) to the Turkish horror film Okul . Matheos and Moore both had holes in their schedules , so decided to work on a second OSI album . 
 The writing and recording process were largely the same as that for the first OSI album . Matheos would send Moore guitar , keyboard and programming parts ; Moore would then " chop them up and stuff " . Matheos considers the writing process for OSI as more collaborative than writing for his other band , Fates Warning : " With Fates I write songs and we don ’ t really change a whole lot from my final version to the version that goes on the record , " he said . " With Kevin it 's much more collaborative in that I come up with a song idea and it can change completely from my original idea to the final product on the record . " 
 Matheos originally intended the first OSI album as a " project " which would never produce a second album . For Free , Matheos and Moore wanted to use a different musician lineup to focus OSI on primarily being Matheos and Moore . They did not want to give the impression that the guests on the first album were part of the band . Matheos stated that the music on Free was " focused less on the progressive elements or the metal elements that were on the first record . We thought we could do something just a little more groove oriented . " Matheos and Moore had both worked with bassist Joey Vera in the past and considered him " perfect " for the album . Moore was pleased with Vera 's bass parts : Vera sent them to Moore in a state such that they required very little editing or enhancement for the final mix of the album . 
 Dream Theater drummer Mike Portnoy was listed as a full member of OSI on the first album , but found working on the first album to be a difficult experience . Moore noted that Portnoy " wasn 't used to having other people have strong ideas about what the drum parts should be " . For Free , Portnoy contributed drum tracks as a session musician , agreeing to " take [ Matheos and Moore 's ] ideas and do the best he could with playing " , according to Moore . Portnoy 's drum parts were recorded at Carriage House Studios in Stamford , Connecticut from November 18 to November 20 , 2005 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Moore stated that he and Matheos had an idea of what style of music to write for Free as they " both have similar feelings about what worked on the first album " . He considered the album as " more focused " than its predecessor . He noted that Free continued " the mood of some of the songs of the first album and the melodies and mixing up some of the heavy stuff with the programming . As opposed to the instrumental , straight ahead , progressive stuff we did " . He attributed the band 's sound to the " very different " ideas he and Matheos ' had . 
 Moore described the lyrics on the album as " just whatever is going on in my head ... I try to development from a stream of consciousness to something that makes sense " . He said the lyrics primarily spoke of relationships , " our way of trying to keep them , the resulting problems and that kind of thing " . Moore cited Roger Waters and Peter Gabriel as influences on his vocal style , " Those guys don ’ t have the best voices either , but they pull it off then I figured I could do it too , " he said . He noted that musically his progressive influences " will always be there " because they influenced all his music , but could not name any other influences as " [ he listens ] to so much stuff it just gets lost " . 
 Moore doubletracked his vocals , but apart from occasional use of delay did not use any effects on his vocals . He used an Elektron <unk> and a Minimoog Voyager with computer software to produce the keyboard sounds on the album . Matheos detuned his guitars to C # and sometimes B instead of using a seven @-@ string guitar because he prefers the sound of a detuned guitar : " To me , they sound totally different if you have those nice loose , floppy strings , " he said . " It 's a real bitch to keep them in tune , stopping every couple measures , <unk> and punching back in . Especially for [ a ] song that 's in B , or even C # is a problem sometimes , especially if you 're doing a lot of fast moving around or high up on the neck . It 's a pain in the ass , but I really like that sound . I don 't think I would ever go to a 7 @-@ string . " 
 The bonus track <unk> 9 features audio clips of former chess world champion Robert ' Bobby ' Fischer 's rambling interview with a radio station after his arrest in Japan , in which he asserts that the U.S. government will torture and murder him once extradited back to the country . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Free was released by InsideOut Music on April 24 , 2006 . Matheos and Moore were keen to tour the US and Europe in the fall of 2006 . In a 2009 interview , Moore reflected that " we tried to get together [ to tour ] , but it just didn ’ t happen " . 
 The special edition of the album contained six extra songs : two were songs that didn 't make it to the final album , but Matheos noted " were interesting nonetheless " ; two tracks were songs Moore had written for Radio For Peace International . Another track was a demo of " When You 're Ready " , a track from Office of Strategic Influence . An EP entitled re : free was released on October 24 , 2006 . InsideOut Music released a CD version of the EP and Burning Shed released a vinyl version . The EP features the tracks " Go " ( remixed by Console ) , " Kicking " and " Home Was Good " ( both remixed by Moore ) and a multimedia track of " Free " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception for Free was generally positive . Blogcritics praised the album as " a masterful evolution of the sound of two fabulous musicians " , describing it as " a magnificent symbiosis of metal and experimental electronica . " Jake Rosenberg of Transcending the Mundane stated that on Office of Strategic Influence , " it sounded like they were experimenting with different approaches , but never really established the OSI sound " . He lauded Free for " [ sounding ] like the work of a mature and confident band " . Adrien Begrand of PopMatters regarded Free as " a challenge to fans of both Fates Warning and Dream Theater , and one that will surprise those who think this is just another slice of flashy prog metal bombast . " 
 Reviewers commented on the differences between Free and Office of Strategic Influence . Rosenberg described Free as " heavier , darker , more experimental and a lot more consistent " than the first album . Stewart Mason of Allmusic described the album as " downright commercial in a way that none of the duo 's previous projects have been " . He regarded the album as less like the " standard @-@ issue epic metal " of the first album and more like " Evanescence 's gothy metal @-@ pop crossed with late @-@ era Radiohead 's fondness for electronic interference " . He considered the songwriting as " catchy enough that it 's not unthinkable that unadventurous rock radio programmers could take a shine to the title track or ' Go ' " , although noted that " Fates Warning and Dream Theater fans might be less impressed " . Rosenberg considers Free as musically " a more progressive version of Nine Inch Nails . Instead of creating their darkness with angst and depression , OSI creates their darkness with sheer indifference . " Begrand compared the album to Head Control System , " in that it tends to stray from the typical metal template in an attempt at something a little more electronic influenced " . Although not considering Free to be as " enthralling " as Head Control System , he noted that the album " still has its moments " . 
 Critics noted that there was a greater focus on Moore 's keyboards than Matheos ' guitar riffs . Blogcritics said that " Free focuses a lot on the keyboards and programming of Kevin Moore " , although Matheos ' " heavy guitar riffs , while not as frequent on this disc , have an even harder edge . They have an energy , and urgency , and serious metal crunch to them that will make any rocker sit up and pay attention . " Chad Bower of About.com noted that Free " isn 't one of those metal albums that <unk> you up and makes you want to break stuff . It 's one where you have to sit back , throw on the headphones , and appreciate the complexity and musicianship . " Olav Björnsen of <unk> stated that " layers upon layers of electronic sounds , that fill out the soundscapes of the songs , create nuances and subtle moods as well as walls of sound and tension . " He said that Matheos used acoustic and electric guitars " to fill out the soundscapes even more , and is at the most effective when playing the acoustic guitar , giving life and warmth to songs that would have been a bit cold sounding without that input . " 
 Bower described Moore 's " laid back and relaxed " vocals as " [ fitting ] in perfectly with the atmospheric style music " . Blogcritics praised Moore 's vocals as being " in such stark contrast to the music that it serves to heighten the tension of the songs " . Björnsen considered Moore 's vocals as " an important asset " to the album : " He isn 't a good vocalist when it comes to singing voice or range , but utilizes his talk @-@ like singing effectively , binding together eleven quite different sounding songs . " Rosenberg considered Moore 's vocals and lyrics as " the thing that stands out the most " , comparing him to Roger Waters . Mason dismissed Moore 's vocals , describing them as " unfortunately reminiscent of any number of faceless alternative rock singers " . Begrand criticized Moore 's " monotonous droning " as " tiresome " . 
 Mike Portnoy 's drumming received praise . " Mike Portnoy continues to amaze with his adaptability , playing perfectly with just about whatever style of music , " Blogcritics noted . Björnsen commended Portnoy 's performance , noting that " He delivers driving rhythms when appropriate , and has a more laid back approach when necessary " . Batmaz praised Portnoy for " displaying admirable restraint " : " Free is perhaps his most minimalistic side , because of the thick atmosphere on the album , but at any rate , his performance his spectacular " . Blogcritics praised Vera 's bass parts as " [ adding ] extra strength and depth to the rhythm section . " 
 Batmaz regarded " All Gone Now " as " arguably the best song " , describing it as being " built upon a strong foundation of atmosphere and dynamics . Constantly shifting between mad riffage and daunting synth passages , this song features some of the finest melodies Kevin Moore has written since Awake . His synth melodies simply soar to high levels while Matheos ' playing contrasts the eerie mood of the piece . " Björnsen dismissed " Our Town " as " filler " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Kevin Moore , all music composed by Jim Matheos and Kevin Moore , except where noted . 
 Special edition bonus disc 
 Re : free track listing 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Jim Matheos - guitars , keyboards and programming 
 Kevin Moore - vocals , keyboards and programming 
 Mike Portnoy - acoustic drums 
 Joey Vera - bass on tracks 1 , 2 , 4 , 6 , and 7 
 Bige Akdeniz - guitar and vocals on " Old War " 
 = Wizard ( horse ) = 
 Wizard ( 1806 – 30 June 1813 ) was a British Thoroughbred racehorse . He won seven of his ten races , with all his wins coming at Newmarket . In 1809 he won the 2000 Guineas Stakes , before finishing second in the Derby Stakes . The following year he won a match race against his Derby conqueror Pope . Throughout his racing career he was owned by Christopher Wilson and trained by Tom Perren . Wizard only stood as a stallion for two years before dying in an accident in 1813 . His son Young Wizard won the Riddlesworth Stakes and was the runner @-@ up in the Derby in 1817 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Wizard was a chestnut colt foaled in 1806 and bred by Mr. Goodison . He was sired by Sorcerer , a successful racehorse and three @-@ time Champion sire in Britain . Amongst Sorcerer 's other progeny were 2000 Guineas and Derby winner <unk> , St. Leger winner <unk> and the Oaks winners Morel , Maid of Orleans and Sorcery . Wizard 's dam was a daughter of Precipitate . Wizard was the second of her ten foals . He was trained by Tom Perren . 
 = = Racing career = = 
 = = = 1809 : Three @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Wizard did not race as a two @-@ year @-@ old and he made his debut on 3 April 1809 in a sweepstakes of 100 guineas each at the Newmarket Craven meeting . Ridden by William Clift , he started the race as the 6 / 5 favourite and won it easily from <unk> . Cock Robin finished third , with three others behind him . Two weeks later he started 4 / 5 favourite for the 2000 Guineas Stakes over the Rowley Mile at Newmarket . This was the first running of the 2000 Guineas . Also near the front of the betting were Japan at 10 / 3 , Robin at 6 / 1 and Fair Star at 7 / 1 . Eight runners started the race , which Wizard won from Robin . Fair Star finished third and Japan fourth . 
 Wizard then went to Epsom Downs for the Derby Stakes , where he was again ridden by Clift , as he had been in his previous two races . He started as the odds @-@ on favourite , priced at about 8 / 11 . Fair Star was the second favourite , with Salivator third in the betting . Salivator took the lead and held it until the field turned into the finishing straight , where Wizard overtook him . Wizard was in front until a few yards from the finish , where he was passed by Pope , a 20 / 1 outsider . Pope won the race by a neck from Wizard with Salivator in third and Fair Star in fourth . In his last race of the season Wizard finished fourth in the St. Leger Stakes at Doncaster . The race was won by Ashton , who had started as favourite . The St. Leger was the first time Wizard had not been ridden by William Clift , with Francis Buckle riding him . 
 = = = 1810 : Four @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Wizard did not reappear as a four @-@ year @-@ old until October , when he defeated Derby winner Pope over one and a quarter miles at Newmarket . Pope had started the race as the 1 / 2 favourite . The following day , Wizard walked over for one @-@ third of a subscription of 25 guineas each . These were his only two appearances in 1810 . 
 = = = 1811 : Five @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Wizard 's first race as a five @-@ year @-@ old was a sweepstakes of 100 guineas each on 20 April at Newmarket . He faced three opponents and won the race from odds @-@ on favourite Spaniard . He was then intended to face 1810 Derby winner Whalebone at Newmarket in early May , but Whalebone 's owner , the 4th Duke of Grafton , paid a forfeit and the race never took place . He beat Middlethorpe at Newmarket after Middlethorpe unseated his rider in the early stages of the race . The match against Middlethorpe won him 500 guineas . The following day he beat Anthonio over five and a half furlongs . He faced Middlethorpe again in September when he fell lame and Middlethorpe beat him . This was his final race and he was retired to stud . Throughout his racing career Wizard earned 3850 guineas . 
 = = Race record = = 
 = = Stud career = = 
 Wizard was a stallion at <unk> Lodge near Ferrybridge , Yorkshire . In 1812 his stud fee was ten guineas plus half a guinea for the groom . He also stood at <unk> , for the same fee , in 1813 . He only stood as a stallion for these two seasons and died on 30 June 1813 at <unk> Lodge two days after running into a post . He broke three ribs and an iron bar attached to the post became so lodged in his backbone that it took two men to remove it . Wizard sired three winners of eleven races . 
 His winning progeny were : 
 Wizard filly ( 1813 ) – won a maiden race at Penrith in three two @-@ mile heats in 1816 . She ran in the Richmond Cup , but was unplaced . 
 Warlock ( 1814 ) – won two races at Chesterfield and two races at Pontefract in 1817 . He also won a race of four three @-@ mile heats at Durham in 1818 . 
 Young Wizard ( 1814 ) – owned by the 3rd Baron Foley and later the 2nd Marquess of Exeter . As a three @-@ year @-@ old in 1817 he won the Riddlesworth Stakes at Newmarket and a Produce Sweepstakes at Doncaster . A match between Young Wizard and <unk> at Newmarket finished in a dead heat . He also finished second to Azor in the Derby . In 1818 he beat Sir Thomas in a match race and won a race at Ascot Heath in 1819 . 
 Wizard 's descendants include 1963 Irish 2000 Guineas and 1964 Queen Elizabeth II Stakes winner Linacre and 1940 Gran Premio di Milano winner Sirte . Through 1948 Prix Edmond Blanc winner <unk> he is an ancestor of multiple time Canadian Champion sire and Hall of Fame inductee Vice Regent and his brother Viceregal and their many descendants ( which include Deputy Minister , Victory Gallop and <unk> ) , as well as Canadian Horse of the Year <unk> and 1979 Prix du Jockey Club winner Top Ville . All these were descended through another unnamed daughter foaled in 1813 , as was Hyacinthus , who won the 1940 Middle Park Stakes . This unnamed daughter of Wizard was never trained to race as she was crippled . 
 Through his 1814 daughter <unk> his descendants include 1928 Grand Prix de Paris winner Cri de Guerre and his descendants ( including 1972 Bay Shore Stakes winner <unk> and 1983 Phoenix Stakes winner King Persian ) . 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 Note : b . 
 = Bay , <unk> . = 
 Black , br . 
 = Brown , ch . = 
 Chestnut 
 * Wizard was inbred <unk> to <unk> . This means that the stallion appears three times in the fourth generation of his pedigree . He was also inbred 4x4 to the Snap mare . 
 = Russian battleship Andrei Pervozvanny = 
 Andrei Pervozvanny ( Russian : <unk> <unk> — St Andrew the First @-@ Called ) was an Andrei Pervozvanny @-@ class predreadnought battleship built for the Imperial Russian Navy during the mid @-@ 1900s . The ship 's construction was seriously extended by design changes as a result of the Russo @-@ Japanese War and labor unrest after the 1905 Revolution , and she took nearly six years to build . Andrei Pervozvanny was not very active during World War I and her bored sailors joined the general mutiny of the Baltic Fleet in early 1917 . She was used by the Bolsheviks to bombard the rebellious garrison of Fort Krasnaya Gorka during the Russian Civil War in 1919 and was torpedoed by British Coastal Motor Boats shortly afterwards , as part of the allied intervention in the Russian Civil War . The ship was never fully repaired and was scrapped in 1923 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Andrei Pervozvanny was 454 feet ( 138 @.@ 4 m ) long at the waterline and 460 feet ( 140 @.@ 2 m ) long overall . She had a beam of 80 feet ( 24 @.@ 4 m ) and a draft of 27 feet ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) . She displaced 18 @,@ 580 long tons ( 18 @,@ 880 t ) at deep load . Her hull was subdivided by 17 transverse watertight bulkheads and the engine rooms were divided by a centerline longitudinal bulkhead . She had a double bottom and a metacentric height of 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) . The ship 's crew consisted of 31 officers and 924 crewmen . 
 Andrei Pervozvanny had two 4 @-@ cylinder vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines with a total designed output of 17 @,@ 600 indicated horsepower ( 13 @,@ 100 kW ) . Twenty @-@ five Belleville boilers provided steam to the engines at a working pressure of 285 pounds per square inch ( 1 @,@ 970 kPa ; 20 @.@ 0 kgf / cm2 ) . On sea trials , the engines produced 17 @,@ 635 ihp ( 13 @,@ 150 kW ) and a top speed of 18 @.@ 5 knots ( 34 @.@ 3 km / h ; 21 @.@ 3 mph ) . She carried a normal load of 800 long tons ( 810 t ) of coal that provided a range of 1 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 400 km ; 1 @,@ 500 mi ) at a speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) and a maximum load of 1 @,@ 500 long tons ( 1 @,@ 500 t ) that gave 2 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 400 km ; 2 @,@ 800 mi ) at the same speed . 
 The main armament consisted of two pairs of 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) Model 1895 40 @-@ caliber guns mounted in twin @-@ gun turrets fore and aft . These guns had a maximum elevation of 35 ° and could depress to -5 ° . Eighty rounds per gun were carried and they could fire one round per minute . Eight of the fourteen 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) Model 1905 45 @-@ caliber guns were mounted in four twin @-@ gun turret at the corners of the superstructure while six were mounted in casemates in the superstructure . For defense against torpedo boats , Andrei Pervozvanny carried twelve 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns mounted in casemates above the 8 @-@ inch guns in the superstructure . Two underwater 450 @-@ millimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes were mounted , one on each side , and they were provided with six spare torpedoes . 
 Based on the Russian experience at the Battle of Tsushima , the sides of the ship 's hull were completely protected by Krupp cemented armor . The main waterline belt had a maximum thickness of 8 @.@ 5 inches ( 216 mm ) and the upper belt was 5 inches ( 127 mm ) at its thickest . The sides of the main gun turrets were 8 inches ( 203 mm ) thick and the armor of the casemates ranged from 3 @.@ 1 to 5 inches ( 79 to 127 mm ) in thickness . The greatest thickness of deck armor was 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Andrei Pervozvanny was built by the Admiralty Shipyard in Saint Petersburg . Construction began on 15 March 1904 and was officially laid down on 11 May . Her construction was slowed by labor trouble in the shipyard from the 1905 Revolution . She was launched on 30 October 1906 and began her sea trials in September 1910 . They were completed in October 1910 , but the ship entered service on 10 March 1911 . Andrei Pervozvanny joined the Baltic Fleet on completion and she made a port visit to Copenhagen in September 1912 . The following September she visited Portland , Cherbourg , and Stavanger together with her sister ship , Imperator Pavel I. She ran aground on Odensholm Island , off the Estonian coast , on 1 July 1914 . The ship was still under repair when World War I began the following month . Her lattice masts were cut down and light topmasts were added while under repair . 
 Andrei Pervozvanny was mostly inactive during the war as the Russian naval strategy in the Baltic was defensive and they did not intend to seek out the German fleet . Torpedo nets were fitted in early 1915 and the ship 's torpedoes were removed in January 1916 . In late 1916 , four 76 @-@ millimeter ( 3 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns were added . The ship 's crew joined the general mutiny of the Baltic Fleet in Helsinki on 16 March 1917 , after they received word of the February Revolution in Saint Petersburg , and several of the ship 's officers were murdered by the crew . The Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk required the Soviets to evacuate their naval base at Helsinki in March 1918 or have their ships interned by newly independent Finland even though the Gulf of Finland was still frozen over . Andrei Pervozvanny and her sister ship the renamed Respublika , led the second group of ships on 5 April and reached Kronstadt five days later in what became known as the " Ice Voyage " . 
 After the October Revolution in 1918 , the ship remained on active duty as part of the Red Navy during the Russian Civil War . Between 13 and 15 June 1919 , Andrei Pervozvanny and the dreadnought Petropavlovsk bombarded Fort Krasnaya Gorka whose garrison had mutinied against the Bolsheviks . The ship fired 170 12 @-@ inch and 408 8 @-@ inch shells and the garrison surrendered on 17 June when Leon Trotsky promised them their lives , only to order them machine @-@ gunned . Andrei Pervozvanny was attacked by the Royal Navy during its Campaign in the Baltic 1918 – 19 , when she was torpedoed by either <unk> 31 or <unk> 88 during the night of 17 / 18 August 1919 as the ship lay at anchor in Kronstadt . She was hit on the port bow and settled 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) down by the bow . The British claimed three torpedo hits , but two of the torpedoes actually struck the harbor wall behind the battleship . The Victoria Cross , Britain 's highest military decoration , was awarded to Commander Claude Congreve Dobson and Lieutenant Gordon Charles Steele for their successful attack . The ship was raised and docked , but never fully repaired . While under repair , she was nearly hit by a small bomb during a British air raid on 3 September . Scrapping of Andrei Pervozvanny began 15 December 1923 , although she was not formally stricken until 21 November 1925 . 
 = Boreray sheep = 
 The Boreray is a breed of sheep originating on the St Kilda archipelago off the west coast of Scotland and surviving as a feral animal on one of the islands , Boreray . 
 The breed , also known as the Boreray Blackface or Hebridean Blackface , was once raised for meat and wool , but is now used mainly for conservation grazing . The Boreray is one of the Northern European short @-@ tailed sheep group of breeds . 
 It is the rarest breed of sheep in the United Kingdom . It is the only breed classed as " Category 2 : Endangered " by the Rare Breeds Survival Trust , because fewer than 300 @-@ 500 are known to exist . 
 = = History = = 
 Until the late eighteenth century , the domesticated sheep throughout the Scottish Highlands and Islands belonged to a type called the Scottish Dunface or Old Scottish <unk> , which was probably similar to the sheep kept in the whole of northern and western Europe up to the Iron Age . A local variety of Dunface was kept on the two main St Kilda islands of Boreray and Hirta by the crofters of the islands , who lived on Hirta , the largest island of the St Kilda archipelago . 
 In the mid @-@ eighteenth century the crofters ' sheep were described as being " of the smallest kind " , with short , coarse wool , and all having horns – usually one pair , but often two pairs . At that time there were about 1 @,@ 000 of these sheep on Hirta and about 400 on Boreray . 
 In the late nineteenth century the crofters ' sheep were cross @-@ bred with Scottish Blackface sheep , which by then had replaced the Dunface throughout mainland Scotland . The other breeds descended from the Dunface include the North Ronaldsay and the Shetland . 
 Before the evacuation of the St <unk> inhabitants , these sheep were farmed . However , when the St Kilda archipelago 's human inhabitants were evacuated in 1930 , the sheep of Hirta were also removed and in 1932 they were replaced by Soays , which still live there as well as on Soay itself . Meanwhile , the remaining sheep on Boreray were left to become feral ; these became the only survivors of the crofters ' sheep , and one of the few surviving descendants of the Dunface . This means that they are the original , unmodified sheep that used to be farmed on the island . In the 1970s half a dozen of them were exported to form the basis of a breeding population on the mainland , but the majority of <unk> still remain on the island . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The Boreray should not be confused with the Soay sheep , also from the St Kilda archipelago , nor with the Hebridean sheep , which was formerly called the " St Kilda " , although it is probably not in fact derived from the St Kilda sheep . Soay sheep are smaller than Boreray sheep , their ewes weighing between 20 and 23 kg . Their fleece is normally black , opposed to the white or tan of the Boreray . The Boreray is also known by the names Boreray Blackface and Hebridean Blackface . 
 Despite being partially derived from a long @-@ tailed breed ( the Scottish Blackface ) , <unk> display characteristics which group them with other northern European short @-@ tailed sheep . They are amongst the smallest sheep in the British Isles , with mature ewes weighing 28 kg ( 62 lb ) and standing 55 cm ( 22 in ) at the withers . 
 They have naturally short tails , which do not require docking . They also moult their fleece naturally , rather than having to be shorn annually , though older individuals do not moult as easily and may require additional shearing . Fleeces are grey or creamy white on the body , though darker individuals occur whose colouring is similar to the Soay sheep . Rough in quality , the wool is mostly used in the creation of tweeds or carpet yarns . A tweed is a rough surfaced coarse cloth , typically made in Scotland . Its colour is a mix of flecked colours . The face and legs are wool @-@ free and black and white , with the proportions varying between individuals . 
 Both sexes of the Boreray display horns . The horns on the ewes tend to be less thick than those on the males and while they curve they do not spiral beyond 360 degrees . Mature rams can grow especially large , spiral horns which may be used for crafts such as making shepherd 's crooks . The horns on the rams have been described as " striking and majestic " by one farmer of the breed . 
 = = = Population = = = 
 In 1999 the population was estimated to be at less than 84 , with 74 ewes . In 2002 , there were between 92 and 100 animals , with 92 ewes and the male population estimated to be less than 7 . In 2012 , 204 ewes were registered in <unk> . According to the Rare Breeds Survival Trust , there are fewer than 300 @-@ 500 sheep in the UK , so they are classed as " Category 2 : Endangered " . They are the only breed in this category , and therefore the rarest breed of sheep in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Use in Farming = = = 
 The breed was primarily raised for meat and wool , but due to its rarity it is now raised for conservation purposes , if raised at all , as most of the population is thought to be feral . 
 Due to the native conditions of where it evolved , the Boreray is very well suited to conservation grazing , which is grazing that uses livestock to improve biodiversity and achieve nature conservation in a given area . However , the Rare Breeds Survival Trust believe that this could be further capitalised on if the breed is developed further . 
 = = = In Literature = = = 
 In his book The complete countryman , Alan Titchmarsh says that ' a good many people keep rare breeds , such as the Soay and Boreray ... for pets ' . This can indicate that the breeds are gaining mainstream acceptance . 
 = William C. Clayton = 
 William C. Clayton ( January 24 , 1831 – March 11 , 1915 ) was an American educator , lawyer , politician , and businessperson in the U.S. state of West Virginia . Clayton served in the West Virginia Senate representing the Eleventh Senatorial District of West Virginia from 1875 until 1879 . He was twice principal of the Romney Classical Institute in Romney in 1853 and 1866 . 
 Clayton was born in 1831 in Hampshire County , Virginia ( present @-@ day West Virginia ) . He received his early education at home from his father , Dr. Townsend Clayton , and attended Romney Academy and the Romney Classical Institute . Clayton continued his post @-@ secondary education at the University of Virginia between 1846 and 1848 . Following his graduation , he served as principal of Washington Academy in Amelia County , the Charlestown Academy in Charles Town , and the Romney Classical Institute in 1853 and 1866 . He began practicing law in Romney in 1859 , and relocated to Keyser in 1873 where he established a law practice . 
 He was elected to the West Virginia Senate in 1874 and served alongside R. B. Sherrard and David Pugh , representing the Eleventh Senatorial District . He unsuccessfully ran for election in the Twelfth Senatorial District for a judicial seat in 1883 . In 1890 , he served as the vice president of the West Virginia Bar Association from West Virginia 's 2nd congressional district . By 1907 , he was president of the Mineral County Bar Association , and in 1909 he served on the bar association 's Committee on Legal Education . In 1892 Clayton was under consideration as a Democratic candidate for a long term on the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia , but was not elected as the party 's candidate at the state convention . 
 Clayton was an incorporator , shareholder , and director of several West Virginia businesses . In 1882 , he was named by the Virginia General Assembly as a trustee of the Virginia and West Virginia Railroad Company . In 1889 he was an incorporator of the Alexander Boom and Lumber Company , and in 1890 he was both an incorporator and a director of the Patterson 's Creek and Potomac Railroad Company . In addition , Clayton was a director of the People 's Bank of Keyser . He practiced law until the year prior to his death , and died in 1915 at his residence in Keyser after an illness . Following his death , The Pittsburgh Post described Clayton as the " <unk> " of the Mineral County bar . 
 = = Early life and academic career = = 
 William C. Clayton was born on January 24 , 1831 , in Hampshire County , Virginia ( present @-@ day West Virginia ) . He was the son of Dr. Townsend Clayton , a physician in Hampshire County , and his wife , Susan O 'Hara Heiskell Clayton . Clayton received his early education from his father at home . He then received a collegiate preparatory education at both Romney Academy and Romney Classical Institute under the academic tutelage of William Henry Foote . He continued his studies at the University of Virginia in the 1846 , 1847 , and 1848 academic sessions . 
 Following his graduation from the University of Virginia , Clayton served as the principal of Washington Academy in Amelia County for several years , and subsequently served as the principal of the Charlestown Academy in Charles Town . According to an advertisement for a female teacher in the The Baltimore Sun on November 9 , 1853 , Clayton was serving as the principal of the Romney Classical Institute in 1853 . Clayton stated in the advertisement that the institute was seeking an experienced female teacher to lead the school 's Female Department . The candidate was to be qualified to teach French , English , and music . Just after the American Civil War , in 1866 , he again served as the principal of the Romney Classical Institute for several academic sessions . 
 = = Law and political careers = = 
 In 1859 , Clayton commenced the practice of law in Romney . He continued the practice of law during his tenure as the principal of the Romney Classical Institute . He relocated to Keyser in 1873 and established a law practice there . 
 On September 11 , 1874 , he was nominated as the West Virginia Democratic Party candidate for the West Virginia Senate seat at the party 's Eleventh Senatorial District Convention in Petersburg . In November 1874 Clayton won his election to the senate seat and represented the district alongside R. B. Sherrard of Hardy County . Clayton first served in the West Virginia Legislature 's 12th Legislative Session , which convened in Charleston on January 13 , 1875 , and adjourned on December 23 , 1875 . He served in the 13th Legislative Session of 1876 , and in the 14th legislative session of 1877 when he served as senator from the Eleventh Senatorial District alongside David Pugh of Hampshire County . Clayton served in the state senate until 1879 . 
 In the Judicial Election of November 6 , 1883 , in the Twelfth Senatorial District , Clayton ran for election against J. D. Armstrong and lost with 1 @,@ 969 votes to Armstrong 's 6 @,@ 203 . In 1887 Clayton was admitted to practice law in the courts of Randolph County . By 1890 , Clayton was still engaged in the practice of law with a lucrative practice in Keyser . He was a member of the West Virginia Bar Association , and in 1890 he served as a vice president of the organization from West Virginia 's 2nd congressional district . In June 1890 , Clayton attended the association 's meeting on <unk> Island , near Parkersburg , where he served on a committee that drafted the bar association 's resolution on the legal rights of married women . On July 1 of that year , Clayton was also selected to serve on the association 's Committee of Legal Biography , on which he served as its chairperson . In 1907 he was president of the Mineral County Bar Association . By 1909 , he served on the West Virginia Bar Association 's Committee on Legal Education . He attended the association 's annual meeting in Webster Springs , July 7 – 8 , 1909 . 
 In March 1891 , Clayton and C. Wood Daily of Keyser argued on behalf of the West Virginia Central and Pittsburgh Railway Company in a mandamus case at the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia brought by a director of the company , W. Irvine Cross . Alex Shaw of Baltimore claimed his right to cumulate his stock ownership in the company , and elected Cross as a director of the company . On March 24 , the court ruled that the company was governed by the cumulative method , and therefore , Cross was entitled to his director seat . 
 In April 1892 , Clayton was under consideration as a Democratic candidate for a long term on the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia . At the West Virginia Democratic Party State Convention in August 1892 , held in Parkersburg , Marmaduke H. Dent was elected as the party 's candidate for election to the long term , beating out Clayton , Joseph Moreland , and Robert W. Monroe . 
 = = Business pursuits = = 
 Clayton was an incorporator , shareholder , and director of several West Virginia businesses . On February 21 , 1882 , the Virginia General Assembly passed an act of incorporation of the Virginia and West Virginia Railroad Company and named Clayton as one of the " body corporate and politic " of the company . The railroad was to have been constructed from the West Virginia – Virginia state line in either Frederick or Shenandoah counties in Virginia to Alexandria or another point on the Potomac River near Alexandria . In July 1889 , Clayton was an incorporator with $ 100 in shares of the Alexander Boom and Lumber Company , which constructed , operated , and maintained log booms across the Buckhannon River near the confluence of the river 's Left Fork and Right Fork tributaries in Upshur County . 
 Clayton was an incorporator and a director of the Patterson 's Creek and Potomac Railroad Company , which was chartered on March 15 , 1900 with a capital stock of $ 20 @,@ 000 . The railroad was to be constructed from Patterson Creek on the North Branch Potomac River , to a point along the North Branch Potomac River between Short Gap and Pinto , thus acting as a 5 @.@ 42 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 72 km ) cut @-@ off around the congested Cumberland Rail Yard in Cumberland . The railroad was to reduce the distance along the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Main Line by 10 @.@ 5 miles ( 16 @.@ 9 km ) . The Patterson 's Creek and Potomac Railroad Company was charged with the railroad 's construction and was to operate the venture from an office in Keyser . On April 5 , 1900 , the company was formally organized at a meeting held at a Baltimore and Ohio Railroad office in Keyser where Clayton was elected as a director . It was decided at the meeting that construction was to begin on both ends of the railroad , which was to include the construction of one tunnel measuring 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) in length . By January 1901 , no track had been laid , and the tunnel had not begun construction , which had been estimated to take a year to complete . The railroad was completed in 1903 , and by 1905 , it was assessed at a value of $ 67 @,@ 850 @.@ 00 and known as the " Pinto Cut @-@ Off . " By 1912 , the Patterson 's Creek and Potomac Railroad Company had become a subsidiary of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad and on September 25 of that year , it was finally merged with its parent company along with its other West Virginia subsidiaries . 
 In March 1909 , Clayton was reelected as a director of the People 's Bank of Keyser . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 He continued to be active into his later years . In 1912 he participated in an automotive procession to Moorefield with other prominent local attorneys to attend the funeral of Moorefield lawyer Benjamin Dailey . Clayton continued to practice law until the year before his death in 1915 . 
 Clayton died on March 11 , 1915 , at his residence in Keyser at the age of 84 , following an illness . Clayton was survived by his sister Clara Clayton , and his nephew Charles T. Clayton of Washington , D.C. , who was a private secretary to David John Lewis , U.S. House Representative from Maryland . In his obituary in The Pittsburgh Post , Clayton was described as the " <unk> " of the Mineral County bar . He was interred at Indian Mound Cemetery in Romney near his wife , Isabella . He shares an obelisk gravestone with his brother Charles T. Clayton and sister @-@ in @-@ law Laura D. Clayton . 
 = = Personal life and marriage = = 
 Clayton married Isabella Paxton Schultze ( March 9 , 1835 – September 27 , 1891 ) . Schultze was born in Edinburgh , Scotland , on March 9 , 1835 , and was the daughter of Dr. Robert Schultze and his wife Elizabeth " Bessie " Armstrong Schultze . Her sister was Elizabeth " Bessie " Jane Schultze , the first wife of Christian Streit White , Hampshire County Clerk of Court and , later , President of the West Virginia Fish Commission . Her father , Dr. Robert Schultze , was a professor of foreign languages at the University of Edinburgh . Dr. Schultze also served in the British Diplomatic Service . Clayton and his wife had one child , Bessie Clayton , who was born on October 3 , 1873 , and died on August 21 , 1874 . 
 On September 27 , 1891 , at 19 : 00 , Clayton 's wife died at their residence in Keyser as a result of contracting typhoid fever . She was buried at Indian Mound Cemetery in Romney . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Clayton was of Presbyterian faith and was an active member and a ruling elder of the Winchester Presbytery . In May 1895 , Clayton served on a special committee that conducted in an investigation over the expulsion of members of the Presbytery 's church in <unk> . 
 = Flag of Ecuador = 
 The flag of Ecuador , which consists of horizontal bands of yellow ( double width ) , blue and red , was first adopted by law on 1835 and later on 26 September 1860 . The design of the current flag was finalized in 1900 with the addition of the coat of arms in the center of the flag . Before using the yellow , blue and red tricolor , Ecuador used white and blue flags that contained stars for each province of the country . The design of the flag is very similar to those of Colombia and Venezuela , which are also former constituent territories of Gran Colombia . All three are based on a proposal by Venezuelan General Francisco de Miranda , which was adopted by Venezuela in 1811 and later Gran Colombia with some modifications . There is a variant of the flag that does not contain the coat of arms that is used by the merchant marine . This flag matches Colombia 's in every aspect , but Colombia uses a different design when her merchant marine ships are at sail . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Ecuadorian National Secretariat of Communication ( Secretaría Nacional de <unk> ) issued regulations describing the applications and proportions of the national flag , coat of arms , and other national symbols in November 2009 . 
 The national flag has a length of 2 @.@ 20 meters and a width of 1 @.@ 47 m , a ratio of 2 to 3 . The field is split into three horizontal colored bands , a yellow band of one @-@ half the flag 's width , a blue band of one @-@ quarter the width , and a red band of one @-@ quarter the width . All three bands extend the full length of the flag . The flag is charged with the Ecuadorian coat of arms scaled to one @-@ half the width of the flag and centered in the field . The coat of arms itself is constructed in a rectangle with proportions 12 : 10 . The national standard has the same design as the national flag , but is square , with length 0 @.@ 9 m and width 0 @.@ 9 m . When used by military units and organizations , lettering can encircle the coat of arms with a diameter of 55 centimeters . The lettering must be 4 cm in height , 3 cm in width , gold @-@ colored Roman font , embroidered with gold thread . The only other regulated size is a table flag ( <unk> ) where the flag is 200 mm wide and 300 mm long . When manufacturing the national flag , sellers to the public must include the name of their company , along with the year of manufacture , by placing a 20 × 10 mm tag on the reverse side of the flag on the sleeve . 
 = = = Coat of arms = = = 
 In the background of the oval shield is the mountain Chimborazo , while the river originating from its base represents the Guayas . Chimborazo is also the highest mountain in Ecuador and is part of the Andes Range . The steamboat on the river is named Guayas as well . The ship was built in Guayaquil and was the first seaworthy steamship built in both Ecuador and in all of South America . It was first put into service on 9 October 1841 . The ship has the features of a Caduceus representing trade and economy . This kind of mast has two wings surrounding a pole with two snakes encircling it . On top a golden sun surrounded by the Zodiac astrological signs for Aries , Taurus , Gemini and Cancer representing the months March to July to symbolize the duration of the March Revolution of 1845 that ousted General Juan José Flores . 
 The condor on top of the shield stretches his wings to symbolize power , greatness and strength of Ecuador . The condor also represents the idea that it will always be ready to attack any enemy . The shield is flanked by four national flags . The laurel on the left represents the victories of the republic . The palm leaf on the right side is a symbol of the martyrs of the fight for independence and liberty . The Fasces below the shield represents the republican dignity . The final design of the coat of arms was completed in 1900 . 
 In the 1989 specifications issued to the Ecuadorian Military , the coat of arms has only eight colors that are used on the flag . The eight colors are yellow , blue , red ( all from the national flag ) , sky blue , green , grey , silver and gold . There is also a nine piece instruction on how to draw the coat of arms , followed by a full color drawing and a black and white drawing of the arms . No size specifications have been laid out for the coat of arms except for when it is used on the national flag . 
 = = = Symbolism = = = 
 Miranda ascribed the colours he chose for his flag to Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 's theory of primary colours . In a letter written to Count Semyon Romanovich Vorontsov in 1792 , Miranda described a late @-@ night conversation which he had with Goethe at a party in Weimar , Germany during the winter of 1785 . Fascinated with Miranda 's account of his exploits in the American Revolutionary War and his travels throughout the Americas and Europe , Goethe told him that , " Your destiny is to create in your land a place where primary colours are not distorted . ” He proceeded to clarify what he meant : 
 The first time the yellow , blue and red flag was flown by Miranda was in 1806 on the ship Leander when trying to face the Spanish forces off of the coast of Jacmel , Haiti . The colors of the modern Ecuadorian flag evolved from those of the flag of the nation of Gran Colombia , which encompassed the territories of modern @-@ day Ecuador , Colombia and Venezuela . The colors have the following meanings : 
 Yellow : The crops and the fertile soil . 
 Blue : The ocean and the clear skies 
 Red : The blood spilled by the heroes who died in the name of their countrymen 's Fatherland and Freedom . 
 = = History = = 
 After the territory of Ecuador was conquered by Sebastián de <unk> , the emblems of the Spanish Empire flew over the newly founded city of Quito . 
 The first calls for independence from the Spanish crown came on 10 August 1809 ; a plain red flag was flown by the rebels . The independence movement was defeated in November 1812 at the hands of Spanish officer Juan <unk> . On 9 October 1820 , a new flag , a blue and white bicolour , with five horizontal alternating stripes , and three white stars in the middle stripe , was raised for the first time . The three stars represent Guayaquil , <unk> and <unk> . This flag was later adopted by the Guayas Province . 
 Gabriel García Moreno , upon assuming power two days after the Battle of Guayaquil in September 1860 , the yellow , blue and red triband was returned to use ; its reinstatement on September 26 is commemorated during Ecuador 's national flag day . Previously , a vertical white , blue and white flag was used . In the middle of the blue stripe , there were white stars placed to signify the number of provinces in Ecuador . The highest star total was seven before this flag was abandoned . In 1900 , the flag was made the definitive national standard , and was charged with the coat of arms for official national government use while the plain flag was reserved for the merchant marine . 
 = = Pledge and hymn = = 
 Students and military cadets in Ecuador are required to recite a pledge to the flag , known as the " Juramento a la Bandera " or " Pledge to the Flag . " This pledge is usually stated during national holiday or important school functions , such as graduations . There is also a patriotic song called the " Himno a la Bandera " ( " Hymn to the Flag " ) that is after the " Juramento a la Bandera " or before flag retirement ceremonies . 
 = = Variants = = 
 According to <unk> Oficial No. 1272 , a decree signed into law on 5 December 1900 , there are two official designs of the national flag . Article Two established the national banner as the tricolor with the yellow stripe doubling the size of the blue and red stripes . Article Three establishes the national flag charged with the coat of arms and is directed to be used by the military , government offices and diplomatic agents outside of Ecuador . While this law establishes the flag with the coat of arms as the state flag , it did not forbid the civilian population from using the flag . The only restriction is stated in Article Six where the merchant marine is restricted to using the flag without the coat of arms . Because of this , this has been construed to be the civil flag as it was practiced in other South American countries , such as Peru , Bolivia and Argentina . Unlike Ecuador , several of these South American countries forbade the civilian population from using the national flag with the coat of arms or , in the case of Argentina until 1985 , the national flag charged with the Sun of May in the middle . Peru and Bolivia still restricts the usage of the state flag to just the government bodies and institutions and reserves the plain flags for national celebrations or as directed by law . However , in practice the flag with the coat of arms is often used in place of the plain flag , especially when it is important to distinguish the latter from the flag of Colombia . In the case when Colombian merchant marine ships are at sea , the Colombian national flag is charged with a red and blue oval with a white star in the center . For city governments , Article 4 in the 1900 decree forbids them from using the national flag with the coat of arms . A special flag was created for the city governments to use ; it is a plain national flag charged with white stars that are placed in a circle pattern . The number of white stars will correspond to the number of provinces in Ecuador . However , this flag is identical to Venezuela 's flag from 1905 until 1930 , and similar to Venezuela 's current flag ( the stars are now in a semi circle pattern ) . 
 = = Derivatives = = 
 Palestina Canton uses the national flag on their flag . Placed in the canton , the Ecuador flag is shown with three even stripes , while the rest of the flag is colored olive green . The use of the Ecuador flag was described by the Palestina government as " unity with the motherland " and olive green represents progress . Loja Province adopted a flag in 1963 that copied the design of the national flag . This was done by the creator of the flag to show his " honor and admiration " to the homeland . Another province , Napo , chose their flag that copied the design of the national flag without the coat of arms . The only modification that was performed was to put a white strip between the blue and yellow . 
 = = Resemblance to other flags = = 
 The flags of Ecuador , Colombia , and Venezuela , can all trace their roots to the flag of the nation of Gran Colombia ( 1819 – 1830 ) , the short @-@ lived republic that encompassed the territories of all three . The Gran Colombian flag in turn was inspired by the flag of the First Republic of Venezuela , the first independent government of that nation . The flag of the Venezuelan Republic was modeled on the one created earlier by General Francisco de Miranda during his attempts to gain Venezuelan independence and which first flew over the port of La Vela in Santa Ana de Coro , Venezuela , in 1806 . 
 As of 2006 , the Ecuadoran flag still shares some similarity with the flags of Colombia and Venezuela . All three flags use the yellow , blue and red tricolor , but that is where the similarities end . In a decree passed in Colombia in 1934 , the ratio of the stripes were set at 2 : 1 : 1 and the flag ratio was set at 2 : 3 , similar to the present Ecuador flag . However , the coat of arms is only changed in the middle of the flag when it is used by government officials or by military forces . For Venezuela , the basic design was to have all three strips even vertically , unlike those of Colombia and Ecuador . Since 1863 , Venezuela decided to change their flag with white stars instead of a coat of arms . A coat of arms was not added to the national flag 1954 , then changed again in 2006 to add another star and alter the coat of arms . The position of the coat of arms on the Venezuelan flag also differs from Ecuador and Colombia by placing the arms at the very top hoist ( left ) side of the flag instead of in the center . 
 = = Provincial flags = = 
 = = = Legislation = = = 
 = Symphonic Odysseys = 
 Symphonic Odysseys : Tribute to Nobuo Uematsu was a symphonic tribute concert held in Cologne , Germany on July 9 , 2011 at the Cologne Philharmonic Hall . The concert exclusively paid homage to the work of Japanese composer Nobuo Uematsu and featured music selected from his works as a video game music composer . Among the games featured were Lost Odyssey , Blue Dragon , Last Story , King 's Knight , Chrono Trigger , Final Fantasy Legend , and selected works from the Final Fantasy series . The concert was produced and directed by Thomas Böcker , with arrangements provided by Finnish composer and musician Jonne Valtonen , along with Roger Wanamo , Masashi Hamauzu , and Jani Laaksonen . The concert was performed by the WDR <unk> Köln and the WDR Radio Choir Cologne under conduction from Arnie Roth , with guest performers Benyamin Nuss and Juraj <unk> joining the orchestra . A video recording of Symphonic Odysseys was streamed live online . 
 The concert was initially scheduled for a single performance , but after selling out within twelve hours a second concert was added prior in the same day in Cologne . This too sold out , resulting in a total attendance of over 4000 . A recording of the concert was published as a two @-@ disc album on December 28 , 2011 by Dog Ear Records , Uematsu 's own record label . The albums , along with the concerts themselves , received varied reviews , with some critics giving enthusiastic praise , especially in regards to the quality of the performance , the choice of source material , and the quality of the arrangements , while other critics greatly disliked several of the arrangements . 
 = = Concert = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Thomas Böcker and then WDR Symphony Orchestra Cologne director Winfried Fechner began collaborating on orchestrated video game concerts in 2007 , after Fechner had attended the Fifth Symphonic Game Music Concert held in Leipzig . As their ideas and plans materialized , three projects were set in motion to determine the interest of a younger audience in classical music performance and the aptitude of the WDR orchestra in focusing on a new source of compositions . The first project was <unk> : That 's Sound , That 's Rhythm , held in early 2008 , featuring a mixture of classical works and video game music , ranging from works by Ralph Vaughan Williams and Morton Gould as well as arrangements of music from video games such as Shenmue and Castlevania previously featured in the Symphonic Game Music Concerts . The second project , held in August 2008 , was a composer @-@ specific concert titled Symphonic Shades – Hülsbeck in Concert , focusing entirely on the works of German video game composer Chris Hülsbeck , while the third project was a concert of music from the video games by Square Enix titled Symphonic Fantasies : Music from Square Enix , held in September 2009 . A third " Symphonic " concert , Symphonic Legends – Music from Nintendo , was then held in September 2010 , and afterwards Böcker decided to have one final production to close out the " Symphonic " series . 
 The fourth concert was first announced by Winfried Fechner in March 2010 as Symphonic Odysseys - Uematsu in Concert , with the subtitle later changed to " Tribute to Nobuo Uematsu " . The sole composer featured in the concert is Nobuo Uematsu , a Japanese video game composer best known for his work at Square Enix , who is considered one of the most famous and respected composers in the video game community . He has composed the music for dozens of video games , including the majority of the Final Fantasy series , and his compositions had been a significant component of the Symphonic Fantasies concert . Böcker has said that he considers Uematsu to be " the most famous composer of video game music and in general one of the most influential " , and that Uematsu 's 20020220 - Music from Final Fantasy concert in 2002 was a big influence on his own concerts . The decision to focus the event on Uematsu was made in part due to Uematsu 's own desire to one day hear a concert based on his compositions as a whole ; he was also very interested in hearing more experimental arrangements of his pieces than have been done in the past after watching the Symphonic Fantasies concert . A website was set up for news and updates on the concert , including video messages from Nobuo Uematsu himself . Tickets for the concert went on sale on December 1 , 2010 , and were sold out within 12 hours , prompting the addition of a second performance to be held earlier in the afternoon of the same day . This too sold out , resulting in a total attendance of over 4000 . 
 Jonne Valtonen and Roger Wanamo , the arrangers for the Symphonic Fantasies and Symphonic Legends concerts , returned as the lead arrangers for the concert . Additional arrangements were made by Jani Laaksonen and Masashi Hamauzu , and Mikko Laine served as the lyricist for the choral components of the concert . Uematsu was not involved in any aspect of the production , even song selection , as he wanted to be surprised by the result . The style of arrangements followed in the tradition of the shows preceding Symphonic Odysseys , featuring a number of rich , sophisticated suites structured for melodic storytelling . A focus was put on presenting a balanced mix of fan favorites as well as lesser known material that was not commonly performed in orchestra concerts based on video game music . Böcker styled the concert to be a mix of Shades and Fantasies , in that there was a mix of shorter pieces with longer suites . The titles chosen to be featured in the concert were the Final Fantasy series , King 's Knight , Chrono Trigger , the SaGa series , The Last Story , Blue Dragon , and Lost Odyssey . Additionally , Uematsu composed an original fanfare to open the concert , which was arranged by Jonne Valtonen . 
 = = = Show = = = 
 The concerts were held on July 9 , 2011 , at 3 : 00 and 8 : 00 pm , at the Cologne Philharmonic Hall in Cologne , Germany . Symphonic Odysseys was performed by the WDR <unk> Köln and the WDR Radio Choir Cologne , conducted by Arnie Roth . Nobuo Uematsu was in attendance , and Ralph <unk> served as the presenter . The concert was also broadcast live online . The concert was divided into two acts separated by an intermission , with the first act focusing on Uematsu 's earlier works and the second act made up of material composed in the later parts of his career . The event was initiated by the original opening fanfare composed by Uematsu followed by a nearly nineteen @-@ minute @-@ long piano concerto of Final Fantasy music from the first six titles in the series , presented in 3 movements : " Grave - Allegro " , " Adagio Cantabile " , and " Allegro Molto " . The piano was played by Benyamin Nuss . The placement of the piece was a throwback to Nuss 's performance at Symphonic Fantasies , where he also performed a piano concerto at the beginning of the concert . The concerto was the one that Wanamo was most excited about arranging for the concert . It was followed by arrangements of individual pieces from King 's Knight , Chrono Trigger , the SaGa series , and Final Fantasy X. 
 After a brief intermission , the second act was started by arrangements of pieces from The Last Story , Final Fantasy XIV and Blue Dragon . The Blue Dragon piece featured a violin performance by Juraj <unk> , who also performed at the Symphonic Legends concert . They were followed by a suite of music from Lost Odyssey to round out the second half of the concert , which lasted twenty minutes . The concert was extended by two encore performances featuring Benyamin Nuss on piano ; the first was an arrangement from Final Fantasy X , and the second a suite of battle music from Final Fantasy VII . 
 = = = Set List = = = 
 = = Album = = 
 The concert in Cologne was recorded and released as an album titled Symphonic Odysseys by Dog Ear Records , Nobuo Uematsu 's recording label . It was announced to be in production on October 26 , 2011 , and released on December 28 , 2011 . The artwork for the album features a cross between a sword and a violin on a white background , in the vein of the Symphonic Fantasies album , which had a cross between a violin and a game controller . The cover art was produced by German design house <unk> , who earlier provided the artwork for the European release of Symphonic Fantasies . Accompanying the CD is a booklet which contains photos of the concert and discusses the arrangers and compositions included in each song . The album contains everything played at the concert , with the Final Fantasy suite split into three tracks , and the album is split at the intermission into two CDs . Its fourteen tracks have a duration of 1 : 34 : 56 . While Dog Ear Records published the album in Japan , the album was released in Europe through the online music retailer <unk> @-@ Sound . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Symphonic Odysseys concert received varied reviews , with praise given the performance and choice of source material , and both praise and criticism given to the quality of the arrangements . Audun Sorlie of Original Sound Version stated that it was " the greatest live music event I have ever attended , " and said that the standing ovation at the end was " the longest [ ... ] I 've been part of " . Original Sound Version named the concert as the best of the year for 2011 in their year @-@ end awards . In his review of the album for the site , Jayson Napolitano said that the arrangements for the concert were " top notch " , and brought attention to works by the composers which were typically overlooked . Joe Hammond of Square Enix Music Online said that it was " an outstanding concert — possibly the most successful in Europe to date " and added that it was " a tour de force of flawless performances and impeccable orchestrations and arrangements " . He felt that several of the pieces surpassed the arrangements played in the Distant Worlds and Symphonic Fantasies concerts , and made special note of the third movement in the Final Fantasy concerto and the Lost Odyssey suite . Polish site <unk> 's Mariusz Borkowski , in his review of the album , made particular note of Benyamin Nuss 's piano performance during the Final Fantasy concerto and Juraj <unk> 's violin performance in the Lost Odyssey suite . He stated that the concert " sets new standards as to how a professional game music event should be organised . " 
 In contrast to the enthusiastic praises of other critics , Kyle Miller of RPGFan felt that many of the pieces were " disorganized and ineptly arranged " , and that the arrangements had a lack of enthusiasm . He reserved praise only for the fanfare and the Lost Odyssey suite . Benjamin Schmädig of the German site <unk> , while not having as extreme a reaction as Miller , felt that some of the arrangements lacked the passion in the arrangements as others , noting " On Windy Meadows " , " Main Theme and Save the World " , and " Spreading Your Wings " as serviceable pieces that did not rise above the source material , and felt that the Lost Odyssey suite was lacking a finale and neglected the choir . Unlike Miller , however , he felt that the other pieces were outstanding , especially the Final Fantasy concerto and " Silent Light " . He also praised the concert 's use of Uematsu 's less @-@ often arranged pieces , but dismissed the efforts of the concert 's moderator as childish . 
 The album release received similar reviews to the original concert . Napolitano , in addition to reiterating some of Sorlie 's praises from the original concert about the quality of the arrangements , praised the production values of the album , noting the " crisp , clean sound " as similar to the listening experience of being at the concert and superior to that of the live stream of the concert and that the applause between pieces had been edited out . Hammond called it a " phenomenal album release " , stating that it would appeal to both classical music fans and video game music fans . Neither Miller nor Borkowski made note of the differences between the concert and the album , and Schmädig did not review the album . 
 = Addax = 
 For the GP2 Series racing team , see Addax Team . 
 The addax ( Addax nasomaculatus ) , also known as the white antelope and the <unk> antelope , is an antelope of the genus Addax , that lives in the Sahara desert . It was first described by Henri de Blainville in 1816 . As suggested by its alternative name , this pale antelope has long , twisted horns - typically 55 to 80 cm ( 22 to 31 in ) in females and 70 to 85 cm ( 28 to 33 in ) in males . Males stand from 105 to 115 cm ( 41 to 45 in ) at the shoulder , with females at 95 to 110 cm ( 37 to 43 in ) . They are sexually dimorphic , as the females are smaller than males . The colour of the coat depends on the season - in the winter , it is greyish @-@ brown with white hindquarters and legs , and long , brown hair on the head , neck , and shoulders ; in the summer , the coat turns almost completely white or sandy blonde . 
 The addax mainly eats grasses and leaves of any available shrubs , leguminous herbs and bushes . These animals are well @-@ adapted to exist in their desert habitat , as they can live without water for long periods of time . Addax form herds of five to 20 members , consisting of both males and females . They are led by the oldest female . Due to its slow movements , the antelope is an easy target for its predators : lions , humans , African hunting dogs , cheetahs and leopards . Breeding season is at its peak during winter and early spring . The natural habitat of the addax are arid regions , semideserts and sandy and stony deserts . 
 The addax is a critically endangered species of antelope , as classified by the IUCN . Although extremely rare in its native habitat due to unregulated hunting , it is quite common in captivity . The addax was once abundant in North Africa , native to Chad , Mauritania and Niger . It is extinct in Algeria , Egypt , Libya , Sudan and Western Sahara . It has been reintroduced in Morocco and Tunisia . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The scientific name of the addax is Addax nasomaculatus . This antelope was first described by French zoologist and anatomist Henri Blainville in 1816 . It is placed in the monotypic genus Addax and family Bovidae . Henri Blainville observed syntypes in Bullock 's <unk> and the Museum of the Royal College of Surgeons . English naturalist Richard Lydekker stated their type locality to be probably Senegambia , though he did not have anything to support the claim . Finally , from a discussion in 1898 , it became more probable that British hunters or collectors obtained the addax from the part of Sahara in Tunisia . 
 The generic name Addax is thought to be obtained from an Arabic word meaning a wild animal with crooked horns . It is also thought to have originated from a Latin word . The name was first used in 1693 . The species name nasomaculatus comes from the Latin words nasus ( or the prefix naso ) meaning nose , and macula , spot or spotted , and the suffix – <unk> refers to the spots and facial markings of the antelope . Bedouins use another name for the addax , the Arabic <unk> ( or <unk> ) al <unk> , which literally means the cow of the wild . The name can be used to refer to other ungulates , as well . The other common names of addax are " white antelope " and " <unk> antelope " . 
 = = Genetics = = 
 The addax has 29 pairs of chromosomes . All chromosomes are acrocentric except for the first pair of autosomes , which are submetacentric . The X chromosome is the largest of the acrocentric chromosomes , and the Y chromosome is medium @-@ sized . The short and long arms of the pair of submetacentric autosomes correspond respectively to the 27th and 1st chromosomes in cattle and goats . In a study , the banding patterns of chromosomes in addax were found to be similar to those in four other species of the subfamily Hippotraginae . 
 = = History and fossil record = = 
 In ancient times , the addax occurred from Northern Africa through Arabia and the Levant . Pictures in a tomb , dating back to the 2500 BCE show at least the partial domestication of the addax by the ancient Egyptians . These pictures show addax and some other antelopes tied with ropes to stakes . The number of addax captured by a person were considered an indicator of his high social and economic position in the society . But today excess poaching has resulted in the extinction of this species in Egypt since the 1960s . 
 Addax fossils have been found in four sites of Egypt - a 7000 BCE fossil from the Great Sand Sea , a 5000 – 6000 BCE fossil from <unk> , a 4000 – 7000 BCE fossil from Abu Ballas <unk> and a 5000 BCE fossil from <unk> Kebir . Apart from these , fossils have also been excavated from <unk> Wadi Howar ( 6300 BCE fossil ) , and Pleistocene fossils from Grotte <unk> , Jebel <unk> and Parc d <unk> . 
 = = Physical description = = 
 The addax is a spiral @-@ horned antelope . Male addax stand from 105 to 115 cm ( 41 to 45 in ) at the shoulder , with females at 95 to 110 cm ( 37 to 43 in ) . They are sexually dimorphic , as the females are smaller than males . The head and body length in both sexes is 120 to 130 cm ( 47 to 51 in ) , with a 25 to 35 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 to 13 @.@ 8 in ) long tail . The weight of males varies from 100 to 125 kg ( 220 to 276 lb ) , and that of females from 60 to 90 kg ( 130 to 200 lb ) . 
 The coloring of the addax 's coat varies with the season . In the winter , it is greyish @-@ brown with white hindquarters and legs , and long , brown hair on the head , neck , and shoulders . In the summer , the coat turns almost completely white or sandy blonde . Their head is marked with brown or black patches that form an ' X ' over their noses . They have scraggly beards and prominent red nostrils . Long , black hairs stick out between their curved and spiralling horns , ending in a short mane on the neck . 
 The horns , which are found on both males and females , have two to three twists and are typically 55 to 80 cm ( 22 to 31 in ) in females and 70 to 85 cm ( 28 to 33 in ) in males , although the maximum recorded length is 109 @.@ 2 cm ( 43 @.@ 0 in ) . The lower and mid portions of the horns are marked with a series of 30 to 35 ring @-@ shaped ridges . The tail is short and slender , ending in a puff of black hair . The hooves are broad with flat soles and strong dewclaws to help them walk on soft sand . All four feet possess scent glands . The life span of the addax is up to 19 years in the wild , which can be extended to 25 years under captivity . 
 The addax closely resembles the scimitar oryx , but can be distinguished by its horns and facial markings . While the addax is spiral @-@ horned , the scimitar oryx has straight , 127 cm ( 50 in ) long horns . The addax has a brown hair tuft extending from the base of its horns to between its eyes . A white patch , continuing from the brown hair , extends till the middle of the cheek . On the other hand , the scimitar oryx has a white forehead with only a notable brown marking a brown lateral stripe across its eyes . It differs from other antelopes by having large , square teeth like cattle , and lacking the typical facial glands . 
 = = = Parasites = = = 
 The addax are most prone to parasites in moist climatic conditions . Addax have always been infected with nematodes in the <unk> and <unk> families . In an exotic ranch in Texas , an addax was found host to the nematodes Haemonchus contortus and Longistrongylus <unk> in its abomasum , out of which the former was more dominant . 
 = = Behavior and ecology = = 
 These animals are mainly nocturnal , particularly in summers . In the day , they dig into the sand in shady locations and rest in these depressions , which also protect them from sandstorms . Addax herds contain both males and females , and have from five to 20 members . They will generally stay in one place and only wander widely in search of food . The addax have a strong social structure , probably based on age , and herds are led by the oldest female . Herds are more likely to be found along the northern edge of the tropical rain system during the summer and move north as winter falls . They are able to track rainfall and will head for these areas where vegetation is more plentiful . Males are territorial , and guard females , while the females establish their own dominance hierarchies . 
 Due to its slow movements , the addax is an easy target for predators such as lions , humans , African hunting dogs , cheetahs and leopards . Caracals , hyenas and servals attack calves . The addax are normally not aggressive , though individuals may charge if they are disturbed . 
 = = = Adaptations = = = 
 The addax are amply suited to live in the deep desert under extreme conditions . They can survive without free water almost indefinitely , because they get moisture from their food and dew that condenses on plants . Scientists believe the addax has a special lining in its stomach that stores water in pouches to use in times of dehydration . They also produce highly concentrated urine to conserve water . Pale colour of the coat reflects radiant heat , and the length and density of the coat helps in thermoregulation . In the day the addax huddle together in shaded areas , and in cool nights rest in sand hollows . These practices help in dissipation of body heat and saving water by cooling the body through evaporation . 
 In a study , eight addax antelopes on a diet of grass hay ( Chloris <unk> ) were studied to determine the retention time of food from the digestive tract . It was found that food retention time was long , taken as an adaptation to a diet including a high proportion of slow fermenting grasses ; while the long fluid retention time could be interpreted to be due to water @-@ saving mechanisms with low water turnover and a roomy rumen . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The addax live in desert terrain where they eat grasses and leaves of what shrubs , leguminous herbs and bushes are available . Their staple foods are the Aristida , Artemisia , Citrullus and Acacia grasses ; perennials which turn green and sprout at the slightest bit of humidity or rain . The addax eat only certain parts of the plant and tend to crop the Aristida grasses neatly to the same height . By contrast , when feeding on Panicum grass , the drier outer leaves are left alone while they eat the tender , inner shoots and seeds . These seeds are important part of the addax diet , being their main source of protein . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Females are sexually mature at two to three years of age and males at about two years . Breeding occurs throughout the year , but it peaks during winter and early spring . In the northern Sahara , breeding peaks at the end of winter and beginning of spring ; in the southern Sahara , breeding peaks from September to October and from January to mid @-@ April . Each estrus bout lasts for one or two days . 
 In a study , the blood serum of female addax was analyzed through immunoassay to know about their luteal phase . <unk> cycle duration was of about 33 days . During pregnancy , ultrasonography showed the uterine horns as coiled . The maximum diameters of the ovarian follicle and the corpus luteum were 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) and 27 mm ( 1 @.@ 1 in ) . Each female underwent an anovulatory period lasting 39 to 131 days , during which there was no ovulation . <unk> was rare in winter , which suggested the effect of seasons on the estrous cycle . 
 Gestation period lasts 257 – 270 days ( about 9 months ) . Females may lie or stand during the delivery , during which one calf is born . A postpartum estrus occurs after two or three days . The calf weighs 5 kg ( 11 lb ) at birth and is weaned at 23 – 29 weeks old . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The addax inhabits arid regions , semideserts and sandy and stony deserts . They even occur in extremely arid areas , with less than 100 mm annual rainfall . They also inhabit deserts with tussock grasses ( <unk> species ) and succulent thorn scrub ( <unk> ) . Formerly , the addax was widespread in the Sahelo @-@ Saharan region of Africa , west of the Nile Valley and all countries sharing the Sahara Desert ; but today the only known self @-@ sustaining population is present in the Termit Massif Reserve ( Niger ) . However , there are reports of sightings from the eastern Air Mountains ( Niger ) and <unk> ( Chad ) . Rare nomads may be seen in north Niger , southern Algeria and Libya ; and the antelope is rumoured to be present along the Mali / Mauritania border , though there are no confirmed sightings . The addax was once abundant in North Africa , native to Chad , Mauritania and Niger . It is extinct in Algeria , Egypt , Libya , Sudan and western Sahara . It has been reintroduced in Morocco and Tunisia . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 Decrease in the population of the addax has begun notably since the mid @-@ 1800s . More recently , addax were found from Algeria to Sudan , but due mainly to overhunting , they have become much more restricted and rare . 
 Addax are easy to hunt due to their slow movements . Roadkill , firearms for easy hunting and nomadic settlements near waterholes ( their dry @-@ season feeding places ) have also decreased numbers . Moreover , their meat and leather are highly prized . Other threats include chronic droughts in the deserts , habitat destruction due to more human settlements and agriculture . Less than 500 individuals are thought to exist in the wild today , most of the animals being found between the Termit area of Niger , the <unk> region of western Chad , and the <unk> in Mauritania . 
 Today there are over 600 addax in Europe , <unk> Hai @-@ Bar Nature Reserve ( Israel ) , <unk> ( Libya ) , Giza Zoo ( Egypt ) , North America , Japan and Australia under captive breeding programmes . There are 1000 more in private collections and ranches in United States and the Middle East . Addax is legally protected in Morocco , Tunisia , and Algeria ; hunting of all gazelles is forbidden in Libya and Egypt . Although enormous reserves , such as the Hoggar Mountains and <unk> in Algeria , the Ténéré in Niger , the Ouadi <unk> @-@ Ouadi Achim Faunal Reserve in Chad , and the newly established Wadi Howar National Park in Sudan , cover areas where addax previously occurred , some do not keep addax at present because they lack the resources . The addax has been reintroduced in Bou <unk> National Park ( Tunisia ) and Souss @-@ Massa National Park ( Morocco ) . <unk> in the wild are ongoing in <unk> National Park ( Tunisia ) and Grand Erg Oriental ( Sahara ) , and another is planned in Morocco . 
 = Bernard Williams = 
 Bernard Arthur Owen Williams , FBA ( 21 September 1929 – 10 June 2003 ) was an English moral philosopher . His publications include Problems of the Self ( 1973 ) , Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy ( 1985 ) , Shame and Necessity ( 1993 ) , and Truth and Truthfulness ( 2002 ) . He was knighted in 1999 . 
 As <unk> Professor of Philosophy at the University of Cambridge and Deutsch Professor of Philosophy at the University of California , Berkeley , Williams became known for his efforts to reorient the study of moral philosophy to psychology , history , and in particular to the Greeks . Described by Colin McGinn as an " analytical philosopher with the soul of a general humanist , " he was sceptical about attempts to create a foundation for moral philosophy . Martha Nussbaum wrote that he demanded of philosophy that it " come to terms with , and contain , the difficulty and complexity of human life . " 
 Williams was a strong supporter of women in academia ; according to Nussbaum , he was " as close to being a feminist as a powerful man of his generation could be . " He was also famously sharp in conversation . Gilbert Ryle , one of Williams 's mentors at Oxford , said that he " understands what you 're going to say better than you understand it yourself , and sees all the possible objections to it , and all the possible answers to all the possible objections , before you 've got to the end of your own sentence . " 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Williams was born in Westcliff @-@ on @-@ Sea , a suburb of Southend , Essex , to Hilda Amy Williams , née Day , a personal assistant , and Owen Pasley Denny Williams , chief maintenance surveyor for the Ministry of Works . He was educated at Chigwell School , an independent school , where he first discovered philosophy . Reading D. H. Lawrence led him to ethics and the problems of the self . In his first book , Morality : An Introduction to Ethics ( 1972 ) , he quoted with approval Lawrence 's advice to " [ f ] ind your deepest impulse , and follow that . " 
 Awarded a scholarship to Oxford , Williams read Greats ( Classics and philosophy ) at Balliol . Among his influences at Oxford were Elizabeth Anscombe , Eric Dodds , Eduard Fraenkel , David Pears and Gilbert Ryle . He graduated in 1951 with a congratulatory first and a prize fellowship at All Souls . 
 After Oxford , Williams spent his two @-@ year national service flying Spitfires in Canada for the Royal Air Force . While on leave in New York , he became close to Shirley Brittain Catlin ( born 1930 ) , daughter of the novelist Vera Brittain and the political scientist George Catlin . They had already been friends at Oxford . Catlin had moved to New York to study economics at Columbia University on a Fulbright scholarship . 
 Williams returned to England to take up his fellowship at All Souls and in 1954 became a fellow at New College , Oxford , a position he held until 1959 . He and Catlin continued seeing each other . She began working for the Daily Mirror and sought election as a Labour MP . Williams , also a member of the Labour Party , helped her with the 1954 by @-@ election in Harwich in which she was an unsuccessful candidate . 
 = = = First marriage , London = = = 
 Williams and Catlin were married in London in July 1955 at St James 's , Spanish Place , near Marylebone High Street , followed by a honeymoon in Lesbos , Greece . 
 The couple moved into a very basic ground @-@ floor apartment in London , on Clarendon Road , Notting Hill . Given how hard it was to find decent housing , they decided instead to share with Helge Rubinstein and her husband , the literary agent Hilary Rubinstein , who at the time was working for his uncle , Victor Gollancz . In 1955 the four of them bought a four @-@ storey , seven @-@ bedroom house in Phillimore Place , Kensington , for ₤ 6 @,@ 800 , a home they lived in together for 14 years . Williams described it as one of the happiest periods of his life . 
 In 1958 Williams spent a term teaching at the University of Ghana in <unk> . When he returned to England in 1959 , he was appointed lecturer in philosophy at University College London . In 1961 , after four miscarriages in four years , Shirley Williams gave birth to their daughter , Rebecca . 
 Williams was a visiting professor at Princeton University in 1963 , and was appointed Professor of Philosophy at Bedford College , London , in 1964 . His wife was elected to parliament that year as the Labour member for Hitchin in Hertfordshire . The Sunday Times described the couple two years later as " the New Left at its most able , most generous , and sometimes most eccentric . " Andy Beckett wrote that they " entertained refugees from eastern Europe and politicians from Africa , and drank sherry in noteworthy quantities . " Shirley Williams became a junior minister and , in 1971 , Shadow Home Secretary . Several newspapers saw her as a future prime minister . She went on to co @-@ found a new centrist party in 1981 , the Social Democratic Party ; Williams left the Labour Party to join the SDP , although he later returned to Labour . 
 = = = Cambridge , second marriage = = = 
 In 1967 , at the age of 38 , Williams became the <unk> Professor of Philosophy at the University of Cambridge and a fellow of King 's College . 
 According to Jane O 'Grady , Williams was central to the decision by King 's in 1972 to admit women , one of three all @-@ male undergraduate colleges to do so that year . Martha Nussbaum wrote that he was " as close to being a feminist as a powerful man of his generation could be . " In both his first and second marriages , he supported his wives in their careers and helped with the children more than was common for men at the time . In the 1970s , when Nussbaum 's thesis supervisor , G. E. L. Owen , was harassing female students , and she decided nevertheless to support him , Williams told her , during a walk along the backs at Cambridge : " [ Y ] ou know , there is a price you are paying for this support and encouragement . Your dignity is being held hostage . You really don 't have to put up with this . " 
 Shirley Williams 's political career ( the House of Commons regularly sat until 10 pm ) meant that the couple spent a lot of time apart . They bought a house in <unk> Pelham , Hertfordshire , near the border with north Cambridgeshire , while she lived in Phillimore Place during the week to be close to the Houses of Parliament . Sunday was often the only day they were together . The differences in their personal values – he was an atheist , she a Catholic – placed a further strain on their relationship . It reached breaking point in 1970 when Williams formed a relationship with Patricia Law Skinner , a commissioning editor for Cambridge University Press and wife of the historian Quentin Skinner . She had approached Williams to write the opposing view of utilitarianism for Utilitarianism : For and Against with J. J. C. Smart ( 1973 ) , and they had fallen in love . 
 Williams and Skinner began living together in 1971 . He obtained a divorce in 1974 ( at Shirley William 's request , the marriage was later annulled ) . Patricia Williams married him that year , and the couple went on to have two sons , Jacob in 1975 and Jonathan in 1980 . Shirley Williams married the political scientist Richard Neustadt in 1987 . 
 = = = Berkeley , Oxford = = = 
 In 1979 Williams was elected Provost of King 's , a position he held until 1987 . He spent a semester in 1986 at the University of California , Berkeley as Mills Visiting Professor and in 1988 left England to become Monroe Deutsch Professor of Philosophy there , announcing to the media that he was leaving as part of the " brain drain " of British academics to America . He was also Sather Professor of Classical Literature at Berkeley in 1989 ; Shame and Necessity ( 1995 ) grew out of his six Sather lectures . 
 Williams returned to England in 1990 as White 's Professor of Moral Philosophy at Oxford and fellow of Corpus Christi . His sons had been " at sea " in California , he said , not knowing what was expected of them , and he had been unable to help . He regretted having made his departure from England so public ; he had been persuaded to do so to highlight Britain 's relatively low academic salaries . When he retired in 1996 , he took up a fellowship again at All Souls . 
 = = = Royal commissions , committees = = = 
 Williams served on several royal commissions and government committees : the Public Schools Commission ( 1965 – 1970 ) , drug abuse ( 1971 ) , gambling ( 1976 – 1978 ) , the Committee on Obscenity and Film Censorship ( 1979 ) , and the Commission on Social Justice ( 1993 – 1994 ) . " I did all the major vices , " he said . While on the gambling commission , one of his recommendations , ignored at the time , was for a national lottery . ( John Major 's government introduced one in 1994 . ) 
 Mary Warnock described Williams 's report on pornography in 1979 , as chair of the Committee on Obscenity and Film Censorship , as " agreeable , actually compulsive to read . " It relied on a " harm condition " that " no conduct should be suppressed by law unless it can be shown to harm someone , " and concluded that so long as children were protected from pornography , adults should be free to read and watch it as they see fit . The report rejected the view that pornography tends to cause sexual offences . Two cases in particular were highlighted , the Moors Murders and the Cambridge Rapist , where the influence of pornography had been discussed during the trials . The report argued that both cases appeared to be " more consistent with pre @-@ existing traits being reflected both in a choice of reading matter and in the acts committed against others . " 
 = = = Opera = = = 
 Williams enjoyed opera from an early age , particularly Mozart and Wagner . Patricia Williams writes that he attended performances of the Carl Rosa Company and Sadler 's Wells as a teenager . In an essay on Wagner , he described having been reduced to a " virtually uncontrollable state " during a performance by Jon Vickers as Tristan at Covent Garden . He served on the board of the English National Opera from 1968 to 1986 , and wrote an entry , " The Nature of Opera , " for The New Grove Dictionary of Opera . A collection of his essays , On Opera , was published posthumously in 2006 , edited by Patricia Williams . 
 = = = Honours and death = = = 
 Williams became a fellow of the British Academy in 1971 and an honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1983 . The following year he was made a syndic of the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge and later the chair . In 1993 he was elected to a fellowship of the Royal Society of Arts , and in 1999 he was knighted . Several universities awarded him honorary doctorates , including Yale and Harvard . 
 Williams died of heart failure on 10 June 2003 while on holiday in Rome ; he had been diagnosed in 1999 with multiple myeloma , a form of cancer . He was survived by his wife , their two sons , and his daughter from his first marriage . He was cremated in Rome . 
 = = Writing = = 
 = = = Approach to ethics = = = 
 A. W. Moore writes that Williams ' work lies within the analytic tradition , although less typical of it " in its breadth , in its erudition , and above all in its profound humanity " : 
 Although he was never a vigorous apologist for that tradition , he always maintained the standards of clarity and rigour which it prizes , and his work is a model of all that is best in the tradition . It is brilliant , deep , and imaginative . It is also extraordinarily tight . There cannot be many critics of his work who have not thought of some objection to what he says , only to find , on looking for a relevant quotation to turn into a target , that Williams carefully presents his views in a way that precisely anticipates the objection . 
 Williams did not produce any ethical theory or system ; several commentators noted , unfairly in the view of his supporters , that he was largely a critic . Moore writes that Williams was unaffected by this criticism : " He simply refused to allow philosophical system @-@ building to eclipse the subtlety and variety of human ethical experience . " He equated ethical theories with " a tidiness , a systematicity , and an economy of ideas , " writes Moore , that were not up to describing human lives and motives . Williams tried not to lose touch " with the real concerns that animate our ordinary ethical experience , " unlike much of the " arid , ahistorical , second @-@ order " debates about ethics in philosophy departments . 
 In his first book , Morality : An Introduction to Ethics ( 1972 ) , Williams wrote that whereas " most moral philosophy at most times has been empty and boring ... [ c ] <unk> moral philosophy has found an original way of being boring , which is by not discussing moral issues at all . " He argued that the study of ethics should be vital , compelling and difficult , and he sought an approach that was accountable to psychology and history . 
 Williams was not an ethical realist ; unlike scientific knowledge , which can approach an " absolute conception of reality , " an ethical judgment rests on a point of view . He argued that the " thick " ethical concepts , such as kindness and cruelty , express a " union of fact and value . " The idea that our values are not " in the world " was liberating : " [ A ] radical form of freedom may be found in the fact that we cannot be forced by the world to accept one set of values rather than another . " 
 = = = Critique of Kant = = = 
 Williams 's work throughout the 1970s and 1980s , in Morality : An Introduction to Ethics ( 1972 ) , Problems of the Self ( 1973 ) , Utilitarianism : For and Against with J. J. C. Smart ( 1973 ) , Moral Luck ( 1981 ) and Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy ( 1985 ) , outlined his attacks on the twin pillars of ethics : utilitarianism and the moral philosophy of the 18th @-@ century German philosopher Immanuel Kant . Nussbaum wrote that his work " denounced the trivial and evasive way in which moral philosophy was being practised in England under the aegis of those two dominant theories . " Both theories simplified the moral life , she wrote , neglecting emotions and personal attachments and how sheer luck shapes our choices . ( Williams said in 1996 : " Roughly , if it isn 't about obligation or consequences , it doesn 't count . " ) 
 Kant 's <unk> zur <unk> der Sitten ( 1785 ) expounded a moral system based on the categorical imperative , one formulation of which is : " Act only according to that maxim through which you can at the same time will that it become a universal law . " Rational agents must act on " principles of pure rational agency , " writes Moore ; that is , principles that regulate all rational agents . But Williams <unk> between thinking and acting . To think rationally is to think in a way compatible with belief in the truth , and " what is takes for one to believe the truth is the same as what it takes for anyone else to believe the truth , " writes Moore . But one can act rationally by satisfying one 's own desires ( internal reasons for action ) , and what it takes to do that may not be what it takes for anyone else to satisfy theirs . Kant 's approach to treating thinking and acting alike is wrong , according to Williams . 
 Williams argued that Kant had given the " purest , deepest and most thorough representation of morality , " but that the " honourable instincts of Kantianism to defend the individuality of individuals against the <unk> indifference of Utilitarianism " may not be effective against the Kantian " abstract character of persons as moral agents . " We should not be expected to act as though we are not who we are in the circumstances in which we find ourselves . 
 = = = Critique of utilitarianism = = = 
 Williams set out the case against utilitarianism – a consequentialist position the simplest version of which is that actions are right only insofar as they promote the greatest happiness of the greatest number – in Utilitarianism : For and Against ( 1973 ) with J. J. C. Smart . One of the book 's thought experiments involves Jim , a botanist doing research in a South American country led by a brutal dictator . Jim finds himself in a small town facing 20 captured Indian rebels . The captain who has arrested them says that if Jim will kill one , the others will be released in honour of Jim 's status as a guest , but if he does not , they will all be killed . Simple act utilitarianism would favour Jim killing one of the men . 
 Williams argued that there is a crucial distinction between a person being killed by Jim , and being killed by the captain because of an act or omission of Jim 's . The captain , if he chooses to kill , is not simply the medium of an effect Jim is having on the world . He is the moral actor , the person with the intentions and projects . The utilitarian loses that distinction , turning us into empty vessels by means of which consequences occur . Williams argued that moral decisions must preserve our psychological identity and integrity . We should reject any system that reduces moral decisions to a few algorithms . 
 = = = Reasons for action = = = 
 Williams argued that there are only internal reasons for action : " A has a reason to φ <unk> A has some desire the satisfaction of which will be served by his φ @-@ ing . " An external reason would be " A has reason to φ , " even if nothing in A 's " subjective motivational set " would be furthered by her φ @-@ ing . Williams argued that it is meaningless to say that there are external reasons ; reason alone does not move people to action . 
 Sophie Grace Chappell argues that , without external reasons for action , it becomes impossible to maintain that the same set of moral reasons applies to all agents equally . In cases where someone has no internal reason to do what others see as the right thing , they cannot be blamed for failing to do it , because internal reasons are the only reasons , and blame , Williams wrote , " involves treating the person who is blamed like someone who had a reason to do the right thing but did not do it . " 
 = = = Truth = = = 
 In his final completed book , Truth and Truthfulness : An Essay in Genealogy ( 2002 ) , Williams identifies the two basic values of truth as accuracy and sincerity , and tries to address the gulf between the demand for truth and the doubt that any such thing exists . Jane O 'Grady wrote in a Guardian obituary of Williams that the book is an examination of those who " sneer at any purported truth as ludicrously naive because it is , inevitably , distorted by power , class bias and ideology . " 
 The debt to Nietzsche is clear , most obviously in the adoption of a genealogical method as a tool of explanation and critique . Although part of Williams 's intention was to attack those he felt denied the value of truth , the book cautions that , to understand it simply in that sense , would be to miss part of its purpose ; rather , as Kenneth Baker wrote , it is " Williams ' reflection on the moral cost of the intellectual vogue for dispensing with the concept of truth . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Williams did not propose any systematic philosophical theory ; indeed , he was suspicious of any such attempt . He became known for his dialectical powers , although he was suspicious of them too . Alan Code wrote that Williams had never been " impressed by the display of mere dialectical cleverness , least of all in moral philosophy " : 
 On the contrary , one of the most notable features of his philosophical outlook was an unwavering insistence on a series of points that may seem obvious but which are nevertheless all @-@ too @-@ frequently neglected : that moral or ethical thought is part of human life ; that in writing about it , philosophers are writing about something of genuine importance ; that it is not easy to say anything worth saying about the subject ; that what moral philosophers write is answerable to the realities of human history , psychology , and social affairs ; and that mere cleverness is indeed not the relevant measure of value . " 
 In 1996 Martin Hollis said that Williams had " a good claim to be the leading British philosopher of his day , " but that , although he had a " lovely eye for the central questions , " he had none of the answers . Alan Thomas identified Williams 's contribution to ethics as an overarching scepticism about attempts to create a foundation for moral philosophy , explicitly articulated in Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy ( 1985 ) and Shame and Necessity ( 1993 ) , in which he argued that moral theories can never reflect the complexities of life , particularly given the radical pluralism of modern societies . 
 Learning to be yourself , to be authentic and to act with integrity , rather than conforming to any external moral system , is arguably the fundamental motif of Williams 's work , according to Sophie Grace Chappell . " If there 's one theme in all my work it 's about authenticity and self @-@ expression , " Williams said in 2002 . " It 's the idea that some things are in some real sense really you , or express what you and others aren 't ... The whole thing has been about spelling out the notion of inner necessity . " He moved moral philosophy away from the Kantian question , " What is my duty ? " , and back to the issue that mattered to the Greeks : " How should we live ? " 
 = = Publications = = 
 Selected papers 
 = Vietnam Airlines = 
 Vietnam Airlines ( Vietnamese : <unk> <unk> <unk> Quốc gia Việt Nam ) is the flag carrier of Vietnam . Founded in 1956 under the name Vietnam Civil Aviation , the airline was established as a state @-@ owned enterprise in April 1989 . Vietnam Airlines is headquartered in Long Bien District , Hanoi , with hubs at Noi Bai International Airport and Tan Son Nhat International Airport . The airline flies to 52 destinations in 17 countries , excluding <unk> services . 
 From its inception until the early 1990s , Vietnam Airlines was a minor carrier within the aviation industry as it was hampered by a variety of factors including the socio @-@ economic and political situation of the country . With the government 's normalization of relations with the United States , the airline was able to expand , improve its products and services , and modernize its ageing fleet . In 1996 , the Vietnamese government brought together 20 service companies to form Vietnam Airlines Corporation , with the airline itself as the centrepiece . In 2010 , the corporation was restructured into a limited liability company and renamed Vietnam Airlines Company Limited . A seven @-@ seat management board , members of which are appointed by the Vietnamese Prime Minister , oversees the company . 
 As passenger transport constitutes its core activity , Vietnam Airlines plays a crucial role in the economic development of the country . It owns 100 % of Vietnam Air Service Company – a regional airline in southern Vietnam , 70 % of the low @-@ cost carrier Jetstar Pacific Airlines , and 49 % of the Cambodian national airline Cambodia Angkor Air . In addition , the corporation earns revenue from airline catering and the maintenance and overhauling of aircraft through a number of its subsidiaries , including Vietnam Airlines Engineering Company and Vietnam Airlines Caterers . The company has also diversified its investments in the aircraft @-@ leasing and airport ground @-@ servicing industries , and is looking to manufacture aircraft components . It controls and operates a cargo division , Vietnam Airlines Cargo . 
 Vietnam Airlines became a member of SkyTeam in June 2010 , making it the first Southeast Asian carrier to have joined that alliance . It is expected to be restructured and partially privatized by 2015 to help it streamline its services and better compete with other airlines . This would facilitate its long @-@ term development plan that involves the improvement of its products and services , and the expansion of its fleet and flight network , as the airline aspires to become the second @-@ largest full @-@ service carrier in Southeast Asia by 2020 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 Vietnam Airlines has its origins in January 1956 ( 1956 @-@ 01 ) , when it was established by the North Vietnamese government under the name " Vietnam Civil Aviation " following the nationalization of Gia Lam Airport . It was instituted after the government signed the Decree No. 666 / <unk> . The airline was created as part of the air force for civilian purposes with support from both the Soviet Union and China ; initially , its fleet consisted of two Lisunov Li @-@ 2s that were later replaced by two Ilyushin Il @-@ 14 and three Aero Ae @-@ 45s . This was due to an embargo that prohibited the airline from leasing and / or buying American technology or components . 
 The airline 's development and expansion was seriously hampered by the Vietnam War ( 1954 – 1975 ) . Following the war , its first international destination was Beijing , followed by Vientiane in 1976 . During that year , the airline was known as General Department of Civil Aviation in Vietnam , and began full operations ; it carried around 21 @,@ 000 passengers , one @-@ third of whom were on international flights , and 3 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 6 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 lb ) of cargo . In 1978 , another important destination of Vietnam Airlines was added , with flights offered to Bangkok . The late 1980s and early 1990s saw the expansion of the network to Hong Kong , Kuala Lumpur , Manila and Singapore . 
 In 1990 , the company initiated discussions regarding the incorporation of Western @-@ built aircraft into the fleet . Later that year , however , the carrier had to cancel the acquisition of two Airbus A310s due to their use of US @-@ manufactured engines . By July 1991 ( 1991 @-@ 07 ) , the airline struck a wet @-@ lease agreement with Dutch lessor <unk> . The aircraft involved was a Boeing 737 @-@ 300 , that arrived in Vietnam Airlines ' livery . However , the aircraft was returned after the U.S. State Department pressured the Dutch lessor to remove the aircraft from Vietnam . Subsequently , Vietnam Airlines organized a similar but more complicated deal with TEA Basle , who spent the rest of 1991 negotiating a deal with US authorities . Eventually , a solution stating that " [ the Boeing 737 ] must be positioned outside Vietnam , with no logo or lettering of Vietnam Airlines . On these conditions , it could operate on behalf of Vietnam Airlines " was reached . In December 1991 ( 1991 @-@ 12 ) , Cathay Pacific and Vietnam Airlines agreed on a 50 – 50 joint venture to operate between Hong Kong and Vietnam , as the airline 's Tupolev Tu @-@ 134 fleet did not meet Kai Tak Airport 's noise restrictions . 
 In October 1992 ( 1992 @-@ 10 ) , the Boeing 737 was supplemented with an Airbus A310 . However , a dispute with Bulgarian Jes Air over who should pay for the repairs after the aircraft sustained an engine failure led to its replacement with another A310 from <unk> , also operated by Jes Air . A similar dispute with United Technologies encouraged the airline to switch from Airbus to Boeing . Hence , a Boeing 767 @-@ 200ER , leased from Ansett Worldwide Aviation Services ( AWAS ) , arrived in January 1993 , and a Royal Brunei Airlines Boeing 767 @-@ 300ER , arrived the following year . In October 1993 , the first Airbus A320 @-@ 200 was incorporated over a two @-@ year wet @-@ lease contract with Air France . Vietnam Airlines by now had started discussions with Air France about a partnership , and the French carrier agreed to lease its <unk> to Vietnam Airlines , and also to provide customer support and pilot / crew training . By that time the route network had further expanded internationally , seeing the incorporation of destinations such as Paris , Tokyo , Seoul , Taipei , Sydney , and Melbourne . In 1993 , the airline carried 1 @.@ 06 million passengers , 418 @,@ 000 of whom were on international flights . 
 = = = New enterprise : 1993 – 2006 = = = 
 The airline became the flag carrier of Vietnam in 1993 , after having completed a restructuring programme that was started four years earlier . In that year , the airline split from the Civil Aviation Administration of Vietnam ( <unk> ) and became a state enterprise . The move was similar to the reorganization of the Civil Aviation Administration of China into several regional airlines in 1987 . Despite the fact that the airline gained some independence from the <unk> , it was still known as Civil Aviation Administration of Vietnam within the 1993 – 1996 period . 
 In February 1994 ( 1994 @-@ 02 ) , US President Bill Clinton lifted the trade embargo to allow Vietnam Airlines the ability to acquire Western @-@ built aircraft . Consequently , Vietnam Airlines announced in April of the same year that it would be phasing out its inefficient Soviet planes . By April 1995 ( 1995 @-@ 04 ) , the fleet consisted of nine Airbus A320s ( all of them leased from Air France ) , 11 Antonov An @-@ 24s , four <unk> , two Boeing 707 @-@ 300s , three Ilyushin Il @-@ 18s , nine Tupolev Tu @-@ <unk> and three Yakovlev Yak @-@ 40s ; at this time the route network comprised 14 domestic destinations ( including Ban Me Thuot , Da Nang , Dien Bien Phu , Hue , Nha Trang , <unk> and Pleiku ) and 16 international destinations ( including Bangkok , Hong Kong , Kuala Lumpur and Singapore ) . On 27 May 1995 ( 1995 @-@ 05 @-@ 27 ) , the airline , along with a number of other aviation @-@ related businesses , were incorporated to establish Vietnam Airlines Corporation . Two Fokker 70s were purchased in mid @-@ 1995 for US $ 50 million ; they were aimed at partly replacing the Tu @-@ 134 fleet on domestic routes as well as at serving as VIP transport . In December 1995 ( 1995 @-@ 12 ) , discussions with GECAS for the lease of three additional , second @-@ hand Boeing 767 @-@ 300ERs were under way ; these ex @-@ Continental Airlines aircraft would act as a replacement for wet @-@ leased Boeing 767 aircraft ( three <unk> and one -200ER leased from AWAS and Royal Brunei ) in the fleet . 
 In September 1996 ( 1996 @-@ 09 ) , Vietnam Airlines started offering business class services and in 1999 , the airline launched its frequent @-@ flyer program , Golden Lotus Plus ; During 1996 , Vietnam Airlines looked for aircraft which would substitute the A320s wet @-@ leased from Air France when the deal was over . Apart from acquiring further A320s , the airline considered Boeing 737s and McDonnell Douglas MD @-@ 90s . In February 1996 ( 1996 @-@ 02 ) , GECAS delivered the first of three Boeing 767 @-@ 300ER to the carrier , on dry @-@ lease for five years . In October the same year , two Boeing 767 @-@ 300ERs and a Boeing 767 @-@ 200 , on lease from AWAS and Royal Brunei Airlines , respectively , were returned to the <unk> , but in early 1997 another Boeing 767 @-@ 300ER was phased in on a one @-@ year lease from AWAS . With its freedom to operate Western @-@ built aircraft , Vietnam Airlines considered the acquisition of long @-@ haul aircraft to better service Vietnamese living overseas . The Airbus A340 , Boeing 747 and the McDonnell Douglas MD @-@ 11 were topics of discussion . Meanwhile , two Fokker 70s were acquired in May and July to replace the twelve Tupolev Tu @-@ <unk> . On 3 September 1997 , the crash of a Tupolev Tu @-@ 134B , on approach to Phnom Penh 's Pochentong Airport in bad weather , resulted in more than 60 fatalities . 
 A new livery was introduced in early 1998 , initially unveiled on a Boeing 767 . In December 2001 ( 2001 @-@ 12 ) , Vietnam Airlines signed a historic agreement with Boeing for the acquisition of its first ever US @-@ built aircraft , signalling the start of trade under the Bilateral Trade Agreement between the two countries . The deal involved four Boeing 777 @-@ 200ERs . The transaction was valued at US $ 680 million ; the first aircraft was initially scheduled for delivery in 2003 . These four aircraft , along with six others of the same type that are leased from International Lease Finance Corporation ( ILFC ) , are the flagships of the airline , and serve on medium and long @-@ haul routes , respectively . During that year , the airline carried 3 @.@ 4 million passengers , 1 @.@ 9 million of whom were on domestic flights ; flights to Beijing resumed and services to Kunming were launched . During 2002 , Vietnam Airlines considered a lease offer from Airbus for two Airbus A340 @-@ 300s . On 4 September 2003 , a landmark ceremony celebrated the airline 's receipt of its first Boeing 777 @-@ 200ER purchased outright from Boeing . On 28 October , the airline decided to move its operations in Moscow from Sheremetyevo International Airport to Domodedovo International Airport . 
 In June 2005 ( 2005 @-@ 06 ) , Vietnam Airlines ordered four Boeing 787 @-@ 8s . Twelve additional 787 @-@ 8s were ordered in late 2007 , some of them to be directly acquired from the company , and the rest to be purchased by the carrier 's subsidiary Vietnam Aircraft Leasing Company ( <unk> ) . These new aircraft were to allow Vietnam Airlines to expand its network and replace some leased aircraft . Regarding the delays from Boeing , CEO Pham Ngoc Minh remarked in September 2009 ( 2009 @-@ 09 ) , " We are not happy about the constant delays . It affects our business plan . We expected to get our planes in 2009 , then 2010 , and now nobody can confirm to us which is the exact delivery date . I can be patient but it gives us a lot of headaches . " In 2010 the airline switched its Boeing 787 order from the – 8 to the – 9 model , stating that 787 @-@ 8s did not meet all the requirements Boeing initially promised ; it is expected the airline will receive its first aircraft of the type in 2015 . 
 On 20 June 2005 , the airline launched direct services to Frankfurt after having discontinued services to Berlin . It came after the 2004 – 2005 period when travel between the two countries soared 70 % . The following year , Vietnam Airlines was admitted into IATA . As part of the move , Vietnam Airlines had to meet the association 's <unk> safety standards . 
 = = = Expansion : 2007 – current = = = 
 According to a number of newspaper reports in 2007 , the Vietnamese government planned to partly privatize Vietnam Airlines . In the plan , the government considered selling 20 – 30 % of the airline 's stake to outsiders , with the government holding the balance . This was a small part of a bigger proposal by the government to privatize its state @-@ owned companies , due to be completed by 2010 . Vietnam authorized the plan the following year ; however , the plan was not carried out as the airline missed its deadline scheduled by the government , which was arranged for 2010 , due to the Global Financial Crisis . 
 On 1 October 2007 , the airline and <unk> signed an memorandum of understanding for the purchase of ten Airbus A350 <unk> , and 20 additional Airbus A321s . The Airbus A350s will supplement the Boeing 787s already ordered by the airline . This single order will result in Vietnam Airlines becoming one of the largest Airbus operators in Asia . The two companies also ordered five extra ATR 72 @-@ 500s in December 2007 ( 2007 @-@ 12 ) . 
 Vietnam was chosen as the host of Miss World 's 60th contest in 2008 . As the country 's national airline , Vietnam Airlines was selected as the sponsoring airline for the beauty pageant . Therefore , it was tasked the job of managing all the transport matters for the contest , to be carried out during September and October , just before the beginning of the competition . However , it was later decided to carry out the event in Sanya , China , following speculations of Vietnam withdrawing . In August 2008 ( 2008 @-@ 08 ) , Vietnam Airlines added Nagoya , the airline 's fourth point served in Japan besides Fukuoka , Osaka and Tokyo , to the route network . 
 In 2009 , Vietnam Airlines and the Government of Cambodia established a joint @-@ venture , having 49 % and 51 % <unk> , respectively , with the goal of boosting tourism in Cambodia . The joint @-@ venture was a new Cambodian national airline named Cambodia Angkor Air , which started flying in July the same year , using ATR @-@ 72 equipment ; an Airbus A321 joined the fleet in September . Also in 2009 , the carrier signed a deal for another 16 Airbus A321s plus two Airbus A350s , during the Paris Air Show . In addition , Vietnam Airlines launched a new bilingual website in October to simplify bookings and adopted a new passenger service system designed by IT provider Sabre Airline Solutions . 
 On 26 August 2010 , the airline teamed up with Boeing during the unveiling of its interior modernization programme to increase passenger comfort . From late September to early October , Vietnam Airlines discounted up to 85 % of its 90 @,@ 000 fares to celebrate Thang Long @-@ Hanoi 's 1000th anniversary . In November 2010 , the airline awarded Honeywell a US $ 100 million contract to retrofit the Airbus A321s ' aircraft flight systems , which is calculated to save Vietnam Airlines US $ 10 @,@ 000 per aircraft per year . 
 In February 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 02 ) , Vietnam Airlines boosted its stake in the low @-@ cost carrier Jetstar Pacific Airlines to 70 % , with Qantas holding the balance . The Vietnamese flag carrier was the major shareholder in Vietnam 's second largest airline , but its stake had been transferred to the Ministry of Finance , and subsequently to the Vietnamese State Capital Investment Corporation ( <unk> ) . The carrier 's takeover of <unk> 's stake in Jetstar Pacific will capitalise the low @-@ cost carrier with US $ 27 million , an amount that will be directed towards fleet renewal . In late April 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 04 ) , the aircraft lessor ALC announced the placement of an order for eight Boeing 787 @-@ 9s , which will be leased to Vietnam Airlines ; deliveries are expected to start in 2017 . In late May 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 05 ) , the carrier signed an agreement with Vietnam 's <unk> Bank for a loan worth US $ 100 million , which the carrier will use to finance the acquisition of four Airbus A321s ; a further US $ 100 million was loaned in April 2013 to finance the purchase of eight Boeing 787s . In a deal valued at US $ 1 @.@ 7 billion , Vietnam Airlines signed a contract with General Electric in October 2013 ( 2013 @-@ 10 ) for 40 engines to power the Boeing 787 aircraft the airline has on order . 
 In July 2014 ( 2014 @-@ 07 ) , a new route to Tokyo @-@ Haneda from Hanoi was introduced . Vietnam Airlines received its first Airbus A350 @-@ 900 in late June 2015 ( 2015 @-@ 06 ) , becoming the second operator of the type worldwide after Qatar Airways . In August 2015 ( 2015 @-@ 08 ) , the airline 's first Boeing 787 @-@ 9 entered the fleet . 
 = = Future = = 
 As it is expected to be operating 170 aircraft in 2020 , Vietnam Airlines is aiming to become the second @-@ largest full @-@ service carrier in Southeast Asia . The airline is interested in launching services to the United States , where more than 1 @.@ 2 million Vietnamese reside . Such plans were confirmed in December 2003 , but have since been postponed because Vietnam is not yet part of Federal Aviation Administration 's International Aviation Safety Assessment Program . Vietnam Airlines also considered " opening new routes such as Ho Chi Minh City / Hanoi , Vietnam – London ; Ho Chi Minh City / Hanoi – Shanghai / Beijing , China ; Ho Chi Minh City – Mumbai ; Ho Chi Minh City – Brisbane ; and Ho Chi Minh City – Doha " , according to CEO Pham Ngoc Minh in 2008 . 
 While the airline had launched flights to London @-@ Gatwick , Beijing and Shanghai , there are currently no flights to Mumbai , Doha , and Brisbane . The airline also plans to re @-@ open flights to Berlin , and commence flights to Adelaide , Perth , Amsterdam , Milan , Prague , Mandalay , Dalian , Nanjing , Hangzhou and African cities ; by 2020 , Vietnam Airlines is expected to serve 53 international destinations , up from 27 in 2011 . By 2020 , Vietnam Airlines plans to increase its annual revenue to US $ 7 billion – up from $ 1 @.@ 86 billion in 2010 – by carrying 620 @,@ 000 tonnes of cargo and 35 million passengers , using a fleet of 163 aircraft ( later revised to 41 million passengers using 170 aircraft ) . It aims to capture a 45 % market share of Vietnam 's aviation market . During its first 15 years of operation , from 1996 to 2010 , Vietnam Airlines carried a total of 82 million passengers on 678 @,@ 550 flights . In addition , Vietnam Airlines plans to transfer most of its international operations from its current hub , Tan Son Nhat International Airport , to the proposed Long Thanh International Airport . With a cost of approximately US $ 6 billion , the airport will , according to Vietnamese authorities , help Vietnam Airlines boost its operations internationally as it seeks to bypass Thailand as the dominant gateway to the Greater Mekong region . London operations were transferred from Gatwick to Heathrow in 2015 ; the airline plans to operate its new Boeing 787 @-@ 9 aircraft to this destination , starting from July 2015 ( 2015 @-@ 07 ) . 
 In January 2011 ( 2011 @-@ 01 ) , plans were announced by the airline to re @-@ initiate an initial public offering ( IPO ) by the end of 2012 ; an earlier attempt was stalled by the 2007 – 2010 financial crisis . Scheduled for mid @-@ 2014 after several delays , the IPO and subsequent share @-@ offerings will supply the funds to expand Vietnam Airlines ' fleet and network . With the company valued at US $ 1 @.@ 5 billion , the government plans to initially keep 75 % of the shares . The IPO plan was submitted to the Vietnamese Ministry of Transport in June 2014 ( 2014 @-@ 06 ) . Scheduled to commence on 14 November 2014 ( 2014 @-@ 11 @-@ 14 ) , the IPO has already received two submissions from foreign companies , yet their names have not been disclosed . The corporation will be restructured by 2015 to bring it in line with other state @-@ owned enterprises and to shift its focus away from non @-@ core businesses . Following restructuring , the airline group will consist of Vietnam Airlines itself , as well as three carriers ; in total , the corporation will comprise 26 independently audited companies . 
 = = Corporate affairs and identity = = 
 Vietnam Airlines Company Limited is a limited liability company wholly owned by the government of Vietnam , having been restructured from Vietnam Airlines Corporation in June 2010 . Its role is to provide economic gains to the country , as its tasks , in addition to scheduled passenger and cargo transport , include " responsibility towards labor , contribution to the state budget , and providing chartered flights " , according to former CEO Dao <unk> Nhung . The airline is headed and overseen by a seven @-@ seat management team , members of which are selected by the Prime Minister of Vietnam . As of July 2015 , Pham Viet Thanh was the chairman of the company , whereas Pham Ngoc Minh was the President and CEO , as of March 2014 . As of March 2014 , the airline branch of the corporation had 10 @,@ 929 employees . The airline is headquartered in the Long Bien District of Hanoi ; previously it was headquartered at Gia Lam Airport in Gia Lam , Hanoi . 
 = = = Training = = = 
 In 2009 , the airline , Airbus and <unk> Aviation Academy created Bay Viet Flight Training Company to train pilots in the country , with the expectation that up to 100 trainees would graduate annually . In October 2010 , the company planned to train 60 pilots in Vietnam during 2011 – 2012 . In 2010 , Vietnam Airlines needed 636 pilots , 60 % of whom were Vietnamese . It planned to raise that figure it to 75 % by 2015 , meaning there will be at least 100 new recruits each year from 2010 until 2015 . Vietnam Airlines also contracts CAE Global Academy Phoenix in Arizona , United States , to train its cadets . 
 = = = Financial performance = = = 
 Vietnam Airlines has enjoyed an average of 37 % increase in passengers flown per year until 1997 , when the Asian Financial Crisis and other contributing causes led to a loss in profits for the airline . Nevertheless , the airline remained profitable throughout the crisis . In 1996 , the airline carried 2 @.@ 5 million passengers , up 18 % from 1995 . The airline carried more than 4 million passengers in 2002 , which is an 18 % increase over the previous year . Its cargo traffic also climbed 20 % during the same period , resulting in a 2002 profit of US $ 35 @.@ 77 million . 
 Despite the severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) outbreak , the airline posted a US $ 26 @.@ 2 million profit for 2003 . In 2006 , it carried 6 @.@ 8 million passengers ( 3 @.@ 7 million international ) and earned revenue of nearly US $ 1 @.@ 37 billion ( first 11 months ) . Vietnam Airlines carried more than 9 million passengers , of which 4 million were international travellers in 2007 , the year which saw the airline earning a gross profit of US $ 23 million from a revenue of US $ 1 @.@ 23 billion . It also transported 115 @,@ 100 tonnes of cargo . In 2009 , the airline 's revenue was US $ 1 @.@ 3 billion , compared to US $ 1 @.@ 56 billion it earned the previous year . During this period , Vietnam Airlines carried 9 @.@ 3 million passengers . According to <unk> , Vietnam Airlines ' passenger capacity for 2010 rose 30 % over the same period of the previous year . This also coincided with the increase in capacity at Vietnamese airports , at 21 % . In 2012 , the company 's total revenue totalled US $ 2 @.@ 4 billion , with profits totalling US $ 3 @.@ 3 million . The following year , the carrier posted a US $ 25 million gross profit . 
 Vietnam Airlines held about 40 % of the market share of international passengers flying to and from Vietnam in February 2012 . At the time , Vietnam Airlines controlled 77 % share of the domestic aviation market , with 14 % covered by Jetstar Pacific . As of December 2012 , Vietnam Airlines controlled just below 70 % of the domestic market share . 
 = = = Subsidiaries and affiliates = = = 
 Vietnam Airlines has at least 20 subsidiaries and affiliates . By the end of its restructuring in 2015 , the company will have offloaded its stakes in more than 10 enterprises . 
 = = = Aircraft maintenance and production = = = 
 Vietnam Airlines is increasingly becoming involved in the maintenance , overhauling , and production of aircraft . Maintenance works are carried out by Vietnam Airlines Engineering Company ( VAECO ) , that was established on 1 January 2009 . VAECO was organized mainly upon the amalgamation of the <unk> and <unk> aircraft maintenance bases . VAECO carries out maintenance and technical services for Vietnam Airlines as well as for other airlines . The establishment of this company opens a new era to the aircraft maintenance field in Vietnam . As of 2013 , VAECO was capable of performing a wide range of maintenance on many different aircraft types ; this includes C @-@ checks for the Boeing 777 , Airbus A330 , Airbus A320 and Airbus A321 ; and D @-@ checks , the most thorough of all maintenance procedures , which are carried out on the ATR 72 and Fokker 70 . 
 In addition to its self maintenance facilities , Vietnam Airlines also has maintenance contracts with other airlines and maintenance organisations . 
 There are currently no production facilities in Vietnam for aircraft and spare parts . However , Boeing has managed to obtain 35 % of the distribution market in Vietnam , and GE Aviation , in turn , supplies jet engines for the Boeing aircraft . For the future , conversely , Vietnam Airlines is planning to build a maintenance factory in conjunction with Rolls Royce and other companies . It has also signed an memorandum of understanding with EADS , a pan @-@ European aerospace and defence corporation , that would let the corporation assemble and manufacture plane components in the future . 
