 The Columbia 's heavy flow and extreme elevation drop over a short distance , 2 @.@ 16 feet per mile ( 40 @.@ 9 cm / km ) , give it tremendous capacity for hydroelectricity generation . In comparison , the Mississippi drops less than 0 @.@ 65 feet per mile ( 12 @.@ 3 cm / km ) . The Columbia alone possesses one @-@ third of the United States 's hydroelectric potential . In 2012 , the river and its tributaries account for 29 GW of hydroelectricity , contributing 44 % of the total hydroelectric generation in the nation . 
 The largest of the 150 hydroelectric projects , the Grand Coulee Dam and the Chief Joseph Dam , are also the largest in the United States and among the largest in the world . 
 Inexpensive hydropower supported the location of a large aluminum industry in the region , because its reduction from bauxite requires large amounts of electricity . Until 2000 , the Northwestern United States produced up to 17 % of the world 's aluminum and 40 % of the aluminum produced in the US . The <unk> of power in the early 21st century , coupled with drought that reduced the generation capacity of the river , damaged the industry and by 2001 , Columbia River aluminum producers had idled 80 % of its production capacity , and by 2003 , the entire United States produced only 15 % of the world 's aluminum , with many smelters along the Columbia having gone dormant or out of business . 
 Power remains relatively inexpensive along the Columbia , and in recent years high @-@ tech companies like Google have begun to move server farm operations into the area to avail themselves of cheap power . 
 Downriver of Grand Coulee , each dam 's reservoir is closely regulated by the Bonneville Power Administration ( BPA ) , the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers , and various Washington public utility districts to ensure flow , flood control , and power generation objectives are met . Increasingly , hydro @-@ power operations are required to meet standards under the US Endangered Species Act and other agreements to manage operations to minimize impacts on salmon and other fish , and some conservation and fishing groups support removing four dams on the lower Snake River , the largest tributary of the Columbia . 
 In 1941 , the BPA hired Oklahoma folksinger Woody Guthrie to write songs for a documentary film promoting the benefits of hydropower . In the month he spent traveling the region Guthrie wrote 26 songs , which have become an important part of the cultural history of the region . 
 = = Ecology and environment = = 
 = = = Fish migration = = = 
 The Columbia supports several species of anadromous fish that migrate between the Pacific Ocean and fresh water tributaries of the river . Sockeye salmon , Coho and Chinook ( also known as " king " ) salmon , and steelhead , all of the genus Oncorhynchus , are ocean fish that migrate up the rivers at the end of their life cycles to spawn . White sturgeon , which take 15 to 25 years to mature , typically migrate between the ocean and the upstream habitat several times during their lives . 
 Salmon populations declined dramatically after the establishment of canneries in 1867 . In 1879 it was reported that 545 @,@ 450 salmon , with an average weight of 22 pounds ( 10 @.@ 0 kg ) were caught ( in a recent season ) and mainly canned for export to England . A can weighing 1 pound ( 0 @.@ 45 kg ) could be sold for 8d or 9d . By 1908 , there was widespread concern about the decline of salmon and sturgeon . In that year , the people of Oregon passed two laws under their newly instituted program of Citizens ' Initiatives limiting fishing on the Columbia and other rivers . Then in 1948 , another initiative banned the use of seine nets ( devices already used by Native Americans , and refined by later settlers ) altogether . 
 Dams interrupt the migration of anadromous fish . Salmon and steelhead return to the streams in which they were born to spawn ; where dams prevent their return , entire populations of salmon die . Some of the Columbia and Snake River dams employ fish ladders , which are effective to varying degrees at allowing these fish to travel upstream . Another problem exists for the juvenile salmon headed downstream to the ocean . Previously , this journey would have taken two to three weeks . With river currents slowed by the dams , and the Columbia converted from wild river to a series of slackwater pools , the journey can take several months , which increases the mortality rate . In some cases , the Army Corps of Engineers transports juvenile fish downstream by truck or river barge . The Chief Joseph Dam and several dams on the Columbia 's tributaries entirely block migration , and there are no migrating fish on the river above these dams . Sturgeon have different migration habits and can survive without ever visiting the ocean . In many upstream areas cut off from the ocean by dams , sturgeon simply live upstream of the dam . 
 Not all fish have suffered from the modifications to the river ; the northern pikeminnow ( formerly known as the <unk> ) thrives in the warmer , slower water created by the dams . Research in the mid @-@ 1980s found that juvenile salmon were suffering substantially from the predatory pikeminnow , and in 1990 , in the interest of protecting salmon , a " bounty " program was established to reward anglers for catching pikeminnow . 
 In 1994 , the salmon catch was smaller than usual in the rivers of Oregon , Washington , and British Columbia , causing concern among commercial fishermen , government agencies , and tribal leaders . US government intervention , to which the states of Alaska , Idaho , and Oregon objected , included an 11 @-@ day closure of an Alaska fishery . In April 1994 the Pacific Fisheries Management Council unanimously approved the strictest regulations in 18 years , banning all commercial salmon fishing for that year from Cape Falcon north to the Canadian border . In the winter of 1994 , the return of coho salmon far exceeded expectations , which was attributed in part to the fishing ban . 
 Also in 1994 , United States Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt first proposed the removal of several Pacific Northwest dams because of their impact on salmon spawning . The Northwest Power Planning Council approved a plan that provided more water for fish and less for electricity , irrigation , and transportation . Environmental advocates have called for the removal of certain dams in the Columbia system in the years since . Of the 227 major dams in the Columbia River drainage basin , the four Washington dams on the lower Snake River are often identified for removal , for example in an ongoing lawsuit concerning a Bush administration plan for salmon recovery . These dams and reservoirs limit the recovery of upriver salmon runs to Idaho 's Salmon and Clearwater rivers . Historically , the Snake produced over 1 @.@ 5 million spring and summer Chinook salmon , a number that has dwindled to several thousand in recent years . Idaho Power Company 's Hells Canyon dams have no fish ladders ( and do not pass juvenile salmon downstream ) , and thus allow no steelhead or salmon to migrate above Hells Canyon . In 2007 , the destruction of the Marmot Dam on the Sandy River was the first dam removal in the system . Other Columbia Basin dams that have been removed include Condit Dam on Washington 's White Salmon River , and the Milltown Dam on the Clark Fork in Montana . 
 = = = Pollution = = = 
 In southeastern Washington , a 50 @-@ mile ( 80 km ) stretch of the river passes through the Hanford Site , established in 1943 as part of the Manhattan Project . The site served as a plutonium production complex , with nine nuclear reactors and related facilities along the banks of the river . From 1944 to 1971 , pump systems drew cooling water from the river and , after treating this water for use by the reactors , returned it to the river . Before being released back into the river , the used water was held in large tanks known as retention basins for up to six hours . Longer @-@ lived isotopes were not affected by this retention , and several terabecquerels entered the river every day . By 1957 , the eight plutonium production reactors at Hanford dumped a daily average of 50 @,@ 000 curies of radioactive material into the Columbia . These releases were kept secret by the federal government until the release of declassified documents in the late 1980s . Radiation was measured downstream as far west as the Washington and Oregon coasts . 
 The nuclear reactors were decommissioned at the end of the Cold War , and the Hanford site is the focus of one of the world 's largest environmental cleanup , managed by the Department of Energy under the oversight of the Washington Department of Ecology and the Environmental Protection Agency . Nearby aquifers contain an estimated 270 billion US gallons ( 1 billion m3 ) of groundwater contaminated by high @-@ level nuclear waste that has leaked out of Hanford 's massive underground storage tanks . As of 2008 , 1 million US gallons ( 3 @,@ 785 m3 ) of highly radioactive waste is traveling through groundwater toward the Columbia River . This waste is expected to reach the river in 12 to 50 years if cleanup does not proceed on schedule . 
 In addition to concerns about nuclear waste , numerous other pollutants are found in the river . These include chemical pesticides , bacteria , arsenic , dioxins , and polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCB ) . 
 Studies have also found significant levels of toxins in fish and the waters they inhabit within the basin . Accumulation of toxins in fish threatens the survival of fish species , and human consumption of these fish can lead to health problems . Water quality is also an important factor in the survival of other wildlife and plants that grow in the Columbia River drainage basin . The states , Indian tribes , and federal government are all engaged in efforts to restore and improve the water , land , and air quality of the Columbia River drainage basin and have committed to work together to enhance and accomplish critical ecosystem restoration efforts . A number of cleanup efforts are currently underway , including Superfund projects at Portland Harbor , Hanford , and Lake Roosevelt . 
 Timber industry activity further contaminates river water , for example in the increased sediment runoff that results from <unk> . The Northwest Forest Plan , a piece of federal legislation from 1994 , mandated that timber companies consider the environmental impacts of their practices on rivers like the Columbia . 
 On July 1 , 2003 , Christopher Swain of Portland , Oregon , became the first person to swim the Columbia River 's entire length , in an effort to raise public awareness about the river 's environmental health . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 Most of the Columbia 's drainage basin ( which , at 258 @,@ 000 square miles or 670 @,@ 000 square kilometres , is about the size of France ) lies roughly between the Rocky Mountains on the east and the Cascade Mountains on the west . In the United States and Canada the term watershed is often used to mean drainage basin . The term Columbia Basin is used to refer not only to the entire drainage basin but also to subsets of the river 's full watershed , such as the relatively flat and unforested area in eastern Washington bounded by the Cascades , the Rocky Mountains , and the Blue Mountains . Within the watershed are diverse landforms including mountains , arid plateaus , river valleys , rolling uplands , and deep gorges . Grand Teton National Park lies in the watershed , as well as parts of Yellowstone National Park , Glacier National Park , Mount Rainier National Park , and North Cascades National Park . Canadian National Parks in the watershed include Kootenay National Park , Yoho National Park , Glacier National Park , and Mount Revelstoke National Park . Hells Canyon , the deepest gorge in North America , and the Columbia Gorge are in the watershed . Vegetation varies widely , ranging from western hemlock and western redcedar in the moist regions to sagebrush in the arid regions . The watershed provides habitat for 609 known fish and wildlife species , including the bull trout , bald eagle , gray wolf , grizzly bear , and Canada lynx . 
 The World Wide Fund for Nature ( WWF ) divides the waters of the Columbia and its tributaries into three freshwater ecoregions , naming them Columbia Glaciated , Columbia Unglaciated , and Upper Snake . The Columbia Glaciated ecoregion , making up about a third of the total watershed , lies in the north and was covered with ice sheets during the Pleistocene . The ecoregion includes the mainstem Columbia north of the Snake River and tributaries such as the Yakima , Okanagan , Pend Oreille , Clark Fork , and Kootenay rivers . The effects of glaciation include a number of large lakes and a relatively low diversity of freshwater fish . The Upper Snake ecoregion is defined as the Snake River watershed above Shoshone Falls , which totally blocks fish migration . This region has 14 species of fish , many of which are endemic . The Columbia Unglaciated ecoregion makes up the rest of the watershed . It includes the mainstem Columbia below the Snake River and tributaries such as the Salmon , John Day , Deschutes , and lower Snake Rivers . Of the three ecoregions it is the richest in terms of freshwater species diversity . There are 35 species of fish , of which four are endemic . There are also high levels of mollusk endemism . 
 In 2000 , about six million people lived within the Columbia 's drainage basin . Of this total about 2 @.@ 4 million people lived in Oregon , 1 @.@ 7 million in Washington , 1 million in Idaho , half a million in British Columbia , and 0 @.@ 4 million in Montana . Population in the watershed has been rising for many decades and is projected to rise to about 10 million by 2030 . The highest population densities are found west of the Cascade Mountains along the I @-@ 5 corridor , especially in the Portland @-@ Vancouver urban area . High densities are also found around Spokane , Washington , and Boise , Idaho . Although much of the watershed is rural and sparsely populated , areas with recreational and scenic values are growing rapidly . The central Oregon county of Deschutes is the fastest @-@ growing in the state . Populations have also been growing just east of the Cascades in central Washington around the city of Yakima and the Tri @-@ Cities area . Projections for the coming decades assume growth throughout the watershed , including the interior . The Canadian part of the Okanagan subbasin is also growing rapidly . 
 Climate varies greatly from place to place within the watershed . Elevation ranges from sea level at the river mouth to more than 14 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 300 m ) in the mountains , and temperatures vary with elevation . The highest peak is Mount Rainier , at 14 @,@ 411 feet ( 4 @,@ 392 m ) . High elevations have cold winters and short cool summers ; interior regions are subject to great temperature variability and severe droughts . Over some of the watershed , especially west of the Cascade Mountains , precipitation maximums occur in winter , when Pacific storms come ashore . Atmospheric conditions block the flow of moisture in summer , which is generally dry except for occasional thunderstorms in the interior . In some of the eastern parts of the watershed , especially shrub @-@ steppe regions with Continental climate patterns , precipitation maximums occur in early summer . Annual precipitation varies from more than 100 inches ( 250 cm ) a year in the Cascades to less than 8 inches ( 20 cm ) in the interior . Much of the watershed gets less than 12 inches ( 30 cm ) a year . 
 Several major North American drainage basins and many minor ones share a common border with the Columbia River 's drainage basin . To the east , in northern Wyoming and Montana , the Continental Divide separates the Columbia watershed from the Mississippi @-@ Missouri watershed , which empties into the Gulf of Mexico . To the northeast , mostly along the southern border between British Columbia and Alberta , the Continental Divide separates the Columbia watershed from the Nelson @-@ Lake Winnipeg @-@ Saskatchewan watershed , which empties into Hudson Bay . The Mississippi and Nelson watersheds are separated by the Laurentian Divide , which meets the Continental Divide at Triple Divide Peak near the headwaters of the Columbia 's Flathead River tributary . This point marks the meeting of three of North America 's main drainage patterns , to the Pacific Ocean , to Hudson Bay , and to the Atlantic Ocean via the Gulf of Mexico . 
 Further north along the Continental Divide , a short portion of the combined Continental and Laurentian divides separate the Columbia watershed from the MacKenzie @-@ Slave @-@ Athabasca watershed , which empties into the Arctic Ocean . The Nelson and Mackenzie watersheds are separated by a divide between streams flowing to the Arctic Ocean and those of the Hudson Bay watershed . This divide meets the Continental Divide at Snow Dome ( also known as Dome ) , near the northernmost bend of the Columbia River . 
 To the southeast , in western Wyoming , another divide separates the Columbia watershed from the Colorado – Green watershed , which empties into the Gulf of California . The Columbia , Colorado , and Mississippi watersheds meet at Three Waters Mountain in the Wind River Range of Wyoming . To the south , in Oregon , Nevada , Utah , Idaho , and Wyoming , the Columbia watershed is divided from the Great Basin , whose several watersheds are endorheic , not emptying into any ocean but rather drying up or sinking into sumps . Great Basin watersheds that share a border with the Columbia watershed include Harney Basin , Humboldt River , and Great Salt Lake . The associated triple divide points are Commissary Ridge North , Wyoming , and <unk> Meadow Northwest , Oregon . To the north , mostly in British Columbia , the Columbia watershed borders the Fraser River watershed . To the west and southwest the Columbia watershed borders a number of smaller watersheds that drain to the Pacific Ocean , such as the Klamath River in Oregon and California and the Puget Sound Basin in Washington . 
 = = = Major tributaries = = = 
 The Columbia receives more than 60 significant tributaries . The four largest that empty directly into the Columbia ( measured either by discharge or by size of watershed ) are the Snake River ( mostly in Idaho ) , the Willamette River ( in northwest Oregon ) , the Kootenay River ( mostly in British Columbia ) , and the Pend Oreille River ( mostly in northern Washington and Idaho , also known as the lower part of the Clark Fork ) . Each of these four averages more than 20 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 570 m3 / s ) and drains an area of more than 20 @,@ 000 square miles ( 52 @,@ 000 km2 ) . 
 The Snake is by far the largest tributary . Its watershed of 108 @,@ 000 square miles ( 280 @,@ 000 km2 ) is larger than the state of Idaho . Its discharge is roughly a third of the Columbia 's at the rivers ' confluence , but compared to the Columbia upstream of the confluence the Snake is longer ( 113 % ) and has a larger drainage basin ( 104 % ) . 
 The Pend Oreille River system ( including its main tributaries , the Clark Fork and Flathead rivers ) is also similar in size to the Columbia at their confluence . Compared to the Columbia River above the two rivers ' confluence , the Pend Oreille @-@ Clark @-@ Flathead is nearly as long ( about 86 % ) , its basin about three @-@ fourths as large ( 76 % ) , and its discharge over a third ( 37 % ) . 
 = Alive or Just Breathing = 
 Alive or Just Breathing is the second studio album by American metalcore band Killswitch Engage . It was released on May 21 , 2002 , through Roadrunner Records . Alive or Just Breathing was Killswitch Engage 's first album on Roadrunner and was recorded from October 2001 to February 2002 . Produced by drummer and guitarist Adam Dutkiewicz , this was the band 's first album on a major label , which prompted them to write and record the album to the best of their abilities . Alive or Just Breathing has been viewed as a landmark album in the metalcore genre and was well praised upon its release by fans and critics . The lyrics , which were all written by vocalist Jesse Leach , were aimed to bring a positive message through the music . 
 Shortly after the release of Alive or Just Breathing , Leach left the band for personal and health issues . Killswitch Engage quickly recruited Howard Jones to replace Leach . Jones would stay in the band for nearly ten years , until his departure in early 2012 , which prompted Leach to rejoin the band on the ten @-@ year anniversary of Alive or Just Breathing . This is also the last album to feature Dutkiewicz on drums , as he would switch to guitar before the touring process . The drumming position was filled by Tom Gomes . 
 = = Background = = 
 In June 2000 , Killswitch Engage released their debut album , titled Killswitch Engage through Ferret Records . The band got its recording deal as a favor for the artwork bassist Mike D 'Antonio created for Ferret . The label 's CEO , Carl Severson signed the band without a contract simply to get the album out to the public because he thought the album " ruled " , and stated " I had a one @-@ off deal and when I knew they wanted to go someplace bigger , I figured it was in my best interest , as their friend , to make the best thing happen for them . " After the album was released , Severson showed it to Roadrunner Records A & R man , Mike Gitter . 
 Gitter played the album for other Roadrunner employees and stated " The feeling was this was something that touched upon classic metal , pulls it up through hardcore , and creates something fairly new and completely exciting . When their music started circulating around the office , there was an immediate ' Holy ... this is great ! ' feeling about it . People weren 't halfway about it . " Gitter offered to sign the band to the label and felt that signing Killswitch Engage was the label 's last chance to have any heavy metal bands on the roster . The band was apprehensive at first , judging by the artist roster of Roadrunner at the time , but after nearly six months of deliberation , Killswitch Engage signed to Roadrunner due to the opportunities provided for them . After signing , the band began work on their major label debut , which would become Alive or Just Breathing . Gitter has claimed that signing Killswitch Engage was the most gratifying signing of his career . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 In summer of 2001 , Killswitch Engage recorded a demo produced by drummer / guitarist Adam Dutkiewicz which featured the songs " Transfiguration " ( which would later become " Fixation on the Darkness " ) , " Just Barely Breathing " , and " Numbered Days " . After giving the demo to Roadrunner , the label agreed to let Dutkiewicz produce Alive or Just Breathing because they were impressed with his production skills . 
 As Killswitch Engage started writing for Alive or Just Breathing , then @-@ guitarist Pete Cortese , who co @-@ wrote " Fixation on the Darkness " , left the band to spend more with his family . The music for Alive or Just Breathing was all written by Dutkiewicz , D 'Antonio , and guitarist Joel Stroetzel , while all of the lyrics were written by singer Jesse Leach . After completing the composition for the album , the band knew they would need to find a second guitarist to play with Stroetzel , because Alive or Just Breathing was written for two guitarists during live performances . 
 Taking into account that this would be the band 's first album on a major label , Killswitch Engage was adamant on making the best album that they could . This required Dutkiewicz to spend more time in the studio producing and writing songs as a whole , rather than just a collection of guitar riffs put together . D 'Antonio stated the writing process for the record went very fast as he wrote the " <unk> , hardcore " style riffs , Stroetzel wrote the thrash metal styled riffs , and Dutkiewicz wrote the " catchy " choruses . Leach said that his main goal when writing lyrics was to be used as an instrument to shine the light of God through his music . He felt that music lyrics in general featured too much negativity and wanted to have positivity shown in his . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 On November 3 , 2001 , Killswitch Engage entered Zing Studios in Westfield , Massachusetts to begin recording Alive or Just Breathing . Upon entering the studio , the album already had its title , derived from a lyric in the song " Just Barely Breathing . " The band members all had jobs and some were going to school during the recording of the album , so each member came in for short periods as they had time available . Stroetzel said this was helpful , as it reduced stress , but regretted that they were not able to get more done in one session . A problem that D 'Antonio , Dutkiewicz , and Stroetzel encountered was keeping their guitars in tune during the sessions . They spent a large amount of the recording budget buying new guitars to improve the tuning . Since the recording of Alive or Just Breathing , they have learned how to keep in tune better as they record . 
 Jesse Leach had troubles gaining confidence as he was recording his vocals , but was determined to make them a " masterpiece " . Leach spoke of Dutkiewicz and recording vocals stating , " I definitely hand it to Adam D. – he 's the man . We 're taking our time , dissecting things . It 's made me push myself to my limits – getting a lot more passion and deliver out of what I 'm doing . " After struggling with nervousness for a while , Dutkiewicz and Leach went to Leach 's home in Rhode Island to finish recording vocals . Mike Gitter was reluctant to hear of this when Killswitch Engage turned the record into Roadrunner , but was ultimately pleased with the results . Before the completion of the record , the band brought in Tom Gomes to play drums as Dutkiewicz moved to the empty guitar position . Though Dutkiewicz recorded most of the drums himself , Gomes provided additional percussion on the album , before he was an official member of the band . Backing vocals on Alive or Just Breathing were done by Leach , Dutkiewicz , as well as Dutkiewicz 's sister Becka , and All That Remains singer Philip Labonte . 
 During the Alive or Just Breathing recording sessions , Killswitch Engage recorded 15 songs . Three of the songs were re @-@ recordings of songs from the band 's debut album . Stroetzel stated that the band decided to re @-@ record " Temple From the Within " , " <unk> Infra " , and " In the <unk> " because at the time , Killswitch Engage was unsure of how many people would ever hear Killswitch Engage because it was released through a small label . " Temple From the Within " and " <unk> Infra " made it onto Alive or Just Breathing . " In the <unk> " and two newly written songs titled " When the Balance is Broken " and " Untitled and <unk> " respectively , did not make it on to the album , but would eventually be heard on the 2005 reissue of Alive or Just Breathing . 
 Alive or Just Breathing was mixed in February 2002 at Backstage Productions in Ripley , Derbyshire , UK by Andy Sneap . Dutkiewicz brought the album to the UK and oversaw the mixing process . The band chose Sneap after hearing good things about his work . The band and label were both very pleased with the mix , and Dutkiewicz in particular noted his satisfaction with the drum tones . 
 = = = Artwork and packaging = = = 
 Mike D 'Antonio owns a graphic design company called <unk> Designs and has made album covers and various other pieces of art ( T @-@ shirts , posters , logos , etc . ) for bands such as Shadows Fall , All That Remains , Crowbar among others . Killswitch Engage made sure to have written in their contract with Roadrunner that D 'Antonio would produce all of the band 's artwork . D 'Antonio stated about the cover of Alive or Just Breathing , " I wanted something that looked ' old school cut @-@ and @-@ paste ' for the cover . Something with texture that appeared like it was just laid down and photographed . I remember Roadrunner hating the cover , saying there was too much going on and nothing to focus on . I told them I did not agree , and that some day they would get it . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Alive or Just Breathing was released on May 21 , 2002 . Killswitch Engage filmed a music video for the song " My Last Serenade " , which gained heavy rotation on MTV 's Headbanger 's Ball and propelled the album to number 37 on Billboard 's Top Heatseekers chart . Alive or Just Breathing also stayed at number one on CMJ 's Loud Rock radio chart for over a month . By the time the band 's third album , The End of Heartache was released , Alive or Just Breathing sold 114 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . Music videos were also filmed for " Life to Lifeless " and " Fixation on the Darkness " . Upon the release of the album , Killswitch Engage embarked on their first nationwide tour , supporting Soilwork and Hypocrisy and would tour for the next year in support of Alive or Just Breathing . Other legs of the tour featured the band touring with acts such as Kittie , Poison the Well , Shadows Fall , and <unk> . 
 Missing his wife whom he had married two weeks prior to the tour , Jesse Leach left Killswitch Engage in the middle of their first national tour . With a combination of depression , missing his wife , and throat problems , Leach sent D 'Antonio an email just a few days before the band was scheduled to play a show , announcing his departure . D 'Antonio stated in an interview that " after three years of hanging out with the dude , and considering him a brother , to just get an email was a little bit harsh . " Killswitch Engage very quickly set up auditions to fill the vocalist position in the band and eventually settled on Howard Jones , who was at the time the frontman of Blood Has Been Shed . Jones very quickly had to learn a set of songs to tour with the band . Leach and the rest of the band quickly reconciled and remained close friends . 
 After the touring process for the album was over , Tom Gomes left the band and was replaced by Justin Foley . This line @-@ up of Killswitch Engage would last until early 2012 , when Jones left the band . Following Jones ' departure , Jesse Leach rejoined the band on the ten @-@ year anniversary of Alive or Just Breathing . 
 In 2005 , as part of Roadrunner 's 25th anniversary , the label re @-@ released Alive or Just Breathing as a special edition . The re @-@ release included a bonus enhanced cd with all of the songs left over from the album 's recording sessions , as well as a re @-@ recorded version of " Fixation on the Darkness " , featuring Jones on lead vocals , a track of studio outtakes and music videos for " My Last Serenade " , " Fixation on the Darkness " , and " Life to Lifeless " . The special edition also included expanded artwork and a biography documenting the recording and release of the album . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critical reception of Alive or Just Breathing was generally positive . Erik Thomas from <unk> said " while this album certainly is responsible for the vast amount of saturation , it stands as a pretty trendsetting , stellar must @-@ own example of metalcore . " Jason D. Taylor of AllMusic stated " This is a pure metal album that seemingly has ignored any fashionable trend and instead relies solely on skill and expertise to sculpt some of meatiest heavy metal since the glory days of Metallica and Slayer . " Taylor also expressed the impressiveness of the band 's " do @-@ it @-@ yourself " work ethic as Dutkiewicz handled all production and D 'Antonio " took the time to give much thought on the album 's packaging and art direction . " Dom Lawson of Kerrang ! magazine gave the album five " Ks " ( or five out of five stars ) . He praised the album 's unique new sound , music , and vocal performances from Leach . Kevin Boyce of CMJ said , " This album is more addictive than crack cocaine that 's been smothered in caffeine and nicotine and drenched with chocolate . Starting with the track ' Numbered Days , ' this 12 @-@ track platter never takes its foot off of the throttle . " Boyce also stated his favorite song from the album was " My Last Serenade , " and applauded " Just Barely Breathing , " comparing parts of it to Metallica 's Ride the Lightning . 
 Reviewing the 2005 re @-@ release of the album , Scott Alisoglu of Blabbermouth.net said that Alive or Just Breathing is " one special album " and that its release " marked a defining moment in metal . " Alisoglu also viewed the album as one of the greatest albums of 2002 and of " the new century . " Alive or Just Breathing is one of only 21 albums to have a perfect site rating on <unk> In 2009 , MetalSucks compiled a list of the " 21 Best Metal Albums of the 21st Century So Far " based on the opinions of various musicians , managers , publicists , label representatives and writers , where Alive or Just Breathing was placed at number four on the list . Noisecreep posted a list of the top 10 best metal albums of the past decade in 2010 , where the album was listed at number six . 
 In a review for 411mania.com , <unk> Manes stated his dislike for the melodic " smooth parts " that he felt were too repetitious throughout Alive or Just Breathing , however he praised the album 's production and positive lyrics . Jesse Leach stated there was a small portion of Killswitch Engage fans who disliked his use of clean singing on the album . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Jesse Leach . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Killswitch Engage 
 Jesse Leach – lead vocals 
 Joel Stroetzel – lead guitar , rhythm guitar 
 Mike D 'Antonio – bass guitar 
 Adam Dutkiewicz – drums , guitars , piano , backing vocals , production , engineering 
 Additional musicians 
 Becka Dutkiewicz – backing vocals 
 Philip Labonte – backing vocals 
 Tom Gomes – additional drumming 
 Howard Jones - lead vocals on " Fixation on the Darkness ( re @-@ recorded version ) 
 Technical staff and photography 
 Andy Sneap – mixing and mastering 
 Daniel Moss – photography 
 Mike D 'Antonio – art direction and design 
 = Jack Crawford ( cricketer ) = 
 John Neville " Jack " Crawford ( 1 December 1886 – 2 May 1963 ) was an English first @-@ class cricketer who played mainly for Surrey and South Australia . An amateur , he played as an all @-@ rounder . As a right @-@ handed batsman , Crawford had a reputation for scoring quickly and hitting powerful shots . He bowled medium @-@ paced off spin and was noted for his accuracy and his ability to make the ball turn sharply from the pitch . Unusually for a first @-@ class cricketer , Crawford wore spectacles while playing . 
 Crawford established a reputation as an outstanding cricketer while still a schoolboy . He played Test cricket for England before he was 21 years old , and successfully toured Australia with the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) in 1907 – 08 . He played only 12 matches for England , although critics believed he had a great future in the sport and was a potential future England captain . In two successive English seasons , he completed the double of 1 @,@ 000 runs and 100 wickets in first @-@ class games . 
 A dispute over the composition of a Surrey side chosen to play a high @-@ profile game in 1909 , after several professional players were omitted for disciplinary reasons , led to an increasingly bitter argument between Crawford and the Surrey authorities . Crawford was told he had no future with the club , and moved to Australia . There , he worked as a teacher and continued his cricket career with South Australia . This arrangement had a controversial end , when he clashed with the South Australian Cricket Association over money and moved to New Zealand to play for Otago . 
 That relationship also ended badly , and he left Otago before being conscripted into the New Zealand armed forces near the end of the First World War . When he was demobilised , he returned to England and made his peace with Surrey . He played a handful of games between 1919 and 1921 but faded out of first @-@ class cricket to pursue a career in industry . In all first @-@ class cricket , Crawford scored 9 @,@ 488 runs at an average of 32 @.@ 60 and took 815 wickets at an average of 20 @.@ 66 . Although he continued to play cricket at a lower level , the remainder of Crawford 's life passed in relative obscurity . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Jack Crawford was born on 1 December 1886 at Cane Hill , Coulsdon , Surrey , the youngest of three sons to the Rev John Charles Crawford and his wife Alice ; the couple also had three daughters . Crawford senior was the chaplain at the recently opened Cane Hill Asylum , in the grounds of which Crawford was born . He grew up in a cricketing environment . His father and uncle , Frank Crawford , played first @-@ class cricket for Kent ; his brothers Vivian and Reginald were also first @-@ class cricketers . The whole family played cricket and encouraged Crawford from a young age , and from the age of eleven he regularly played with adults . 
 After attending <unk> School in Eastbourne , Crawford went to St Winifred 's School in Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames where , in his two years in the cricket team , he scored 2 @,@ 093 runs and took 366 wickets . In 1902 , Crawford moved to Repton School . Reaching the cricket team in his first year , he remained in the eleven until he left the school in 1905 . His impact was considerable . A 1906 report in Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack rated him as one of the best three schoolboy cricketers in the previous 40 years , only matched by A. G. Steel and Stanley Jackson . Cricket historians similarly praised his cricket at Repton . Benny Green notes that his prolific achievements " created ... chaos among schoolboy cricketers . " Gerald Brodribb describes him as " probably the best ever " schoolboy cricketer . 
 By 1904 , Crawford dominated the Repton team . He scored 759 runs and his 75 wickets were more than the combined total of all the other bowlers in the team . He was particularly effective in the school 's most important fixtures . The report in Wisden described him as possibly the best amateur bowler in England that year : he bowled medium @-@ paced off spin , although he varied the speed of his delivery from slow to fast . Surrey County Cricket Club took an interest in Crawford almost immediately , calling him to a trial in 1903 . Following his achievements in 1904 , he was invite to play for the county . The county club was in the midst of a spell of uncertainty ; several men captained the team , but only for a handful of matches each . The composition of the side continually changed , and the team performed poorly , causing unrest among supporters accustomed to success . Crawford was just one of many players brought in as an experiment , albeit one of the most successful . He made his first @-@ class debut against Kent . Taking three wickets and top @-@ scoring in Surrey 's first innings with 54 , Crawford did well enough to retain his place for another seven games , and was praised in the press for his performances . Against Gloucestershire , he took seven wickets for 43 runs in the second innings , and a total of ten wickets in the match . In the season as a whole he took 44 first @-@ class wickets at an average of 16 @.@ 93 to top the county 's bowling averages , and scored 229 runs at an average of 16 @.@ 35 . 
 Although hampered by injuries during the 1905 season for Repton , his last at the school , Crawford scored 766 runs with a batting average of 85 . In the five matches in which he was fit to bowl he took 55 wickets at an average under 13 . In the August holidays , he returned to play for Surrey . In his second game , he took seven for 90 against Yorkshire and in his third , he scored his maiden first @-@ class century — 119 not out against Derbyshire — to become the youngest centurion for the county , a record that was not broken until 2013 . Later , he took eight for 24 against Northamptonshire and scored 142 not out against Leicestershire . At the end of the season , he played in the Hastings Festival , appearing in several representative games for teams representing the South of England and played for the Rest of England against the County Champions Yorkshire . Crawford finished second in Surrey 's batting averages for 1905 ; in all first @-@ class games he scored 543 runs at an average of 33 @.@ 93 and took 47 wickets at an average of 18 @.@ 46 . As the season ended , he was invited by the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) to join their tour of South Africa that winter . 
 = = International cricketer = = 
 = = = Tour to South Africa = = = 
 Having finished his school career , Crawford joined the first MCC tour of South Africa in the 1905 – 06 season . The team was not particularly strong — before the tour , critics judged it to possess the equivalent strength of a moderate county side . The MCC was criticised by the press in both England and South Africa for omitting many of the strongest players . As the youngest member of the team , Crawford was given the traditional role of writing press reports to be sent back home during the tour . When the team played in Worcester during the tour , the local press carried a report that Crawford planned to remain in South Africa . The 1906 Wisden carried the same story ; in a comment on his success in 1905 , it suggested that it was uncertain for how long he would play , and questioned whether , if he played Test cricket , he would do so for England or South Africa . The cricket historian Nigel Hart queries why Wisden mentioned South Africa ; Crawford 's only known connection came through his uncle , who had left South Africa five years before . 
 In all first @-@ class matches on the tour , Crawford scored 531 runs at an average of 31 @.@ 23 , coming third in the tour batting averages , and took 34 wickets at an average of 18 @.@ 44 , placing him fifth among the regular bowlers in the team . In the early tour matches , Crawford recorded two five wicket hauls and scored 98 . He made his Test match debut for England against South Africa in the first Test at the age of 19 years and 32 days to become England 's youngest Test cricketer , a record he held until Brian Close made his debut in 1949 . Batting at number six , Crawford scored 44 runs in the first innings and 43 in the second ; he took a wicket with his first delivery , bowling Bert Vogler . He was wicketless in the second innings , and bowled inaccurately as the home side recorded a one @-@ wicket win . Wisden noted that Crawford batted well in both innings . After a month of cricket in between the Tests , during which Crawford scored 212 in a minor game , the English team were suffering from fatigue when the remaining matches were played . In the second Test , Crawford was promoted to open the batting , a position he retained for most of the series . In the final match , he scored 74 , his first Test fifty and the highest score of his Test career . His best bowling also came in the final match , where he took three for 69 . 
 In the Test series , Crawford scored 281 runs at an average of 31 @.@ 22 and took nine wickets at 35 @.@ 77 . England lost the series 4 – 1 , finding it difficult to bat against the South African googly bowlers . Wisden 's tour report described Crawford 's batting as one of the few positives for his side . Writing home during the tour , the MCC captain Pelham Warner frequently praised Crawford and the extent of his ability at a young age . The English press even parodied what Crawford 's biographer , Michael Burns , describes as Warner 's " near @-@ obsession " with Crawford . Other critics believed that Crawford should have been more successful as a bowler but was distracted by the matting surfaces used in South Africa ; because he was able to make the ball bounce and turn extravagantly from the surface , he tried to spin the ball too much and lost accuracy as a result . 
 = = = Surrey cricketer = = = 
 Returning to England for the 1906 season , Crawford completed the double of 1 @,@ 000 runs and 100 wickets in first @-@ class cricket , the youngest player at the time to accomplish this feat . Against Gloucestershire , he scored 148 and then took seven for 85 and four for 63 with the ball ; he also took ten wickets in his next game . In total , he compiled 1 @,@ 174 runs at an average of 30 @.@ 10 , and took 118 wickets at an average of 20 @.@ 28 . These performances earned him selection for the representative Gentlemen versus Players matches at both Lord 's and The Oval , in which he played for the amateur Gentlemen . At the end of the season , he was chosen as one of Wisden 's Cricketers of the Year . The citation said : " Few cricketers have won equal fame at so early an age " , and noted the unusual ease with which he had moved into first @-@ class cricket . Crawford 's powerful batting and straight hitting were praised , as was his accurate bowling . The report also stated : " That he should have done all this is the more astonishing from the fact that he invariably plays in glasses . No one handicapped in this way has ever been so consistently successful both as batsman and bowler . " 
 Crawford had a reputation by this stage as a batsman who favoured aggressive , powerful shots and his performances drew in crowds . In 1907 , in the space of a few days , he hit deliveries in two different matches through the windows of both the home and the visitors ' dressing rooms at The Oval . Towards the end of the season , he scored 103 runs in 90 minutes against Kent , his only century that year , hitting several deliveries into the crowd ; The Times described the ball in this innings as " soaring away like a bird " . Crawford 's overall batting record was similar to the previous season : he scored 1 @,@ 158 runs at an average of 30 @.@ 47 . With the ball , he took 124 wickets at 16 @.@ 95 , completing his second double . Once again , he was selected in both Gentlemen v Players matches , taking six for 54 in the second , and was chosen to play two of the three Test matches against South Africa . These were his only Test matches in England ; he scored 26 runs in three innings and was wicketless after bowling 29 overs . He missed England 's victory in the second match , the only match in the series not to be a draw , but Wisden 's correspondent believed that the pitch conditions for that game made it a mistake to leave Crawford out . Despite his lack of success in the Tests , Crawford was invited to tour Australia that winter even before the South African series was complete ; he suggested to the press that he might remain in Australia after the tour . 
 = = = Tour to Australia = = = 
 The MCC team which toured Australia in 1907 — 08 , like that which toured South Africa , faced questions about its strength . Because at least four first @-@ choice players chose not to tour , and another was not selected despite strong claims , the team was less representative than usual for an Ashes series . The tourists lost the Tests 4 – 1 , although Wisden suggested that the series was more competitive than suggested by the results . 
 Crawford began the tour well , taking seven wickets in the opening first @-@ class match against Western Australia . In the second game , he scored 114 runs in 58 minutes against South Australia , the fastest first @-@ class century scored in Australia until then , followed by bowling figures of five for 40 in the second innings . Crawford contributed little more with bat or ball in the lead @-@ up to the Test series ; in England , the cricketer Gilbert Jessop wrote an article suggesting that Crawford had become an " unsound " batsman . He scarcely bowled in the first Test , won by Australia , and both the English and Australian press were critical of his bowling . Frederick Fane , the acting @-@ captain of England , seemed to share this view in the second Test , withholding Crawford from the attack for some time . However , Crawford took five for 79 in the first innings helped to restrict Australia on a good batting pitch and took eight wickets in the match as England levelled the series . 
 Australia won the remaining games to win the series . In the third match , Crawford scored his only half @-@ century of the series , hitting 62 out of England 's 363 to help his team build up a first innings lead . However , Australia scored 506 at the second attempt , during which Crawford bowled nearly 46 overs to take three for 113 . The series was settled in the fourth Test ; Australia recorded a big victory after rain affected the pitch and created difficult batting conditions during England 's first innings . On the first day , Crawford took five for 48 , his best Test figures , as Australia were bowled out for 214 on a very good pitch . Wisden noted Crawford " [ mixed ] up his pace with remarkable skill " . By this stage of the tour , the press looked on him much more favourably , and he received praise for his performances . However , his heavy workload with the ball affected his health ; he lost a stone in weight during the tour , and before the final Test a Melbourne doctor diagnosed that he had " strained the right side of his heart " and advised that he see a specialist . Crawford played in that game , won by Australia , despite his ill health , with several other players unfit , and the tour manager later wrote that he looked poorly throughout and should not have played . Nevertheless , he bowled 54 overs and took eight wickets in the match . 
 Wisden considered Crawford 's bowling to be one of the most successful features of the tour and praised his ability to spin the ball , reporting : " It was said of Crawford that even on the most perfect wickets he could at times make the ball break back . " He led the English Test bowling averages with 30 wickets at an average of 24 @.@ 73 . His batting was less productive than expected ; in five Tests , he scored 162 runs at an average of 18 @.@ 00 , batting usually at number eight . In all first @-@ class matches on the tour , he scored 610 runs at 26 @.@ 52 and took 66 wickets at 25 @.@ 19 . Crawford 's contributions enhanced his growing reputation and critics expected his cricket to go from strength to strength . Australian batsman Clem Hill commented : " There are grand cricketers in this game , and then there is Jack Crawford . " The final game in the series turned out to be Crawford 's last Test . In 12 Test matches , he had scored 469 runs at an average of 22 @.@ 33 and took 39 wickets at 29 @.@ 48 . 
 As the tour neared its completion , the Australian press reported that Crawford planned to remain in Australia , that he had attracted the attention of several " society " women , and had become engaged . Even so , he returned to England when the tour ended . In May 1909 , he published a book about the tour , JN Crawford 's Trip to " Kangaroo " land . 
 = = Dispute with Surrey = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 During the 1908 season , Crawford narrowly failed to complete his third double . He scored 1 @,@ 371 runs at an average of 37 @.@ 05 and took 98 wickets at 21 @.@ 48 . His season began with a probable dispute over the Surrey captaincy . H. D. G. Leveson Gower had been appointed captain for 1908 but the combination of an injury and his marriage left him unavailable for four matches near the beginning of the season . Crawford also missed the beginning of the season ; a newspaper article by Albert Trott , a former Australian Test all @-@ rounder now playing for Middlesex , suggested that Crawford withdrew from the team because he was not appointed captain in Leveson Gower 's absence . Instead Harry Bush , who had not played first @-@ class cricket for five years , led the team . Trott was sympathetic to Crawford , stating that the Surrey committee went out of their way " to inflict a most undeserved slight " on Crawford . 
 In the remainder of the season , Crawford scored 232 against Somerset , his highest first @-@ class score , as well as centuries against Derbyshire and Hampshire . The increased strength and variety of Surrey 's bowling attack restricted his opportunities ; he was used less as a strike bowler and bowled fewer overs than in the previous season . Contemporary reports suggested that his performances tailed off as the season progressed , possibly through tiredness from having played too much cricket , and that he became a less accurate bowler through trying too hard to spin the ball . The Surrey captaincy remained unsettled ; Crawford led the team on several occasions , including Surrey 's final game of the season , when his brother Vivian captained Leicestershire , their opponents . 
 Crawford , who played as an amateur but was not independently wealthy , received an increased expenses allowance during 1908 , but other financial dealings with the committee were less successful : they paid his laundry bills in 1905 , but refused to do so afterwards ; additionally , they refused his request in 1907 to have part of his expenses paid for matches that he missed , as happened with the wages of professionals . His financial problems were compounded by his inability to find a suitable job , and the Surrey committee threatened that he " ought not to be played on the same terms " unless he " [ commenced ] to earn his livelihood " . 
 Crawford 's performances in the 1909 season were less effective than in previous years . He began well , but was later hampered by an injury which prevented him from bowling . His batting average also fell . Surrey experienced disciplinary problems with several of their professional players during the season . The club president , Lord Alverstone , favoured amateurs , arguing that a losing amateur team was preferable to a professional side that won ; several professionals were left out in favour of amateurs . Apart from adversely affecting some players ' careers , this preference had destabilised the team over several seasons . Crawford disagreed with Alverstone , but nevertheless frequently assumed the leadership in the absence of the regular captain Leveson Gower for much of the season . He captained Surrey to a win over the touring Australian team early in 1909 after a strong performance by the professional bowler Tom Rushby . However , his captaincy was strongly criticised in the press , particularly over his management of the bowling . Around this time , Crawford 's form declined . With the bat , he was often dismissed attempting aggressive shots , and he lost his effectiveness as a bowler . As a result , he was not chosen for the Gentlemen and missed selection in the Ashes series . The press continued to criticise his captaincy , despite Surrey 's good results under his leadership . Burns notes : " For a young man with no experience of prolonged failure on the cricket field , this was almost certainly a traumatic time . " 
 Surrey had other problems at this time . When the team arrived in Chesterfield to play Derbyshire , eight of the professionals were arrested following an incident in the street ; the matter was cleared up and the press suggested that the police had been over @-@ eager . The county subsequently defeated Derbyshire by an innings in early July ; Rushby and his fellow professionals Walter Lees and W. C. Smith were very successful with the ball . Shortly after this , Rushby and Lees were involved in an incident of some kind — the exact details are unknown . Leveson Gower suspended them , making them unavailable for Surrey 's second match against the Australians . Crawford was asked to lead the team for that game , but with Rushby and Lees omitted , another bowler missing and himself unable to bowl owing to a shoulder injury , he considered the attack too weak . Consequently , he refused the captaincy , and apologised to the Australians for the selection of what he thought a substandard side . In Crawford 's absence , Surrey were led by the professional Tom Hayward ; the match , affected by rain , was drawn . 
 = = = Correspondence and split = = = 
 The cricket press noticed the absence of Crawford and the professionals from Surrey 's team over the following games , and noted that Crawford was now playing club cricket . Meanwhile , Alverstone wrote to Crawford that the Surrey committee fully supported Leveson Gower 's decision to omit Rushby and Lees , and told him that Surrey would not select him again unless he apologised to Leveson Gower . Crawford refused , writing to Alverstone : " I do not know who was responsible for the selection of the second eleven sort of team furnished up for such an important match ... There seems to be some impression amongst a few of the Surrey committee that I am some young professional instead of being a young fellow who has had an experience of cricket that has seldom fallen to the lot of anyone , and my request for an alteration of the team should have had some weight " . In his History of Cricket , Benny Green describes the letter as evidence of a " literate and quietly self @-@ confident young man who will not easily be manipulated . " 
 Alverstone replied that he " regretted " Crawford 's views ; the committee respected Crawford as a " brilliant amateur with great experience " , but Crawford had not supported his captain — a prime duty for an amateur . Crawford replied that he had been unaware of the reason for the suspensions of Rushby and Lees — which Alverstone and the committee disputed — and would have supported Leveson Gower , but suggested it was unfair to ask him to captain a weak bowling team and then demand he apologise for preferring not to . He also observed that the players omitted from the team against the Australians had since been restored to the county side , making their exclusion harder to understand in the first place . 
 At this point Leveson Gower withdrew his invitation for Crawford to appear at the Scarborough Festival ; Leveson Gower also prevented Crawford 's selection for the MCC winter tour of South Africa . Crawford 's father wrote to the Surrey committee in support of his son . By the beginning of August 1909 , two weeks after the match against the Australians , the Surrey committee severed their connection with Crawford ; Leveson Gower felt that he had shown the " deepest ingratitude " . Wisden reported : " The committee were much incensed and passed a resolution that Crawford be not again asked to play for the county . " Informed of his expulsion by letter , Crawford replied to the committee a final time : " I fail to see why I should practically be branded as a criminal because , as acting captain , I declined the responsibility of skippering a team which did not include three essential players , an independence which I trust will remain in spite of the awful example made of me to every amateur in the United Kingdom . " 
 The Surrey committee initially attempted to keep the dispute private , but Crawford sent copies of the letters to the newspapers , explaining in a letter that he wished to end speculation about his absence from the Surrey team . Burns notes that this " [ generated ] a strong response from the public , mainly unsympathetic to the young amateur " in the letters pages of many newspapers . Many commentators felt that the argument could have been resolved easily had either side made concessions . Green comments that the committee probably either expected Crawford to back down , or were happy to sacrifice him to establish their authority . Another of the players involved , Rushby , left Surrey at the end of the season to play league cricket , but later returned to the team . Crawford 's father made a further attempt to end the dispute between Surrey and his son in 1910 , asking the committee to reverse their decision . Wisden reported that Alverstone declined on the grounds that it would suggest a lack of confidence in the committee , but that if Crawford " came forward in a sportsmanlike way [ Alverstone ] would be proud to give his personal support to the step proposed . This of course meant that an apology was expected . " 
 In his History of Cricket , Green contended that the " Surrey committee must be held accountable for a degree of idiocy rarely met with even in the realms of cricket administration " for the way they dealt with Crawford , " one of the world 's most prodigious all @-@ rounders . " Hart observes that Crawford was challenging figures high up in the cricket establishment on the Surrey committee ; he also suggests that Crawford 's actions in his later career , and the complaints made against him by other cricket authorities , reveal a stubbornness in his character and suggest he was not merely a victim of the Surrey committee . The Times speculated that factors other than the dispute may have contributed to Surrey 's decision . Burns believes that Crawford was feeling pressure from several directions : his inability to secure a job , possible frustration at the controlling influence of his father , a desire to be independent , his poor run of form and criticism of his captaincy . Even though , according to Burns , it was an " unwinnable battle " , he suggests simply : " Young Jack was in the mood for a fight . " 
 At the end of the season , Crawford played his last matches in England for 10 years , appearing for an " England XI " against the Australians and for the Gentlemen of the South . He had previously discussed emigrating to Australia with the Australian Test player Victor Trumper , who had asked Clem Hill to investigate a potential teaching post at St Peter 's College , Adelaide . Originally , assuming that he would be part of the MCC tour to South Africa , he planned to take take up his position in March 1910 . When the dispute arose , Crawford sent a telegram to inform the college he would take up the post of " Resident Master " early in 1910 , for a salary of £ 160 per year . Burns suggests that this knowledge that he had the offer of work may have prompted him to take a stand against the Surrey committee . In October 1910 he was offered the position of " Ordinary Master " at the college , and £ 50 towards his travel expenses if he departed immediately . He left England by boat two days later , seen off by his family . No cricket figures saw his departure , but there was considerable interest from the press . 
 = = Later career = = 
 = = = Cricket in South Australia = = = 
 At St Peter 's School , Crawford combined his teaching role with supervision of sports , including acting as coach for the cricket team . On several occasions , he had to request leave from the headmaster to play first @-@ class cricket . After arriving in Australia in December 1909 , he was playing district cricket for East Torrens within a week , and played in South Australia 's last three matches in the Sheffield Shield competition ; the team went on to win the trophy for the first time since 1893 – 94 . Crawford played a large part in this success . There was some controversy over his eligibility to play ; New South Wales initially protested , but there was a precedent for ignoring the requirement of a three @-@ month qualification period , and the New South Wales Cricket Association ( NSWCA ) Executive Committee accepted this in the case of Crawford , to the displeasure of the full NSWCA . Over four seasons , Crawford played 22 matches for South Australia , scoring 1 @,@ 512 runs at an average of 40 @.@ 86 and taking 120 wickets at 23 @.@ 86 . Green suggests that such a performance would have earned him Test selection if he had been Australian , and Wisden noted that his record in Australia was impressive . 
 In the 1910 – 11 Australian season , Crawford scored a half @-@ century in every first @-@ class game he played but was less successful with the ball . His success against the touring South Africans , perhaps helped by his experience facing their googly bowlers on previous occasions , brought him close to selection for the Australian Test team that year . The Australian Board of Control eventually decided that , as he had already appeared for England , they could not choose him ; instead they picked Charlie Kelleway as the all @-@ rounder . Crawford resigned from his position as St Peter 's in March 1911 , suggesting to the press that he might move into farming . He may have considered leaving South Australia , but the Cricket Association appointed him as a clerk at the Adelaide Oval , a position which earned £ 200 per annum , with additional responsibility for coaching and youth scouting . Meanwhile , in England , after unsuccessful attempts by his father to change the mind of the Surrey committee , including a failed bid to secure his own election to the committee , Crawford sent a written apology to Surrey at some time in 1910 . Consequently , the committee passed a motion in March 1911 which ended the ban on Crawford playing for the county . 
 Press rumours over the following 12 months cast doubt on Crawford 's future , suggestions including a return to England for the 1912 season . Instead , he remained with South Australia in the 1911 – 12 season . Although less successful generally , he played for a non @-@ representative Australian XI against the MCC touring team which contested the Ashes that season and scored 110 in as many minutes against bowlers including Sydney Barnes , at the time regarded as the greatest bowler in the world . The following season , in which South Australia again won the Shield , Crawford took seven for 31 against Western Australia , including a hat @-@ trick , and scored 163 in 177 minutes against Victoria before taking eight for 66 in their first innings . 
 In 1913 , Crawford was included in an Australian team which toured North America . The team was organised by Edgar Mayne , a South Australian batsman who tried to secure backing from the Australian Board of Control to make it an official representative team , but the Board refused to do so . In all matches , Crawford scored over 1 @,@ 000 runs and took over 200 wickets , and he was particularly effective as a bowler in the matches designated first @-@ class . He later stated that this was the best tour he had been on ; more press rumours suggested that he would return to England at the conclusion of the tour , but he returned to Australia with the rest of the team . 
 = = = Further controversy = = = 
 In December 1913 , Crawford wrote to the South Australian Cricket Association ( SACA ) asking for a six @-@ month leave of absence and a guaranteed renewal of his contract . The SACA described his letter as " arrogant " before eventually granting his request and offering him a three @-@ year contract worth around £ 300 per year , including coaching fees . In effect , he wanted to double his salary or leave to seek a position in New Zealand . Describing these events , Hart comments : " Crawford 's financial dealings with the SACA reveal him both as mercenary and as an awkward ' cuss ' . The latter aspect of his personality needs to be taken into account lest he be considered merely an establishment victim in his parting with Surrey " . On the field , Crawford was successful in 1913 – 14 . He took 34 wickets , and against New South Wales he hit 91 in 89 minutes before taking 10 wickets ; against Victoria he took eleven wickets . This latter match was his last for South Australia . Later in 1914 , Crawford toured New Zealand with an Australian team — assembled without the approval of the Australian Board of Control — which contained many leading players , under the captaincy of the former Canterbury batsman Arthur Sims . In first @-@ class games on this tour Crawford took 21 wickets and scored a century , but his most notable innings came in a minor match . Against the " XV of South Canterbury " , he scored 354 in five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter hours , striking 14 sixes and 45 fours . He and Victor Trumper shared a partnership of 298 in 69 minutes , and Monty Noble helped him to score 50 runs in 9 minutes as the Australian team scored 922 for nine . 
 In March 1914 , the Otago Cricket Association ( OCA ) offered Crawford a three @-@ year contract worth £ 350 per year , and a share in the management of a sports store , to play for them . Briefly returning to Adelaide after the tour , he resigned from his South Australia contract before moving to Dunedin in June 1914 . The South Australian Cricket Association were widely criticised for failing to retain Crawford ; in their defence , the committee publicly stated that Crawford had been offered an increased deal and had promised to turn down any offers made to him in New Zealand , but went back on his word . Later historians — Nigel Hart in his biography of Crawford , and Chris Harte in his A History of Australian Cricket ( 1993 ) — condemned Crawford as arrogant and mercenary for his behaviour towards South Australia . Harte also suggests that Crawford left Australia with many debts . Burns , however , suggests that Crawford may have wanted to maximise his earnings to support his upcoming marriage , and notes that his South Australian team @-@ mates held no grudges and even organised a farewell presentation . Once in his new position , Crawford immediately organised a Colts team which produced several future Otago players . While qualifying to play for Otago , he played club cricket in Dunedin , scoring 559 runs and taking 88 wickets . During the 1914 – 15 season he appeared in four first @-@ class games for Otago , in which he scored 337 runs and took 30 wickets . He briefly returned to Australia in 1915 to marry Anita Schmidt in Melbourne in April . Schmidt — from Adelaide and described in the society press as a " beauty " — and Crawford met in 1912 when the former was 18 years old and became well @-@ known as a couple at fashionable events in Adelaide . Burns suggests that the wedding took place in Melbourne rather than Adelaide because Crawford may have been avoiding his creditors . Two days after the wedding , the couple returned to New Zealand . 
 Crawford 's wages caused the OCA some financial difficulty and were the cause of extended negotiations in 1915 . Part of the settlement involved Crawford receiving a lower salary in return for freedom to offer his services to other clubs on a freelance basis . As a consequence , he represented different teams throughout the season in local cricket . He was also paid to coach at Otago Boys High School . There were other difficulties ; the association complained about the lateness of Crawford 's report on the Otago team , and were unhappy that he also coached golf . Crawford in turn told the association that several Otago players were late for practice . After further complaints about Crawford 's coaching in 1916 , the OCA decided to terminate his contract . Crawford initially offered to continue for less money — £ 245 . The OCA bargained , suggesting a payment of £ 200 , whereupon Crawford insisted that he should be paid £ 300 . The OCA then proposed to terminate his contract immediately for a payment of £ 150 but he refused . He was eventually paid £ 200 in June to leave Otago . That November , with the First World War into its third year , New Zealand brought in conscription . Crawford was called up in July 1917 , and was posted to a training camp near Wellington in late 1917 . During this time , he played twice for Wellington 's cricket team in first @-@ class matches during early 1918 . When given weekend passes , he visited his wife who was left alone in Dunedin . He travelled to England prior to a posting to the Western Front , although he arrived too late to join the fighting . He was part of the New Zealand Rifle Brigade but it is unclear what his rank was . The Repton School War Register states that he was a rifleman but New Zealand press accounts named him as a quartermaster sergeant . According to a 1992 article in Wisden Cricket Monthly by Jim Sullivan , Crawford was demoted while he was in the army . The reasons are unknown , but Burns speculates that his " independent and obstinate nature " made it difficult for him to accept military discipline . While Crawford was in the army , his wife moved to Adelaide . According to Anita , the marriage became unhappy in 1916 and Crawford left her in November of that year . She claimed that he had not supported her financially from that point . When the war ended , she returned to live in Australia with her parents . Her subsequent career as a dress designer and fashion buyer necessitated a move to London , where Crawford was living , in 1921 but the couple never reconciled . They were divorced , with some publicity in Australia , in 1923 ; in court , she gave evidence that he had an affair with a " third party " . She went on to remarry and to have a successful career as a designer and orchestral conductor . 
 = = = Return to England = = = 
 After the First World War , Crawford returned to live in England , and was demobilised from the New Zealand Army in April 1919 . Looking for work , he wrote to Surrey offering to play for them if they found him some employment in turn , but the committee , while writing that they would be pleased if he played for the county again , could not " see [ their ] way to find him employment " . Crawford may have been contemplating playing professional cricket — unheard of for a former Public School cricketer — but instead found work at Repton , his old school . It is unclear what his position at Repton was at this time ; he seems to have had no official cricketing role and it is possible he worked as a teacher simply to maintain his amateur status . In any case , Crawford only remained at Repton until the end of the academic year ; his short stay may have been the result of poor results by the cricket team . However , Burns suggests : " Another indication that the school was not entirely happy to be associated with the Surrey rebel , whose baggage also included an indifferent war record , was that when the Old Boys cricket team , the Repton Pilgrims , was formed in 1921 , Crawford was alone among the school 's former distinguished players not to be made a member . He was not invited to join the club until 1952 . " 
 Having settled his disagreement with Surrey , Crawford resumed his English first @-@ class cricket career in 1919 . After appearing for the Gentlemen against the Players , Crawford returned to play for Surrey against the Australian Imperial Forces . He scored 144 not out , which was later described by Wisden as the innings of his life . Surrey were 26 for five in reply to the tourists ' innings of 436 when Crawford came in to bat . Neville Cardus reported : " [ Crawford ] fell upon the advancing Australian attack , and by driving seldom equalled , threw it back . " He more than doubled his score after the ninth wicket had fallen , hitting 73 out of the last 80 runs scored in 35 minutes to take Surrey past the target required to avoid the follow @-@ on . Among his other successes , he scored 92 against Yorkshire . Playing against Kent , he hit 48 not out as Jack Hobbs and he scored 96 in 32 minutes ; this partnership took Surrey to victory as they chased an apparently impossible chase in the short time remaining in the match . 
 In total , Crawford played in eight games in 1919 , scoring 488 runs and taking 20 wickets . Wisden commented that his batting was as good as it had ever been , but his bowling lacked spin and accuracy . He played only four more times in first @-@ class cricket . Part of the explanation was that he joined Dunlop Rubber as a manager at one of its mills in Rochdale . He played as an amateur for Rochdale Cricket Club in 1920 , but by 1921 he had left the club — the Manchester Guardian speculated that he had returned to Surrey . He returned to live with his family in Merton Park , and played for the local cricket club . Of his first @-@ class matches , one was for Surrey against the Australian touring team of 1921 and the others were for teams representing the Gentlemen . In his entire first @-@ class career , Crawford scored 9 @,@ 488 runs at an average of 32 @.@ 60 and took 815 wickets at 20 @.@ 66 . 
 From the mid @-@ 1920s until his retirement in 1952 , Crawford worked for the importers Elders and <unk> . He played cricket and hockey for the firm until the Second World War , but kept a far lower profile than in his earlier cricketing life . He married his second wife , Hilda May Beman , in December 1925 , but he never had children . He maintained a loose connection with cricket ; he appeared at a birthday dinner for Pelham Warner , at a centenary celebration for the Free Foresters Cricket Club and in a radio broadcast for Jack Hobbs 's 80th birthday . Crawford had a stroke in early 1962 and remained ill for the rest of the year ; he died , aged 76 , in a Surrey hospital on 2 May 1963 . 
 = = Style and technique = = 
 Crawford 's obituary in The Times described him as one of the best young players to play cricket in England and said : " Although he invariably played in glasses , he was a most attractive player to watch , an aggressive hitter of the ball and a dangerous medium @-@ paced bowler " . Wisden described him as a " hard @-@ hitting batsman " , and said he played mainly from the front foot . He had an orthodox batting technique , moved his feet well to get to the ball , and played very straight . Herbie Collins , who played with Crawford in Australia , described one of his innings as " a hurricane innings , full of classical shots charged with dynamite . " 
 As a bowler , Crawford 's technique was also orthodox , although he was unusual in using his second and third fingers to spin the ball — most bowlers used their first and second . His bowling pace varied from fast to medium , and he spun the ball so much that his fingers snapped audibly as he released it . An accurate bowler , it was difficult for batsmen to score runs against him . Crawford could swing the ball away from the bat , but his most effective delivery was his off break : Clem Hill stated that Crawford could make the ball turn several inches , despite the hard pitches prevalent in Australia when he played there . John Arlott described him as " the schoolboy genius who turned on Australian pitches where no one else deviated from straight " . In 1937 , Herbie Collins wrote , at a time when Wally Hammond was considered to be the world 's leading all @-@ rounder , that " people who have seen both men consider [ Crawford ] a better all @-@ rounder " . 
 Commenting on the interruption of Crawford 's career by his dispute with Surrey , Neville Cardus wrote : " His break with Surrey must be regarded as a sad deprivation of fame and pleasure to himself , and a grievous loss to the annals of English cricket . It is as certain as anything in a man 's life can be confidently postulated , that had he continued to play in English county cricket ... he would have taken his place amongst the select company of England 's captains . " The Times commented : " It was one of the great disappointments of English cricket in the first quarter of this century that his outstanding promise was never fully realized . " Hart observes that Crawford 's on @-@ field successes were many up to 1909 but after that , his career effectively stalled during his absence from English cricket . Hart notes Crawford 's " capacity to get on the scoreboard and up establishment noses . He could turn games around and agreements over , antagonise the powerful , endear himself to the young and those young enough at heart to care to characterise great personal performances as ' heroic ' " . He concludes that Crawford spent the last 40 years of his life " in comparative sporting obscurity " . No @-@ one on the Surrey committee ever expressed regret at what had happened , and Leveson Gower did not mention the affair in his autobiography . 
 = Lactarius torminosus = 
 Lactarius torminosus , commonly known as the woolly milkcap or the bearded milkcap , is a large agaric fungus . A common and widely distributed species , it is found in North Africa , northern Asia , Europe , and North America . It was first described scientifically by Jacob Christian Schäffer in 1774 as an Agaricus , and later transferred to the genus Lactarius in 1821 by Samuel Frederick Gray . A variety , L. torminosus var. nordmanensis , is known from the United States , Canada , and Switzerland . L. torminosus officially became the type species of Lactarius in 2011 after molecular studies prompted the taxonomic reshuffling of species between several Russulaceae genera . 
 A mycorrhizal species , L. torminosus associates with various trees , most commonly birch , and its fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) grow on the ground singly or in groups in mixed forests . The caps of L. torminosus mushrooms are convex with a central depression , and attain a diameter of up to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) . A blend of pink and ochre hues , the cap sometimes has concentric zones of alternating lighter and darker shades . The edge of the cap is rolled inward , and shaggy when young . On the underside of the cap are narrow flesh @-@ colored gills that are crowded closely together . The cylindrical stem is a pale flesh color with a delicately downy surface and brittle flesh ; it is up to 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) long and 0 @.@ 6 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick . When cut or injured , the fruit bodies ooze a bitter white latex that does not change color upon exposure to air . The variety nordmanensis , in contrast , has latex that changes from white to yellow . Lactarius torminosus can be distinguished from similar species like L. pubescens or L. villosus by differences in morphology and coloration , or by microscopic characteristics like spore shape and size . 
 Although it is valued for its peppery flavor and eaten after suitable preparation in Russia and Finland , the species is highly irritating to the digestive system when eaten raw . The toxins , also responsible for the strongly bitter or acrid taste , are destroyed by cooking . Studies have identified several chemicals present in the mushrooms , including ergosterol and derivatives thereof , and the pungent @-@ tasting <unk> . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 German naturalist Jacob Christian Schäffer was the first to describe the species , placing it in Agaricus in 1774 . Seven years later in 1781 , Jean Bulliard described a species he called Agaricus necator and illustrated it in the first volume of his Herbier de la France ; this name and the synonym Lactarius necator , resulting from Christian Hendrik Persoon 's 1800 transfer to Lactarius , are both considered to refer to L. torminosus . Otto Kuntze , for his part chose to put it in Lactifluus , while Paul Kummer thought Galorrheus was the appropriate placement ; until the recent resurrection of Lactifluus , both genera had been long considered to be unnecessary segregates of Lactarius . According to Index Fungorum , another synonym is Samuel Frederick Gray 's Lactarius <unk> . Gray also gave the species its modern name when he transferred it to Lactarius in his 1821 Natural Arrangement of British Plants . 
 The specific epithet torminosus means " tormenting " or " causing colic " , in reference to the gastrointestinal distress associated with consuming the raw mushroom . Early English vernacular names were Gray 's " <unk> milk @-@ stool " ( 1821 ) , and James Edward Smith 's " bearded pepper agaric " ( 1824 ) . More recent common names include " shaggy milkcap " , " <unk> milkcap " , " pink @-@ fringed milkcap " , " bearded milkcap " , and the British Mycological Society @-@ recommended " woolly milkcap " . 
 According to Hesler and Smith 's 1979 classification of the genus Lactarius , L. torminosus belongs to subgenus Piperites , section Piperites ( in which it is the type species ) , subsection Piperites . Species in this subsection are characterized by having latex that does not turn yellow after exposure to air , and / or that does not stain the cut surface of the mushroom surface yellow . A 2004 phylogenetic analysis of European Lactarius species concluded that L. torminosus falls into a group that includes L. <unk> , and that these two species are closely related to a group that includes L. <unk> , L. scoticus , and L. pubescens . 
 A multi @-@ gene molecular analysis published in 2008 demonstrated that species then distributed in the genera Lactarius and Russula actually consisted of four distinct lineages . The subsequent reorganization of Russulaceae species — a taxonomic change needed to make Russula and Lactarius monophyletic — required that a new type species be defined for Lactarius , since the previous type , L. piperatus , belonged to the clade that will be transferred to genus Lactifluus . A proposal to conserve Lactarius with L. torminosus as the type was accepted by the <unk> Committee for Fungi and passed at the 2011 International Botanical Congress . The change minimizes " taxonomic disruption " , allowing most of the common and well @-@ known Lactarius species to retain their names . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is initially convex , but as it matures the center forms a depression and the outer edges rise until it assumes the shape of a shallow funnel ; its final width is typically between 2 and 12 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 and 4 @.@ 7 in ) . The cap margin is strongly curled inward ; when young , it is tomentose ( covered with a thick matting of hairs ) , forming a veil @-@ like structure that partly covers up the gills . This tomentum diminishes with age . The cap surface is at first similarly tomentose , but eventually the hairs wear off , leaving the surface more or less smooth . The surface starts off somewhat sticky with clear concentric rings of darker shade ( a zonate pattern ) ; these rings , especially the outer ones , usually fade in maturity . The cap color is pinkish @-@ orange to pale dull pink , becoming orange to whitish toward the margin as the pink gradually fades . The white to flesh @-@ colored flesh is firm and brittle , but becomes flaccid in age . The latex that is produced when the mushroom tissue is cut or injured is white to cream , and does not change color with prolonged exposure to air , nor does it stain the gills . It has an acrid taste , with a slight to pungent odor . 
 The gills are subdecurrent ( running only a small way down the length of the stem ) , close to crowded together , narrow , and sometimes forked near the stem . Their color is whitish , becoming pink @-@ tinged , turning pale tan with age . The adult stem is 1 @.@ 5 – 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) long , 0 @.@ 6 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick , fragile , more or less equal in width throughout , and cylindrical or narrowed at the base . Its surface is dry , and either smooth to pruinose ( covered with a very fine whitish powder on the surface ) . The color ranges from pale light pink to yellowish @-@ tinged or slightly pinkish orange to orange white , sometimes spotted . The interior of the stem is firm , beige white , and filled with a soft pith , but it eventually becomes hollow . Occasionally , white mycelium is visible at the base of the stem where it meets the ground . 
 The fruit body formation of L. torminosus is <unk> . In this type of development , the hymenium forms early on the underside of the cap and upper stem of the mushroom primordium . As the cap enlarges , the margin , made of flaring filamentous hyphae that grow outward and downward , tends to curve inward , eventually forming a flap of tissue roughly parallel to the stem surface . As further development takes place , these hyphae make contact with and adhere to the hymenial surface of the stem , covering basidia and <unk> ( very long cystidia ) already present . The junction between the two tissues produces a cavity that provides some temporary protection to the basidia , although they are already fertile when the cap margin starts to grow . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spore print of L. torminosus is cream to pale yellow , and the spores 8 – 10 @.@ 2 by 5 @.@ 8 – 6 @.@ 6 μm , roughly spherical to broadly elliptical in side view , and hyaline ( translucent ) . Only the ornamentation on their surface is amyloid ; it is partially reticulate ( network @-@ like ) with interrupted ridges roughly 0 @.@ 5 – 0 @.@ 7 μm high , and a few isolated warts . Spores have a conspicuous apiculus , demarcating where it was once attached to the basidia via the sterigma . The basidia are four @-@ spored , hyaline and club @-@ shaped to cylindrical , measuring 30 – 47 @.@ 7 by 7 @.@ 3 – 8 @.@ 2 μm . 
 Pleurocystidia are only present in the form of <unk> embedded and originating in the hymenium and just below it , they reach 40 @.@ 3 – 80 @.@ 0 by 5 @.@ 1 – 9 @.@ 5 μm . <unk> are abundant in the hymenium . Characterized by their spindle @-@ shaped to ventricose ( swollen on one side ) form that gradually tapers in width , they have granular hyaline contents . Gill edge cystidia ( cheilocystidia ) are smaller : 30 – 52 by 4 @.@ 5 – 8 @.@ 0 μm . The cap cuticle is made of gelatinized , interwoven hyphae arranged more or less parallel to the cap surface ( a form known as ixocutis ) ; the thin @-@ walled , threadlike hyphae of this layer are 2 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 3 μm wide . 
 = = = Variety nordmanensis = = = 
 Lactarius nordmanensis was described by Alexander Smith in 1960 to account for a North American species closely resembling L. torminosus in appearance , but with a slightly larger range of spore sizes ( 9 – 11 by 6 @.@ 5 – 8 μm ) . In contrast to the unchanging latex of L. torminosus , L. nordmanensis has whitish latex that slowly changes to pale yellow upon exposure to air ; the latex also stains mushroom tissues and paper yellow . Hesler and Smith reduced L. nordmanensis to the status of a variety under L. torminosus in 1979 . Lactarius torminosus var. nordmanensis has been recorded from California , Idaho , Michigan , and Wisconsin in the United States , Quebec in Canada , and Switzerland . The variety resembles Lactarius pubescens var. <unk> , but differs in its longer pleurocystidia , larger spores with slightly different spore ornamentation , and strongly burning acrid taste . The holotype specimen of L. torminosus var. nordmanensis was collected by Smith in 1956 near Nordman , Idaho . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The woolly cap margin , pinkish tones in the cap , acrid latex , and association with birch are reliable field characteristics to help identify L. torminosus . However , there are several hairy Lactarius species with which it is often confused , and sometimes examination of microscopic characteristics is necessary to distinguish between them . The closely related L. torminosus is a dwarf version of L. torminosus , an arctic species associated with the birches Betula nana or B. glandulosa . Immature fruit bodies of L. scrobiculatus resemble L. torminosus , but they have a white latex that soon turns yellow upon exposure to air , and their stems have shiny depressed spots . The caps of the poorly known species L. <unk> are not zonate , and its spores are smaller . L. pubescens is physically quite similar , but can be distinguished by its paler color and smaller spores ( 6 @.@ 0 – 7 @.@ 5 by 5 @.@ 0 – 6 @.@ 5 μm ) . L. <unk> has a cap margin that is not as hairy , whitish to cream @-@ colored gills , and larger spores measuring 7 @.@ 5 – 10 by 6 – 7 @.@ 5 μm . L. <unk> has a coloration similar to L. torminosus , but is rarer and typically found associated with oak trees on calcareous soil . Known only from North Carolina and western Canada , L. <unk> was named for its similarity to L. torminosus . It can be distinguished by its mild @-@ tasting latex and smaller , roughly spherical spores measuring 5 @.@ 5 – 7 by 5 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 5 μm . 
 = = Edibility and toxicity = = 
 The intensely peppery taste of the raw mushroom can blister the tongue if sampled in excess . Some authors have reported the species as outright poisonous , or causing " mild to fatal gastroenteritis " . In a 1930 publication , Hans <unk> reported that although the mushroom was not toxic to " unicellular and cold @-@ blooded organisms " when ingested , the liquid extract and the pressed juice of the fruit bodies , when injected under the skin of a frog , resulted in disturbed breathing , paralysis , and eventually death . Symptoms that are typically experienced after consuming raw mushrooms include nausea , vomiting , and severe diarrhea that starts about one hour after ingestion . This combination can lead to dehydration , muscle spasms , and circulatory collapse . The gastroenteritis will usually resolve without treatment in a couple of days . 
 Despite these reports of toxicity , L. torminosus mushrooms are prepared in Finland , Russia , and other northern and eastern European countries by parboiling , soaking in brine for several days , or pickling , after which it is valued for its peppery taste . In Norway , it is roasted and added to coffee . Mushrooms are harvested for commercial sale in Finland . The nutrient composition of Finnish specimens has been analyzed and found to contain the following components ( as a percentage of dry weight ) : protein , 17 @.@ 2 % ; phosphorus , 0 @.@ 46 % ; calcium , 0 @.@ 12 % ; magnesium , 0 @.@ 088 % ; potassium , 2 @.@ 97 % ; sodium 0 @.@ 011 % . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 The compound thought to be responsible for the toxicity of raw L. torminosus is the pungent @-@ tasting <unk> present at a concentration of 0 @.@ 16 mg / g mushroom . <unk> is a breakdown product of <unk> @-@ <unk> . Broken lactifers — specialized hyphal cells that produce the mushroom 's latex — leak the precursor chemicals whose breakdown products act as the defensive agents toxic to humans , effectively deterring certain vertebrates that might consume the mushroom . The lactarane @-@ type sesquiterpene lactone 15 @-@ <unk> A is one of several sesquiterpenes produced by the species . Other <unk> are found in various Lactarius species , such as blennin A in L. deliciosus and L. blennius , and lactarorufin N in Lactarius rufus . Fungal sesquiterpenes are commonly produced as toxins to defend against predation , and as a result some have chemical properties that may have applications in medicinal chemistry . 
 Fruit bodies of Lactarius torminosus contain a number of sterols , of which ergosterol ( a component of fungal cell walls ) is the most predominant at 60 @.@ 5 % of all sterols , followed by its derivatives and ergosta @-@ 5 / 7 @-@ dien @-@ 3 @-@ ol ( 17 @.@ 0 % ) , <unk> @-@ 7 @-@ en @-@ 3 @-@ ol ( 13 @.@ 7 % ) and ergosta @-@ 7 @-@ 22 @-@ dien @-@ 3 @-@ ol ( 8 @.@ 3 % ) . Researchers have identified 28 volatile compounds that contribute to the odor of the mushroom . Many of these are alcohols and carbonyl compounds with eight carbon atoms ; the predominant volatile compound ( about 90 % ) is 1 @-@ octen @-@ 3 @-@ one , an <unk> common in mushrooms . 
 = = Ecology and distribution = = 
 Lactarius torminosus is a mycorrhizal species , and as such plays an important role in facilitating nutrient and water uptake by trees . It grows in association with birch ( Betula ) and hemlock ( Tsuga ) in mixed forests . It is also known to grow in urban settings when birch trees are nearby . A field study in Scotland concluded that the species is more likely to be present in older than in younger birch woodlands . Fruit bodies grow on the ground , scattered or grouped together . They are a component of the diet of the red squirrel , and serve as breeding sites for some fungus @-@ feeding flies in the Drosophilidae and Mycetophilidae families . Lactarius torminosus mushrooms may be parasitized by the mold Hypomyces <unk> , which produces a cream @-@ ochre to cinnamon @-@ colored granular or velvety growth of mycelium on the surfaces of the gills and causes them to be deformed . 
 The species is found in northern temperate and boreal climates , penetrating sometimes into subarctic regions . It has been recorded from North Africa , northern Asia , Europe , and is common in North America , where it sometimes grows with aspen ( Populus species ) . The North American distribution extends north into the Yukon and Alaska and south to Mexico . 
 = Pauli Murray = 
 Anna Pauline " Pauli " Murray ( November 20 , 1910 – July 1 , 1985 ) was an American civil rights activist , women 's rights activist , lawyer , and author . Drawn to the ministry , in 1977 Murray became the first black woman to be ordained as an Episcopal priest and among the first group of women to become priests in this church . 
 Born in Baltimore , Maryland , Murray was raised mostly by her maternal grandparents in Durham , North Carolina . At the age of sixteen , she moved to New York to attend Hunter College , graduating with a Bachelor of Arts degree in English in 1933 . In 1940 , Murray sat in the whites @-@ only section of a Virginia bus with a friend , and they were arrested for violating state segregation laws . This incident , and her subsequent involvement with the socialist Workers ' Defense League , led to a career goal as a civil rights lawyer . She enrolled in the law school of Howard University , where she also became aware of sexism . She called it " Jane Crow " , alluding to the Jim Crow racial segregation laws . Murray graduated first in their class , but was denied the chance to do post @-@ graduate work at Harvard University because of her gender . She earned a master 's in law at University of California , Berkeley , and in 1965 she became the first African American to receive a Doctor of Juridical Science degree from Yale Law School . 
 As a lawyer , Murray argued for civil rights and women 's rights . National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) Chief Counsel Thurgood Marshall called Murray 's 1950 book States ' Laws on Race and Color the " bible " of the civil rights movement . Murray served on the 1961 Presidential Commission on the Status of Women and in 1966 was a co @-@ founder of the National Organization for Women . Ruth Bader Ginsburg later named Murray a coauthor on a brief for Reed v. Reed in recognition of her pioneering work on gender discrimination . Murray held faculty or administrative positions at the Ghana School of Law , Benedict College , and Brandeis University . 
 In 1973 , Murray left academia for the Episcopal Church , becoming an ordained priest in 1977 , among the first generation of women priests . Murray struggled in her adult life with issues related to her sexual and gender identity , describing herself as having an " inverted sex instinct " . She had a brief , annulled marriage to a man and several deep relationships with women . In her younger years , she occasionally passed as a teenage boy . In addition to her legal and advocacy work , Murray published two well @-@ reviewed autobiographies and a volume of poetry . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Murray was born in Baltimore , Maryland in 1910 . Both sides of her family were of mixed racial origins , with ancestors including black slaves , white slave owners , Native Americans , Irish , and free blacks . The varied features and complexions of her family were described as a " United Nations in miniature " . Murray 's parents — schoolteacher William H. Murray and nurse Agnes ( Fitzgerald ) Murray — both identified as black . In 1914 , Agnes died of a cerebral hemorrhage . After her father began to have emotional problems as a result of typhoid fever , relatives took custody of the children and eventually William was committed to a psychiatric institution , where he received no meaningful treatment . 
 Three year old Pauli Murray was sent to Durham , North Carolina , to live with her mother 's family . There , her maternal aunts , Sarah ( Sallie ) Fitzgerald and Pauline Fitzgerald Dame ( both teachers ) as well as her maternal grandparents Robert and Cornelia ( Smith ) Fitzgerald raised her . She attended St. Titus Episcopal Church with her mother 's family , as had her mother before Murray was born . In 1923 , her father , who had been committed to the Hospital for the Negro Insane of Maryland , died as a result of being beaten by a white guard . Murray had wanted to rescue him when she reached legal age , but was just thirteen . 
 Murray lived in Durham until the age of sixteen , at which point she moved to New York to finish high school and prepare for college . There she lived with the family of her cousin Maude ; they were passing for white in their white neighborhood . Murray 's presence discomfited Maude 's neighbors , however , as Murray was more visibly of partial African descent . She nonetheless graduated with her second high school diploma and honors in 1927 , and was able to enroll at Hunter College for two years . 
 Murray was briefly married in 1930 , to a man she referred in her autobiography only as " Billy " , although they would not formally divorce for 18 years . She had the marriage annulled several months after it began . 
 Inspired to attend Columbia University by a favorite teacher , Murray was turned away because the university did not admit women ; she did not have the funds to attend its partner women 's school of Barnard College . Instead she attended Hunter College , a free city university , where she was one of the few students of color . Murray was encouraged in her writing by one of her English instructors , who gave her an " A " for an essay about her maternal grandfather ; this became the basis of her later memoir Proud Shoes ( 1956 ) about her mother 's family . Murray published an article and several poems in the college paper . She graduated in 1933 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in English . 
 Murray took a job selling subscriptions to Opportunity , an academic journal of the National Urban League , a civil rights organization based in New York City . Poor health forced her to resign , and her doctor recommended that Murray seek a healthier environment . 
 She took a position at Camp Tera , a " She @-@ She @-@ She " conservation camp established at the urging of First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt to parallel the male Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) camps formed under President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's New Deal to provide employment to young adults while improving infrastructure . During her three months at the camp , Murray 's health recovered and she met Eleanor Roosevelt , which would later lead to correspondence that changed her life . However , Murray clashed with the camp 's director who found a Marxist book from her Hunter College course in Murray 's belongings , questioned Murray 's stance during the First Lady 's visit , and disapproved of her cross @-@ racial relationship with Peg Holmes , a white counselor . Murray and Holmes left the camp in February 1935 , and began traveling the country by walking , hitchhiking , and hopping freight trains . Murray later worked for the Young Women 's Christian Association . 
 = = Law school years = = 
 Murray applied to the University of North Carolina in 1938 , but was rejected because of her race ; all schools and other public facilities in the state were segregated . The case was broadly publicized in both white and black newspapers . Murray wrote to officials ranging from the university president to President Roosevelt , releasing their responses to the media in an attempt to embarrass them into action . The NAACP was initially interested in the case , but later declined to represent her in court , perhaps fearing that her long residence in New York state weakened her case . NAACP leader Roy Wilkins opposed representing her because Murray had already released her correspondence , which he considered " not diplomatic " . Concerns about her sexuality may also have played a role in the decision ; Murray often wore pants rather than the customary skirts of women and was open about her relationships with women . 
 In early 1940 , Murray was walking the streets in Rhode Island , distraught after " the disappearance of a woman friend . " She was taken into custody by police . She was transferred to Bellevue Hospital in New York City for psychiatric treatment . In March , Murray left the hospital with <unk> McBean , her roommate and girlfriend , and took a bus to Durham to visit her aunts . 
 In Petersburg , Virginia , the two women moved out of the broken seats in the black ( and back ) section of the bus , where state segregation laws mandated they sit , and into the white section . Inspired by a conversation they had been having about Gandhian civil disobedience , the two women refused to return to the rear even after the police were called , and they were arrested and jailed . Murray and McBean were initially defended by the NAACP , but when the pair were convicted only of disorderly conduct rather than violating segregation laws , the organization ceased to represent them . The Workers ' Defense League ( WDL ) , a socialist labor rights organization that was also beginning to take civil rights cases , paid her fine . A few months later the WDL hired Murray for its Administrative Committee . 
 With the WDL , Murray became active in the case of Odell Waller , a black Virginia sharecropper sentenced to death for killing his white landlord , Oscar Davis , during an argument . The WDL argued that Davis had cheated Waller in a settlement and as their argument grew more heated , Waller had shot Davis in legitimate fear of his life . Murray toured the country raising funds for Waller 's appeal . She wrote to First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt on Waller 's behalf . Roosevelt in turn wrote to Virginia Governor James Hubert Price , asking him to guarantee that the trial was fair ; she later persuaded the president to privately request Price to commute the death sentence . Through this correspondence , Murray and Eleanor Roosevelt began a friendship that would last until the latter 's death two decades later . Despite the WDL 's and Roosevelts ' efforts , however , the governor did not commute Waller 's sentence . Waller was executed on July 2 , 1942 . 
 = = = Howard University = = = 
 Murray 's trial on charges stemming from the bus incident and her experience with the Waller case inspired a career in civil rights law . In 1941 , she began attending Howard University law school . Murray was the only woman in her law school class , and she became aware of sexism at the school , which she labeled " Jane Crow " — alluding to Jim Crow , the system of racial discriminatory state laws oppressing African Americans . On Murray 's first day of class , one professor , William Robert Ming , remarked that he did not know why women went to law school . She was infuriated . 
 In 1942 , while still in law school , Murray joined the Congress of Racial Equality ( CORE ) . That year she published an article , " Negro Youth 's Dilemma , " that challenged segregation in the US military , which continued during World War II . She also participated in sit @-@ ins challenging several Washington , D.C. restaurants with discriminatory seating policies . These activities preceded the more widespread sit @-@ ins during the civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s . 
 Murray was elected Chief Justice of the Howard Court of Peers , the highest student position at Howard , and in 1944 she graduated first in her class . Men who graduated first in the class were awarded Julius Rosenwald Fellowships for graduate work at Harvard University , but that university did not accept women . Murray was rejected despite a letter of support from President Roosevelt . She wrote in response , " I would gladly change my sex to meet your requirements , but since the way to such change has not been revealed to me , I have no recourse but to appeal to you to change your minds . Are you to tell me that one is as difficult as the other ? " 
 She did post @-@ graduate work at Boalt Hall School of Law at University of California , Berkeley . Her master 's thesis was The Right to Equal Opportunity in Employment , which argued that " the right to work is an inalienable right " . It was published in the California Law Review produced by the school . 
 = = Later career = = 
 After passing the California bar exam in 1945 , Murray was hired as the state 's first black deputy attorney general in January of the following year . That year , the National Council of Negro Women named her its " Woman of the Year ; " Mademoiselle magazine did the same in 1947 . 
 In 1950 , Murray published States ' Laws on Race and Color , an examination and critique of state segregation laws throughout the nation . She drew on psychological and sociological evidence as well as legal , an innovative discussion technique for which she had previously been criticized by Howard professors . Murray argued for civil rights lawyers to directly challenge state segregation laws as unconstitutional , rather than trying to prove the inequality of so @-@ called " separate but equal " facilities , as was done in some challenges . 
 Thurgood Marshall , then NAACP Chief Counsel and a future Supreme Court Justice , called Murray 's book the " bible " of the civil rights movement . Her approach was influential to the NAACP 's arguments in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka ( 1954 ) , by which they drew from psychological studies assessing the effects of segregation on students in school . The US Supreme Court ruled that segregated public schools were unconstitutional . 
 Murray lived in Ghana from 1960 to 1961 , serving on the faculty of the Ghana School of Law . She returned to the US and studied at Yale Law School , in 1965 becoming the first African American to receive a <unk> ( Juris <unk> Doctor , Doctor of the Science of Law ) from the school . She taught at Brandeis University from 1968 to 1973 , where she received tenure as Full Professor in American Studies . 
 = = = Jane Crow = = = 
 At the front of the Civil Rights Movement , alongside such leaders as Martin Luther King , Jr. and Rosa Parks , but lesser known , was Pauli Murray , an outspoken woman who protested discrimination on the basis of race and sex . She coined the term " Jane Crow , " which demonstrated Murray 's belief that Jim Crow laws also negatively impacted African @-@ American women . She was determined to work with other activists to put a halt to both racism and sexism . Murray 's speech , " Jim Crow and Jane Crow , " delivered in Washington , D.C. in 1964 , sheds light on the long struggle of African @-@ American women for racial equality and their later fight for equality among the sexes . Pauli Murray ultimately helped push the American Civil Rights Movement by letting her audience know that women 's rights were just as important as civil rights . " Jim Crow and Jane Crow , " Murray 's speech , was given during Lyndon B. Johnson 's presidency . It primarily addresses an audience of African @-@ American women . Pauli Murray acknowledges the fact that African @-@ American women have always contributed to the progress of the Civil Rights Movement . She believes that African @-@ American women have worked just as hard , if not harder than , African @-@ American men to achieve equal rights among whites and blacks . According to Murray , " Not only have they stood ... with Negro men in every phase of the battle , but they have also continued to stand when their men were destroyed by it . " The black women decided to " ... continue ... [ standing ] ... " for their freedom and liberty even when " ... their men ... " began to experience exhaustion from a long struggle for civil rights . These women were unafraid to stand up for what they believed in and refused to back down from the long and tedious " battle . " Murray continues her praise for black women when she says that " ... one cannot help asking : would the Negro struggle have come this far without the indomitable determination of its women ? " The " Negro struggle " was able to progress partly because of " ... the indomitable determination of its women . " African @-@ American women were vital to the Civil Rights Movement and pushed it forward with their own might . They were just as important to the black struggle for racial justice as their male counterparts . Their work ethic and persistence defined African @-@ American women as important to a long fight against racism in America . 
 = = = Women 's rights = = = 
 Ruth Bader Ginsburg named Murray an honorary co @-@ author of her brief in Reed v. Reed ( 1971 ) . US President John F. Kennedy appointed Murray to the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women in 1961 . She prepared a memo titled A Proposal to <unk> the Applicability of the Fourteenth Amendment to State Laws and Practices Which Discriminate on the Basis of Sex Per Se , which argued that the Fourteenth Amendment forbade sex discrimination as well as racial discrimination . 
 1963 she became one of the first to criticize the sexism of the civil rights movement , in her speech " The Negro Woman and the Quest for Equality " . In a letter to civil rights leader A. Philip Randolph , she criticized the fact that in the 1963 March on Washington no women were invited to make one of the major speeches or to be part of its delegation of leaders who went to the White House , among other grievances . She wrote : 
 I have been increasingly perturbed over the blatant disparity between the major role which Negro women have played and are playing in the crucial grassroots levels of our struggle and the minor role of leadership they have been assigned in the national policy @-@ making decisions . It is indefensible to call a national march on Washington and send out a call which contains the name of not a single woman leader . 
 In 1965 Murray published her landmark article ( coauthored by Mary Eastwood ) , " Jane Crow and the Law : Sex Discrimination and Title VII " , in the George Washington Law Review . The article discussed Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 as it applied to women , and drew comparisons between discriminatory laws against women and Jim Crow laws . In 1966 she was a cofounder of the National Organization for Women ( NOW ) , which she hoped could act as an NAACP for women 's rights . In March of that year , Murray wrote to Commissioner Richard Alton Graham that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission was not fulfilling its duty in upholding the gendered portion of its mission , leaving only half the black population protected . Later she and Dorothy Kenyon successfully argued White v. Crook , a case in which the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit ruled that women have an equal right to serve on juries . When lawyer and future Supreme Court justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote her brief for Reed v. Reed — a 1971 Supreme Court case that for the first time extended the Fourteenth Amendment 's Equal Protection Clause to women — she added Murray and Kenyon as coauthors in recognition of her debt to their work . 
 = = = Academia and priesthood = = = 
 Murray served as vice president of Benedict College from 1967 – 68 . She left Benedict to become a professor at Brandeis University , where she remained until 1973 . In addition to teaching law , Murray introduced classes on African @-@ American studies and women 's studies , both firsts for the university . Murray later wrote that her time at Brandeis was " the most exciting , tormenting , satisfying , embattled , frustrated , and at times triumphant period of my secular career " . 
 Increasingly inspired by her connections with other women in the Episcopal Church , Murray , now more than sixty years old , left Brandeis to attend the seminary . After three years of study , in 1977 she became the first African @-@ American woman ordained as an Episcopal priest and among the first generation of Episcopal women priests . That year she celebrated her first Eucharist by invitation at Chapel of the Cross ; this was the first time a woman celebrated the Eucharist at an Episcopal church in North Carolina . In 1978 she preached her first sermon in her ' hometown ' of Durham , North Carolina , on Mother 's Day at St. Philip 's Episcopal Church , where her mother and grandparents had attended in the 19th century . She announced her mission of reconciliation . For the next seven years , Murray worked in a parish in Washington , D.C. , focusing particularly on ministry to the sick . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 The Rev. Dr. Pauli Murray died of pancreatic cancer in the house she owned with a lifelong friend , Maida Springer Kemp , in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , on July 1 , 1985 . 
 In 2012 the General Convention of the Episcopal Church voted to honor Murray as one of its Holy Women , Holy Men , to be commemorated on July 1 , the anniversary of her death , along with fellow writer Harriet Beecher Stowe . Bishop Michael Curry of the Episcopal Diocese of North Carolina said this recognition honors " people whose lives have exemplified what it means to follow in the footsteps of Jesus and make a difference in the world . " 
 In 2015 the National Trust for Historic Preservation named the childhood home of Murray ( on Carroll Street in Durham , North Carolina 's West End neighborhood ) as a National Treasure . 
 In April 2016 , Yale University announced that their leadership had selected Murray as the namesake of one of two new residential colleges , the other of which will be named after Benjamin Franklin upon completion in 2017 . 
 = = Sexuality and gender identity = = 
 Murray struggled with her sexual and gender identity through much of her life . Her marriage as a teenager ended almost immediately with the realization that " when men try to make love to me , something in me fights " . Though acknowledging the term " homosexual " in describing others , Murray preferred to describe herself as having an " inverted sex instinct " that caused her to behave as a man attracted to women . She wanted a " monogamous married life " , but one in which she was the man . The majority of her relationships were with women whom she described as " extremely feminine and heterosexual " . In her younger years , Murray would often be devastated by the end of these relationships , to the extent that she was twice hospitalized for psychiatric treatment , in 1937 and in 1940 . 
 Murray wore her hair short and preferred pants to skirts ; due to her slight build , there was a time in her life when she was often able to pass as a teenage boy . In her twenties , she shortened her name from Pauline to the more androgynous Pauli . Murray pursued hormone treatments in the 1940s to correct what she saw as a personal imbalance , and even requested abdominal surgery to test if she had " submerged " male sex organs . 
 = = Memoirs and poetry = = 
 In addition to her legal work , Murray wrote two volumes of autobiography and a collection of poetry . Her first autobiographical book , Proud Shoes ( 1956 ) , traces her family 's complicated racial origins , particularly focusing on her maternal grandparents , Robert and Cornelia Fitzgerald . Cornelia was the daughter of a slave raped by her owner and his brother ; she was raised by her owner 's sister and educated . Robert was a free black from Pennsylvania , also of mixed racial ancestry ; he moved to the South to teach during the Reconstruction Era . Newspapers including The New York Times gave the book very positive reviews . The New York Herald Tribune stated that Proud Shoes is " a personal memoir , it is history , it is biography , and it is also a story that , at its best , is dramatic enough to satisfy the demands of fiction . It is written in anger , but without hatred ; in affection , but without pathos and tears ; and in humor that never becomes extravagant " . 
 Murray published a collection of her poetry , Dark Testament and Other Poems , in 1970 . The volume contains what critic Christina G. Bucher calls a number of " conflicted love poems " , as well as exploring economic and racial injustice . The collection has received little critical attention , and as of 2007 , was out of print . 
 A follow @-@ up volume to Proud Shoes , her memoir Song in a Weary Throat : An American Pilgrimage was published posthumously in 1987 . Song focused on Murray 's own life , particularly her struggles with both gender and racial discrimination . It received the Robert F. Kennedy Book Award , the Christopher Award , and the Lillian Smith Book Award . 
 = = Works by Murray = = 
 = = = Law = = = 
 Davison Douglas , ed . , 1997 . States ' Law on Race and Color , 2d ed . , University of Georgia Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8203 @-@ 1883 @-@ 7 
 with Rubin , Leslie . The Constitution and Government of Ghana , London : Sweet & Maxwell , 1961 . African Universities Press , 1964 
 = = = Poetry = = = 
 Dark Testament and Other Poems , Silvermine , Norwalk : Connecticut , 1970 ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 016 @-@ 4 
 = = = Autobiographies = = = 
 Proud Shoes : The Story Of An American Family , New York : Harper & Brothers , 1956 ISBN 0 @-@ 8070 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Song In A Weary Throat : An American Pilgrimage , Harper & Row , New York City , 1987 . ISBN 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . Reissued as Pauli Murray : The Autobiography of a Black Activist , Feminist , Lawyer , Priest and Poet . University of Tennessee Press , 1989 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 596 @-@ 8 . 
 = Cold War ( Doctor Who ) = 
 " Cold War " is the eighth episode of the seventh series of the British science @-@ fiction television drama Doctor Who . It first aired on BBC One on 13 April 2013 , and was written by Mark Gatiss and directed by Douglas Mackinnon . 
 In the episode , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) and his companion Clara Oswald ( Jenna @-@ Louise Coleman ) land on a Soviet submarine in 1983 during the Cold War , where the Ice Warrior Grand Marshal Skaldak breaks loose and plots revenge against humanity . 
 " Cold War " reintroduces the Ice Warriors , who were last seen in the Third Doctor serial The Monster of Peladon ( 1974 ) . Bringing back the monsters was Gatiss ' idea , and he convinced executive producer Steven Moffat by coming up with new things to do with them . The Ice Warriors ' costume was improved but not significantly redesigned , as the production team felt they were not well known enough . The episode was filmed in June 2012 on a submarine set , as the story is a closed " base @-@ under @-@ siege " . " Cold War " was watched by 7 @.@ 37 million viewers and received generally positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A Soviet submarine is sailing near the North Pole in 1983 during the Cold War . A nuclear weapons launch drill they are running is interrupted by Professor <unk> ( David Warner ) . In the submarine 's cargo hold a sailor prematurely begins to defrost a block of ice that <unk> believes contains a frozen mammoth , and is attacked by what is inside . 
 The submarine begins sinking as the creature in the ice escapes and runs amok . The TARDIS , which originally was on a course set for Las Vegas , materialises inside the submarine and the Doctor and Clara tumble out . The Doctor convinces Captain Zhukov ( Liam Cunningham ) to maneuver the submarine to the side , landing it safely and preventing it from imploding . During this the TARDIS inexplicably dematerialises . They then encounter the escaped Ice Warrior , Grand Marshal Skaldak ( Spencer Wilding , voiced by Nicholas Briggs ) . The Doctor encourages the crew to be peaceful , but the ship 's executive officer <unk> ( Tobias Menzies ) knocks out Skaldak with a cattle prod , suspecting that he is not an alien but part of a Western plot . Knowing that Skaldak will desire vengeance for being attacked , the Doctor and the crew chain Skaldak , who sends out a distress call for others of his race to find him . 
 Clara volunteers to speak to Skaldak to try and calm him , relaying the Doctor 's words to Skaldak , though he knows that the Doctor is listening . The Doctor informs Skaldak he was encased in the ice for 5000 years . Skaldak laments the loss of his daughter and his people ; however , the Doctor tries to comfort him with the knowledge that the Ice Warriors still live , just not on Earth or Mars . Skaldak escapes from his armour - an act of great dishonour - and stops broadcasting the signal to the other Ice Warriors because he believes himself to be the only one of his kind left . The Doctor surmises that , thinking himself to be the last of his kind , Skaldak has nothing left to lose . He manages to grab and kill three members of the crew . 
 Having learnt of the ongoing Cold War and the doctrine of mutually assured destruction from <unk> , Skaldak plans to use the submarine 's nuclear missiles to provoke a global thermonuclear war and destroy humanity as revenge for the humans attacking him - under the Martian code humanity as a whole has declared war on the Ice Warrior race by assaulting him . Reaching the bridge , he is able to connect himself to the sub 's missile guidance systems and activate the missiles . The Doctor and Clara are attempting to persuade Skaldak to show mercy when the sub is rocked by a tractor beam from above : the Ice Warriors have arrived over the site of the submarine 's undersea grounding , and they haul it to the surface . Skaldak is beamed aboard the Ice Warriors ' spaceship , though the missile launch system is still active . Showing mercy , Skaldak deactivates the missiles remotely . When the Doctor 's sonic screwdriver informs him the TARDIS has reappeared , he informs Clara that it had " relocated " to the South Pole automatically as part of the <unk> ( " Hostile Action Displacement System " ) , which the Doctor admits he reactivated by accident while fiddling with the controls . As they are at the North Pole , an embarrassed Doctor asks Zhukov for a lift to get the TARDIS before saluting the Ice Warrior ship as it leaves . 
 = = Production = = 
 The Ice Warriors were a well @-@ known villain of the original Doctor Who series . They appeared alongside the Second Doctor ( Patrick Troughton ) in The Ice Warriors ( 1967 ) and The Seeds of Death ( 1969 ) and returned in the Third Doctor ( Jon Pertwee ) stories The Curse of Peladon ( 1972 ) and The Monster of Peladon ( 1974 ) . Showrunner Steven Moffat had originally been hesitant to bring back the Ice Warriors , worrying that they were seen as " the default condition for what people thought of as rubbish Doctor Who monsters — things that moved very , very slowly and spoke in a way that meant you couldn 't hear a word they said . " Writer Mark Gatiss , however , was a fan of the Ice Warriors ' stories and had been campaigning to bring them back . In a phone conversation with Moffat that was originally supposed to be about their show Sherlock , Gatiss pitched new and " very clever ideas " of what to do with the Ice Warriors , and Moffat agreed . What sold Moffat were the submarine setting and seeing what the Ice Warriors looked like underneath their suits . Gatiss felt that the Ice Warriors had a lot of gaps in their timeline and had not been featured in a while , which allowed a lot of room to explore them . 
 The submarine was Gatiss 's idea ; he felt that Doctor Who called out to be set on a submarine . Executive producer Caroline Skinner described the story as " Letting a huge Ice Warrior loose at the heart of a classic Hunt For Red October style submarine movie . " Gatiss chose the time period because he was " kind of obsessed " with the Cold War , and felt that there were several times in the 1980s where the danger was close . Gatiss also described " Cold War " as a " love @-@ letter " to the base @-@ under @-@ siege stories that were common during Troughton 's time ; the episode even contains a reference to Troughton 's The Krotons , which was the last time the TARDIS 's <unk> had been mentioned . 
 The read @-@ through for " Cold War " took place on 6 June 2012 , with filming beginning on 13 June . For the submarine setting , the cast would be sprayed in between every take . The scenes in which the characters are drenched in water were achieved by constantly pouring " gallons and gallons of water " on the cast . Coleman found the experience fun , while Smith said that it made acting easier . Coleman said , " The whole make @-@ up process was reversed as they would damp us down in the morning and rub my mascara off ! " For the shots of the submarine in the ocean , a model was used . It was suspended upside @-@ down with " shredded feathers " blown at it to give the effect of being under the sea . 
 Unlike some other returning monsters , the Ice Warriors were not heavily redesigned . Gatiss insisted upon keeping the fundamentals of the original and Moffat explained that the original design was not well @-@ known enough to put a new spin on it , and so Skaldak 's shell is just a " super @-@ version of the original " . Of the original design , Millennium FX 's Neill Gorton said , " My problem with the old ones is they had Lego hands and weird , spindly arms but a bulky body and these strange <unk> hips , almost feminine . They had fur sticking out everywhere . So all of that together didn 't suggest " ice warriors . " They should be much beefier and stronger . We gave it more of a bodybuilder physique , changed the hands and styled the body to make it look more like armour @-@ plating , even though it 's reptilian . " The costume was made of flexible urethane rubber instead of the fibreglass like the original , as it would damage less easily and be more comfortable to wear . The costume was made to specially fit Spencer Wilding . Though only some of the Skaldak 's real appearance was shown on @-@ screen , Gorton stated that they created a full animatronic body . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Cold War " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 13 April 2013 . Overnight ratings showed that 5 @.@ 73 million viewers watched the episode live , a 28 @.@ 8 % audience share . When timeshifted viewers were taken into account , the figure rose to 7 @.@ 37 million viewers , the fifth most @-@ watched programme of the week on BBC One . In addition , " Cold War " received 1 @.@ 65 million requests on the online BBC iPlayer during April , the fourth most @-@ watched programme on the service for the month . The episode also received an Appreciation Index of 84 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received generally positive reviews . Dan Martin of The Guardian wrote that " Cold War " was " easily the best of this new series so far , and Mark Gatiss 's finest contribution yet . " He praised the reinvention of the Ice Warrior and felt that the elements came together to form a " tense , tightly wound , claustrophobic but also full of heart . " Zap2it 's Geoff Berkshire said that " Cold War " was better than Gatiss ' previous episodes " The Idiot 's Lantern " and " Victory of the Daleks " . He praised the guest cast , but wished " their characters had a bit more meat to them . " The Independent reviewer Neela Debnath described the story as " slick and intelligent " with " cinematic aesthetics and tone . " 
 Patrick Mulkern of Radio Times found an inconsistency with the TARDIS translation matrix , but overall was positive towards the acting , visual aspects , and story . The Daily Telegraph reviewer Gavin Fuller gave the episode four out of five stars , describing it as " finely crafted " and " thrilling . " He praised the setting and the dialogue , but felt that the Soviet characters were " perilously close to being ciphers . " Digital Spy 's Morgan Jeffery awarded the episode five out of five stars , saying that it was " fresh and exciting " but also had a " wonderfully old @-@ school tone . " He wrote that it had " one of the best guest casts to have graced Doctor Who since the show returned in 2005 " and also praised the reintroduction of the Ice Warriors and the production values . Alasdair Wilkins of The A.V. Club gave " Cold War " a grade of A , highlighting the tense atmosphere , the " bold new direction " taken with the Ice Warriors , the guest performances , and Clara 's importance . 
 Russell Lewin of SFX gave " Cold War " four out of five stars , praising the set and direction as well as the Ice Warrior . On the other hand , Lewin noted that , as a base @-@ under @-@ siege story , it did not play with the narrative form or " go anywhere we couldn 't have predicted , " with the exception of the Ice Warrior breaking out of its suit . IGN 's Mark Snow gave the episode a rating of 8 @.@ 3 out of 10 . Snow praised the reintroduction of the Ice Warriors and called Skaldak " the show 's most memorable villain in a while , thanks to his stern , occasionally psychopathic approach to problem solving , and an environment that helped make the bulky , heavy creature design imposing rather than laughably naff . " However , he felt that some of Skaldak 's effects were " laughably rubbery " and that his motivations were " <unk> random . " Tor.com reviewer Emily Asher @-@ Perrin was more critical of the episode , pointing out that little happened . She called the pacing " sloppy " and found Skaldak to not be an interesting foe . 
 In Doctor Who Magazine issue 460 , Graham Kibble @-@ White gave it a mixed review . He complimented the fact that " the action kicks off early - very early - and then doesn 't let up " , and said the Ice Warrior redesign was " the best reinvention so far of an old Doctor Who foe , although admitting he thought it was " a shame to lose the tufts of hair around the joints " , saying they gave the Ice Warriors " a pleasing organic feel upon the shell . " He complained about the reference to the Ice Warriors ' code of honour , claiming it to have always been " damnably dull . " Additionally , he disliked the revelation of Skaldak 's true form , claiming it to look like " a not especially memorable CGI tortoise " and saying the BBC seems to have forgotten that " monsters are diminished when they 're brought into the light " , as well as worrying that it may have been " breaking a taboo for the show " . 
 = Scarlett Johansson = 
 Scarlett Johansson ( / <unk> / ; born November 22 , 1984 ) is an American actress , model , and singer . She made her film debut in North ( 1994 ) . Johansson subsequently starred in Manny & Lo in 1996 , and garnered further acclaim and prominence with roles in The Horse Whisperer ( 1998 ) and Ghost World ( 2001 ) . She shifted to adult roles with her performances in Girl with a Pearl Earring ( 2003 ) and Sofia Coppola 's Lost in Translation ( 2003 ) , for which she won a BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role . 
 Her subsequent films included A Love Song for Bobby Long ( 2004 ) , Woody Allen 's Match Point ( 2005 ) , The Island ( 2005 ) , The Black Dahlia ( 2006 ) , The Prestige ( 2006 ) , The Other Boleyn Girl ( 2008 ) , Vicky Cristina Barcelona ( 2008 ) , He 's Just Not That Into You ( 2009 ) , Don Jon ( 2013 ) , Her ( 2013 ) , Under the Skin ( 2013 ) , and Lucy ( 2014 ) . Since 2010 , Johansson has also portrayed the Marvel Comics character Natasha Romanoff in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . She won the Tony Award for Best Performance by a Featured Actress in a Play for her performance in the 2010 Broadway revival of Arthur Miller 's A View from the Bridge . As a singer , Johansson has released two albums , Anywhere I Lay My Head and Break Up . 
 Johansson is considered one of Hollywood 's modern sex symbols , and has frequently appeared in published lists of the sexiest women in the world , including when she was named the " Sexiest Woman Alive " by Esquire magazine in both 2006 and 2013 ( the only woman to be chosen for the title twice ) , and the " Sexiest Celebrity " by Playboy magazine in 2007 . As of July 2016 , she is the highest @-@ grossing actress of all time and the tenth movie star in general , with her films making over $ 3 @.@ 3 billion . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Johansson was born in New York City . Her father , Karsten Johansson , is a Danish @-@ born architect originally from Copenhagen , and her paternal grandfather , <unk> Johansson , was a screenwriter and director . Her mother , Melanie Sloan , a producer , comes from an Ashkenazi Jewish family from the Bronx ; Sloan 's ancestors were Jewish immigrants from both Poland and Minsk in the Russian Empire . She has an older sister , Vanessa , also an actress ; an older brother , Adrian ; a twin brother , Hunter ( who appeared with her in the film Manny & Lo ) ; and an older half @-@ brother , Christian , from her father 's first marriage . 
 Johansson grew up in a household with " little money " , and with a mother who was a " film buff " . She and her twin brother attended PS 41 elementary school in the Greenwich Village neighborhood of Manhattan . Johansson began her theatrical training by attending and graduating from Professional Children 's School in Manhattan in 2002 . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Early roles = = = 
 Johansson began acting during childhood , after her mother started taking her to auditions . She would audition for commercials but took rejection so hard her mother began limiting her to film tryouts . She made her film debut at the age of 9 , as John Ritter 's daughter in the 1994 fantasy comedy , North . Following minor roles in the 1995 film Just Cause , as the daughter of Sean Connery and Kate Capshaw , and If Lucy Fell in 1996 , she played the role of Amanda in Manny & Lo ( 1996 ) . Her performance in Manny & Lo garnered a nomination for the Independent Spirit Award for Best Lead Female , and positive reviews , one noting , " [ the film ] grows on you , largely because of the charm of ... Scarlett Johansson " , while San Francisco Chronicle critic Mick LaSalle commentated on her " peaceful aura " , and wrote , " If she can get through puberty with that aura undisturbed , she could become an important actress . " 
 After appearing in minor roles in Fall and Home Alone 3 in 1997 , Johansson garnered widely spread attention for her performance in the 1998 film The Horse Whisperer , directed by Robert Redford . She received a nomination for the Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Most Promising Actress for the film . In 1999 , she appeared in My Brother the Pig and in 2001 in the neo @-@ noir Coen brothers film The Man Who Wasn 't There . Also in 1999 , she appeared in the music video for Mandy Moore 's single , " Candy " . Although the film was not a box office success , she received praise for her break @-@ out role in Ghost World ( 2001 ) . Credited with " sensitivity and talent [ that ] belie her age " . In 2002 , she appeared in Eight Legged Freaks with David Arquette . 
 = = = Transition to adult roles = = = 
 Johansson made the transition from teen roles to adult roles , with two roles in 2003 . In the Sofia Coppola film Lost in Translation , she played Charlotte , a listless and lonely young wife , opposite Bill Murray . Roger Ebert wrote that he loved the film and described the performances of Johansson and Murray as " wonderful " . Entertainment Weekly wrote of Johansson 's " embracing , restful serenity " , and the New York Times said , " At 18 , the actress gets away with playing a 25 @-@ year @-@ old woman by using her husky voice to test the level of acidity in the air ... Ms. Johansson is not nearly as accomplished a performer as Mr. Murray , but Ms. Coppola gets around this by using Charlotte 's simplicity and curiosity as keys to her character . " Johansson won the BAFTA Award and was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress . She received nominations from a number of film critic organizations , including the Broadcast Film Critics Association and the Chicago Film Critics Association . 
 At age 18 , Johansson played Griet in Peter Webber 's Girl with a Pearl Earring . While noting , " Audiences feel as if they are spying on a moment of artistic inspiration when painter Vermeer creates the title work " , USA Today praised her , suggesting , " [ She ] is having a banner year that Oscar voters should recognize . " In his review for the New Yorker , Anthony Lane said , " What keeps Webber 's movie alive is the tenseness of the setup ... and , above all , the presence of Johansson . She is often wordless and close to plain onscreen , but wait for the ardor with which she can summon a closeup and bloom under its gaze ; this is her film , not Vermeer 's , all the way . " Owen Gleiberman , for Entertainment Weekly , wrote of her " nearly silent performance " , observing , " The interplay on her face of fear , ignorance , curiosity , and sex is intensely dramatic . " She was nominated for the Golden Globe for Best Actress in a Drama and the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role . She was nominated by the London Film Critics ' Circle , the Phoenix Film Critics Society . 
 Johansson was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in June 2004 . The same year , she had voice or onscreen roles in five films : The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie ; A Good Woman , an adaptation of Oscar Wilde 's Lady Windermere 's Fan , which had a limited U.S. release , and was both a box office and critical failure , described by the The New York Times as a " misbegotten Hollywood @-@ minded screen adaptation " with " an excruciating divide between the film 's British actors ( led by Tom Wilkinson and Stephen Campbell Moore ) , who are comfortable delivering Wilde 's aphorisms ... and its American marquee names , Helen Hunt and Scarlett Johansson , [ who have ] little connection to the English language as spoken in the high <unk> style " ; the critically panned teen heist film The Perfect Score , the romantic comedy In Good Company , a critical and box office success ; and , finally , the dark , Southern drama , A Love Song for Bobby Long , for which she earned her a third Golden Globe for Best Actress nomination . 
 = = = 2005 – 07 = = = 
 In July 2005 , Johansson starred with Ewan McGregor in Michael Bay 's science fiction film , The Island , in dual roles as Sarah Jordan and her clone , Jordan Two Delta . The film was a commercial failure and received mixed critical reviews . In contrast , her role as Nola , the American actress with whom Chris ( Jonathan Rhys Meyers ) is obsessed , in the Woody Allen @-@ directed drama Match Point , was well received . The New York Times said , " Ms. Johansson and Mr. Rhys @-@ Meyers manage some of the best acting seen in a Woody Allen movie in a long time , escaping the archness and emotional disconnection that his writing often imposes . " Johansson received her fourth Golden Globe nomination , and one from the Chicago Film Critics Association , for Best Supporting Actress . 
 In another collaboration with Allen , she was cast opposite Hugh Jackman and Allen in the 2006 film Scoop . While the film enjoyed a modest worldwide box office success , it received mixed reviews by critics . The same year , she appeared in Brian De Palma 's The Black Dahlia , a film noir shot in Los Angeles and Bulgaria . Johansson later said she was a De Palma fan and had wanted to work with him on the film , even though she thought that she was " physically wrong " for the part . 
 Johansson next had a supporting role in the Christopher Nolan thriller The Prestige ( 2006 ) , again opposite Hugh Jackman , as well as Christian Bale . Nolan , who described Johansson as possessing an " ambiguity ... a shielded quality " , said he was " very keen " for her to play the role . Johansson said , " I loved working with [ Christopher Nolan ] . He 's incredibly focused and driven and involved , and really involved in the performance in every aspect . He 's incredible to watch . " The film was both a critical and a worldwide box office success , recommended by the Los Angeles Times as " an adult , provocative piece of work . " Also in 2006 , Johansson starred in the short film ' When The Deal Goes Down , directed by Bennett Miller , set to Bob Dylan 's " When the Deal Goes Down ... " , released to promote Dylan 's album , Modern Times . 
 Johansson starred in 2007 's The Nanny Diaries , alongside Laura Linney . The film performed only marginally well at the box office , and was critically panned . Johansson 's reviews were mixed , with Variety saying , " [ She ] essays an engaging heroine " , while The New Yorker criticized her for looking " merely confused " while " trying to give the material a plausible emotional center " . 
 = = = 2008 – present = = = 
 In 2008 , Johansson starred in The Other Boleyn Girl , with Natalie Portman and Eric Bana , a film which garnered mixed reviews . Writing for Rolling Stone , Pete Travers criticized the film for " [ moving ] in frustrating <unk> and jerks " , but was more positive in his assessment of Johansson and Portman , and wrote , " What works is the combustible teaming of Natalie Portman and Scarlett Johansson , who give the Boleyn hotties a tough core of intelligence and wit , swinging the film 's sixteenth @-@ century <unk> issues handily into this one . " 
 Johansson filmed her third Woody Allen film , Vicky Cristina Barcelona , in Spain , appearing opposite Javier Bardem and Penélope Cruz . The film was one of Allen 's most profitable and appeared on many critics ' top ten lists of the best films of 2008 . She also played the femme fatale Silken Floss in Frank Miller 's film noir , comedy adaptation of The Spirit . The film received mostly poor reviews . Johansson later appeared in the role of Anna , a yoga instructor , in the 2009 ensemble cast of He 's Just Not That Into You , with Jennifer Connelly , Bradley Cooper , Drew Barrymore and Kevin Connolly . The film was a box office success but only gained average critical reception . 
 In March 2009 , Johansson signed on to play Natalia Romanova / Natasha Romanoff , aka " The Black Widow " in Iron Man 2 after Emily Blunt turned down the role . The film was released on May 7 , 2010 . The film was a box office success and received mostly positive reviews from critics . In 2011 , Johansson played the role of Kelly , a zookeeper in the family film We Bought a Zoo . The film gained mainly favorable reviews . 
 In November 2011 , it was reported that she planned to make her directorial debut by adapting Truman Capote 's novel , Summer Crossing , with the screenplay written by playwright <unk> Skyler . Johansson reprised the role of Natasha Romanoff in The Avengers in 2012 . The Avengers received positive reviews and was highly successful at the box office , becoming the third highest @-@ grossing film both in the United States and worldwide . In early March 2012 , it was announced that Johansson had been cast as Janet Leigh in the Sacha Gervasi @-@ directed film Hitchcock , a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes drama about the making of Alfred Hitchcock 's 1960 film Psycho . Released in November 2012 , Hitchcock received mixed to positive reviews . 
 Johansson received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on May 2 , 2012 , located at <unk> Hollywood Blvd . , in front of Madame Tussauds Hollywood wax museum . Also in 2012 , Johansson was cast in Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt 's directorial debut , Don Jon . The film premiered at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival , and had its wide release in September 2013 . Don Jon received positive reviews . Johansson 's performance was highlighted by critics ; Claudia Puig of USA Today stated that she " gives one of her best performances as the bossy , gum @-@ chewing Jersey girl " . 
 In 2013 , Johansson voiced the character Samantha , an intelligent computer operating system , in the Spike Jonze film Her , replacing Samantha Morton in the role . The film received critical acclaim upon release with Johansson 's performance being well @-@ received among critics . Johansson was also cast in the 2013 film Under the Skin , the film adaptation of Michel Faber 's novel of the same name , directed by Jonathan Glazer , appearing in a role which required full frontal nudity . The film was released in the United States in 2014 , to positive reviews . Johansson 's performance received a positive reception . 
 In October 2014 , it was announced that Johannson will star in and executive produce the upcoming eight @-@ episode period series The Custom of the Country , based on Edith Wharton 's 1913 novel of the same name . She is set to play Undine Spragg , a young woman from the Midwest who tries to climb her way up the New York City social ladder . It will be written by Christopher Hampton . 
 Johansson reprised her role as Black Widow in the 2014 sequel Captain America : The Winter Soldier , alongside frequent co @-@ star Chris Evans as the title character . The film received positive reviews . She played Molly in the 2014 film Chef , alongside Jon Favreau , Robert Downey , Jr. and Sofía Vergara . She also starred in Lucy , a science fiction action film directed by Luc Besson , which was released on July 25 , 2014 . The film received largely positive , but also polarizing , critical reviews , and grossed $ 458 million against a budget of $ 40 million . 
 In 2015 , Johansson again played the Black Widow in Avengers : Age of Ultron , alongside the original cast of the first Avengers film . A mixture of close @-@ ups , concealing costumes , stunt doubles and visual effects were used to help hide Johansson 's pregnancy during filming . 
 On January 5 , 2015 , Variety announced that Johannson has signed on to play the lead role in a film adaptation of the Ghost in the Shell franchise , which will be directed by Rupert Sanders and produced by Avi Arad and Steven Paul . The casting of Johansson for the film was met with criticism from many fans and critics , calling the choice " whitewashing " . A petition was created in the effort to have Johansson removed from the project . 
 Johansson again reprised her role as Black Widow in Captain America : Civil War , released in May 2016 . 
 = = = Stage work = = = 
 Johansson made her first stage appearance when she was 8 years old in the Off Broadway play <unk> opposite Ethan Hawke . In January 2010 , following previews that began December 28 , 2009 , Johansson made her debut on Broadway , as Catherine Carbone in the drama A View from the Bridge , written by Arthur Miller and directed by Gregory Mosher . Liev Schreiber played opposite her . Johansson won the 2010 Tony Award for Best Performance by a Featured Actress in a Play , for her role in the play . Her win received some backlash from critics and seasoned Broadway actors who felt she was undeserving of the award . 
 Johansson starred as Maggie in a Broadway revival of Cat on a Hot Tin Roof beginning January 17 , 2013 . Her performance received mixed reviews from critics . Thom Geier , writing for Entertainment Weekly , wrote , " Scarlett Johansson brings a fierce fighting spirit to Maggie the Cat in director Rob Ashford 's languorous revival ... Johansson shows a winning determination – to lure back her husband , to defend their share of his family 's fortune , to maintain a sometimes shaky Southern accent . " On the other hand , reviewer Joe Dziemianowicz ( The Daily News ) called her performance " alarmingly one @-@ note " . 
 = = Endorsements = = 
 Johansson has appeared in advertising campaigns for Calvin Klein , L 'Oréal and Louis Vuitton , and has been the face of Spanish brand Mango since 2009 . After appearing at the Metropolitan Museum of Art 's Costume Institute Gala with Domenico Dolce and Stefano Gabbana , Johansson was announced as the face of the new Dolce & Gabbana make @-@ up collection in early 2009 . She made a personal appearance at the London store , Selfridges , on July 31 , 2009 , to help launch and promote the line . Johansson was also the first Hollywood celebrity to become an ambassador for a champagne house . She is the spokesperson for Moët & Chandon . In January 2014 , the Israeli <unk> home @-@ carbonation system company announced Johannson as its first brand ambassador . She has stayed the course , though her involvement has generated controversy . 
 = = Music career = = 
 In 2005 , Johansson was considered for the role of Maria in Andrew Lloyd Webber 's West End revival of The Sound of Music , though the role ultimately went to newcomer Connie Fisher ( winner of the BBC talent show How Do You Solve a Problem Like Maria ? ) Released on May 8 , 2006 , Johansson sang the track " Summertime " for Unexpected Dreams – Songs From the Stars , a non @-@ profit collection of songs recorded by Hollywood actors . She performed with The Jesus and Mary Chain for a special Coachella Reunion Show in Indio , California in April 2007 . 
 In 2007 , Johansson appeared as the leading lady in Justin Timberlake 's music video , for " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " , which was nominated in August 2007 , for video of the year at the MTV Video Music Awards . 
 In mid @-@ 2007 , she spent about a month in Maurice , Louisiana recording an album at Dockside Studio . The album , consisting of one original song and ten cover versions of Tom Waits songs , was produced by Dave <unk> of TV on the Radio and features David Bowie , members from the Yeah Yeah Yeahs and Celebration . Released on May 20 , 2008 , it was entitled Anywhere I Lay My Head . Reviews of the album were mixed , or average . Spin commented , " There 's nothing particularly compelling about Scarlett Johansson 's singing . " Conversely , some critics found it to be " surprisingly alluring " , " a bravely eccentric selection " , and " a brilliant album " with " ghostly magic " . 
 The album was named the " 23rd best album of 2008 " by NME and peaked at No.1 on the Billboard Top Heatseekers chart and No. 126 on the Billboard 200 chart . Of her album , Johansson said , " I had this golden opportunity to record and thought I would do maybe an album of standards , because I 'm not a songwriter . I 'm a vocalist . " Johansson said for her recording she " wanted to have space and [ she ] wanted to be in a remote place where all of us could just be ourselves and not worry about anyone trying to listen in or get in on that . " Johansson said in an interview that she started listening to Tom Waits when she was 11 or 12 years old . Of Tom Waits , Johansson said in an interview , " His melodies are so beautiful , his voice is so distinct and I had my own way of doing Tom Waits songs . " In December 2008 , MTV reported Johansson planned to follow @-@ up Anywhere I Lay My Head with an album of all original music , saying , " I don 't think I 'd do covers , so it 'd be a project that I have to dedicate myself to . I feel like that 's something for the future . " 
 In 2009 , Johansson covered Jeff Buckley 's " Last Goodbye " for the soundtrack of He 's Just Not That Into You . Released on September 8 , 2009 , she and singer / songwriter Pete Yorn recorded a collaborative album , Break Up , inspired by Serge Gainsbourg 's duets with Brigitte Bardot . In 2010 , Steel Train released Terrible Thrills Vol . 1 , which includes their favourite female artists singing songs from their self @-@ titled album . Johansson is the first artist on the album , singing " Bullet " . In 2011 , Johansson sang " One Whole Hour " for the soundtrack of the documentary film Wretches & <unk> . In 2012 , Johansson added her voice to a J. Ralph track entitled " Before My Time " to the end credits of the climate documentary Chasing Ice . The song received a nomination from the Academy Awards in the " Best Original Song " category . 
 In February 2015 , Johansson formed a band called The Singles . It is made up of Este Haim from <unk> , Holly Miranda , Kendra Morris , and Julia <unk> . The first single released by the group was called " Candy " . Johansson was issued a cease and desist order from the lead singer of the Los Angeles @-@ based rock band The Singles , demanding Johansson stop using their name . 
 = = Public image = = 
 Johansson 's physical appearance and personality consistently score high within the US and UK male demographic . Maxim ranked her at No. 6 in their Hot 100 Issue in 2006 , No. 3 in 2007 , No. 2 in 2008 , No. 34 in 2009 , No. 14 in 2010 , and 2011 , No. 17 in 2012 No. 15 in 2013 , and No. 2 in 2014 . In November 2006 , she was named the " Sexiest Woman Alive " by Esquire . She appeared on the cover of the March 2006 issue of Vanity Fair in the nude alongside actress Keira Knightley and fashion designer Tom Ford . In February 2007 , she was named the " Sexiest Celebrity " of the year by Playboy . In 2010 , GQ named her its Babe of the Year . In 2011 , Men 's Health named her one of the " 100 Hottest Women of All @-@ Time " , ranking her at No. 12 . FHM has regularly ranked her as one of their 100 sexiest famous women since 2005 . 
 During the filming of Match Point , director Woody Allen described Johansson as " sexually overwhelming " , saying that he found it " very hard to be extra witty around a sexually overwhelming , beautiful young woman who is wittier than you are . " In 2014 , New Yorker film critic Anthony Lane wrote that " she is evidently , and profitably , aware of her sultriness , and of how much , down to the last inch , it contributes to the contours of her reputation . " 
 Johansson is commonly referred to as " <unk> " by the media and fans , but has stated that she dislikes the nickname , calling it " awful " and " terrible " . In the May 2014 issue of Glamour , she stated , " I associate that name [ <unk> ] with , like , pop stars . It sounds tacky . It 's lazy and flippant . And there 's something kind of violent about it . There 's something insulting about it . " 
 = = Activism = = 
 = = = Charity work = = = 
 In 2005 , Johansson became a Global Ambassador for the aid and development agency Oxfam . In March 2008 , a UK @-@ based bidder paid £ 20 @,@ 000 on an eBay auction to benefit Oxfam , winning a hair and makeup treatment , a pair of tickets and a chauffeured trip to accompany Johansson on a 20 @-@ minute date to the world premiere of He 's Just Not That Into You . 
 In January 2014 , Johansson resigned from her Oxfam position after facing criticism for her promotion of <unk> , whose main factory is based in <unk> Adumim , an Israeli settlement in the West Bank , as Oxfam opposes all trade with such Israeli settlements . Johansson said she and Oxfam " have a fundamental difference of opinion in regards to the Boycott , Divestment and Sanctions movement " . In response to her resignation , Oxfam stated that it was " grateful for her many contributions ... [ in ] helping to highlight the impact of natural disasters and raise funds to save lives and fight poverty " . 
 = = = Political advocacy = = = 
 Johansson was registered as an independent , at least through 2008 , and campaigned for Democratic candidate John Kerry in the 2004 United States presidential election . About George W. Bush 's 2004 reelection , she said , " [ I am ] disappointed . I think it was a disappointment for a large percentage of the population . " 
 Johansson also campaigned for Democratic candidate Barack Obama : Her efforts included appearances in Iowa during January 2008 , where her efforts were targeted at younger voters ; an appearance at Cornell College ; and a speaking engagement at Carleton College in Northfield , Minnesota on Super Tuesday , 2008 . Johansson appeared in the 2008 music video for The Black Eyed Peas front man will.i.am 's song , " Yes We Can " , directed by Jesse Dylan , a song inspired by Obama 's speech following the 2008 New Hampshire primary . On February 7 , 2012 , Johansson and Anna Wintour hosted a fashion launch of pro @-@ Obama clothing , bags and accessories , with proceeds going to the President 's re @-@ election campaign . She addressed voters at the Democratic National Convention on September 6 , 2012 , calling for President Obama 's reelection and for more engagement from young voters . She specifically encouraged women to vote for Obama and condemned Mitt Romney for his opposition to Planned Parenthood . 
 Johansson publicly endorsed and supported Manhattan Borough President Scott Stringer 's 2013 run for New York City Comptroller by hosting a series of fundraisers . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Religion and relationships = = = 
 Johansson celebrates a " little of both " Christmas and Hanukkah , and has described herself as Jewish . 
 From 2001 to 2002 , while Johansson attended the Professional Children 's School , she dated classmate Jack <unk> , who went on to become the guitarist for the band Fun . She dated her Black Dahlia co @-@ star Josh Hartnett for about two years until the end of 2006 , with Hartnett citing their busy lives as the reason for the split . 
 Johansson began dating Canadian actor Ryan Reynolds in 2007 , and in May 2008 , it was reported that they were engaged . On September 27 , 2008 , the couple married in a quiet ceremony near <unk> , British Columbia . They purchased a $ 2 @.@ 8 million home together near Los Angeles . On December 14 , 2010 , the couple announced their separation . Their divorce was finalized on July 1 , 2011 . 
 Following her separation from Reynolds , Johansson dated actor Sean Penn in a short @-@ lived , but highly publicized relationship that lasted until June 2011 , after which Johansson entered a year @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half long relationship with advertising executive Nate Naylor . The pair split up in October 2012 . 
 In November 2012 , Johansson started dating Frenchman Romain Dauriac , the owner of an independent advertising agency . In September 2013 , it was announced that Johansson and Dauriac were engaged . In 2014 , Johansson and Dauriac began dividing their time between residences in New York City and Paris , France . Her representative confirmed on September 4 , 2014 , that their daughter , Rose Dorothy Dauriac , had been born at an unspecified date . Johansson and Dauriac married on October 1 , 2014 , in Philipsburg , Montana . 
 = = = Cell phone hack = = = 
 In September 2011 , nude photographs of Johansson hacked from her cell phone were published online . Following an FBI investigation , Christopher Chaney was arrested , pleaded guilty , and was sentenced to 10 years in prison . Johansson said the photos had been sent to her then @-@ husband , Ryan Reynolds , three years prior to the incident . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Stage = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = Soundtrack appearances = = = 
 = = = Other album appearances = = = 
 = Anna Wintour = 
 Anna Wintour , OBE ( / <unk> / ; born 3 November 1949 ) is a British @-@ American journalist and editor . She has been editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Vogue since 1988 . In 2013 , she became artistic director for Condé Nast , Vogue 's publisher . With her trademark pageboy bob haircut and dark sunglasses , Wintour has become an important figure in much of the fashion world , widely praised for her eye for fashion trends and her support for younger designers . Her reportedly aloof and demanding personality has earned her the nickname " Nuclear Wintour " . 
 She is the eldest daughter of Charles Wintour , who was editor of the London Evening Standard from 1959 to 1976 . Her father consulted her on how to make the newspaper relevant to the youth of the era . Anna became interested in fashion as a teenager . Her career in fashion journalism began at two British magazines . Later , she moved to the United States , with stints at New York and House & Garden . She returned home for a year to turn around British Vogue , and later assumed control of the franchise 's magazine in New York , reviving what many saw as a stagnating publication . Her use of the magazine to shape the fashion industry has been the subject of debate within it . Animal rights activists have attacked her for promoting fur , while other critics have charged her with using the magazine to promote elitist views of femininity and beauty . 
 A former personal assistant , Lauren Weisberger , wrote the 2003 best selling roman à clef The Devil Wears Prada , later made into a successful film starring Meryl Streep as Miranda Priestly , a fashion editor , believed to be based on Wintour . In 2009 , she was the focus of another film , R.J. Cutler 's documentary The September Issue . 
 = = Family = = 
 Wintour was born in London , in 1949 , to Charles Wintour ( 1917 – 1999 ) , editor of the Evening Standard , and Eleanor " <unk> " Trego Baker ( 1917 @-@ 1995 ) , daughter of a Harvard law professor . Her parents married in 1940 and divorced in 1979 . Wintour was named after her maternal grandmother , Anna Baker ( born <unk> ) , a merchant 's daughter from Pennsylvania . Audrey Slaughter , a magazine editor who founded publications such as Honey and Petticoat , is her stepmother . The late @-@ 18th @-@ century novelist Lady Elizabeth Foster , Duchess of Devonshire , was Wintour 's great @-@ great @-@ great @-@ grandmother , and Sir Augustus Vere Foster , the last Baronet of that name , was a granduncle . 
 She had four siblings . Her older brother , Gerald , died in a traffic accident as a child . One of her younger brothers , Patrick , is also a journalist , currently political editor of The Guardian . James and Nora Wintour have worked in London local government and for international non @-@ governmental organisations respectively . 
 = = Early life = = 
 In her youth , Wintour was educated at the independent North London Collegiate School , where she frequently rebelled against the dress code by taking up the hemlines of her skirts . At the age of 14 , she began wearing her hair in a bob . She developed an interest in fashion as a regular viewer of Cathy McGowan on Ready Steady Go ! , and from the issues of Seventeen her grandmother sent from America . " Growing up in London in the ' 60s , you 'd have to have had Irving Penn 's sack over your head not to know something extraordinary was happening in fashion , " she recalled . Her father regularly consulted her when he was considering ideas for increasing readership in the youth market . 
 At the age of 15 , she began dating well @-@ connected older men . She was involved briefly with Piers Paul Read , then 24 . In her later teens , she and gossip columnist Nigel Dempster became a fixture on the London club circuit . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = From fashion to journalism = = = 
 " I think my father really decided for me that I should work in fashion , " she recalled in The September Issue . He arranged for his daughter 's first job , at the influential Biba boutique , when she was 15 . The next year , she left North London Collegiate and began a training program at Harrods . At her parents ' behest , she also took fashion classes at a nearby school . Soon she gave them up , saying , " You either know fashion or you don 't . " Another older boyfriend , Richard Neville , gave her her first experience of magazine production at his popular and controversial Oz . 
 In 1970 , when Harper 's Bazaar UK merged with Queen to become Harper 's & Queen , Wintour was hired as one of its first editorial assistants , beginning her career in fashion journalism . She told her co @-@ workers that she wanted to edit Vogue . While there , she discovered model Annabel <unk> , a former North London classmate . Her connections helped her secure locations for innovative shoots by Helmut Newton , Jim Lee and other trend @-@ setting photographers . One recreated the works of Renoir and Manet using models in go @-@ go boots . After chronic disagreements with her rival , Min Hogg , she quit and moved to New York with her boyfriend , freelance journalist Jon Bradshaw . 
 = = = New York City = = = 
 In her new home , she became a junior fashion editor at Harper 's Bazaar in New York City in 1975 . Wintour 's innovative shoots led editor Tony Mazzola to fire her after nine months . She was introduced to Bob Marley by one of Bradshaw 's friends , and disappeared with him for a week . A few months later , Bradshaw helped her get her first position as a fashion editor , at Viva , a women 's adult magazine started by Kathy Keeton , then wife of Penthouse publisher Bob Guccione . She has rarely discussed working there , due to that connection . This was the first job at which she was able to hire a personal assistant , which began her reputation as a demanding and difficult boss . 
 In late 1978 , Guccione shut down the unprofitable magazine . Wintour decided to take some time off from work . She broke up with Bradshaw and began a relationship with French record producer Michel Esteban , for two years dividing her time with him between Paris and New York . She returned to work in 1980 , succeeding Elsa <unk> as fashion editor for a new women 's magazine named Savvy . It sought to appeal to career @-@ conscious professional women , who spent their own money , the readers Wintour would later target at Vogue . 
 The following year , she became fashion editor of New York . There , the fashion spreads and photo shoots she had been putting together for years finally began attracting attention . Editor Edward <unk> sometimes bent very strict rules for her and let her work on other sections of the magazine . She learned through her work on a cover involving Rachel Ward how effectively celebrity covers sold copies . " Anna saw the celebrity thing coming before everyone else did , " Grace Coddington said three decades later . A former colleague arranged for an interview with Vogue editor Grace Mirabella that ended when Wintour told Mirabella she wanted her job . 
 = = = Condé Nast = = = 
 She went to work at Vogue later when Alex Liberman , editorial director for Condé Nast , publisher of Vogue , talked to Wintour about a position there in 1983 . She eventually accepted after a bidding war that doubled her salary , becoming the magazine 's first creative director , a position with vaguely defined responsibilities . Her changes to the magazine were often made without Mirabella 's knowledge , causing friction among the staff . She began dating child psychiatrist David Shaffer , an older acquaintance from London . They married in 1984 . 
 In 1985 , Wintour attained her first editorship , taking over British Vogue after Beatrix Miller retired . Once in charge , she replaced many staffers and exerted far more control over the magazine than any previous editor had , earning the nickname " Nuclear Wintour " in the process . Those editors who were retained began to refer to the period as " The Wintour of Our Discontent . " Her changes moved the magazine from its traditional eccentricity to a direction more in line with the American magazine . Wintour 's ideal reader was the same woman Savvy had tried to reach . " There 's a new kind of woman out there , " she told the Evening Standard . " She 's interested in business and money . She doesn 't have time to shop anymore . She wants to know what and why and where and how . " 
 In 1987 , Wintour returned to New York to take over House & Garden . Its circulation had long lagged behind rival Architectural Digest , and Condé Nast hoped she could improve it . Again , she made radical changes to staff and look , canceling $ 2 million worth of photo spreads and articles in her first week . She put so much fashion in photo spreads that it became known as House & Garment , and enough celebrities that it was referred to as Vanity Chair , within the industry . 
 Those changes worsened the magazine 's problems . When the title was shortened to just HG , many longtime subscribers thought they were getting a new magazine and put it aside for the real thing to arrive . Most of those subscriptions were eventually canceled , and while some fashion advertisers came over , most of the magazine 's traditional advertisers pulled out . 
 Ten months later , she finally became editor of Vogue . Under Mirabella , it had become more focused on lifestyles as a whole and less on fashion . Industry insiders worried that it was losing ground to the recently introduced American edition of Elle . 
 After making sweeping changes in staff , Wintour also changed the style of the cover pictures . Mirabella had preferred tight head shots of well @-@ known models in studios ; Wintour 's covers showed more of the body and were taken outside , like those Diana Vreeland had done years earlier . She used less well @-@ known models , and mixed inexpensive clothes with the high fashion : the first issue she was in charge of , November 1988 , featured a Peter Lindbergh photograph of 19 @-@ year @-@ old Michaela <unk> in a $ 50 pair of faded jeans and a bejeweled jacket by Christian Lacroix worth $ 10 @,@ 000 . It was the first time a Vogue cover model had worn jeans ( <unk> was originally supposed to have worn the skirt that coordinated with the jacket , but she had gained some weight and it didn 't fit ) . In 2012 , Wintour reflected on the cover : 
 It was so unlike the studied and elegant close @-@ ups that were typical of Vogue ’ s covers back then , with tons of makeup and major jewelry . This one broke all the rules . Michaela wasn 't looking at you , and worse , she had her eyes almost closed . Her hair was blowing across her face . It looked easy , casual , a moment that had been snapped on the street , which it had been , and which was the whole point . Afterwards , in the way that these things can happen , people applied all sorts of interpretations : It was about mixing high and low , Michaela was pregnant , it was a religious statement . But none of these things was true . I had just looked at that picture and sensed the winds of change . And you can ’ t ask for more from a cover image than that . 
 Years later , Wintour admitted the photo had never been planned as the cover shot . In 2011 , when Vogue put its entire archive online , Wintour was quoted as saying , " I just said , ' Well , let 's just try this . ' And off we went . It was just very natural . To me it just said , ' This is something new . This is something different . ' The printers called to make sure that was supposed to be the cover , as they thought a mistake might have been made . " In 2015 she said if she had to pick a favorite of her covers , it would be that one . " [ I ] t was a leap of faith and it was certainly a big change for Vogue . " 
 " Wintour 's approach hit a nerve — this was the way real women put clothes together ( with the likely exception of wearing multi @-@ thousand @-@ dollar T @-@ shirts ) , " one reviewer says . On the June 1989 cover , another model was shown in wet hair , with just a bathrobe and no apparent makeup . Photographers , makeup artists , and <unk> got credited along with the models . 
 In August 2014 , Gigi Hadid paid tribute to Wintour 's first cover . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 Under her editorship , the magazine renewed its focus on fashion and returned to the prominence it had held under Vreeland . Vogue held its position as market leader against three contenders : Elle ; Harper 's Bazaar , which had lured away Liz <unk> , Wintour 's most prominent deputy , and Mirabella , a magazine Rupert Murdoch created for Wintour 's fired predecessor . Her most serious competitor was within the company : Tina Brown , editor of Vanity Fair and later The New Yorker . 
 At the end of the decade , another of Wintour 's inner circle left to run Harper 's Bazaar . Kate Betts , seen as Wintour 's likely successor , had broadened the magazine 's reach by commissioning stories with a more hard @-@ news edge , about women in politics , street culture , and the financial difficulties of some major designers . She had also added the " Index " section , a few pages of tips meant to be torn out of the magazine . At staff meetings , she earned Wintour 's respect as the only person who publicly challenged her . 
 The two began to disagree about the magazine 's direction . Betts felt Vogue 's fashion coverage was getting too limited . Wintour in turn thought that the stories with popular culture angles Betts was assigning were beneath readers , and began pairing Betts with Plum Sykes , whom Betts reportedly detested as a " pretentious airhead . " Eventually , she left , complaining to the New York Times that Wintour had not even sent her a baby gift . Wintour wrote an editor 's letter that complimented Betts and wished her well . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 Betts was one of several longtime editors to leave Vogue around the new millennium . A year later , Sykes , another putative successor , left to concentrate on her best @-@ selling novels set in the city 's upper classes and a screenplay . A number of other editors also left to assume the top jobs at other publications . While some of their replacements didn 't last , a new group of core editors formed . 
 The September 2004 issue was 832 pages , the largest issue of a monthly magazine ever published at that time , since exceeded by the September 2007 issue Cutler 's documentary covered . Wintour also oversaw the introduction of three spinoffs : Teen Vogue , Vogue Living and Men 's Vogue . Teen Vogue has published more ad pages and earned more advertiser revenue than either Elle Girl and Cosmo Girl , and the 164 ad pages in the début issue of Men 's Vogue were the most for a first issue in Condé Nast history . <unk> named her " Editor of the Year " for this brand expansion . Queen Elizabeth II appointed her Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) in the 2008 Birthday Honours . 
 That year was generally difficult , as the economy worsened . After ruffling feathers at the Milan shows in February , the April issue 's cover image of LeBron James and Gisele Bündchen brought criticism for its evocation of racial stereotypes . The next month a lavish Karl Lagerfeld gown she wore to the Met 's Costume Institute Gala was called " the worst fashion faux pas of 2008 . " In the fall , Vogue Living was suspended indefinitely , and Men 's Vogue cut back to two issues a year as an <unk> or supplement to the women 's magazine . At the end of the year , December 's cover highlighted a disparaging comment Jennifer Aniston made about Angelina Jolie , to the former 's displeasure . It seemed Wintour had lost her touch . 
 In 2008 , rumours arose that she would retire , and be replaced by French Vogue editor Carine <unk> . An editor at Russian GQ reportedly introduced Russian Vogue editor <unk> <unk> as the next editor of American Vogue . Condé Nast responded by taking out a full @-@ page ad in The New York Times defending her record . In that same publication , Cathy Horyn later wrote that while Wintour hadn 't lost her touch , the magazine had become " stale and predictable , " as a reader had recently complained . " To read Vogue in recent years is to wonder about the peculiar fascination for the ' villa in Tuscany ' story , " Horyn added . The magazine also dealt awkwardly with the recession , she commented . 
 In 2009 , Wintour began making more media appearances . On a 60 Minutes profile , she said she would not retire . " To me this is a really interesting time to be in this position and I think it would be in a way irresponsible not to put my best foot forward and lead us into a different time . " In September , The September Issue , a documentary film by The War Room producer R.J. Cutler about the production of the September 2007 issue , was released . It focused on the sometimes @-@ difficult relationship between Wintour and creative director Grace Coddington . She appeared on the Late Show with David Letterman to promote it , defending the relevance of fashion in a tough economy . The American Society of Magazine Editors elected her to its Hall of Fame in 2010 . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 In 2013 , Condé Nast announced she would be taking on the position of artistic director for the company 's magazines while remaining at Vogue . She assumed some of the responsibilities of Si Newhouse , the company 's longtime editorial director , who , in his mid @-@ 80s at the time , had begun moving from his role at Condé Nast to join the rest of his family in managing Advance Publications , its parent company . A company spokesman told The New York Times the position was created to keep Wintour . She described it as " an extension of what I am doing , but on a broader scale . " 
 In January 2014 , the Metropolitan Museum of Art named its Costume Institute complex after Wintour ; First Lady Michelle Obama opened it in May of that year . Wintour starred in The Fashion Fund , which aired on Ovation TV that year as well ; she was also named the 39th most powerful woman in the world by Forbes . 
 = = = Fashion industry power broker = = = 
 Through the years , she has come to be regarded as one of the most powerful people in fashion , setting trends , and anointing new designers . Industry publicists often hear " Do you want me to go to Anna with this ? " when they have differences with her subordinates . The Guardian has called her the " unofficial <unk> " of New York City . She has encouraged fashion houses such as Christian Dior to hire younger , fresher designers such as John Galliano . 
 Her influence extends outside fashion . She persuaded Donald Trump to let Marc Jacobs use a ballroom at the Plaza Hotel for a show when Jacobs and his partner were short of cash . More recently , she persuaded Brooks Brothers to hire the relatively unknown Thom Browne . A protégée at Vogue , Plum Sykes , became a successful novelist , drawing her settings from New York 's fashionable élite . 
 Her salary was reported to be $ 2 million a year in 2005 . In addition , she receives several perks , such as a chauffeured Mercedes S @-@ Class ( both in New York and abroad ) , a $ 200 @,@ 000 shopping allowance , and the Coco Chanel Suite at the Hotel Ritz Paris while attending European fashion shows . Condé Nast president S. I. Newhouse also had the company make her an interest @-@ free $ 1 @.@ 6 million loan to purchase her townhouse in Greenwich Village . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 She had two children by David Shaffer following their 1984 marriage : Charles ( Charlie ) born 1985 , and Katherine ( known as Bee ) born 1987 . The latter wrote occasional columns for The Daily Telegraph in 2006 , but says she won 't follow her mother into fashion . The couple divorced in 1999 . Newspapers and gossip columnists claimed her affair with investor Shelby Bryan ended the marriage . She declined to comment . Her friends say Bryan has mellowed her . " She smiles now and has been seen to laugh , " the Observer quoted one as saying . 
 Wintour is also a philanthropist . She serves as a trustee of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York , where she has organised benefits that have raised $ 50 million for the museum 's Costume Institute . She began the CFDA / Vogue Fund in order to encourage , support and mentor unknown fashion designers . She has also raised over $ 10 million for AIDS charities since 1990 , by organising various high profile benefits . 
 She claims to rise before 6 am , plays tennis and has her hair and makeup done , then gets to Vogue 's offices two hours later . She always arrives at fashion shows well before their scheduled start . " I use the waiting time to make phone calls and notes ; I get some of my best ideas at the shows , " she says . According to the BBC documentary series Boss Woman , she rarely stays at parties for more than 20 minutes at a time and gets to bed by 10 : 15 every night . She exerts a great deal of control over the magazine 's visual content . Since her first days as editor , she has required that photographers not begin until she has approved Polaroids of the setup and clothing . Afterwards , they must submit all their work to the magazine , not just their personal choices . 
 Her control over the text is less certain . Her staffers claim she reads everything written for publication , but former editor Richard Story has claimed she rarely , if ever , read any of Vogue 's arts coverage or book reviews . Earlier in her career , she often left the task of writing the text accompanying her layouts to others ; former coworkers claim she has minimal skills in that area . Today , she writes little for the magazine save the monthly editor 's letter . She reportedly has three full @-@ time assistants but sometimes surprises callers by answering the phone herself . She often turns her cell phone off in order to eat her lunch , usually a steak ( or <unk> hamburger ) , undisturbed . High @-@ protein meals have been a habit of hers for a long time . " It was smoked salmon and scrambled eggs every single day " for lunch , says a coworker at Harpers & Queen . " She would eat nothing else . " 
 = = = Personal fashion preferences = = = 
 Because of her position , Wintour 's wardrobe is often closely scrutinised and imitated . Earlier in her career , she mixed fashionable T @-@ shirts and vests with designer jeans . When she started at Vogue as creative director she switched to Chanel suits with miniskirts . She continued to wear them during both pregnancies , opening the skirts slightly in back and keeping her jacket on to cover up . Wintour was listed as " one of the fifty best @-@ dressed over 50s " by the Guardian in March 2013 . 
 According to biographer Jerry Oppenheimer , her ubiquitous sunglasses are actually corrective lenses , since she suffers from deteriorating vision as her father did . A former colleague he interviewed recalls trying on her Wayfarers in her absence and getting dizzy . " I think at this point they 've become , you know , really armour , " Wintour herself told 60 Minutes correspondent Morley Safer , explaining that they allow her to keep her reactions to a show private . As she rebounded from the end of her marriage and the turnover in the magazine 's editorial staff , a fellow editor and friend noted that " she 's not hiding behind her glasses anymore . Now she 's having fun again . " 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Wintour has been a supporter of the Democratic Party since Hillary Clinton 's 2000 Senate run and John Kerry 's 2004 presidential run and serving Barack Obama 's 2008 and 2012 presidential runs as a " <unk> " of contributions . In 2008 and 2012 , she co @-@ hosted fundraisers with Sarah Jessica Parker , the latter being a 50 @-@ person , $ 40 @,@ 000 @-@ a @-@ plate dinner at Parker 's West Village town house with Meryl Streep , Michael Kors , and Trey Laird , an advertising executive , among the attendees . She has also teamed with Calvin Klein and Harvey Weinstein on fundraisers during Obama 's first term and Donna Karan has been amongst the attendees . In 2013 when Vogue 's former director of communications stepped down , Wintour was rumoured to be looking to hire someone with a political background . Soon after , Wintour hired Hildy <unk> , a former fundraiser for the Democratic National Committee and Obama 's first <unk> also supported Hillary Clinton 's 2016 Presidential Campaign , forming part of Clinton 's long list of wealthy <unk> or " <unk> " . 
 = = The Devil Wears Prada = = 
 Lauren Weisberger , a former Wintour assistant who left Vogue for Departures along with Richard Story , wrote The Devil Wears Prada after a writing workshop he suggested she take . It was eagerly anticipated for its supposed insider portrait of Wintour prior to its publication . Wintour told The New York Times , " I always enjoy a great piece of fiction . I haven 't decided whether I am going to read it or not . " While it has been suggested that the setting and Miranda Priestly were based on Vogue and Wintour , Weisberger claims she drew not only from her own experiences but those of her friends as well . Wintour herself makes a cameo appearance near the end of the book , where it is said she and Miranda dislike each other . 
 In the novel , Miranda has many similarities to Wintour — among them , she is British , has two children , and is described as a major contributor to the Met . Priestly is a tyrant ; who makes impossible demands of her subordinates , gives them almost none of the information or time necessary to comply and then berates them for their failures to do so . 
 Betts , who had been fired by Harper 's after two years during which staffers said she tried too hard to emulate Wintour , reviewed it harshly in the New York Times Book Review : 
 Having worked at Vogue myself for eight years and having been mentored by Anna Wintour , I have to say Weisberger could have learned a few things in the year she sold her soul to the devil of fashion for $ 32 @,@ 500 . She had a ringside seat at one of the great editorial franchises in a business that exerts an enormous influence over women , but she seems to have understood almost nothing about the isolation and pressure of the job her boss was doing , or what it might cost a person like Miranda Priestly to become a character like Miranda Priestly . 
 Priestly has some positive qualities . Andrea notes that she makes all the magazine 's key editorial decisions by herself and that she has genuine class and style . " I never for one second didn 't know it was an amazing opportunity to assist Anna , " Weisberger said in 2008 . 
 = = = Film adaptation = = = 
 The film version of the novel has not been the only movie to have a character borrowing some aspects of Wintour . Edna Mode 's similar hairstyle in The Incredibles has been noted , Johnny Depp said he partially based the demeanour of Willy Wonka in Charlie and the Chocolate Factory on Wintour . Fey Sommers in the Ugly Betty television series was also likened to Wintour , from the trademark bob and sunglasses , to Wintour 's last name homophonous with ' Winter ' , while Sommers ' is homophonous with ' Summer ' . 
 During the film 's production in 2005 , Wintour was reportedly threatening prominent fashion personalities , particularly designers , that Vogue would not cover them if they made cameo appearances in the movie as themselves . She denied it through a spokesperson who said she was interested in anything that " supports fashion . " Many designers are mentioned in the film . Only one , Valentino Garavani , appeared as himself . 
 The film was released , in mid @-@ 2006 , to great commercial success . Wintour attended the première wearing Prada . In the film , actress Meryl Streep plays a Priestly different enough from the book 's to receive critical praise as an entirely original ( and more sympathetic ) character . ( Streep 's office in the film was similar enough to Wintour 's that Wintour reportedly had hers redecorated . ) 
 Wintour reportedly said the film would probably go straight to DVD . It made over $ 300 million in worldwide box office receipts . Later in 2006 , in an interview with Barbara Walters that aired the day of the DVD 's release , Wintour said she found the film " really entertaining " and praised it for making fashion " entertaining and glamorous and interesting ... I was 100 percent behind it . " 
 That opinion of the movie has not yet led her to forgive Weisberger . When it was reported that the novelist 's editor told her to start her third novel over , Wintour 's spokesman suggested she " should get a job as someone else 's assistant . " 
 Oppenheimer suggests The Devil Wears Prada may have done Wintour a favour by increasing her name recognition . " Besides giving Weisberger her fifteen minutes , " he says , " [ it ] ... place [ d ] Anna squarely in the mainstream celebrity pantheon . [ She ] was now known and talked about over Big Macs and french fries under the Golden Arches by young fashionistas in Wal @-@ Mart denim in Davenport and Dubuque . " 
 When The September Issue was released three years later , critics compared it with the earlier , fictional film . " For the past year or so , she 's been on the media warpath to win back her image , " said Paul Schrodt in Slant Magazine . Many considered the question of how similar she was to Streep 's Priestly , and praised the film for showing the real person . Manohla Dargis at The New York Times said that Priestly had helped humanise Wintour , and " the documentary continues this . " " The movie offers insights that lift it beyond a realist version of The Devil Wears Prada , " agreed Mary Pols in Time . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 In 2005 , two years after The Devil Wears Prada , Oppenheimer 's Front Row : The Cool Life and Hot Times of Vogue 's Editor in Chief was published . It painted a similar portrait of the real woman . According to Oppenheimer , Wintour not only declined his requests for an interview but discouraged others from talking to him . 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Wintour is often described as emotionally distant by those who have come to know her well , even her close friends . " At some stage in her career , Anna Wintour stopped being Anna Wintour and became ' Anna Wintour , ' at which point , like wings of a stately home , she closed off large sections of her personality to the public , " wrote The Guardian . " I think she enjoys not being completely approachable . Just her office is very intimidating . You have to walk about a mile into the office before you get to her desk and I 'm sure it 's intentional , " Coddington says . " I don 't find her to be accessible to people she doesn 't need to be accessible to , " agrees Vogue publisher Tom Florio . 
 She has said she admired her father Charles , known as " Chilly Charlie " for being " inscrutable . " Former coworkers told Oppenheimer of a similar aloofness on her part . But she is also known for volatile outbursts of displeasure , and the widely used " Nuclear Wintour " sobriquet is a result of both . She dislikes it enough to have asked The New York Times not to use it . " There are times I get quite angry , " she admitted in The September Issue . 
 " I think she has been very rude to a lot of people in the past , on her way up – very terse , " a friend told the Observer . " She doesn 't do small talk . She is never going to be friends with her assistant . " A former assistant said , " You definitely did not ride the elevator with her . " Unwritten rules imposed by Wintour at the Vogue offices forbid junior staffers from initiating conversation with her ; an editor who greeted her on the elevator was reprimanded by one of Wintour 's assistants . ( She calls that an exaggeration . ) A visiting reporter saw a junior staffer appear visibly panicked when she realised she would have to ride the elevator with Wintour . Once a junior editor saw her trip in the hallway , walked past without offering assistance , and was later told she " did absolutely the right thing . " 
 Even friends admit to some trepidation in her presence . " Anna happens to be a friend of mine , " says Barbara Amiel , " a fact which is of absolutely no help in coping with the cold panic that grips me whenever we meet . " " I know when to stop pushing her , " says Coddington . " She doesn 't know when to stop pushing me . " 
 She has often been described as a perfectionist who routinely makes impossible , arbitrary demands of subordinates : " kitchen scissors at work , " in the words of one commentator . She once made a junior staffer look through a photographer 's trash to find a picture he had refused to give her . In a deleted scene from The September Issue , she complains about the " horrible white plastic buckets " of ice behind the bars at the CFDA 's 7th on Sale AIDS benefit and moves them out of sight . " The notion that Anna would want something done ' now ' and not ' shortly ' is accurate , " Amiel says of The Devil Wears Prada . " Anna wants what she wants right away . " A longtime assistant says , " She throws you in the water and you 'll either sink or swim . " 
 Peter Braunstein , the former Women 's Wear Daily ( WWD ) media reporter , later convicted of sexually assaulting a coworker , allegedly planned to kill Wintour because of perceived slights . After receiving only one ticket to the 2002 Vogue Fashion Awards , which he perceived as a snub , he became so angry that WWD fired him . At his 2007 trial , prosecutors introduced as evidence a journal he kept on his computer in which he stated his intention to kill her . In it he wrote , " She just never talked to peons like us " to justify his intended actions . 
 On one occasion , she has had to pay for her treatment of employees . In 2004 , a court ruled that she and Shaffer were to pay $ 104 @,@ 403 , and Wintour herself an additional $ 32 @,@ 639 , to settle a lawsuit brought against them by the New York State Workers ' Compensation Board . They had failed to pay the $ 140 @,@ 000 judgement it incurred on behalf of a former employee injured on the job , who did not have the necessary insurance coverage . 
 In the 2000s , her relationship with Bryan was credited with softening her personality at work . " Even when she 's in a bad mood , she has a different posture , " someone described as a " Wintour watcher " told the New York Observer . " The consensus is that she 's so much more mellow and easier to work for because she 's probably getting laid . " 
 = = = Pro @-@ fur stance = = = 
 She has often been the target of animal rights organisations like PETA , who are angered by her use of fur in Vogue , her pro @-@ fur editorials and her refusal to run paid advertisements from animal rights organisations . Undeterred , she continues to use fur in photo spreads , saying there 's always a way to wear it . " Nobody was wearing fur until she put it on the cover in the early 1990s , " says Vogue co @-@ worker Tom Florio . " She ignited the entire industry . " 
 She has " lost count " of the times she has been physically attacked by activists . In Paris in October 2005 , she was hit with a tofu pie while waiting to get into the Chloé show . On another occasion , an activist dumped a dead raccoon on her plate at a restaurant ; she told the waiter to remove it . She and Vogue publisher Ron <unk> once retaliated for a protest outside the Condé Nast offices during the company 's annual Christmas party by sending down a plate of roast beef . 
 Others outside of the animal @-@ rights community have raised the fur issue . Fashion journalist Peter Braunstein wrote in his manifesto that she would go to a hell guarded by large rats , where it would be so warm she wouldn 't need to wear fur . Pamela Anderson , in an early 2008 interview , said Wintour was the living person she most despised " because she bullies young designers and models to use and wear fur . " 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Another common criticism of Wintour 's editorship focuses on Vogue 's increasing use of celebrities on the cover , and her insistence on making them meet her standards . She reportedly told Oprah Winfrey to lose weight before her cover photograph . Likewise , Hillary Clinton was told not to wear a blue suit . At the 2005 <unk> celebration , a Vogue @-@ sponsored salute to British fashion at the Met , Wintour is said to have personally chosen the clothes for prominent attendees such as Jennifer Lopez , Kate Moss , Donald Trump , and Diane von Fürstenberg . " I don 't think Vreeland had that kind of concentration , " says WWD publisher Patrick McCarthy . " She wouldn 't have dressed Babe Paley . Nor would Babe Paley have let her . " By persuading designers to loan clothes to prominent socialites and celebrities , who are then photographed wearing the clothes not only in Vogue but more general @-@ interest magazines like People and Us , which in turn influence what buyers want , some in the industry believe Wintour is exerting too much control over it , especially since she is not involved in making or producing clothes herself . " The end result is that Anna can control it all the way to the selling floor , " says Candy <unk> Price , executive fashion director at <unk> She has been credited with killing grunge fashion in the early 1990s , when it wasn 't selling well , by telling designers if they continued to avoid glamour their looks would not be photographed for Vogue . All complied . 
 Another Vogue writer has complained Wintour excluded ordinary working women , many of whom are regular subscribers , from the pages . " She 's obsessed only about reflecting the aspirations of a certain class of reader , " she says . " We once had a piece about breast cancer which started with an airline stewardess , but she wouldn 't have a stewardess in the magazine so we had to go and look for a high @-@ flying businesswoman who 'd had cancer . " 
 Wintour has been accused of setting herself apart even from peers . " I do not think fiction could surpass the reality , " a British fashion magazine editor says of The Devil Wears Prada . " [ A ] rt in this instance is only a poor imitation of life . " Wintour , the editor says , routinely requests to be seated out of sight of competing editors at shows . " We spend our working lives telling people which it @-@ bag to carry but Anna is so above the rest of us she does not even have a handbag . " 
 At the 2008 Milan Fashion Week she requested that some key shows be rescheduled for earlier in the week so she and other U.S.-based editors could have time to return home before the Paris shows . This led to complaints . Other editors said they had to rush through the earlier shows , and lesser @-@ known designers who had to show later were denied an important audience . Dolce & Gabbana said Italian fashion was getting short shrift and Milan was becoming a " circus without sense . " 
 Giorgio Armani , who at the time was co @-@ chairing a Met exhibition on superheroes ' costumes with Wintour , drew some attention for his personal remarks . " Maybe what she thinks is a beautiful dress , I wouldn 't think was a beautiful dress , " he said . While he claimed he couldn 't understand why people disliked her , saying he himself was indifferent , he expressed hope she hadn 't made a comment once attributed to her " the Armani era is over . " He accused her of preferring French and American fashion over Italian . Geoffrey Beene , who stopped inviting Wintour to shows after she stopped writing about him , called her " a boss lady in four @-@ wheel drive who ignores or abandons those who do not fuel her tank . As an editor , she has turned class into mass , taste into waste . " 
 Her remarks about obesity have caused controversy on more than one occasion . In 2005 , Wintour was heavily criticised by the New York chapter of the National Association to Advance Fat Acceptance after Vogue editor @-@ at @-@ large André Leon Talley said on The Oprah Winfrey Show , at one point , Wintour demanded he lose weight . " Most of the Vogue girls are so thin , tremendously thin " he said , " because Miss Anna doesn 't like fat people . " In 2009 , residents of Minneapolis took umbrage after she told 60 Minutes she could " only kindly describe most of the people I saw as little houses . " They noted their city had been named the third fittest in the nation that year by Men 's Fitness while New York had been named the fifth fattest . 
 Wintour surprised observers when developing an association with the Kardashian family and Kanye West , which culminated in having the Kardashian @-@ Wests on a Vogue cover ; Wintour reportedly commented that having only " deeply tasteful " people in the magazine was boring , and her decision to resort to such personalities has led some to accuse the magazine of being " desperate for buzz . " Wintour has nevertheless continued the association with the less @-@ <unk> " deeply tasteful " pair . 
 = = = Responses = = = 
 Defences of Wintour have often come from others . Amanda Fortini at Slate said she was comfortable with Wintour 's elitism since that was intrinsic to fashion : 
 Most of us read Vogue not with the intention of buying the wildly expensive clothes , but because doing so educates our eye and <unk> our taste , similar to the way eating gourmet food refines the palate . This is a pleasure enabled by Wintour 's ruthless aesthetic , her refusal to participate in the democratizing tendency of most of her competitors . To deny her that privilege is to deny her readers the privilege of fantasy in the form of beautifully photographed Paris couture . 
 Emma Brockes sees this in Wintour herself : " [ Her ] unwavering ability to look as if she lives within the pages of her magazine has a sort of honesty to it , proof that , whatever one thinks about it , the lifestyle peddled by Vogue is at least physically possible . " " Print publications have to be as luxurious an experience as possible , " Wintour explained in 2015 . " You have to feel it coming off the page . You have to see photographs and pieces that you couldn 't possibly see anywhere else . " 
 Some friends see her purported coldness as just traditional British reserve , or shyness . Brockes says it may be mutual , " partly a reflection of how awkward people are with her , particularly women , who get preemptively <unk> when faced with the prospect of meeting Fashion Incarnate . " Wintour describes herself as shy , and Harry Connick Jr . , who escorted her and Bee to shows in 2007 , agrees . When Morley Safer asked her about complaints about her personality , she said 
 I have so many people here , Morley , that have worked with me for 15 , 20 years , and , you know , if I 'm such a bitch , they must really be a glutton for punishment because they 're still here ... If one comes across sometimes as being cold or brusque , it 's simply because I 'm striving for the best . 
 She has made similar statements in defence of her reported refusal to hire fat people . " It 's important to me that the people that are working here , particularly in the fashion department , " she says , " will present themselves in a way that makes sense to the outside world that they work at Vogue . " 
 Her defenders have called criticism sexist . " Powerful women in the media always get inspected more thoroughly than their male counterparts , " said The New York Times in a piece about Wintour shortly after The Devil Wears Prada 's release . When she took over at Vogue , gossip columnist Liz Smith reported rumours she had gotten the job through an affair with Si Newhouse . A reportedly furious Wintour made her anger the subject of one of her first staff meetings . She still complained about it when accepting a media award in 2002 . 
 She has been called a feminist whose changes to Vogue have reflected , acknowledged , and reinforced advances in the status of women . Reviewing Oppenheimer 's book in The Washington Monthly , managing editor Christina Larson notes Vogue , unlike many other women 's magazines , 
 ... doesn 't play to its readership 's sense of inadequacy ... Instead , it reminds women to take satisfaction , parading all manner of fineries ( clothes , furniture , travel destinations ) that a successful woman might buy , or at least admire . While it surely exists to sell ads ... it does so primarily by exploiting ambition , not insecurity . 
 Wintour , unlike Vreeland , " ... shifted Vogue 's focus from the cult of beauty to the cult of the creation of beauty . " To her , the focus on celebrities is a welcome development as it means women are making the cover of Vogue at least in part for what they have accomplished , not just how they look . 
 Complaints about her role as fashion eminence grise are dismissed by those familiar with how she actually exercises it . " She 's honest . She tells you what she thinks . Yes is yes and no is no , " according to Karl Lagerfeld . " She 's not too pushy " agrees François @-@ Henri Pinault , chief executive officer of PPR , Gucci 's parent company . " She lets you know it 's not a problem if you can 't do something she wants . " Defenders also point out she continued supporting Gucci despite her strong belief PPR should not have let Tom Ford go . Designers such as Alice Roi and Isabel Toledo have flourished without indulging Wintour or Vogue . Her willingness to throw her weight around has helped keep Vogue independent despite its heavy reliance on advertising dollars . Wintour was the only fashion editor who refused to follow an Armani ultimatum to feature more of its clothes in the magazine 's editorial pages , although she has also admitted if she has to choose between two dresses , one by an advertiser and the other not , she will choose the former every time . " Commercial is not a dirty word to me . " 
 Wintour herself , when asked about it , dismisses the notion that she has all the power attributed to her . " I don 't think of myself as a powerful person , " she told Forbes in 2011 , when it named her 69th on its list of the world 's hundred most powerful women . " You know , what does it mean ? It means you get a better seat in a restaurant or tickets to a screening or whatever it may be . But it is a wonderful opportunity to be able to help others , and for that I 'm extremely grateful . " 
 In response to criticisms like Beene 's , she has defended the democratisation of what were once exclusive luxury brands . " It means more people are going to get better fashion , " she told Dana Thomas . " And the more people who can have fashion , the better . " 
 = 2010 Giro d 'Italia = 
 The 2010 Giro d 'Italia was the 93rd edition of the Giro d 'Italia , one of cycling 's Grand Tours . The Giro started off in Amsterdam on 8 May and stayed in the Netherlands for three stages , before leaving the country . The route included climbs such as Monte Zoncolan , Plan de Corones , the Passo del Mortirolo and the Passo di Gavia before ending in Verona with an individual time trial . 
 Principal favorites for overall success in the Giro included Ivan Basso of the Liquigas – Doimo team , Cadel Evans for BMC Racing Team , and Cervélo TestTeam 's Carlos Sastre . After three weeks of racing , it was Basso who claimed his second Giro d 'Italia title , after also winning in 2006 . David Arroyo from Caisse d 'Epargne and Basso 's teammate Vincenzo Nibali rounded out the podium . Australian riders won all the lesser jersey awards , with Evans taking the points classification , Omega Pharma – Lotto 's Matthew Lloyd the winner of the mountains classification , and Richie Porte of Team Saxo Bank the Giro 's best young rider . 
 The road race stages in the Netherlands were both marred by repeated crashes , which led to some unexpected big time gaps before the transfer to Italy . The overall standings were very turbulent in the first week , with four different riders holding the race leader 's pink jersey . The 11th stage greatly re @-@ shaped the overall standings , when several riders , including Sastre , gained almost 13 minutes against the remainder of the field . Porte took the pink jersey after this stage . Two days later , Arroyo took the jersey , and kept it for five days . He eventually lost it to Basso on the first of two very difficult mountain stages to close out the Giro . Success was fairly widespread among the Giro 's 22 teams , as 17 of them came away with either a stage win , classification win , or stint in the pink jersey . 
 = = Teams = = 
 The 22 teams in the race were announced on 22 March . Sixteen teams were guaranteed a place in the race by virtue of a September 2008 agreement between the UCI and the organizers of the season 's three Grand Tours . Those guaranteed a place are those who were members of the UCI ProTour at the time of the agreement . Two from this group , Euskaltel – Euskadi and Française des Jeux , declined to participate in the race , instead focusing on the Tour de France and the Vuelta a España . Two new teams joined the ProTour for 2010 . One , Team Sky , participated in the race , but the other , Team RadioShack , did not wish to participate , since they planned to send their best riders to the partially concurrent Tour of California . Seven UCI Professional Continental teams , two of which ( Bbox Bouygues Telecom and Cofidis ) were part of the September 2008 agreement as they were members of the ProTour at that time , joined the 15 ProTour teams to round out the teams list . Each team entered a squad of nine riders , giving the event a 198 @-@ rider peloton at its outset . 
 The race 's 22 teams were : 
 = = = Non @-@ invitation of Dutch teams = = = 
 The Giro , like the 2009 Vuelta a España before it and the forthcoming Tour de France , began in the Netherlands . The two Dutch Professional Continental teams , Skil – Shimano and Vacansoleil , had both ridden Grand Tours in 2009 . Throughout the season , the two teams tried to prove their combativeness in the hopes of securing Grand Tour invites , trying especially to outdo one another . Since the openings to the Giro and the Tour were partly financed by Dutch tax money , Vacansoleil 's team manager called for political help to get invites for his team , but neither Dutch team made it into either the Giro or the Tour . Consequently , neither made the Vuelta a España teams selection , either . The teams ' disappointment at their non @-@ invitation led to communications with UCI President Pat McQuaid , which may result in reforms to how teams are selected for the Grand Tours . 
 = = Pre @-@ race favorites = = 
 The Giro was often described as being wide open in terms of who had the best chance to win it . This is because many notable riders , including the past three champions , did not enter . 2007 Giro d 'Italia champion Danilo Di Luca , who originally finished second in the 2009 Giro d 'Italia , was suspended by his national federation in February for a doping incident in the 2009 Giro . 2008 Giro d 'Italia champion Alberto Contador skipped the Giro to better focus on the Tour de France , as he also had in the previous season . After first indicating that he might defend his championship , 2009 champion Denis Menchov also announced that he would not ride the Giro , instead focusing on the Tour de France , in order to complete the career sweep of the Grand Tours . Lance Armstrong and Levi Leipheimer , leaders of the Astana squad in the 2009 Giro , announced in October 2009 that they would ride the partially concurrent Tour of California instead of the Giro , which is why Team RadioShack was not selected for the Giro . 
 Just five days before the race began , the UCI announced several riders were under suspicion of doping by virtue of irregular values in their biological passports . Among them was Franco Pellizotti , who had been set to be one of the leaders for the Liquigas – Doimo team and had been described as a pre @-@ race favorite . While team firmly stood behind Pellizotti in the case and expressed anger that the UCI unveiled their findings so close to the start of the Giro , they obligingly pulled him from their squad . He was replaced by Vincenzo Nibali , who had been planning to ride the Tour of California as a squad leader . While not an overall favorite , Alessandro Ballan intended to participate in the race , stating in October that it was a certainty he would start , after missing out on the Giro in 2009 when he was world champion . This was an indication well in advance that the BMC Racing Team was in line for an invite to the race . Ballan was later suspended by his team as a result of an internal doping investigation , meaning he had to miss the Giro . He was later cleared of any wrongdoing . 
 Most pre @-@ race analyses identified Ivan Basso , Cadel Evans , and Carlos Sastre as the major favorites to win the overall classification , with Evans perhaps the consensus pick . Basso and Sastre had both ridden the Giro in 2009 and come away finishing in the top five . Sastre also won two difficult mountain stages in the race 's final week , and was noted as a rider who gets stronger as a race goes along , making the Giro 's very climbing @-@ intensive third week possibly sit in his favor . Evans had finished on a Grand Tour podium in each of the past three seasons , including in the most recent three @-@ week event , the 2009 Vuelta a España . He also entered the race as the reigning world cycling champion and had had a successful 2010 season to date , with a win in La Flèche Wallonne and a podium finish in the Tirreno – Adriatico . Neither Basso nor Sastre had raced much in the 2010 season prior to the Giro . Other riders named as contenders included Bradley Wiggins , former Giro winners Damiano Cunego and Stefano Garzelli , Alexander Vinokourov , Marzio Bruseghin , Christian Vande Velde , Domenico Pozzovivo , David Moncoutié , and Michele Scarponi . Race director Angelo Zomegnan also named Basso , Evans , and Sastre as his three favorites , and included Wiggins and Linus Gerdemann as possible <unk> . 
 Mark Cavendish and Daniele Bennati , stage winners in the past two editions of the Giro , were absent from this race , but several top sprinters took the start in Amsterdam . These included Tyler Farrar , André Greipel , and Alessandro Petacchi , all of whom had themselves won Grand Tour stages in 2009 and figured to be top favorites for the Giro 's flat stages . Former Tour de France points classification winner Óscar Freire intended to make his Giro debut in this race , but he pulled out due to sinusitis shortly before the race started . Other sprinters in the Giro peloton included Robbie McEwen , Freire 's teammate Graeme Brown , Baden Cooke , Leonardo Duque , Sebastian Haedo , Wouter Weylandt , and Greg Henderson . 
 = = Route and stages = = 
 The Giro 's 21 stages were divided into the following classifications by race organizers Gazzetta dello Sport : four time trials ( three individual and one team ) , seven flat stages , five mixed stages , and six mountain stages . The race began in the Netherlands , the ninth time in the Giro 's history that the race began outside Italy , and the first since 2006 's start in Belgium . A short individual time trial and two flat stages were held there . Starting the race away from Italy meant that an early rest day , coming just three days into the 23 @-@ day race , was necessary to transfer to Italy . The first stage upon entering Italy was a team time trial , the fifth consecutive year that discipline had featured in the Giro . Stage 7 visited Tuscany and was raced partly on unpaved roads used yearly in the Italian semi @-@ classic Montepaschi Strade Bianche . The course honored Italian cycling legends Gino Bartali , Fausto Coppi , and <unk> <unk> by passing through their hometowns in the first road race stages in Italy . 
 Five stages ended with climbs , with most coming in the race 's last week . The first was stage 8 to Monte Terminillo , a 16 @.@ 1 km ( 10 @.@ 0 mi ) long climb gaining 1 @,@ 672 m ( 5 @,@ 486 ft ) of vertical elevation for an average gradient of 7 @.@ 3 percent , one of the most difficult climbs in the Apennine Mountains in the region of Abruzzo . The next was Monte Zoncolan in the <unk> Alps , which at 10 @.@ 5 km ( 6 @.@ 5 mi ) in length was shorter than some of the other climbs in the race , but with 1 @,@ 210 m ( 3 @,@ 970 ft ) of vertical gain in that time , its 20 percent maximum gradient made it one of the most difficult . The Stage 16 individual time trial went to Plan de Corones , on a course identical to the one used in the 2008 Giro d 'Italia . In 12 @.@ 9 km ( 8 @.@ 0 mi ) , this stage gained over 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) and featured a section with 24 percent gradients in the final kilometer . The Giro 's last two road race stages were especially climbing @-@ intensive , including the Passo del Mortirolo , rising 1 @,@ 250 m ( 4 @,@ 100 ft ) in 12 @.@ 8 km ( 8 @.@ 0 mi ) for an average gradient of 10 percent , and the Passo di Gavia , known for being climbed during the 1988 Giro d 'Italia in the middle of a driving blizzard . The Gavia was also the Cima Coppi , the race 's highest point , and Stage 20 , in which it featured , was considered the queen stage . Other climbs during the race included the Passo del <unk> , Monte Grappa , the Passo delle <unk> , the Passo di Santa Cristina , the Forcola di Livigno , and the last climb of the race , the Passo del <unk> . Most of these climbs also featured difficult descents . 
 The route was noted to appeal to many types of riders , be they climbers , sprinters , or time trialists . The race had seven flat stages which figured into end in mass sprints , and the hilly mixed stages were inviting for breakaways . Sastre , one of the first riders to announce he would ride the Giro , commented that the route was much harder than that of the 2009 Giro , and would demand a very strong climber to be its champion . Zomegnan concurred that the route favored climbers , noting that the distance spent time trialing was not great and that it would take errors from climbing specialists to allow a rider better suited for time trialing to be Giro champion . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 The Giro began in Amsterdam with an individual time trial . Favorites for the stage included two British riders , Team Sky captain Bradley Wiggins and Garmin – Transitions ' David Millar . Several riders in the Giro peloton considered Wiggins the prohibitive favorite . Wiggins won the stage , securing the first pink jersey . A major surprise on the stage was Grand Tour rookie Brent Bookwalter from BMC Racing Team coming in second , just 2 seconds off Wiggins ' winning time . Millar was seventh , 6 seconds back . This set the stage for a turbulent opening to the Giro , as both of the road race stages in the Netherlands featured several crashes . The courses for the road stages in the Netherlands were noted to have a lot of street furniture on them , which combined with the riders ' nerves on the first day of a three @-@ week Grand Tour as well as crosswinds from the North Sea to make the first mass @-@ start stages very perilous . Tyler Farrar , Carlos Sastre , Christian Vande Velde , Greg Henderson , Wiggins , Alessandro Petacchi , Domenico Pozzovivo , Marzio Bruseghin , Filippo Pozzato , and Gilberto Simoni all fell from their bikes at some point while the Giro was in the Netherlands . There were also many other crashes that took down so many riders it was difficult to keep track of exactly who was effected . Crashing and , consequently , falling away from the leading group on the road , meant different things for different riders . For sprinters like Farrar and Petacchi , crashing meant they were unlikely to be able to contest the finishes for stage wins , while overall contenders like Wiggins and Sastre lost time in the general classification . For the second year in a row , <unk> suffered a broken collarbone as a result of his crash , consequently abandoning the race . Despite crashing during stage 2 , Farrar got up and was able to win the stage from a depleted field sprint . The state of the roads in the Netherlands and the sheer quantity of crashes that took place there incurred much criticism and questions over whether they should be included in a Grand Tour . Cadel Evans and Alexander Vinokourov both took the pink jersey while the Giro was in the Netherlands . Vinokourov held it prior to the transfer to Italy , with six riders from three teams within 10 seconds of him , meaning the pink jersey still remained very much in flux . 
 After the transfer , the first stage in Italy was a team time trial , a race where each member of the squad races against the clock together , and the team 's time is taken for the fifth rider to cross the finish line . Liquigas – Doimo was the winning squad , and had a time gap over Vinokourov 's Astana team that was sufficiently large enough for Vincenzo Nibali to become the fourth race leader in as many stages . At last , there was stability in the race leadership , as Nibali comfortably retained over the next two stages , both of which featured breakaways taking the day 's honors while the peloton finished together . Stage 7 was a major one , incorporating stretches of gravel roads near the finish . The day on which this stage was run also happened to have very heavy rainfall , making the course muddy and dangerous . Much like had happened in the Netherlands , a great many riders crashed in this stage , perhaps chief among them Wiggins and Sastre , who both lost more than four minutes . Nibali also crashed , and upon seeing this , Alexander Vinokourov , Damiano Cunego , and Cadel Evans broke free of the leading group . Evans won the stage , one of many riders to cross the finish line covered in mud , and Vinokourov took back the race leadership . Through the first mountain stage and two flat stages that followed , the overall standings did not change much , and Vinokourov retained the jersey . 
 Stage 11 into L 'Aquila provided for major changes to the overall standings . More than 50 riders formed the day 's escape group , and they quickly took 20 minutes advantage . Among them were Sastre , Wiggins , and Team Saxo Bank 's Richie Porte , who was holding the white jersey as best young rider and , at sixth overall , was the best @-@ placed man in the group . Sastre , Wiggins , and Porte all had multiple support riders with them in the breakaway who set strenuous paces to keep the group away . The main field , containing the Giro 's top favorites , pulled back a little time but was still nearly 13 minutes behind stage winner Evgeni Petrov at the finish . The day 's result massively shuffled the overall classification . Porte was the only rider who had been in the top ten before the stage who remained there afterward , and took the pink jersey . Sastre and Wiggins , who entered the Giro as contenders but had fallen well back in the overall standings before this stage , both moved back into the top ten . 
 Porte kept the pink jersey for two days , conceding it to David Arroyo , a fellow member of the L 'Aquila breakaway , on stage 14 when he could not climb Monte Grappa with the leaders on the day . On this stage , the race 's overall favorites began to creep back into the top of the overall classification , as previous race leaders Nibali , Vinokourov , and Evans assumed 8th through 10th in the standings . There were again great changes to the overall classification in stage 15 , by way of the climb up Monte Zoncolan . Ivan Basso won the stage and greatly reduced his deficit to Arroyo , though the Spaniard still held the pink jersey after this stage . Evans , Scarponi , Vinokourov , and Nibali also finished well @-@ placed and moved up . Wiggins again fell out of contention , this time conclusively so , by losing 25 minutes on the climb . Evans turned in the best ride of the pre @-@ race favorites in the Plan de Corones time trial , closing his deficit to Basso and moving past Sastre in the overall . After this stage , the only riders left in the top ten from the L 'Aquila breakaway were Arroyo , Porte , Sastre , and Robert Kišerlovski , who all finished the Giro in the top ten . 
 After a stage each for the breakaway and the sprinters , during which there were no major changes to the overall standings , the riders were faced with the very climbing @-@ intensive final two road stages . The Liquigas – Doimo team rode a very hard tempo in stage 19 over the Passo del Mortirolo , which eventually whittled that group down to just Basso , Nibali , and Scarponi . They crossed the Mortirolo more than two minutes ahead of Arroyo , which was nearly enough time to make Basso the virtual race leader . Arroyo , noted as a far better descender than Basso , took very aggressive lines coming down the Mortirolo and caught up with Vinokourov , Sastre , Evans , and John Gadret , who had been between him and the leading trio . Basso 's group had only 30 seconds on Arroyo 's at the start of the stage @-@ concluding Aprica climb , but they took more and more time as the climb went on and finished three minutes ahead , giving Basso the pink jersey with two days left to race . Arroyo elected not to try to aggressively descend any of the four large climbs on course in the final road race stage , settling for second place by riding with Basso and the other top riders in the peloton most of the day . There were a few changes in time gaps , but the same riders remained in the top ten from the previous day , as Johan Tschopp won the stage from a breakaway . The individual time trial in Verona which closed out the Giro also provided for small changes to the overall , but Basso 's 15th place on the stage was easily enough to make him Giro champion . Arroyo and Nibali rounded out the podium . 
 Australian riders won each of the lesser jersey awards . Evans won the points classification , represented in 2010 with a red jersey in a return to the original colour scheme for the three minor classifications that reflected the colours of the Italian flag . Evans 's victory came about by way of nine top @-@ ten finishes , including a stage win , over the course of the race . This classification was tightly contested throughout the race ; six different riders held the jersey , and it changed hands nine times . Matthew Lloyd of Omega Pharma – Lotto won the green jersey for the mountains classification , taking maximum mountains points during his stage @-@ winning breakaway in stage 6 . He made morning breakaways later on in mountain stages to take points on other climbs and consolidate his lead . Porte won the white jersey as best young rider , holding it for all but three stages . Success was widespread among the 22 teams in the race . In sharp contrast to the 2009 Giro , the only rider to win multiple stages in this year 's race was Farrar , who took the sprint finishes to stages 2 and 10 . Team Sky , Omega Pharma – Lotto , BMC Racing Team , Colnago – CSF Inox , Acqua & Sapone , Cofidis , Androni Giocattoli , and Bbox Bouygues Telecom each won one stage . Quick @-@ Step had two stage wins , first with Wouter Weylandt in a depleted sprint finish to stage 3 in the Netherlands , and two stages later Jérôme Pineau led a winning breakaway across the finish line . Team Saxo Bank 's Chris Anker Sørensen won stage 8 on Monte Terminillo after figuring into a morning breakaway , and their time trial specialist Gustav Larsson won the final race against the clock in Verona . Team HTC – Columbia won multiple sprint stages , first with leadout man Matthew Goss when ace sprinter André Greipel missed out on the opportunity , and later Greipel himself took a win . Team Katusha took back @-@ to @-@ back stage wins , first with Petrov in L 'Aquila and then with Filippo Pozzato , who won a 10 @-@ man sprint after a late breakaway in stage 12 . After there had been no Italian stage winners for the first 11 days of racing , Pozzato 's stage win was the first of five in a row and six overall for Italian riders . Nibali and Basso were among those stage winners ; as they also won the stage 4 team time trial , theirs was the only squad with more than two stage wins . They also won both teams classifications , the time @-@ based Trofeo Fast Team and the points @-@ based Trofeo Super Team . Astana , Caisse d 'Epargne , and Rabobank did not win any stages , but Vinokourov 's and Arroyo 's stints in the pink jersey and Tom Stamsnijder 's win in the Traguardo Volante classification meant that they did not come away from the Giro empty @-@ handed . Only Ag2r – La Mondiale , Cervélo TestTeam , <unk> – Servetto – Fuji , Lampre – Farnese Vini , and Team Milram came away from the Giro with nothing , even though Milram had one of their riders ( Paul Voss ) wearing the Mountains jersey at some point . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 In the 2010 Giro d 'Italia , four different jerseys were awarded . For the general classification , calculated by adding each cyclist 's finishing times on each stage , and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass @-@ start stages , the leader received a pink jersey . This classification was considered the most important of the Giro d 'Italia , and the winner was considered the winner of the Giro . 
 Additionally , there was a points classification , which awarded a red jersey . In the points classification , cyclists got points for finishing in the top 15 in a stage . Unlike in the better known points classification in the Tour de France , the type of stage had no effect on what points were on offer – each stage had the same points available on the same scale . The win earned 25 points , second place earned 20 points , third 16 , fourth 14 , fifth 12 , sixth 10 , and one point fewer per place down to a single point for 15th . In addition , points could be won in intermediate sprints . 
 There was also a mountains classification , the leadership of which was marked by a green jersey . In the mountains classifications , points were won by reaching the top of a climb before other cyclists . Each climb was categorized as either first , second , or third category , with more points available for the higher @-@ categorized climbs . The Cima Coppi , the race 's highest point of elevation , awarded still more points than the other first @-@ category climbs . 
 The fourth jersey represented the young rider classification , marked by a white jersey . This was decided the same way as the general classification , but only riders born after 1 January 1985 were eligible . 
 There were also three classifications for teams . In the Trofeo Fast Team classification , the times of the best three cyclists per team on each stage were added ; the leading team was the team with the lowest total time ; the Trofeo Super Team was a team points classification , with the top 20 placed riders on each stage earning points ( 20 for first place , 19 for second place and so on , down to a single point for 20th ) for their team ; and the Fair Play classification rewarded those teams that best avoided penalty points for minor technical infringements . 
 The rows in the following table correspond to the jerseys awarded after that stage was run . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = = Minor classifications = = = 
 Other less well @-@ known classifications , whose leaders did not receive a special jersey , were awarded during the Giro . These awards were based on points earned throughout the three weeks of the tour . Each mass @-@ start stage had one intermediate sprint , the Traguardo Volante , or T.V. The T.V. gave bonus seconds towards the general classification , points towards the regular points classification , and also points towards the T.V. classification . This award was known in previous years as the " Intergiro " and the " Expo Milano 2015 " classification . It was won by Tom Stamsnijder of the Rabobank team . 
 Other awards included the Combativity classification , which was a compilation of points gained for position on crossing intermediate sprints , mountain passes and stage finishes . Mountains classification winner Matthew Lloyd won this award . The Azzurri d 'Italia classification was based on finishing order , but points were awarded only to the top three finishers in each stage . It was won , like the closely associated points classification , by Cadel Evans . Additionally , the Premio della Fuga rewarded riders who took part in a breakaway at the head of the field , each rider in an escape of ten or fewer riders getting one point for each kilometre that the group stayed clear . Quick @-@ Step 's Jérôme Pineau was first in this competition . Teams were given penalty points for minor technical infringements . Liquigas – Doimo was most successful in avoiding penalties , and so won the Fair Play classification . 
 = = = World Rankings points = = = 
 The Giro was one of 26 events throughout the season that contributed points towards the 2010 UCI World Ranking . Points were awarded to the top 20 finishers overall , and to the top five finishers in each stage . 
 = Tales of Legendia = 
 Tales of Legendia ( Japanese : テイルズ オブ <unk> , Hepburn : Teiruzu Obu <unk> ) , is a role @-@ playing video game that was developed and published by Namco for the PlayStation 2 as the seventh main title in their Tales series . Originally released in Japan in August 2005 , it was later made available in English in North America in February 2006 . The game was created by a development team known collectively as " Project <unk> " , which was composed of members of Namco 's Tales Studio along with developers from the company 's Tekken and Soulcalibur fighting game series . It features character designs from anime artist Kazuto Nakazawa and music from composer Go Shiina , as well as songs performed by Do As Infinity , Donna Burke , and Kanon . Its producers gave it the characteristic genre name RPG Where Bonds Spin Legends ( <unk> , Kizuna ga <unk> o <unk> RPG ) . 
 The game is set in a fantasy world covered in water , taking place entirely on a gigantic ship that is actually a remnant of an ancient civilization . Players assume the role of a young man named Senel , who must rescue his sister from individuals who believe her to be a prophesied savior , while the mysteries of his world begin to unravel before him . It received mostly mixed reviews upon its release in North America , with critics routinely commending the title 's music while panning its derivative plot and tedious pace , and would sell approximately 397 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Tales of Legendia is a console role @-@ playing game set in a fantasy world featuring three @-@ dimensional characters and environments . The game is presented from a top @-@ down perspective , and players must move their character through a number of locales , battle monsters , and interact with non @-@ player characters to advance the story . Unlike previous games in the series where monsters were visible before being encountered , Tales of Legendia features randomized battles that occur every few steps while inside dungeons or other hostile areas . 
 Like previous games in the series , Tales of Legendia was designed to focus on the interactions between the main cast . However , a unique feature to this game is the addition of a second series of scenarios after the player has completed the main story that focuses more on the individual characters themselves . Animated sequences also accompany certain story segments . 
 The game features a variation of the series ' Linear Motion Battle System , where players are able to freely move their characters around the battle area and engage enemies in real @-@ time , known as the " X @-@ <unk> " ( Crossover Linear Motion Battle System ) , which was specifically designed to resemble a traditional fighting game . Despite playable characters and enemies being rendered in 3D , battles are limited to a two @-@ dimensional plane where combatants can only move forward , backward , or jump straight up into the air . In addition to normal attacks , players can attack enemies using special skills called " Eres " , which involve spending Tech Points ( TP ) , and can be chained together to create combos . A total of eight playable characters can be recruited as the game progresses , with up to four of them making up a player 's party at any time . As players attack enemies , they fill up a " Climax " gauge at the bottom of the screen that can be expended to freeze all enemies in place for a short period . Whenever battles are completed , players are awarded both experience points that allow characters to gain levels and grow stronger , as well as items called " Eres Stones " that allow them to purchase additional skills . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Tales of Legendia is set in a world covered mostly in water , with all the events of the game taking place aboard a massive , country @-@ sized ship called the Legacy , a remnant of a highly advanced ancient civilization . The population is divided into two groups : the Orerines ( " the people of the land " ) and the Ferines ( " the people of the sea " ) , a race of fair @-@ skinned , light @-@ haired people with the ability to live underwater , with the tensions between them serving as the backdrop to the game 's plot . In addition , a select portion of the population are known as " <unk> " , people born with the ability to use special powers known as " eres " , which are divided into two groups : crystal eres , which includes casting magic spells , and iron eres , which revolves around physical abilities . A fictional language known as <unk> appears throughout the game , forming the basis for some location and character names . 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 Senel Coolidge ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a 17 @-@ year @-@ old martial artist and marine of the Holy Alliance who can use iron eres . Although strong @-@ willed and passionately protective of his surrogate sister Shirley , his cold nature comes off as uncaring to those around him . He is voiced by Kenichi Suzumura in the Japanese version , and Scott Holst in the English version . His name comes from Cuban writer Senel Paz . 
 Shirley <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a 15 @-@ year @-@ old practitioner of crystal eres . She has a demure yet stubborn demeanor and is constantly chased by those who view her as the " Merines " , the chosen one of the Ferines said to command great power . She is voiced by Ryō <unk> in the Japanese version , and Carrie Savage in the English version . Her name comes from the 1849 novel Shirley by English author Charlotte Brontë . 
 Will Raynard ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Will <unk> in the Japanese version ) is a 28 @-@ year @-@ old historian and local sheriff who can use crystal eres . The oldest character in the group , he is often looked to for leadership and advice , and is characterized as having a strict yet kind personality . He is voiced by Susumu Chiba in the Japanese version , and Cam Clarke in the English version . His name comes from English writer William Shakespeare . 
 Chloe Valens ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a 17 @-@ year @-@ old female knight from the prestigious House of Valens who uses iron eres . Her staunch determination to prove herself as a warrior worthy of her family name masks her true feminine nature . She is voiced by Masumi Asano in the Japanese version , and Heather Halley in the English version . Her name comes from the character Chloë from the 1947 novel Froth on the Daydream by French author Boris Vian . 
 Norma Beatty ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Norma <unk> in the Japanese version ) is a 16 @-@ year @-@ old treasure hunter and practitioner of crystal eres . <unk> cheerful and positive , she also possesses an insightful side and has a habit of creating nicknames for other members of the party . She is voiced by Kaori <unk> in the Japanese version , and Amy Gross in the English version . Her name comes from American author Norma Field . 
 Moses Sandor ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is the 17 @-@ year @-@ old leader of a tribe of bandits and beast @-@ <unk> who wields a spear and uses iron eres . Despite his wild , uncouth exterior , he is a caring individual who looks after a large wolf @-@ like creature named <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) , and values family above all else . He is voiced by Kazuya Nakai in the Japanese version , and Shiloh Strong in the English version . His name comes from Romanian writer Moses <unk> . 
 Jay ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a cryptic 16 @-@ year @-@ old ninja and practitioner of iron eres . He is characterized as being highly cynical and tends to liberally use cutting remarks , and has a talent for information gathering and analysis . He is voiced by Ryoko Shiraishi in the Japanese version , and Steve Staley in the English version . His name comes from American author Jay McInerney . 
 Grune ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a mysterious woman who wields magic water jugs and has the ability to use crystal eres . Despite being amnesiac , she is perpetually in high spirits and never strays from her calm demeanor , smiling almost constantly . She is voiced by Ayako Kawasumi in the Japanese version . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game begins as Senel and Shirley wash ashore on the Legacy after their boat is tossed in a storm . Shirley is soon kidnapped by a bandit named Moses , prompting Senel to team up with a local sheriff named Will and a female knight named Chloe to rescue her . Will explains that Shirley 's arrival coincided with a pillar of light at the center of the ship , leading many to believe that she is the legendary " Merines " , a person destined to lead the Ferines to prosperity . After finding her at the thieves ' hideout , she is captured yet again by a Ferines soldier named Walter <unk> , who takes her away . When the group eventually catches Walter , he reveals that he was only protecting her from the real enemy : the <unk> <unk> Empire Army , led by a man named Vaclav <unk> , who promptly arrives and abducts Shirley himself . While in captivity , Shirley becomes friends with another captive , a young Ferines girl named Fenimore <unk> . 
 Senel and his team are joined by a treasure hunter named Norma as well as Moses , who has decided to atone for his earlier actions . Together , the team travels deeper into the ship , where they discover that not only does Vaclav have Shirley , but her older sister Stella , who Shirley and Senel believed dead three years earlier when the Empire 's forces invaded their hometown . After being forced to escape when they are confronted by Vaclav 's underlings , the Terrors , the party regroups and meets an amnesiac women named Grune and boy named Jay who joins the team and accompanies them to the Legacy 's bridge . They confront Vaclav once more , who plans to use Shirley and Stella 's latent Merines powers to activate a giant laser cannon located on the ship to destroy the Ferines ' village and later subjugate other countries around the world . Although the party is victorious , Vaclav sets the cannon to fire in his final moments , with Stella in turn awakening her powers just in time to fly into the path of the beam , sacrificing herself . 
 Shirley resolves to complete a ritual to fully become the Merines and fulfill her destiny , meeting with Walter and the Ferines leader Maurits <unk> . However , soldiers from the country of <unk> attack during the ceremony attempting to kill her thinking she willfully sided with Vaclav , with Fenimore jumping in the way of one of their blades and dying instead . The traumatic event causes Shirley to be fully engulfed by <unk> , the malevolent spirit of the ocean itself , before leaving with Maurits . Senel and his friends go after her , passing through the deeper areas of the ship where they discover from fractured recordings that the Legacy was a colony ship from another world , and the Ferines came to the planet and made war with the Orerines 4000 years ago . Arriving at Maurits ' stronghold , the party faces Walter , who reveals his jealousy over Shirley choosing Senel over him , and fights until his life gives out . They learn from Maurits that it was in fact the Orerines , not the Ferines , who are the outsiders . He explains that the Orerines ' terraforming technology upset the will of the sea so much that his people can no longer live in it , and wishes to use Shirley to flood the world and appease the ocean so that the Ferines can thrive once more . After he is beaten and Shirley brought back to her senses , Maurits summons a physical manifestation of <unk> itself , which is driven back by Senel and his friends . In the end , Maurits resolves to put aside old hatreds and work towards an era of peace between Orerines and Ferines as the characters return to their old lives . 
 = = Development = = 
 Preliminary development on Tales of Legendia began in 2000 , after the release of Tales of Eternia , with many of its staff drawn from that of Eternia . Its development happened in parallel to Tales of Destiny 2 and Tales of Symphonia . While its exact development time is unknown , a report in Famitsu stated that its development lasted three years . It was first revealed in December 2004 in a teaser trailer featured on a pre @-@ order bonus disc for the series ' previous title Tales of Rebirth , which only referred to the game by its development codename " Project <unk> " . On February 14 , 2005 , Namco posted silhouettes of two characters on their Tales Channel website , with the game 's official reveal coming four days later . A tentative Japanese release date of sometime in 2005 was announced the following month , with an English North American release formally announced by the company in April for February 2006 . In May 2005 , Namco gave a finalized Japanese release date set for the following August . The game would make an appearance at the 2005 Electronic Entertainment Expo in Los Angeles the following June . 
 The game was developed by a team that consisted of staff members from previous Tales entries , as well as developers from the company 's Tekken and Soulcalibur fighting game series . Producer Jun Toyoda explained that the goal was to create a role @-@ playing game with the " exhilarating battle scenes " found in those titles , and to appeal to players who either felt that fighting games lacked a story or felt that traditional role @-@ playing game combat was too " tedious " . Although the game features three @-@ dimensional characters , battle sequences were purposefully restricted to a two @-@ dimensional plane to allow the developers to create large monsters without fear of them obstructing the player 's view of the action . Character animation was handled by Yosuke <unk> , who had previously used the same motion @-@ capture technology on Soulcalibur II . The scenario was written by <unk> Matsumoto and Tsuyoshi Tanaka . The main story theme was " bonds " , with the main priority being the overlapping stories of the main cast . Unlike previous Tales games where character art and design was mostly done by Mutsumi Inomata , Tales of Legendia features characters designed by anime illustrator and animator Kazuto Nakazawa , known for his prior work on the animated sequences from the 2003 film Kill Bill Vol . 1 , as well as animated features such as El @-@ Hazard and Nadia : The Secret of Blue Water . Tales of Legendia includes animated cutscenes produced by Japanese studio Production I.G. , and contains more animation than any previous game in the series . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Tales of Legendia is the first main series title in the Tales franchise to not feature music by Motoi Sakuraba , with composition duties instead going to Go Shiina . The game features the opening theme song " Tao " performed by J @-@ pop group Do As Infinity , as well as the ending theme " My Tales " performed in English by Donna Burke and <unk> Desmond . Incidental vocal songs include " A Firefly 's Light " ( <unk> , Hotarubi ) performed in Japanese by Mayumi Sudou , " Hotarubi " , performed in English by Donna Burke , " Let 's Talk " ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) performed by the <unk> Children 's Choir , and both " The Legendary Sorcerer " ( <unk> , Densetsu no <unk> ) and " The Birds Chirp , I Sing " ( <unk> 、 <unk> , <unk> Naki , Boku wa Utau ) both performed by Kanon . In addition , some of the game 's instrumental themes were performed live by the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra . 
 An official soundtrack was released in Japan in August 2005 by Avex Trax , which includes two discs of select tracks from the game , and a third disc that includes a radio drama featuring members of the game 's voice cast . Two follow @-@ up drama albums called Tales of Legendia ~ Voice of Character Quest ~ ( テイルズ オブ <unk> ～ voice of character quest ～ 1 , Teiruzu Obu <unk> Voice of Character Quest ) were released one year later in August and September 2006 respectively , with the second volume containing an additional 41 tracks not present on the previous official soundtrack release . Music from the game has been featured in video game concerts such as the Eminence Symphony Orchestra 's A Night in Fantasia 2007 in Sydney , Australia , and Press Start -Symphony of Games- 2009 at the Tokyo Metropolitan Art Space . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Tales of Legendia was mostly well received in Japan , earning a 32 out of 40 total score from Weekly Famitsu based on individual reviews of 8 , 8 , 8 , and 8 , as well as an 85 out of 100 average from Dengeki PlayStation magazine based on scores of 80 , 80 , 90 , and 90 . The game would go on to sell 342 @,@ 779 copies in the region by the end of 2005 , becoming the 30th best @-@ selling software title of that year , with a total of 397 @,@ 000 copies sold worldwide by December 2007 . 
 Elsewhere , Tales of Legendia received " mixed or average reviews " according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . While IGN felt that the game 's characterization and " addictive " battle system were its high points , the title was ultimately marred by a " run of the mill " story and " lackluster " battle AI . The website would find that the game 's second half was more enjoyable overall , stating that " Legendia is definitely slanted towards more action @-@ oriented role @-@ players who don 't mind breezing through an easy twenty hours before getting to the real tests of skill , " and although the voice acting was " rather stiff , " the translation was of good quality overall . GameSpot similarly praised the strong cast of characters , and the interactions between them , but complained of excessive random battles and backtracking through locations in the game . 
 1UP.com praised the game 's story , stating that " despite the predictability of the overall narrative , the details are frequently surprising and consistently entertaining , " and additionally found that the game tended to flaunt convention in its characters : " Yet within this morass of overly familiar plot devices , Legendia tries to rise above its limitations by twisting conventions . The strongest combatants are female , and the burly man who wields a massive hammer plays the role of intellectual and healer . " However , the website criticized the game for its sometimes " frustrating " combat and playing too similarly to past Tales titles , and that it would primarily appeal to longtime fans of the series . In 2012 , 1UP would include Tales of Legendia on its list of " <unk> RPGs with Overwhelming Soundtracks , " calling the game one of Go Shiina 's strongest works and " one of the best and most moving RPG soundtracks to date . " 
 The characters Chloe and Senel would rank 8th and 29th respectively in Namco Bandai 's 2nd Top 30 character fan poll in 2005 . Game Informer would also list Jay and Moses on their list of the best characters in the series that same year for " having some of the best banter in any Tales game . " 
 = Scottish religion in the eighteenth century = 
 Scottish religion in the eighteenth century includes all forms of religious organisation and belief in Scotland in the eighteenth century . This period saw the beginnings of a fragmentation of the Church of Scotland that had been created in the Reformation and established on a fully Presbyterian basis after the Glorious Revolution . These fractures were prompted by issues of government and patronage , but reflected a wider division between the Evangelicals and the Moderate Party . The legal right of lay patrons to present clergymen of their choice to local ecclesiastical livings led to minor schisms from the church . The first in 1733 , known as the First Secession and headed by figures including Ebenezer Erskine , led to the creation of a series of secessionist churches . The second in 1761 led to the foundation of the independent Relief Church . 
 In 1743 the Cameronians established themselves as the Reformed Presbyterian Church , remaining largely separate from religious and political debate . Of independent churches from England that were established in the seventeenth century only the Quakers managed to endure in to the eighteenth century . Baptist chapels were re @-@ established in the middle of the century and , although Scotland initially appeared fertile ground for Methodism , it failed to expand as quickly as elsewhere in the Great Britain and Ireland . A number of minor Scottish sects developed , such as the Bereans , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . 
 Episcopalianism had retained supporters through the civil wars and changes of regime in the seventeenth century . Since most Episcopalians gave their support to the Jacobite rebellions in the first half of the early eighteenth century , they suffered a decline in fortunes . The remoteness of the Highlands and the lack of a Gaelic @-@ speaking clergy undermined the missionary efforts of the established church . The later eighteenth century saw some success , owing to the efforts of the SSPCK missionaries and to the disruption of traditional society . Catholicism had been reduced to the fringes of the country , particularly the Gaelic @-@ speaking areas of the Highlands and Islands . Conditions grew worse for Catholics after the Jacobite rebellions and Catholicism was reduced to little more than a poorly run mission . There was Evangelical Revival from the 1730s , reaching its peak at the Cambuslang Wark in 1742 . The movement benefited the secessionist churches who gained recruits . 
 The Kirk had considerable control over the lives of the people , with a major role in the Poor Law and schools and over the morals of the population . Strict Sabbatarianism was vital to Presbyterianism . The sermon was seen as central and the only participation by the congregation the singing of the psalms . Communion was the central occasion of the church , conducted infrequently , at most once a year , often taking a week of festivals as part of a communion season . In the second half of the century there were a series of reforms of church music connected to a choir movement . Episcopalians installed organs and hired musicians , following the practice in English parish churches . Catholic worship was deliberately low key , with musical accompaniment prohibited . 
 = = Church of Scotland = = 
 The religious settlement after the Glorious Revolution of 1688 / 9 adopted the legal forms of 1592 , which instituted a fully Presbyterian kirk , and doctrine based on the 1646 Westminster Confession of Faith . The early eighteenth century saw the growth of " praying societies " , who supplemented the services of the established kirk with communal devotions . These often had the approval of parish ministers and their members were generally drawn from the lower ranks of local society . Their outlook varied but they disliked preaching that simply emphasised the Law or that understood the gospel as a new law <unk> , or that was mere morality , and sought out a gospel that stressed the Grace of God in the sense set out in the Confession of Faith . They often disliked the role of lay patronage in the kirk . The theological division between <unk> and <unk> tendencies in the kirk were highlighted by the Marrow Controversy . The Marrow of Modern Divinity was a mid @-@ seventeenth century book with an <unk> perspective that was reprinted in 1718 and promoted by Thomas Boston ( 1676 – 1732 ) and others . The book was condemned by the General Assembly , giving it widespread publicity . The decision was appealed by 12 " Marrow Men " , but the repudiation was upheld in 1722 and although its supporters were not expelled , they were denied advancement and the controversy continued . 
 There were growing divisions between the Evangelicals and the Moderate Party . While Evangelicals emphasised the authority of the Bible and the traditions and historical documents of the kirk , the Moderates tended to stress intellectualism in theology , the established hierarchy of the kirk and attempted to raise the social status of the clergy . From the 1760s the Moderates gained an ascendancy in the General Assembly of the Church . They were led by the historian William Robertson ( 1721 – 93 ) , who became principal of the University of Edinburgh and then by his successor George Hill ( 1750 – 1819 ) , who was professor at the University of Aberdeen . Evangelical leaders included John <unk> ( 1680 – 1750 ) , John McLaurin ( 1693 – 1754 ) and Alexander Webster ( 1707 – 84 ) . The most important figure was John Erskine ( 1721 – 1803 ) , who was minister of Old Greyfriars Church in Edinburgh from 1768 and for 26 years a friend and colleague to Robertson . He was orthodox in doctrine , but sympathised with the Enlightenment and supported reforms in religious practice . A popular preacher , he corresponded with religious leaders in other countries , including New England theologian Johnathan Edwards ( 1703 – 58 ) , whose ideas were a major influence on the movement in Scotland . Judged by the number of books printed in Scotland , Boston was the most popular theological writer in the movement . 
 = = Secession = = 
 The eighteenth century saw the beginnings of a fragmentation of the Church of Scotland that had its foundation in the Reformation . These fractures were prompted by issues of government and patronage , but reflected a wider division between the Evangelicals and the Moderate Party over fears of fanaticism by the former and the acceptance of Enlightenment ideas by the latter . Ecclesiastical patronage , the right of local lairds or other notables to appoint ministers to a parish , had been abolished at the Glorious Revolution , but it was reintroduced in the Patronage Act of 1711 , resulting in frequent protests from the kirk . 
 The First Secession was over the right to appoint in cases where a patron made no effort to fill a vacancy . The result was that a group of four ministers , led by Ebenezer Erskine , the minister of Stirling , formed a distinct " Associate Presbytery " in 1733 , but were not forced from the kirk until 1740 . This movement was initially very small , but was petitioned by the praying societies with requests for preaching , leading to rapid growth . Although its founding ministers were from Perthshire and Fife , the forty congregations they had established by 1740 were widely spread across the country , mainly among the middle classes of major towns . The <unk> soon split amongst themselves over the issue of the burgess oath , which was administered after the 1745 rebellion as an anti @-@ Jacobite measure , but which implied that the Church of Scotland was the only true church . The " burghers " , led by Erskine , maintained that the oath could be taken , but they were excommunicated by an " anti @-@ burgher " faction , led by Andrew Gibb , who established a separate General Associate Synod . In the 1790s the <unk> became embroiled in the Old and New Light controversy . The " Old <unk> " continued to follow the principles of the Covenanters , while the " New <unk> " were more focused on personal salvation , considered the strictures of the Covenants as less binding and that a connection of the church and the state was not warranted . 
 The second break from the kirk was also prompted by issues of patronage . Minister Thomas Gillespie ( 1708 – 74 ) was deposed by the General Assembly in 1752 after he refused to participate in inducting a minister to the Inverkeithing parish , since the parishioners opposed the appointment . Gillespie was joined by two other ministers and they held the first meeting of the Presbytery of Relief at <unk> in Fife in 1761 . While evangelical in doctrine , the Relief Church did not maintain that it was the only true church , but stated that it was still in communion with the kirk and maintained contact with Episcopalians and Independents . Like the Associate Presbytery , the movement was initially small , but benefited from the Evangelical Revival of the later eighteenth century , which helped it expand rapidly . 
 = = Episcopalianism = = 
 Episcopalianism had retained supporters through the civil wars and regime changes in the seventeenth century . Although the bishops had been abolished in the settlement that followed the Glorious Revolution , becoming " non @-@ jurors " , not subscribing to the right of William and Mary to be monarchs , they continued to consecrate Episcopalian clergy . Many clergy were " outed " from their livings , but the king had issued two acts of indulgence in 1693 and 1695 , allowing those who accepted him as king to retain their livings and around a hundred took advantage of the offer . New " meeting houses " sprang up for those who continued to follow the episcopalian clergy . They generally prospered under Queen Anne and all but the hardened Jacobites would be given toleration in 1712 . Since most Episcopalians gave their support to the Jacobite rebellion in 1715 , they suffered a decline in fortunes . A number of the clergy were deprived and in 1719 all meeting houses where prayers were not offered for King George were closed . In 1720 the last surviving bishop died and another was appointed as " primus " , without any particular episcopal see . After the Jacobite rising of 1745 , there was another round of restrictions under the Toleration Act of 1746 and Penal Act of 1748 , and the number of clergy and congregations declined . The church was sustained by the important nobles and gentlemen in its ranks . 
 This period saw the establishment of Qualified Chapels , where worship was conducted according to the English Book of Common Prayer and where congregations , led by priests ordained by Bishops of the Church of England or the Church of Ireland , were willing to pray for the Hanoverians . Such chapels drew their congregations from English people living in Scotland and from Scottish Episcopalians who were not bound to the Jacobite cause . These two forms of episcopalianism existed side by side until 1788 when the Jacobite claimant Charles Edward Stuart died in exile . Unwilling to recognise his brother Henry Benedict Stuart , who was a cardinal in the Roman Catholic Church , as his heir , the non @-@ juror Episcopalians elected to recognise the House of Hanover and offer allegiance to George III . At the repeal of the penal laws in 1792 there were twenty @-@ four Qualified Chapels in Scotland . 
 = = Cameronians = = 
 The Society People , known after one of their leaders as the Cameronians , who had not accepted the restoration of episcopacy in 1660 , remained outside of the established kirk after the Revolution settlement , refusing to rejoin an " un @-@ <unk> " kirk . However , most of their remaining ministers re @-@ entered the Church of Scotland . After years of persecution their numbers were few and largely confined to the southwest of the country . In the period 1714 – 43 they had only one minister and were unable to form a presbytery and ordain new clergy . Many joined the Secession Church in order to avoid extinction . In 1743 , having obtained the services of a second minister from the Secession Church , they established themselves as the Reformed Presbyterian Church . Roughly 10 @,@ 000 in number , they remained separate from other denominations and abstained from political involvement , refusing even to vote . 
 = = Independent churches = = 
 In the mid @-@ seventeenth century , the extension of toleration to sectaries under the Commonwealth brought a number of independent movements to Scotland . The only one not to collapse after the withdrawal of the army at the Restoration in 1660 were the Quakers . Their numbers remained small in the eighteenth century and they were largely confined to the large cities and the northwest . Baptist churches had been founded in several towns during the Commonwealth , largely consisting of English soldiers and their families . They lapsed when the English occupation ended and the first Scottish Baptist church is usually thought to be founded at <unk> in 1750 by William Sinclair . Occasionally individual Presbyterian ministers led their congregations out of existing churches and into independent churches , leading to the establishment of isolated churches for groups like the Unitarians . The series of evangelical enterprises undertaken by the brothers James and Robert Haldane in the period 1796 – 1800 , which led to the foundation of Sunday schools , day schools and tabernacles in parts of the Lowlands , Highlands and Islands , helped strengthen the Baptist and Congregational churches when the brothers later embraced adult Baptism and the congregations divided between the two traditions . 
 Scotland appeared to be fertile ground for Methodism in the 1740s and 1750s , when visits from figures such as John Wesley and George Whitfield attracted large audiences of presbyterians . Methodist societies were established in textile and fishing villages , particularly in Shetland , where Methodism was to enjoy its greatest relative popularity . Most members were to be in the large cities , with Glasgow and Airdrie accounting for 43 per cent of all members in 1819 . However , in the 1760s the growth of the movement did not keep pace with that elsewhere in the United Kingdom , with an average annual increase of only 0 @.@ 2 per cent , compared with 5 , nearly 6 and nearly 8 per cent in England , Wales and Ireland respectively . The reasons for the relative failure of Methodism in Scotland have been debated by historians . The Scots preferred an ordained clergy , rather than the lay preachers common elsewhere , and when Wesley granted this concession in 1785 membership doubled in four years , but it was rescinded after this death in 1791 and adherence reduced . The middle classes may also have seen the lay positions in the church as not carrying the same status as did offices like that of elder within the presbyterian churches . Allan MacLaren has argued that the doctrinal Arminianism of Methodism conflicted with the dominant Calvinism of Scotland . The place that Methodism occupied elsewhere in the kingdom may also have been taken by the Secession and Relief churches , the last of which were seen as " Scots Methodists " . 
 = = Minor sects = = 
 As well as the series of secessionist movements , the eighteenth century saw the formation of a number of minor sects . These included the <unk> , formed by Church of Scotland minister John Glas , who was expelled from his parish of <unk> in 1730 for his objections to the state 's intervention in the affairs of the kirk . He advocated a strong form of biblical literalism . With his son @-@ in @-@ law Robert Sandeman , from whose name they are known as the <unk> , he founded a number of churches in Scotland and the sect expanded to England and the United States . Closely involved with the <unk> were the followers of industrialist David Dale who broke with the kirk in the 1760s and formed the Old Scotch Independents , sometimes known as the <unk> . He preached a combination of industry and faith that led him to co @-@ found the cotton @-@ mill at New Lanark and to contribute to the Utopian Socialism associated with his son @-@ in @-@ law Robert Owen . 
 The Bereans were formed by John Barclay in Edinburgh in 1773 . Barclay was one of the most prominent followers of moral philosopher Archibald Campbell and espoused a rigorous form of pre @-@ destination and insisted on Biblical @-@ based preaching . Having been rejected from various <unk> and by the General Assembly , he founded independent churches in Scotland and then in England , taking the name Bereans from the people mentioned in Acts 17 : 11 . After Barclay 's death in 1798 his followers joined the congregationalists . The <unk> were a Millenarian cult that broke away from the Relief Church when Hugh White , minister at Irvine , declared Elspeth Buchan to be a special saint identified with the woman described in Revelation 12 . They attracted less than fifty followers and having been expelled by local magistrates they formed a community at a farm known as New <unk> in Nithsdale , Dumfriesshire . The sect collapsed after the death of Buchan in 1791 . Other minor sects include the <unk> , reported as a group of <unk> who had separated from kirk discipline in <unk> in 1721 . Another group in the same area , called the <unk> , were alleged to have sworn at a minister . The <unk> were later absorbed into the Secession Church with other Covenanters after 1736 . 
 = = Catholicism = = 
 By the eighteenth century Catholicism had been reduced to the fringes of the country , particularly the Gaelic @-@ speaking areas of the Highlands and Islands . Numbers probably reduced in the seventeenth century and organisation had deteriorated . Pope Innocent X appointed Thomas Nicolson as the first Vicar Apostolic over the mission in 1694 . The country was organised into districts and by 1703 there were thirty @-@ three Catholic clergy . Conditions grew worse for Catholics after the Jacobite rebellions and Catholicism was reduced to little more than a poorly run mission . In 1733 it was divided into two vicariates , one for the Highlands and one for the Lowlands , each under a bishop . There were six attempts to found a seminary in the Highlands between 1732 and 1838 , all of which floundered on financial issues . Clergy entered the country secretly and although services were illegal they were maintained . In 1755 it was estimated that there were only 16 @,@ 500 communicants , mainly in the north and west , although the number is probably an underestimate . By the end of the century this had probably fallen by a quarter due to emigration . The First Relief Act of 1778 , was designed to bring a measure of toleration to Catholics , but a campaign led by Lord George Gordon , that resulted anti @-@ Catholic riots in Scotland , known after him as the Gordon Riots , meant that it was limited to England . The provisions of the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1791 , which allowed freedom of worship for Catholics who took an oath of allegiance , were extended to Scotland in 1793 . In 1799 the Lowland District seminary was transferred to <unk> , near Inverurie in Aberdeenshire , so that it could serve the entire country . It was secretly funded by the government , who were concerned at the scale of emigration by Highland Catholics . 
 = = Protestant missions = = 
 Long after the triumph of the Church of Scotland in the Lowlands , Highlanders and Islanders clung to a form of Christianity infused with animistic folk beliefs and practices . The remoteness of the region and the lack of a Gaelic @-@ speaking clergy undermined missionary efforts . The Scottish Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge ( SSPCK ) was founded by Royal Charter in 1708 . Its aim was partly religious and partly cultural , intending to " wear out " Gaelic and " learn the people the English tongue " . By 1715 it was running 25 schools , by 1755 it was 116 and by 1792 it was 149 , but most were on the edges of the Highlands . The difficulty of promoting Protestantism and English in a Gaelic speaking region , eventually led to a change of policy in the SSPCK and in 1754 it sanctioned the printing of a Bible with Gaelic and English text on facing pages . The government only began to seriously promote Protestantism from 1725 , when it began to make a grant to the General Assembly known as the Royal Bounty . Part of this went towards itinerant ministers , but by 1764 there were only ten . Probably more significant for the spread of Protestantism were the lay <unk> , who met the people on the Sabbath , read Scripture , and joined them in Psalms and prayers . They would later be important in the Evangelical revival . 
 = = Evangelical Revival = = 
 From the later 1730s Scotland experienced a version of the Evangelical revival that also affected England and Wales and North America . Protestant congregations , usually in a specific locations , experienced intense " awakenings " of enthusiasm , renewed commitment and , sometimes , rapid expansion . This was first seen at Easter Ross in the Highlands in 1739 and most famously in the Cambuslang Wark ( work ) near Glasgow in 1742 , where intense religious activity culminated in a crowd of perhaps 30 @,@ 000 gathering there to hear English preacher George Whitefield . Scotland was also visited 22 times by John Wesley , the English evangelist and founder of Methodism , between 1751 and 1790 . 
 Most of the new converts were relatively young and from the lower groups in society , such as small tenants , craftsmen , servants and the unskilled , with a relatively high proportion of unmarried women . This has been seen as a reaction against the oligarchical nature of the established kirk , which was dominated by local lairds and heritors . Unlike awakenings elsewhere , the revival in Scotland did not give rise to a major religious movement , but benefited the secession churches . The revival was particularly significant in the Highlands , where the lack of a clear parochial structure led to a pattern of spiritual enthusiasm , recession and renewal , often instigated by lay <unk> , known as " the Men " , who would occasionally emerge as charismatic leaders . The revival left a legacy of strict Sabbatarianism and local identity . 
 From the late eighteenth century Scotland gained many of the organisations associated with the revival in England , including Sunday schools , mission schools , ragged schools , Bible societies and improvement classes . Because the revival occurred at the same time as the transformation of the Highlands into a crofting society , Evangelicalism was often linked to popular protest against patronage and the clearances , while the Moderates became identified with the interests of the landholding classes . It laid the ground for the Great Disruption in the mid @-@ nineteenth century , leading to the Evangelicals taking control of the General Assembly and those in the Highlands joining the Free Church of Scotland in large numbers . 
 = = Popular religion = = 
 At the beginning of the century , the kirk had considerable control over the lives of the people . It had a major role in the Poor Law and schools , which were administered through the parishes , and over the morals of the population , particularly over sexual offences such as adultery and fornication . A rebuke was necessary for moral offenders to " purge their scandal " . This involved standing or sitting before the congregation for up to three Sundays and enduring a rant by the minister . There was sometimes a special repentance stool near the pulpit for this purpose . In a few places the subject was expected to wear sackcloth . From the 1770s kirk session increasingly administered private rebukes , particularly for men from the social elites , while until the 1820s the poor were almost always give a public rebuke . In the early part of the century the kirk , particularly in the Lowlands , attempted to suppress dancing and events like penny weddings at which secular tunes were played . The oppression of secular music and dancing by the kirk began to ease between about 1715 and 1725 . 
 Strict Sabbatarianism was vital to Presbyterian culture . For members of separatist churches , the Sunday walk to the meeting house , sometimes as much as thirty miles , marked the intensity of dissent and strict keeping of the Sabbath was a mark of true membership . Fast days were also important , particularly in <unk> culture . They often did not involve actual fasting , but focused on stricter observance of the Sabbath . The established kirk had three a year , but the <unk> as many as six . 
 In Presbyterian worship the sermon , which could be several hours long , was seen as central , meaning that services tended to have a didactic and wordy character . There were also Bible readings and the only participation by the congregation was musical , in the singing of the psalms . From the late seventeenth century the common practice was lining out , by which the precentor sang or read out each line and it was then repeated by the congregation . From the second quarter of the eighteenth century it was argued that this should be abandoned in favour of the practice of singing stanza by stanza . These innovations became linked to a choir movement that included the setting up of schools to teach new tunes and singing in four parts . 
 Among Presbyterians , communion was the central occasion of the church , conducted infrequently , at most once a year , often taking a week of festivals as part of a communion season . <unk> were examined by a minister and elders , proving their knowledge of the Shorter Catechism . They were then given communion tokens that entitled them to take part in the ceremony . Long tables were set up in the middle of the church at which communicants sat to receive communion . Where ministers refused or neglected parish communion , largely assemblies were carried out in the open air , often combining several parishes . These large gatherings were discouraged by the General Assembly , but continued . They could become mixed with secular activities and were commemorated as such by Robert Burns in the poem Holy Fair . They could also be occasions for evangelical meetings , as at the Cambuslang Wark . 
 Among Episcopalians , Qualified Chapels used the English Book of Common Prayer . They installed organs and hired musicians , following the practice in English parish churches , singing in the liturgy as well as metrical psalms , while the non @-@ jurors had to worship covertly and less elaborately . When the two branches united in the 1790s , the non @-@ juring branch soon absorbed the musical and liturgical traditions of the qualified churches . 
 Catholic worship was deliberately low key , usually in the private houses of recusant landholders or in domestic buildings adapted for services . Surviving chapels from this period are generally austere and simply furnished . Typical worship consisted of a sermon , long vernacular prayers and an unsung Low Mass in Latin . Musical accompaniment was prohibited until the nineteenth century , when organs began to be introduced into chapels . 
 = Modern Benoni = 
 The Modern Benoni is a chess opening that begins with the moves 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5 3.d5 e6 . It is classified under the ECO codes A60 – <unk> . After the initial moves , Black proceeds to capture on d5 , creating a majority of black pawns on the queenside . To support their advance , the king 's bishop is usually fianchettoed on g7 . These two features differentiate Black 's setup from the other Benoni defences and the King 's Indian Defence , although transpositions between these openings are common . 
 Frank Marshall invented the Modern Benoni in 1927 , but his experiments with the opening went largely ignored for over 20 years . In the 1950s the system was revitalized by players in the Soviet Union , chief among them Mikhail Tal . Its subsequent adoption by players of a similarly aggressive and uncompromising style such as Bobby Fischer and Garry Kasparov established the opening 's reputation as one of Black 's most dynamic responses to 1.d4. 
 The Modern Benoni suffered a serious theoretical crisis in the 1980s and 1990s , when players as Black encountered great difficulties in meeting the Taimanov Attack and the Modern Main Line . Only in the 21st century has the opening 's reputation and theoretical standing made a recovery . Notably , it was Vladimir Kramnik 's choice when he needed a win with Black in the penultimate game of the 2004 World Championship . 
 = = Initial moves = = 
 The standard move order for Black to enter the Modern Benoni is 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5 . Here it is possible for White to avoid 3.d5 : respectable alternatives include 3.Nf3 , typically transposing to a line of the English Opening , as well as <unk> Taking the pawn with <unk> is hardly ever seen , because Black easily recovers it after 3 ... e6 followed by ... Bxc5 . 
 Still , 3.d5 has long been considered White 's most challenging move , as it gains space in the centre . While it is possible for Black to avoid ... e7 @-@ e6 for the time being and play other moves such as 3 ... d6 or 3 ... g6 , delaying this move until after White plays e2 @-@ e4 gives White the extra option of recapturing on d5 with the e @-@ pawn . While recapturing in this fashion does not give White a central pawn majority , it maintains White 's spatial advantage and denies Black the counterplay associated with possession of a queenside pawn majority . Thus players who are seeking the typical imbalance in pawn structure associated with the Modern Benoni tend to prefer the immediate 3 ... e6 followed by 4 ... exd5 . 
 = = Alternative move orders and transpositions = = 
 It is possible , indeed common , for Black 's second and third moves to be reversed : thus 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 c5 and 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nf3 c5 will both transpose into the Modern Benoni if White allows it with <unk> The latter move order has been especially popular since the 1980s , as it allows Black to reach the Modern Benoni while sidestepping the Taimanov Attack . It also gives Black the additional option of meeting 4.d5 with 4 ... b5 , the Blumenfeld Gambit . Players who use this move order will often choose a different defence against 3.Nc3 , such as the Nimzo @-@ Indian with 3 ... Bb4 . 
 Another frequent transposition into the Modern Benoni occurs when White invites a Catalan Opening with 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.g3 and Black responds with 3 ... c5 . If White responds with 4.d5 exd5 5.cxd5 , Black can play 5 ... d6 , which often transposes into the Fianchetto Variation ; but a common alternative is 5 ... b5 , which leads to independent positions . 
 Black can also try to reach the Modern Benoni through a Benoni Defence move order , i.e. 1.d4 c5 <unk> Nf6 , when 3.c4 e6 would complete the transposition . However , White often prefers not to play 3.c4 , since it takes away a useful square from a white knight . Several lines of the King 's Indian Defence , such as the Four Pawns Attack , the Sämisch Variation and the Fianchetto Variation , can also transpose into variations of the Modern Benoni if Black plays ... c5 followed by ... e6 and ... exd5 and White recaptures with the c @-@ pawn . 
 = = History = = 
 The Modern Benoni was invented by Frank Marshall at the New York 1927 chess tournament . He played it twice , gaining a draw against José Raúl Capablanca in the Fianchetto Variation , but losing soundly to Aron Nimzowitsch , who played the Knight 's Tour . Nimzowitsch received the third special prize of the tournament for this game and labelled Marshall 's opening an " unfortunate " " extravagance " in his annotations ; as a result , it lay virtually abandoned for decades . However , Karel <unk> 's experiments with the Benoni Defence in the 1930s occasionally featured the moves ... e7 @-@ e6 and ... exd5 , resulting in a transposition to the Modern Benoni . 
 Only in the 1950s was interest in the system revived , when the King 's Indian Defence gained in popularity among Soviet players and their investigations branched into related opening systems such as the Modern Benoni . The imbalance inherent in its pawn structure and the counter @-@ chances this implied for Black appealed to aggressive players such as Rashid <unk> and Alexander <unk> ; the Israeli master Moshe <unk> also employed it frequently . Lev Polugaevsky , Boris Spassky and Alexey <unk> were among the younger generation of Soviet players who used it regularly in the 1950s and 1960s . 
 But the player primarily responsible for elevating the Modern Benoni to the status of a major opening was Mikhail Tal , who took up the opening in 1953 after seeing one of <unk> 's games . The tactical positions it led to were a perfect fit for Tal 's combinatorial gifts and he crushed many opponents in brilliant style . Famous examples include his game against <unk> Gurgenidze at the 1957 USSR championship , excerpted below , and his win against Yuri Averbakh at the same tournament the following year . He also became the first player to use the Modern Benoni in a world championship match , playing it twice against Mikhail Botvinnik in 1960 . Former World Champion and opening authority Max Euwe acknowledged Tal 's contribution to the opening by naming it the " Tal @-@ System " in his 1965 opening encyclopedia . 
 These developments did not go unnoticed outside the Soviet Union : the name " Modern Benoni " had appeared in print by 1956 . In the 1960s Larry Evans began employing the system frequently , and from 1966 onwards , Bobby Fischer also included it in his repertoire , albeit as a secondary weapon . Even so , Fischer was responsible for one of the most famous games ever played with the opening : down 2 – 0 in the 1972 World Championship match , he answered Spassky 's 1.d4 with the Modern Benoni in Game 3 and scored a momentum @-@ changing victory . 
 The successes of Tal and Fischer inspired a new generation of players to take up the Modern Benoni in the 1970s and 1980s , including Walter Browne , Ljubomir Ljubojević , John Nunn , Dragoljub Velimirović , Lev Psakhis , Mihai Suba and Nick de Firmian . The young Garry Kasparov also had the defence in his arsenal — his win against Viktor Korchnoi at the 1982 Lucerne Olympiad was considered the highlight of the tournament and remains one of the most famous games ever played in the opening . It became a favoured weapon for players needing to win against 1.d4 : for example , Psakhis used it to defeat Yuri <unk> in the penultimate round of the 1980 USSR Championship , catching Alexander <unk> in the lead and ultimately sharing first place with him . 
 But in the early 1980s , White scored several crushing victories at high @-@ profile tournaments using the aggressive Taimanov Attack , which caused players to question the fundamental soundness of Black 's opening . By the end of the decade , the Modern Main Line had also emerged as a dangerous weapon for White , which only compounded Black 's troubles . As a result , the opening declined in popularity and a number of grandmasters gave it up altogether . Those who continued to play it often chose to do so via the move order 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nf3 c5 4.d5 , when White 's early development of the knight to f3 rules out the Taimanov Attack and gives Black opportunities to avoid the Modern Main Line . 
 Mired in this theoretical crisis , the Modern Benoni remained unpopular in the 1990s . Veselin Topalov was the only top @-@ level player to play it regularly , and he too generally preferred the 2 ... e6 3.Nf3 c5 move order . At the beginning of the new millennium , the theoretician John Watson published a well @-@ regarded survey of the opening that may have contributed to the opening 's revival . Many of the ideas he recommended , such as 9 ... Qh4 + versus the Taimanov Attack and 9 ... Nh5 in the Modern Main Line , grew in popularity after its publication . The opening regained some more of its former respectability when Vladimir Kramnik , needing a win with Black against Peter Leko , played it in the second last game of the 2004 World Championship . While he did achieve a winning position at one point , the game ended in a draw . Nevertheless , Étienne Bacrot , Boris Gelfand and Vassily Ivanchuk have all since used the Modern Benoni at the highest levels of competition , while Vugar Gashimov became the opening 's most notable proponent . He was the strongest player willing to use the original 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5 3.d5 e6 move order and defend Black 's cause in both the Taimanov Attack and the Modern Main Line . 
 = = Strategy = = 
 The Modern Benoni is one of Black 's sharpest and most active defences against 1.d4. The exchange of White 's c @-@ pawn for Black 's e @-@ pawn leaves White with a pawn majority in the centre and Black with one on the queenside . This asymmetry suggests that White will try to play on the kingside and in the centre , while Black will seek counterplay on the queenside . However , this simplistic generalization does not hold in many cases — depending on how the pieces are arranged , either side may be able to fight back on the flank where they are theoretically weaker . 
 The creation of such a pronounced structural imbalance so early on in the game implies that Black aims to counterattack rather than equalize . Thus the opening has acquired a reputation for being risky : as Psakhis once wrote , the Modern Benoni " is definitely not an opening for cowards . " Since White 's central superiority typically constitutes a positional advantage , Black must frequently resort to tactical play and material sacrifices in order not to be forced into passivity . 
 = = = Black 's queenside play = = = 
 The game Donner – Tal , Zurich 1959 , was a classic demonstration of the power of Black 's queenside pawn advance , backed up by the bishop on g7 . After Black 's 20 ... Qb4 ! White was unable to exchange queens , as <unk> cxb4 <unk> Nc5 would fork the pawns on a4 and e4 . However , the actual game did not last long after Donner 's <unk> : Tal set his pawns in motion with 21 ... c4 <unk> b5 <unk> axb5 <unk> , created a passed c @-@ pawn with 24 ... Bxc3 ! <unk> Qxc3 <unk> <unk> <unk> c3 <unk> , and forced Donner 's resignation with 28 ... Nc5 ! when White could neither save his e @-@ pawn nor stop Black 's c @-@ pawn from <unk> . According to Donner , while he spent over two hours on the game , Tal used only fifteen minutes . 
 = = = White 's kingside play = = = 
 The central pawn majority is White 's main positional trump in the Modern Benoni . By staking out an advantage in space on the kingside , it allows White to develop an initiative on that side of the board . The most important tool in White 's arsenal is the e4 @-@ e5 pawn advance , which can open up lines and squares for the white pieces , and result in the creation of a passed d @-@ pawn if Black answers with ... dxe5 . 
 A famous example of the e4 @-@ e5 break leading to a kingside attack occurred in the game Penrose – Tal from the 1960 Leipzig Olympiad . Following <unk> ! dxe5 <unk> ! Bb7 <unk> <unk> <unk> White had managed to install a powerful knight on e4 , while Black 's pieces were hemmed in by the pawn on e5 . Penrose soon crashed through on the f @-@ file and scored a stunning upset over the reigning world champion . Other classic examples of this central breakthrough include <unk> – Keres , Estonia – Finland match , Helsinki 1960 and Korchnoi – Tal , USSR championship , Yerevan 1962 . 
 = = = Black 's kingside play = = = 
 Black 's half @-@ open e @-@ file grants him a certain degree of influence over the kingside . A rook on <unk> puts pressure on White 's e @-@ pawn and restrains it from advancing . Tactics involving ... Nxe4 are not uncommon — the games Averbakh – Tal , USSR championship , Riga 1958 , and Uhlmann – Fischer , Interzonal , Palma de Mallorca 1970 , are well @-@ known examples . Black can initiate further kingside activity by playing ... Nd7 @-@ e5 followed by ... g7 @-@ g5 . The pawn move prevents White from driving away the knight with f2 @-@ f4 , and sets up the possibility of Black bringing a knight on f4 via g6 or h5 . Further space @-@ gaining pawn advances such as ... g5 @-@ g4 and ... f7 @-@ f5 may even be possible . 
 En route to winning his first USSR championship , Tal provided a brilliant example of how Black 's dark @-@ square control could lead to a kingside attack . Against Gurgenidze at the 1957 championship in Moscow , he unleashed the double sacrifice 14 ... Nxf2 ! ! <unk> Qh4 + <unk> ( 16.g3 ? Bd4 + <unk> Qxh3 + <unk> Bg4 + <unk> g5 + <unk> Be3 + <unk> Qh6 mate ) Bd4 <unk> Qxh3 ! with the point that <unk> Bxh3 is mate . After <unk> <unk> <unk> f5 ! <unk> <unk> <unk> Ba6 ! White was unable to defend against Black 's threats of 22 ... Rxe4 <unk> Re8 <unk> Nxd5 and 22 ... Bxc4 + <unk> Rf8 + 24 . <unk> Rxf3 + . Gurgenidze resigned the game after move 27 , which put Tal into the tournament lead with three rounds remaining . 
 = = = White 's queenside play = = = 
 When Black prepares the ... b7 @-@ b5 pawn break with ... a6 , White usually tries to hinder it by playing a2 @-@ a4 , even though this advance weakens the b4 @-@ square . As a further deterrent to Black 's queenside expansion , White often moves the knight on f3 to c4 via d2 . With the knight on c4 , Black 's ... b7 @-@ b5 break may be met by axb5 followed by Na5 , when the arrival of a white knight on c6 could severely disrupt Black 's position . The knight on c4 also attacks Black 's backward pawn on d6 , and White can often increase the pressure on this pawn by playing Bf4 or <unk> . The strength of White 's knight on c4 often induces Black to exchange it off : typical ways of doing so are ... Nb6 , ... Ne5 , or ... b7 @-@ b6 followed by ... Ba6 . 
 Even if Black should succeed in enforcing the ... b7 @-@ b5 break , White may halt the b @-@ pawn 's further advance by simply playing b2 @-@ b4 . Even though this would give Black the opportunity to establish a passed c @-@ pawn with ... c5 @-@ c4 , blockading the queenside in this manner may allow White to pursue play in the centre and on the kingside undisturbed . The ... c5 @-@ c4 advance would also relinquish Black 's control over the d4 @-@ square , which may be occupied to good effect by a white knight or bishop . 
 A successful demonstration of this last idea occurred in the game <unk> – <unk> at the 1998 <unk> Olympiad . White answered Black 's 21 ... b5 with <unk> ! , and Black was unable to keep the queenside open with 22 ... <unk> ? because <unk> <unk> <unk> dxc5 <unk> would have left White 's central pawns unstoppable . After the game 's 22 ... c4 <unk> ! Qe7 <unk> Black 's queenside play had ground to a halt ; <unk> later won with a pawn advance on the kingside . 
 = = Variations = = 
 After the initial moves 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5 3.d5 e6 , the moves 4.Nf3 and 4.g3 reach positions discussed previously , while <unk> fxe6 is also ineffective , since Black gains a half @-@ open f @-@ file and the chance to take over the centre with ... d7 @-@ d5 . Instead White 's most popular move is 4.Nc3 , preparing to support the d @-@ pawn with <unk> As mentioned above , were Black to delay the capture on d5 , White would then gain the option of recapturing with the e @-@ pawn . Thus Black generally plays 4 ... exd5 immediately . 
 Following the recapture 5.cxd5 , Black has an eccentric option in 5 ... Bd6 , the Snake Benoni . But most players prefer 5 ... d6 , which stops White 's d @-@ pawn from advancing to d6 . Black 's control over the central dark squares d4 and e5 will then be augmented by <unk> the bishop on g7 . Meanwhile , White must decide whether or not to play <unk> Although this move gains space in the centre , it also gives Black a target of attack on the half @-@ open e @-@ file . White can deny Black this target for the time being by playing 6.Nf3 first . 
 = = = 4.Nc3 exd5 5.cxd5 d6 6.e4 g6 = = = 
 The most critical lines in the Modern Benoni occur after 6.e4 g6 . At this point 7.Nf3 has historically been White 's most popular move , intending to complete kingside development and castle . Here theory divides into three major branches : 
 7 ... Bg7 8.Be2 0 @-@ 0 9 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 , the Classical Main Line ; 
 7 ... Bg7 8.h3 0 @-@ 0 9.Bd3 , the Modern Main Line ; 
 and 7 ... a6 , an attempt by Black to avoid the Modern Main Line . 
 Apart from 7.Nf3 , White also has several important alternatives , including : 
 7.f4 , which leads to the Taimanov Attack , Four Pawns Attack , or <unk> Attack ; 
 7.Bd3 , which often leads to the Knaak Variation but may also transpose to the Modern Main Line ; 
 7.h3 , which is yet another way for White to reach the Modern Main Line after 7 ... Bg7 8.Nf3 0 @-@ 0 9.Bd3 ; 
 7.f3 , the Kapengut Variation ; 
 and <unk> , which was recommended for White in 2012 by Lars <unk> . The idea is to develop with <unk> , Be2 and 0 @-@ 0 . 
 = = = = 7.Nf3 Bg7 8.Be2 0 @-@ 0 9 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 : Classical Main Line = = = = 
 Before the advent of the Taimanov Attack and the Modern Main Line , the sequence 7.Nf3 Bg7 8.Be2 0 @-@ 0 9 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 was the most frequently contested line in the Modern Benoni . Here Black has a choice between three main plans . Two of them begin with 9 ... Re8 , attacking the e @-@ pawn . After 10.Nd2 , Black 's most dynamic plan is to prepare kingside play with 10 ... Nbd7 followed by ... Ne5 and ... g6 @-@ g5 . This plan became popular in the 1970s after Fischer used it , and although it is riskier than the alternatives , it remains Black 's best option to complicate the game . 
 Alternatively , Black can try the older move 10 ... Na6 , intending to bring the knight to c7 to prepare the ... b7 @-@ b5 break . White most commonly responds with Gligorić 's <unk> <unk> <unk> , which clamps down on b5 and <unk> e4 so that White can follow up with Nc4 . Black 's position remains solid but offers fewer active possibilities than after 10 ... Nbd7 . 
 At the 1973 Madrid international tournament Ljubojević demonstrated what is now considered to be Black 's most reliable path to equality . Against <unk> Garcia Martinez he played 9 ... a6 10.a4 Bg4 <unk> Bxf3 <unk> and now the innovation 12 ... Qe7 ! which prepares ... Nbd7 while keeping the pawn on d6 defended . The exchange of Black 's bishop for White 's knight eases Black 's slightly cramped position and weakens the force of White 's e4 @-@ e5 break . 
 = = = = 7.Nf3 Bg7 8.h3 0 @-@ 0 9.Bd3 : Modern Main Line = = = = 
 By the late 1980s Ljubojević 's plan of exchanging the light @-@ squared bishop had been proven so reliable it was deterring White from entering the Classical Main Line altogether . The desire to prevent ... Bg4 led to the development of the Modern Main Line , 7.Nf3 Bg7 8.h3 0 @-@ 0 <unk> If Black continues in the same manner as in the Classical Main Line , e.g. 9 ... a6 10.a4 Nbd7 11 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 Re8 , then White appears to maintain an advantage with <unk> 
 Originally it was thought that the temporary pawn sacrifice 9 ... b5 was an easy equalizer : after <unk> Nxe4 ? ! <unk> Re8 Black seemingly regains the sacrificed piece without trouble . But in Alburt – de Firmian , USA ch 1990 , White <unk> <unk> ! and went on to win : this move was judged the most important theoretical novelty in Volume 50 of Chess Informant . Only later was it discovered that the immediate 10 ... Re8 is a better way of recovering the pawn , with a complicated game in the offing . 
 The other capture <unk> has been subjected to extensive analysis and testing , which has led to the conclusion that the sequence 10 ... Nxe4 <unk> Qa5 + <unk> <unk> <unk> Qa6 <unk> Nd7 15 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 is more or less forced . In the resulting positions Black has found it difficult to generate any winning chances , and even finding equality has not been a simple task . The fact that one must know a lot of theory just to secure a draw has rendered the entire variation beginning with 9 ... b5 rather unattractive from Black 's point of view , even though it appears to be objectively the best move . 
 Thus Black has sought other methods of combating the Modern Main Line . The sharp variation 9 ... Re8 10 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 c4 received significant attention in the mid @-@ 1990s , but after <unk> Nxe4 <unk> Rxe4 <unk> Black has yet to demonstrate clear equality . In 2001 John Watson published a detailed analysis of 9 ... Nh5 , which stops White from playing Bc1 @-@ f4 and allows Black to follow up with ... Nd7 @-@ e5 . While it is also unclear whether this move ultimately <unk> , at least Black retains significant counterplay . 
 = = = = 7.Nf3 a6 : Black avoids the Modern Main Line = = = = 
 White 's success with the Modern Main Line has spurred Black to search for ways to get in ... Bg4 before White stops it with h2 @-@ h3 . After 7.Nf3 , the immediate 7 ... Bg4 ? runs into <unk> + ! , when 8 ... Bd7 9.Qb3 or 8 ... Nbd7 ? <unk> ! threatening <unk> both give White the advantage . So Black first plays 7 ... a6 threatening 8 ... b5 . Only after 8.a4 does Black play 8 ... Bg4 , when a transposition to the Classical Main Line is likely : 9.Be2 Bxf3 <unk> Bg7 11 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 0 @-@ 0 <unk> Qe7 is Ljubojević 's line , for example . Instead White may try to exploit Black 's early ... Bg4 with 9.Qb3 , but after 9 ... Bxf3 <unk> Black can either maintain material and positional equality with 10 ... <unk> or try for more with 10 ... Nbd7 ! ? . To cut across Black 's idea of ... Bg4 , White has even resorted to 8.h3 allowing 8 ... b5 , but after 9.Bd3 Bg7 10 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 0 @-@ 0 Black obtains an acceptable position . 
 If White has entered the Benoni through the standard move order ( 4.Nc3 exd5 5.cxd5 d6 6.e4 g6 ) , White can dodge such sidelines by avoiding the immediate 7.Nf3 and starting with 7.Bd3 or 7.h3 instead : the latter two moves leave Black little choice but to enter the Modern Main Line after 7 ... Bg7 and 8 ... 0 @-@ 0 . 
 = = = = 7.f4 : Taimanov Attack and other lines = = = = 
 With 7.f4 White stakes out even more space in the centre and threatens to overrun Black 's position with a quick e4 @-@ e5 . After 7 ... Bg7 White can transpose to the main line of the Four Pawns Attack in the King 's Indian Defence with 8.Nf3 0 @-@ 0 <unk> A rarer option is <unk> , the <unk> Attack , against which Black can equalize with either 8 ... Nfd7 or the rarer 8 ... dxe5 <unk> Nfd7 . 
 By far the most popular continuation for White is <unk> + , the Taimanov Attack . <unk> by Mark Taimanov in 1956 , the strength of this variation was not fully appreciated until the early 1980s . The point of the check is that both 8 ... Bd7 and 8 ... Nbd7 allow <unk> with advantage to White , since the knight on f6 can no longer retreat to d7 . After the strongest move 8 ... Nfd7 the most popular move used to be 9.Bd3 , preparing to meet 9 ... a6 with <unk> But in two crushing and high @-@ profile victories with White ( against Frans Andre <unk> at the 1980 World Junior Chess Championship in Dortmund , and against Nunn at the 1982 Olympiad in Lucerne ) Kasparov showed that 9.a4 was more dangerous for Black , it having the advantage of not determining the bishop 's retreat square for the time being . 
 White 's success with this idea led some to question the soundness of the Modern Benoni , at least in its original move order . In 1982 , Nunn concluded his analysis of the Taimanov with the words , " Black badly needs a new idea against <unk> + and 9.a4 to keep the Benoni in business " ; two years later , he had given up the opening altogether . Other players such as Psakhis resorted to using the move order 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 , only playing 3 ... c5 in response to 3.Nf3 to avoid the Taimanov , while choosing an entirely different opening against <unk> The damage this variation did to the opening 's reputation led David Norwood to rechristen it the " Flick @-@ Knife Attack . " 
 Not until the 21st century did players and analysts begin to revive Black 's chances in this line . First , Watson showed that the disruptive check 9 ... Qh4 + was playable , the point being that after <unk> White is no longer able to bring the bishop on c1 to the squares g3 or h4 , where it can assist in White 's kingside attack . Later players such as Gashimov showed that the queen check is not mandatory , and that Black also retains good chances in the line 9 ... 0 @-@ 0 <unk> Na6 11 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 <unk> , taking advantage of the outpost on b4 . 
 = = = = 7.Bd3 : Knaak Variation = = = = 
 The move 7.Bd3 is sometimes used by White to enter the Modern Main Line after 7 ... Bg7 8.h3 without allowing Black 's attempts to play an early ... Bg4 . It is also the prelude to a variation championed by Rainer Knaak , 7 ... Bg7 <unk> 0 @-@ 0 9 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 . White 's plan is to play for a kingside attack beginning with the moves <unk> , f2 @-@ f4 , and then either e4 @-@ e5 or f4 @-@ f5 . A famous demonstration of White 's kingside attack was the game Penrose – Tal , Leipzig ol 1960 . However , the development of the knight to e2 rules out the Nf3 @-@ d2 @-@ c4 manoeuvre , so Black is able to get quick counterplay on the queenside with ideas like ... c5 @-@ c4 followed by ... Nd7 @-@ c5 . 
 = = = = 7.f3 : Kapengut Variation = = = = 
 In 1996 Albert Kapengut published a dense analysis of the move 7.f3 , which now bears his name . Kapengut himself gave it the name " Half @-@ Sämisch Variation " , because the positions it leads to are often reached via transposition from the Sämisch Variation of the King 's Indian Defence . The pawn on f3 <unk> e4 and prevents ... Ng4 , so that White can continue 7 ... Bg7 <unk> and retreat the bishop to e3 after ... h7 @-@ h6 without it being further harassed by Black 's knight . Notable past practitioners of this line have included Viktor Korchnoi and Murray Chandler . 
 = = = 4.Nc3 exd5 5.cxd5 d6 6.Nf3 g6 = = = 
 This position arises particularly frequently through the transposition 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nf3 c5 4.d5 exd5 5.cxd5 d6 6.Nc3 g6 . At this point White can still transpose to the Classical or Modern Main Lines after <unk> Other common alternatives are : 
 7.g3 , the Fianchetto Variation ; 
 7.Nd2 , the Knight 's Tour Variation ; 
 7.Bf4 ; 
 7.Bg5 , the Uhlmann Variation ; 
 and 7.h3 , which is yet another attempt for White to enter the Modern Main Line without allowing an early ... Bg4 . But in this move order Black can also prevent the transposition with 7 ... a6 ( the immediate 7 ... Qe7 ? 8.e4 Nxe4 ? ? loses the knight to <unk> + ) 8.a4 Qe7 , which stops White from playing e2 @-@ e4 . 
 = = = = 7.g3 : Fianchetto Variation = = = = 
 The Fianchetto Variation has never been considered particularly dangerous for Black to meet , since White 's setup does not put Black 's position under immediate pressure . However , it also offers Black no obvious target to attack — the fianchettoed bishop covers e4 and d5 and also protects White 's king . Since the same bishop no longer covers the a6 @-@ f1 diagonal , White typically plays Nf3 @-@ d2 @-@ c4 to help defend against Black 's queenside expansion . After further preparatory moves such as Bf4 and Re1 , White may be able to push forward in the centre with e2 @-@ e4 @-@ e5 . Noted proponents of the Fianchetto Variation have included strong positional players such as Viktor Korchnoi , Gennadi <unk> and Predrag Nikolić , and after a recommendation by the influential theorist Boris <unk> in 2010 , the line has become more topical . 
 Play typically proceeds 7.g3 Bg7 <unk> 0 @-@ 0 9 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 , and now the most common continuation sees Black developing in standard Benoni fashion while White manoeuvres the king 's knight to c4 , i.e. 9 ... a6 10.a4 Nbd7 <unk> Re8 <unk> Rb8 <unk> Here Black can challenge White 's knight with either 13 ... Ne5 or 13 ... Nb6 . White may also try to develop more quickly with <unk> in order to strengthen the threat of e2 @-@ e4 @-@ e5 . The idea of an early Bf4 is also effective in other variations such as 9 ... Re8 <unk> Black too can deviate : for example , the idea of playing for ... b7 @-@ b5 after 9 ... Na6 10.Nd2 <unk> is frequently seen . 
 The Fianchetto Variation is often reached via transposition from other openings . For instance , the position in the diagram can be reached from the King 's Indian via 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.g3 Bg7 4.Bg2 c5 <unk> d6 6.Nc3 0 @-@ 0 7.Nf3 e6 8 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 exd5 <unk> , or from the Catalan via 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.g3 c5 4.d5 exd5 5.cxd5 d6 6.Nc3 g6 7.Bg2 Bg7 8.Nf3 0 @-@ 0 9 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 . 
 = = = = 7.Nd2 : Knight 's Tour Variation = = = = 
 The Knight 's Tour Variation 7.Nd2 immediately sends the knight towards c4 , where it attacks the d @-@ pawn ; the pressure on it can be increased with moves like Bf4 . Black can counter this plan with 7 ... Nbd7 intending <unk> Nb6 , while 8.e4 Bg7 9.Be2 0 @-@ 0 10 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 would lead to a major variation of the Classical Main Line after 10 ... Re8 , with White having avoided Black 's alternative plan of ... Bg4 . 
 Black is not obliged to allow this transposition though : 7 ... Bg7 is also playable . After 8.e4 0 @-@ 0 9.Be2 , Black has alternatives to 9 ... Re8 , such as the 9 ... Na6 10 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 Ne8 Kramnik played against Leko at the 2004 World Championship . And if White carries out his original intention with <unk> 0 @-@ 0 <unk> , Black can either defend the pawn with 9 ... Ne8 or sacrifice it with 9 ... Na6 or 9 ... b6 . 
 = = = = 7.Bf4 = = = = 
 The move 7.Bf4 is similar in spirit to 7.Nd2 , in that White hopes to inconvenience Black by a quick attack on d6 . After 7 ... Bg7 <unk> + ! Bd7 9.Qb3 White attacks both b7 and d6 , and Black must be careful not to drift into a passive position after 9 ... Qc7 <unk> 0 @-@ 0 . 
 More commonly Black prefers to rule out White 's queen check with 7 ... a6 , which incidentally threatens to expand on the queenside . White can ignore this with 8.e4 b5 <unk> , aiming to quickly overrun Black in the centre with the e4 @-@ e5 advance . However , 8.a4 Bg7 is the most popular continuation , when White can aim for a transposition to the Classical Main Line with <unk> Another possibility is 9.h3 0 @-@ 0 <unk> , which gives the bishop a retreat square in case of ... Nh5 and delays further expansion in the centre until the White 's development is complete . Although a number of opening books recommended the 7.Bf4 variation for White in the early 21st century , Black appears to be able to maintain the balance in this line . 
 = = = = 7.Bg5 : Uhlmann Variation = = = = 
 The variation with 7.Bg5 is named after Wolfgang Uhlmann , who played it a few times in the 1960s . Botvinnik also employed it in his 1960 world championship match against Tal . By pinning the knight , White aims to transpose into favourable lines of the Averbakh Variation of the King 's Indian Defence , which may occur after 7 ... 0 @-@ 0 <unk> ! . To prevent this , Black can either break the pin immediately with 7 ... h6 <unk> g5 <unk> Nh5 , or after developing with 7 ... Bg7 8.e4 h6 <unk> At this point 9 ... g5 <unk> Nh5 runs into the pawn sacrifice <unk> + Kf8 <unk> ! when White has a dangerous attack , and in the late 1970s this line was even thought to have refuted the Modern Benoni . Later it was realized that Black can prevent the bishop check with 9 ... a6 ! : the only way White can forestall ... g5 and ... Nh5 is with 10.Nd2 , but this allows Black to expand on the queenside with 10 ... b5 and reach a satisfactory position . 
 = Indiana @-@ class battleship = 
 The three Indiana @-@ class battleships were the first battleships to be built by the United States Navy that were comparable to contemporary European ships , such as the British HMS Hood . Authorized in 1890 and commissioned between November 1895 and April 1896 , they were relatively small battleships with heavy armor and ordnance that pioneered the use of an intermediate battery . Specifically intended for coastal defense , their freeboard was insufficient to deal well with the waves of the open ocean . Their turrets lacked counterweights , and the main belt armor was placed too low to be effective under most conditions . 
 The ships were named Indiana , Massachusetts , and Oregon and were designated Battleship Number 1 through 3 . All three served in the Spanish – American War , although Oregon — which was stationed on the West Coast — had to cruise 14 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 26 @,@ 000 km ; 16 @,@ 000 mi ) around South America to the East Coast first . After the war , Oregon returned to the Pacific and participated in the Philippine – American War and Boxer Rebellion , while her sister ships were restricted to training missions in the Atlantic Ocean . After 1903 , the obsolete battleships were <unk> and recommissioned several times , the last time during World War I when Indiana and Massachusetts served as training ships , while Oregon was a transport escort for the Siberian Intervention . 
 In 1919 , all three ships were decommissioned for the final time . Indiana was sunk in shallow water as an explosives test target a year later and sold for scrap in 1924 . Massachusetts was scuttled off the coast of Pensacola in 1920 and used as an artillery target . The wreck was never scrapped and is now a Florida Underwater Archaeological Preserve . Oregon was initially preserved as a museum , but was sold for scrap during World War II . The scrapping was later halted and the stripped hulk was used as an ammunition barge during the battle of Guam . The hulk was finally sold for scrap in 1956 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Indiana class was very controversial at the time of its approval by the United States Congress . A policy board convened by the Secretary of the Navy Benjamin F. Tracy came up with an ambitious 15 @-@ year naval construction program on 16 July 1889 , three years after the Maine and the Texas were authorized . The battleships in their plan would include ten first @-@ rate long @-@ range battleships with a 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) top speed and a steaming radius of 5 @,@ 400 nmi ( 10 @,@ 000 km ; 6 @,@ 200 mi ) at 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) — 6 @,@ 500 nmi ( 12 @,@ 000 km ; 7 @,@ 500 mi ) maximum . These ocean @-@ going ships were envisioned as a possible fleet in being , a fleet capable of raiding an enemy 's home ports and intended to deter powerful warships from ranging too far from home . Twenty @-@ five short @-@ range second @-@ rate battleships would provide home defense in both the Atlantic and Pacific and support the faster and larger long @-@ range vessels . With a range of roughly 2 @,@ 700 nmi ( 5 @,@ 000 km ; 3 @,@ 100 mi ) at 10 knots and a draft of 23 @.@ 5 ft ( 7 @.@ 2 m ) , they would roam from the St. Lawrence River in the north to the Windward Islands and Panama in the south and would be able to enter all of the ports in the southern United States . 
 It was proposed , probably for cost reasons , that the short @-@ range battleships should have a hierarchy of three subclasses . The first would mount four 13 @-@ inch ( 330 mm ) guns each on eight 8 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 8 @,@ 100 t ; 9 @,@ 000 @-@ short @-@ ton ) ships , the second would mount four 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns each on ten 7 @,@ 150 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 7 @,@ 260 t ; 8 @,@ 010 @-@ short @-@ ton ) ships , and the third would mount two 12 @-@ inch and two 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) guns each on five 6 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 6 @,@ 100 t ; 6 @,@ 700 @-@ short @-@ ton ) ships . The two battleships already under construction , Texas and Maine , were to be grouped under the last class . In addition , 167 smaller ships , including rams , cruisers and torpedo boats , would be built , coming to a total cost of $ 281 @.@ 55 million , approximately equal to the sum of the entire US Navy budget during the previous 15 years ( adjusted for inflation , $ 6 @.@ 6 billion in 2009 dollars ) . 
 Congress balked at the plan , seeing in it an end to the United States policy of isolationism and the beginning of imperialism . Even some supporters of naval expansion were wary ; Senator Eugene Hale feared that because the proposal was so large , the entire bill would be shot down and no money appropriated for any ships . However , in April 1890 , the United States House of Representatives approved funding for three 8 @,@ 000 @-@ long ton battleships . Tracy , trying to soothe tensions within Congress , remarked that these ships were so powerful that only twelve would be necessary instead of the 35 called for in the original plan . He also slashed the operating costs of the Navy by giving the remaining Civil War @-@ era monitors — which were utterly obsolete by this time — to navy militias operated by the states . The appropriation was also approved by the Senate , and in total three coast @-@ defense battleships ( the Indiana class ) , a cruiser , and a torpedo boat were given official approval and funding on 30 June 1890 . 
 The first class of short @-@ range ships as envisioned by the policy board were to mount 13 @-@ inch / 35 caliber and new 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) guns , with 17 in ( 432 mm ) of belt armor , 2 @.@ 75 in ( 70 mm ) of deck armor and 4 in ( 102 mm ) of armor over the casemates . The Indiana class , as actually built , exceeded the design in displacement by 25 percent , but most other aspects were relatively similar to the original plan . An 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) belt and a secondary battery of 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) and 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns were adopted , the latter because the Bureau of Ordnance did not have the capability to construct rapid @-@ firing 5 @-@ inch weaponry . The larger weapons were much slower firing and much heavier , but without the bigger guns , the ships would not be able to penetrate the armor of foreign battleships . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The Indiana @-@ class ships were designed specifically for coastal defense and were not intended for offensive actions . This design view was reflected in their moderate coal endurance , relatively small displacement and low freeboard , which limited seagoing capability . However , they were heavily armed and armored , so much in fact that Conway 's All The Worlds Fighting Ships describes them as " attempting too much on a very limited displacement . " They resembled the British battleship HMS Hood , but were 60 ft ( 18 m ) shorter and featured an intermediate battery consisting of eight 8 @-@ inch guns not found in European ships , giving them a very respectable amount of firepower for their time . 
 The original design of the Indiana class included bilge keels , but with keels they would not fit in any of the American drydocks at the time , so they were omitted during construction . This meant a reduction in stability and caused a serious problem for Indiana , when both main turrets broke loose from their clamps in heavy seas a year after being commissioned . Because the turrets were not centrally balanced , they swung from side to side with the motion of the ship , until they were secured with heavy ropes . When the ship encountered more bad weather four months later , she promptly steamed back to port for fear the clamps would break again . This convinced the navy that bilge keels were necessary and they were subsequently installed on all three ships . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Given their limited displacement , the Indiana class had formidable armament for the time : four 13 @-@ inch guns , an intermediate battery of eight 8 @-@ inch guns and a secondary battery of four 6 @-@ inch guns , twenty Hotchkiss 6 @-@ pounders , and six Maxim @-@ Nordenfelt 1 @-@ pounders , as well as six 18 @-@ inch Whitehead torpedo tubes . 
 The 13 @-@ inch gun was 35 calibers long and used black powder , giving a range of about 12 @,@ 000 yards ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) at 15 degrees of elevation . At 6 @,@ 000 yards ( 5 @,@ 500 m ) , a shell was expected to penetrate 10 – 12 inches ( 250 – 300 mm ) of side armor . The four guns were mounted in two centerline turrets , located fore and aft . The turrets were originally designed to feature sloping side armor , but space requirements made this impossible without using significantly larger gun turrets or redesigning the gun mounts ( which was later done for the Illinois @-@ class battleships ) . The ships ' low freeboard greatly hindered the use of the main battery in rough weather conditions , because the deck would become awash . Also , because the ship lacked a counterweight to offset the weight of the gun barrels , the ship would list in the direction the guns were aimed . This reduced the maximum arc of elevation ( and thus range ) to about 5 degrees , brought the main armor belt under water on that side , and exposed the unarmored bottom on the other . It was considered in 1901 to replace the turrets with new balanced models used in later ships , but that was decided to be too costly as the ships were already obsolete . Instead , counterweights were added , which partially solved the problem . The hydraulic rammers and turning mechanisms of the 8 @-@ inch turrets were also replaced by faster and more efficient electric equivalents , new sights were fitted on Indiana and Massachusetts , and new turret hoists were installed to improve the reloading speed , but the gun mountings never performed in an entirely satisfactory manner . 
 The eight 8 @-@ inch guns were mounted in pairs in four wing turrets placed on the superstructure . Their arc of fire , although big on paper , was in reality limited . Adjacent gun positions and superstructure would be damaged by their muzzle blast if the gun was trained alongside it , a defect also suffered by the 13 @-@ inch guns . The smaller 6 @-@ inch guns were mounted in twin wing casemates midships on the main deck level , with a 6 @-@ pounder in between . The other Hotchkiss 6 @-@ pounders lined the superstructure and bridge decks . Four of the 1 @-@ pounders were placed in hull casemates at the bow and stern of the ship and two more in the fighting tops of the masts . In 1908 , all the 6 @-@ inch and most of the lighter guns were removed to compensate for the counterweights added to the main battery and because ammunition supply for the guns was considered problematic . A year later , twelve 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) / 50 @-@ caliber single @-@ purpose guns were added midships and in the fighting tops . 
 Sources conflict on the number of torpedo tubes originally included in the ships , but it is clear they were located on the berth deck and had above @-@ water ports located on the extreme front and aft and midships . Located too close to the waterline to allow use while moving and vulnerable to gunfire when opened , they were considered useless and were quickly reduced in number , and removed entirely before 1908 . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 With the exception of the deck armor , 8 @-@ inch turrets and conning tower — which consisted of conventional nickel steel — the Indiana class was protected with the new Harvey armor . Its main protection was a belt 18 in ( 457 mm ) thick , placed along two thirds of the length of the hull from 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) above to 1 ft ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) under the waterline . Beyond this point , the belt gradually grew thinner until it ended 4 ft 3 in ( 1 @.@ 30 m ) under the waterline , where the belt was only 8 @.@ 5 in ( 220 mm ) thick . Below the belt the ship had no armor , only a double bottom . On both ends the belt was connected to the barbettes of the main guns with 14 @-@ inch ( 360 mm ) armored bulkheads . In the waterline sections outside this central citadel , compartments were filled with compressed cellulose , intended to self @-@ seal when damaged . Between the deck and the main belt , 5 @-@ inch hull armor was used . The deck armor was 2 @.@ 75 in ( 70 mm ) thick inside the citadel and 3 in ( 76 mm ) outside it . The hollow conning tower was a single forging 10 inches thick . The 13 @-@ inch gun battery had 15 in ( 380 mm ) of vertical turret plating and 17 @-@ inch @-@ thick ( 430 mm ) barbettes , while the 8 @-@ inch cannons only had 6 inches of vertical turret plating and 8 @-@ inch @-@ thick ( 200 mm ) barbettes . The casemates protecting the 6 @-@ inch guns were 5 inches thick and the other casemates , lighter guns , shell hoists and turret crowns were all lightly armored . 
 The placement of the belt armor was based on the draft from the design , which was 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) with a normal load of 400 long tons ( 406 t ; 448 short tons ) of coal on board . Her total coal storage capacity was 1 @,@ 600 long tons ( 1 @,@ 626 t ; 1 @,@ 792 short tons ) , and fully loaded her draft would increase to 27 feet ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) , entirely submerging the armor belt . During actual service , especially at war , the ships were kept fully loaded whenever possible , rendering her belt armor almost useless . That this was not considered in the design outraged the Walker policy board – convened in 1896 to evaluate the existing American battleships and propose a design for the new Illinois @-@ class battleships – and they set a standard that the load of coal and ammunition that future ships were designed for had to be at least two @-@ thirds of the maximum , so similar problems would be prevented in new ships . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Two vertical inverted triple expansion reciprocating steam engines powered by four double @-@ ended Scotch boilers drove twin propellers , while two single @-@ ended Scotch boilers supplied steam for auxiliary machinery . The engines were designed to provide 9 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 6 @,@ 700 kW ) , giving the ships a top speed of 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . During sea trials , which were conducted with limited amounts of coal , ammunition and supplies on board , it was found that the indicated horsepower and top speed exceeded design values and a significant variation between the three ships existed . The engines of Indiana delivered 9 @,@ 700 ihp ( 7 @,@ 200 kW ) , giving a top speed of 15 @.@ 6 kn ( 28 @.@ 9 km / h ; 18 @.@ 0 mph ) . Massachusetts had a top speed of 16 @.@ 2 kn ( 30 @.@ 0 km / h ; 18 @.@ 6 mph ) with 10 @,@ 400 ihp ( 7 @,@ 800 kW ) and Oregon reached a speed of 16 @.@ 8 kn ( 31 @.@ 1 km / h ; 19 @.@ 3 mph ) with 11 @,@ 000 ihp ( 8 @,@ 200 kW ) . Eight Babcock & Wilcox boilers , including four with superheaters , were installed on Indiana in 1904 and the same number on Massachusetts in 1907 to replace the outdated Scotch boilers . 
 = = Ships in class = = 
 = = = Indiana ( BB @-@ 1 ) = = = 
 Commissioned in 1895 , Indiana did not participate in any notable events until the outbreak of the Spanish – American War in 1898 , when Indiana was part of the North Atlantic Squadron under Rear Admiral William T. Sampson . His squadron was ordered to the Spanish port of San Juan in an attempt to intercept and destroy Admiral <unk> 's Spanish squadron , which was en route to the Caribbean from Spain . The harbor was empty , but Indiana and the rest of the squadron bombarded it for two hours before realizing their mistake . Three weeks later news arrived that Commodore Schley 's Flying Squadron had found Cervera and was now blockading him in the port of Santiago de Cuba . Sampson reinforced Schley two days later and assumed overall command . Cervera saw that his situation was desperate and attempted to run the blockade on 3 July 1898 . Indiana did not join in the chase of the fast Spanish cruisers because of her extreme eastern position on the blockade and low speed caused by engine problems , but was near the harbor entrance when the Spanish destroyers Pluton and Furor emerged . Together with the battleship Iowa and armed yacht Gloucester she opened fire , destroying the lightly armored enemy ships . 
 After the war , Indiana returned to training exercises before being decommissioned in 1903 . The battleship was recommissioned in January 1906 to function as a training vessel until she was decommissioned again in 1914 . Her third commission was in 1917 when Indiana served as a training ship for gun crews during World War I. She was decommissioned for the final time on 31 January 1919 , shortly after being reclassified Coast Battleship Number 1 so that the name Indiana could be assigned to the newly authorized — but never completed — battleship Indiana ( BB @-@ 50 ) . She was sunk in shallow water as a target in underwater explosion and aerial bombing tests in November 1920 . Her hulk was sold for scrap on 19 March 1924 . 
 = = = Massachusetts ( BB @-@ 2 ) = = = 
 Between being commissioned in 1896 and the outbreak of the Spanish – American War in 1898 , Massachusetts conducted training exercises off the eastern coast of the United States . During the war , she was placed in the Flying Squadron under Commodore Winfield Scott Schley . Schley went searching for Cervera 's Spanish squadron and found it in the port of Santiago . The battleship was part of the blockade fleet until 3 July , but missed the Battle of Santiago de Cuba , because she had steamed to Guantánamo Bay the night before to resupply coal . The next day , the battleship came back to Santiago , where she and Texas fired at the Spanish cruiser Reina Mercedes , which was being scuttled by the Spanish in a failed attempt to block the harbor entrance channel . 
 During the next seven years , Massachusetts cruised the Atlantic coast and eastern Caribbean as a member of the North Atlantic Squadron and then served for a year as a training ship for Naval Academy midshipmen until she was decommissioned in January 1906 . In May 1910 , she was placed in reduced commission as a training ship again before entering the Atlantic Reserve Fleet in September 1912 , where she stayed until being decommissioned in May 1914 . Massachusetts was recommissioned in June 1917 to serve as a training ship for gun crews during World War I. She was decommissioned for the final time on 31 March 1919 , after being redesignated Coast Battleship Number 2 two days earlier so her name could be reused for Massachusetts ( BB @-@ 54 ) . On 6 January 1921 she was scuttled off the coast of Pensacola and used as an artillery target for Fort Pickens . The Navy attempted to sell her for scrap , but no buyer could be found and in 1956 the ship was declared the property of the state of Florida . The wreck is currently one of the Florida Underwater Archaeological Preserves and serves as an artificial reef . 
 = = = Oregon ( BB @-@ 3 ) = = = 
 Oregon served for a short time with the Pacific Station before being ordered on a voyage around South America to the East Coast in March 1898 in preparation for war with Spain . She departed from San Francisco on 19 March , and reached Jupiter Inlet on 24 May , stopping several times for additional coal on the way . A journey of over 14 @,@ 000 nautical miles was completed in 66 days , which was considered a remarkable achievement at the time . The Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships describes the effect of the journey on the American public and government as follows : " On one hand the feat had demonstrated the many capabilities of a heavy battleship in all conditions of wind and sea . On the other it swept away all opposition for the construction of the Panama Canal , for it was then made clear that the country could not afford to take two months to send warships from one coast to the other each time an emergency arose . " After completing her journey , Oregon was ordered to join the blockade at Santiago as part of the North Atlantic Squadron under Rear Admiral Sampson . She took part in the Battle of Santiago de Cuba , where she and the cruiser Brooklyn were the only ships fast enough to chase down the Spanish cruiser Cristobal Colon , forcing its surrender . Around this time , she received the nickname " Bulldog of the Navy " , most likely because of her high bow wave — known as " having a bone in her teeth " in nautical slang — and perseverance during the cruise around South America and the battle of Santiago . 
 After the war , Oregon was refitted in New York before she was sent back to the Pacific , where she served as a guard ship for two years . She served for a year in the Philippines during the Philippine – American War and then spent a year in China at Wusong during the Boxer Rebellion until May 1901 , when she was ordered back to the United States for an overhaul . In March 1903 , Oregon returned to Asiatic waters and the ship remained in the Far East , returning only shortly before decommissioning in April 1906 . Oregon was recommissioned in August 1911 , but saw little activity and was officially placed on reserve status in 1914 . On 2 January 1915 , the ship was returned to full commission and sailed to San Francisco for the Panama – Pacific International Exposition . A year later , she was back to reserve status , only to be returned to full commission in April 1917 when the United States joined World War I. Oregon acted as one of the escorts for transport ships during the Siberian Intervention . In June 1919 , she was decommissioned , but a month later she was temporarily recommissioned as the reviewing ship for President Woodrow Wilson during the arrival of the Pacific Fleet at Seattle . In October 1919 , she was decommissioned for the final time . As a result of the Washington Naval Treaty , Oregon was declared " incapable of further warlike service " in January 1924 . In June 1925 , she was loaned to the State of Oregon , who used her as a floating monument and museum in Portland . 
