 = = = McCarthyism era = = = 
 During the early 1950s , the ACLU continued to steer a moderate course through the Cold War . When leftist singer Paul Robeson was denied a passport in 1950 , even though he was not a communist and not accused of any illegal acts , the ACLU chose to not defend him . The ACLU later reversed their stance , and supported William Worthy and Rockwell Kent in their passport confiscation cases , which resulted in legal victories in the late 1950s . 
 In response to communist witch @-@ hunts , many witnesses and employees chose to use the fifth amendment protection against self @-@ incrimination to avoid divulging information about their political beliefs . Government agencies and private organizations , in response , established polices which inferred communist party membership for anyone who invoked the fifth amendment . The national ACLU was divided on whether to defend employees who had been fired merely for pleading the fifth amendment , but the New York affiliate successfully assisted teacher Harry Slochower in his Supreme Court case which reversed his termination . 
 The fifth amendment issue became the catalyst for a watershed event in 1954 , which finally resolved the ACLU 's ambivalence by ousting the anti @-@ communists from ACLU leadership . In 1953 , the anti @-@ communists , led by Norman Thomas and James Fly , proposed a set of resolutions that inferred guilt of persons that invoked the fifth amendment . These resolutions were the first that fell under the ACLU 's new organizational rules permitting local affiliates to participate in the vote ; the affiliates outvoted the national headquarters , and rejected the anti @-@ communist resolutions . Anti @-@ communists leaders refused to accept the results of the vote , and brought the issue up for discussion again at the 1954 bi @-@ annual convention . ACLU member Frank Graham , president of the University of North Carolina , attacked the anti @-@ communists with a counter @-@ proposal , which stated that the ACLU " stand [ s ] against guilt by association , judgment by accusation , the invasion of privacy of personal opinions and beliefs , and the confusion of dissent with disloyalty . " The anti @-@ communists continued to battle Graham 's proposal , but were outnumbered by the affiliates . The anti @-@ communists finally gave up and departed the board of directors in late 1954 and 1955 , ending an eight @-@ year reign of ambivalence within the ACLU leadership ranks . Thereafter , the ACLU proceeded with firmer resolve against Cold War anti @-@ communist legislation . The period from the 1940 resolution ( and the purge of Elizabeth Flynn ) to the 1954 resignation of the anti @-@ communist leaders is considered by many to be an era in which the ACLU abandoned its core principles . 
 McCarthyism declined in late 1954 after television journalist Edward R. Murrow and others publicly chastised McCarthy . The controversies over the Bill of Rights that were generated by the Cold War ushered in a new era in American Civil liberties . In 1954 in Brown v. Board of Education , the Supreme Court unanimously overturned state @-@ sanctioned school segregation , and thereafter a flood of civil rights victories dominated the legal landscape . 
 The Supreme Court handed the ACLU two key victories in 1957 , in Watkins v. United States and Yates v. United States , both of which undermined the Smith Act and marked the beginning of the end of communist party membership inquiries . In 1965 , the Supreme Court produced some decisions , including Lamont v. Postmaster General ( in which the plaintiff was Corliss Lamont , a former ACLU board member ) , which upheld fifth amendment protections and brought an end to restrictions on political activity . 
 = = 1960s = = 
 The decade from 1954 to 1964 was the most successful period in the ACLU 's history . Membership rose from 30 @,@ 000 to 80 @,@ 000 , and by 1965 it had affiliates in seventeen states . During the ACLU 's bi @-@ annual conference in Colorado in 1964 , the Supreme Court issued rulings on eight cases in which the ACLU was involved ; the ACLU prevailed on seven of the eight . The ACLU played a role in Supreme Court decisions reducing censorship of literature and arts , protecting freedom of association , prohibiting racial segregation , excluding religion from public schools , and providing due process protection to criminal suspects . The ACLU 's success arose from changing public attitudes ; the American populace was more educated , more tolerant , and more willing to accept unorthodox behavior . 
 = = = Separation of church and state = = = 
 Legal battles concerning the separation of church and state originated in laws dating to 1938 which required religious instruction in school , or provided state funding for religious schools . The Catholic church was a leading proponent of such laws ; and the primary opponents ( the " <unk> " ) were the ACLU , Americans United for Separation of Church and State , and the American Jewish Congress . The ACLU led the challenge in the 1947 Everson v. Board of Education case , in which Justice Hugo Black wrote " [ t ] he First Amendment has erected a wall between church and state … . That wall must be kept high and impregnable . " It was not clear that the Bill of Rights forbid state governments from supporting religious education , and strong legal arguments were made by religious proponents , arguing that the Supreme Court should not act as a " national school board " , and that the Constitution did not govern social issues . However , the ACLU and other advocates of church / state separation persuaded the Court to declare such activities unconstitutional . Historian Samuel Walker writes that the ACLU 's " greatest impact on American life " was its role in persuading the Supreme Court to " <unk> " so many public controversies . 
 In 1948 , the ACLU prevailed in the McCollum v. Board of Education case , which challenged public school religious classes taught by clergy paid for from private funds . The ACLU also won cases challenging schools in New Mexico which were taught by clergy and had crucifixes hanging in the classrooms . In the 1960s , the ACLU , in response to member insistence , turned its attention to in @-@ class promotion of religion . In 1960 , 42 percent of American schools included Bible reading . In 1962 , the ACLU published a policy statement condemning in @-@ school prayers , observation of religious holidays , and Bible reading . The Supreme Court concurred with the ACLU 's position , when it prohibited New York 's in @-@ school prayers in the 1962 Engel v. Vitale decision . Religious factions across the country rebelled against the anti @-@ prayer decisions , leading them to propose the School Prayer Constitutional Amendment , which declared in @-@ school prayer legal . The ACLU participated in a lobbying effort against the amendment , and the 1966 congressional vote on the amendment failed to obtain the required two @-@ thirds majority . 
 However , not all cases were victories ; ACLU lost cases in 1949 and 1961 which challenged state laws requiring commercial businesses to close on Sunday , the Christian Sabbath . The Supreme Court has never overturned such laws , although some states subsequently revoked many of the laws under pressure from commercial interests . 
 = = = Freedom of expression = = = 
 During the 1940s and 1950s , the ACLU continued its battle against censorship of art and literature . In 1948 , the New York affiliate of the ACLU received mixed results from the Supreme Court , winning the appeal of Carl Jacob Kunz , who was convicted for speaking without a police permit , but losing the appeal of Irving <unk> who was arrested to prevent a breach of the peace , based on his oration denouncing president Truman and the American Legion . The ACLU lost the case of Joseph <unk> , who was arrested for group libel when he distributed literature impugning the character of African Americans . 
 Cities across America routinely banned movies because they were deemed to be " harmful " , " offensive " , or " immoral " – censorship which was validated by the 1915 Mutual v. Ohio Supreme Court decision which held movies to be mere commerce , undeserving of first amendment protection . The film The Miracle was banned in New York in 1951 , at the behest of the Catholic Church , but the ACLU supported the film 's distributor in an appeal of the ban , and won a major victory in the 1952 decision Joseph Burstyn , Inc. v. Wilson . The Catholic Church led efforts throughout the 1950s attempting to persuade local prosecutors to ban various books and movies , leading to conflict with the ACLU when the ACLU published it statement condemning the church 's tactics . Further legal actions by the ACLU successfully defended films such as M and la Ronde , leading the eventual dismantling of movie censorship . Hollywood continued employing self @-@ censorship with its own Production Code , but in 1956 the ACLU called on Hollywood to abolish the Code . 
 The ACLU defended beat generation artists , including Allen Ginsberg who was prosecuted for his poem " Howl " ; and – in an unorthodox case – the ACLU helped a coffee house regain its restaurant license which was revoked because its Beat customers were allegedly disturbing the peace and quiet of the neighborhood . 
 The ACLU lost an important press censorship case when , in 1957 , the Supreme Court upheld the obscenity conviction of publisher Samuel Roth for distributing adult magazines . As late as 1953 , books such as Tropic of Cancer and From Here to Eternity were still banned . But public standards rapidly became more liberal though the 1960s , and obscenity was notoriously difficult to define , so by 1971 prosecutions for obscenity had halted . 
 = = = Racial discrimination = = = 
 A major aspect of civil liberties progress after World War II was the undoing centuries of racism in federal , state , and local governments – an effort generally known as the Civil Rights Movement . Several civil liberties organizations worked together for progress , including the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) , the ACLU , and the American Jewish Congress . The NAACP took primary responsibility for Supreme Court cases ( often led by lead NAACP attorney Thurgood Marshall ) , with the ACLU focusing on police misconduct , and supporting the NAACP with amicus briefs . The NAACP achieved a key victory in 1950 with the Henderson v. United States decision that ended segregation in interstate bus and rail transportation . 
 In 1954 , the ACLU filed an amicus brief in the case of Brown v. Board of Education , which led to the ban on racial segregation in U.S. public schools . Southern states instituted a McCarthyism @-@ style witch @-@ hunt against the NAACP , attempting it to disclose membership lists . The ACLU 's fight against racism was not limited to segregation ; in 1964 the ACLU provided key support to plaintiffs , primarily lower income urban residents , in Reynolds v. Sims , which required states to establish the voting districts in accordance with the " one person , one vote " principle . 
 = = = Police misconduct = = = 
 The ACLU regularly tackled police misconduct issues , starting with the 1932 case Powell v. Alabama ( right to an attorney ) , and including 1942 's Betts v. Brady ( right to an attorney ) , and 1951 's Rochin v. California ( involuntary stomach pumping ) . In the late 1940s , several ACLU local affiliates established permanent committees to address policing issues . During the 1950s and 1960s , the ACLU was responsible for substantially advancing the legal protections against police misconduct . The Philadelphia affiliate was responsible for causing the City of Philadelphia , in 1958 , to create the nation 's first civilian police review board . In 1959 , the Illinois affiliate published the first report in the nation , Secret Detention by the Chicago Police , which documented unlawful detention by police . 
 Some of the most well known ACLU successes came in the 1960s , when the ACLU prevailed in a string of cases limiting the power of police to gather evidence ; in 1961 's Mapp v. Ohio , the Supreme court required states to obtain a warrant before searching a person 's home . The Gideon v. Wainwright decision in 1963 provided legal representation to indigents . In 1964 , the ACLU persuaded the Court , in Escobedo v. Illinois , to permit suspects to have an attorney present during questioning . And , in 1966 , the Miranda v. Arizona decision required police to notify suspects of their constitutional rights . Although many law enforcement officials criticized the ACLU for expanding the rights of suspects , police officers themselves took advantage of the ACLU . For example , when the ACLU represented New York policemen in their lawsuit which objected to searches of their workplace lockers . In the late 1960s , civilian review boards in New York and Philadelphia were abolished , over the ACLU 's objection . 
 = = = Civil liberties revolution of the 1960s = = = 
 The 1960s was a tumultuous era in the United States , and public interest in civil liberties underwent an explosive growth . Civil liberties actions in the 1960s were often led by young people , and often employed tactics such as sit ins and marches . Protests were often peaceful , but sometimes employed militant tactics . The ACLU played a central role in all major civil liberties debates of the 1960s , including new fields such as gay rights , prisoner 's rights , abortion , rights of the poor , and the death penalty . Membership in the ACLU increased from 52 @,@ 000 at the beginning of the decade , to 104 @,@ 000 in 1970 . In 1960 , there were affiliates in seven states , and by 1974 there were affiliates in 46 states . During the 1960s , the ACLU underwent a major transformation tactics ; it shifted emphasis from legal appeals ( generally involving amicus briefs submitted to the Supreme Court ) to direct representation of defendants when they were initially arrested . At the same time , the ACLU transformed its style from " disengaged and elitist " to " emotionally engaged " . The ACLU published a breakthrough document in 1963 , titled How Americans Protest , which was borne of frustration with the slow progress in battling racism , and which endorsed aggressive , even militant protest techniques . 
 African @-@ American protests in the South accelerated in the early 1960s , and the ACLU assisted at every step . After four African @-@ American college students staged a sit @-@ in in a segregated North Carolina department store , the sit @-@ in movement gained momentum across the United States . During 1960 @-@ 61 , the ACLU defended black students arrested for demonstrating in North Carolina , Florida , and Louisiana . The ACLU also provided legal help for the Freedom Rides in 1961 , the integration of the University of Mississippi , the 1963 protests in Birmingham , Alabama , and the 1964 Freedom Summer . 
 The NAACP was responsible for managing most sit @-@ in related cases that made it to the Supreme Court , winning nearly every decision . But it fell to the ACLU and other legal volunteer efforts to provide legal representation to hundreds of protestors – white and black – who were arrested while protesting in the South . The ACLU joined with other civil liberties groups to form the Lawyers Constitutional Defense Committee ( <unk> ) which subsequently provided legal representation to many of the protesters . The ACLU provided the majority of the funding for the <unk> . 
 In 1964 , the ACLU opened up a major office in Atlanta , Georgia , dedicated to serving Southern issues . Much of the ACLU 's progress in the South was due to Charles Morgan , Jr . , the charismatic leader of the Atlanta office . He was responsible for desegregating juries ( <unk> v. Georgia ) , desegregating prisons ( Lee v. Washington ) , and reforming election laws . The ACLU 's southern office also defended African @-@ American congressman Julian Bond in Bond v. Floyd , when the Georgia congress refused to formally induct Bond into the legislature . Another widely publicized case defended by Morgan was that of Army doctor Howard Levy , who was convicted of refusing to train Green Berets . Despite raising the defense that the Green Berets were committing war crimes in Vietnam , Levy lost on appeal in Parker v. Levy , 417 U.S. 733 ( 1974 ) . 
 In 1969 , the ACLU won a major victory for free speech , when it defended Dick Gregory after he was arrested for peacefully protesting against the mayor of Chicago . The court ruled in Gregory v. Chicago that a speaker cannot be arrested for disturbing the peace when the hostility is initiated by someone in the audience , as that would amount to a " heckler 's veto " . 
 = = = Vietnam war = = = 
 The ACLU was at the center of several legal aspects of the Vietnam war : defending draft resisters , challenging the constitutionality of the war , the potential impeachment of Richard Nixon , and the use of national security concerns to preemptively censor newspapers . 
 David J. Miller was the first person prosecuted for burning his draft card . The New York affiliate of the ACLU appealed his 1965 conviction ( 367 F.2d 72 : United States of America v. David J. Miller , 1966 ) , but the Supreme Court refused to hear the appeal . Two years later , the Massachusetts affiliate took the card @-@ burning case of David O 'Brien to the Supreme Court , arguing that the act of burning was a form of symbolic speech , but the Supreme Court upheld the conviction in United States v. O 'Brien , 391 US 367 ( 1968 ) . Thirteen @-@ year @-@ old Junior High student Mary Tinker wore a black armband to school in 1965 to object to the war , and was suspended from school . The ACLU appealed her case to the Supreme Court and won a victory in Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District . This critical case established that the government may not establish " enclaves " such as schools or prisons where all rights are forfeit . 
 The ACLU defended Sydney Street , who was arrested for burning an American flag to protest the reported assassination of civil rights leader James Meredith . In the Street v. New York decision , the court agreed with the ACLU that encouraging the country to abandon one of its national symbols was constitutionally protected form of expression . The ACLU successfully defended Paul Cohen , who was arrested for wearing a jacket with the words " fuck the draft " on its back , while he walked through the Los Angeles courthouse . The Supreme Court , in Cohen v. California , held that the vulgarity of the wording was essential to convey the intensity of the message . 
 Non @-@ war related free speech rights were also advanced during the Vietnam war era ; in 1969 , the ACLU defended a Ku Klux Klan member who advocated long @-@ term violence against the government , and the Supreme Court concurred with the ACLU 's argument in the landmark decision Brandenburg v. Ohio , which held that only speech which advocated imminent violence could be outlawed . 
 A major crisis gripped the ACLU in 1968 when a debate erupted over whether to defend Benjamin Spock and the Boston Five against federal charges that they encouraged draftees to avoid the draft . The ACLU board was deeply split over whether to defend the activists ; half the board harbored anti @-@ war sentiments , and felt that the ACLU should lend its resources to the cause of the Boston Five . The other half of the board believed that civil liberties were not at stake , and the ACLU would be taking a political stance . Behind the debate was the longstanding ACLU tradition that it was politically impartial , and provided legal advice without regard to the political views of the defendants . The board finally agreed to a compromise solution that permitted the ACLU to defend the anti @-@ war activists , without endorsing the activist 's political views . Some critics of the ACLU suggest that the ACLU became a partisan political organization following the Spock case . After the Kent State shootings in 1970 , ACLU leaders took another step towards politics by passing a resolution condemning the Vietnam war . The resolution was based in a variety of legal arguments , including civil liberties violations and a claim that the war was illegal . 
 Also in 1968 , the ACLU held an internal symposium to discuss its dual roles : providing " direct " legal support ( defense for accused in their initial trial , benefiting only the individual defendant ) , and appellate support ( providing amicus briefs during the appeal process , to establish widespread legal precedent ) . Historically , the ACLU was known for its appellate work which led to landmark Supreme Court decisions , but by 1968 , 90 % of the ACLU 's legal activities involved direct representation . The symposium concluded that both roles were valid for the ACLU . 
 = = 1970s and 1980s = = 
 = = = Watergate era = = = 
 The ACLU supported The New York Times in its 1971 suit against the government , requesting permission to publish the Pentagon papers . The court upheld the Times and ACLU in the New York Times Co. v. United States ruling , which held that the government could not preemptively prohibit the publication of classified information and had to wait until after it was published to take action . 
 As the Watergate saga unfolded , the ACLU became the first national organization to call for Nixon 's impeachment . This , following the resolution opposing the Vietnam war , was a second major decision that caused critics of the ACLU , particularly conservatives , to claim that the ACLU had evolved into a liberal political organization . 
 = = = Enclaves and new civil liberties = = = 
 The decade from 1965 to 1975 saw an expansion of the field of civil liberties . Administratively , the ACLU responded by appointing Aryeh <unk> to take over from Pemberton as Executive Director in 1970 . <unk> embarked on an ambitious program to expand the ACLU ; he created the ACLU Foundation to raise funds , and he created several new programs to focus the ACLU 's legal efforts . By 1974 , ACLU membership had reached 275 @,@ 000 . 
 During those years , the ACLU led the way in expanding legal rights in three directions : new rights for persons within government @-@ run " enclaves " , new rights for victim groups , and privacy rights for mainstream citizens . At the same time , the organization grew substantially . The ACLU helped develop the field of constitutional law that governs " enclaves " , which are groups of persons that live in conditions under government control . Enclaves include mental hospital patients , members of the military , and prisoners , and students ( while at school ) . The term enclave originated with Supreme Court justice Abe Fortas 's use of the phrase " schools may not be enclaves of totalitarianism " in the Tinker v. Des Moines decision . 
 The ACLU initiated the legal field of student 's rights with the Tinker v. Des Moines case , and expanded it with cases such as Goss v. Lopez which required schools to provide students an opportunity to appeal suspensions . 
 As early as 1945 , the ACLU had taken a stand to protect the rights of the mentally ill , when it drafted a model statute governing mental commitments . In the 1960s , the ACLU opposed involuntary commitments , unless it could be demonstrated that the person was a danger to himself or the community . In the landmark 1975 O 'Connor v. Donaldson decision the ACLU represented a non @-@ violent mental health patient who had been confined against his will for 15 years , and persuaded the Supreme Court to rule such involuntary confinements illegal . The ACLU has also defended the rights of mentally ill individuals who are not dangerous , but who create disturbances . The New York chapter of the ACLU defended Billie Boggs , a mentally ill woman who exposed herself and defecated and urinated in public . 
 Prior to 1960 , prisoners had virtually no recourse to the court system , because courts considered prisoners to have no civil rights . That changed in the late 1950s , when the ACLU began representing prisoners that were subject to police brutality , or deprived of religious reading material . In 1968 , the ACLU successfully sued to desegregate the Alabama prison system ; and in 1969 , the New York affiliate adopted a project to represent prisoners in New York prisons . Private attorney Phil <unk> discovered degrading conditions in Virginia prisons following the Virginia State Penitentiary strike , and won an important victory in 1971 's Landman v. Royster which prohibited Virginia from treating prisoners in inhumane ways . In 1972 , the ACLU consolidated several prison rights efforts across the nation and created the National Prison Project . The ACLU 's efforts led to landmark cases such as Ruiz v. Estelle ( requiring reform of the Texas prison system ) and in 1996 U.S. Congress enacted the Prison Litigation Reform Act ( <unk> ) which codified prisoners ' rights . 
 = = = Victim groups = = = 
 The ACLU , during the 1960s and 1970s , expanded its scope to include what it referred to as " victim groups " , namely women , the poor , and homosexuals . Heeding the call of female members , the ACLU endorsed the Equal Rights Amendment in 1970 and created the Women 's Rights Project in 1971 . The Women 's Rights Project dominated the legal field , handling more than twice as many cases as the National Organization for Women , including breakthrough cases such as Reed v. Reed , <unk> v. Richardson , and Taylor v. Louisiana . 
 ACLU leader Harriet <unk> raised the issue of the rights of homosexuals in 1964 , and two years later the ACLU formally endorsed gay rights . In 1972 , ACLU cooperating attorneys in Oregon filed the first federal civil rights case involving a claim of unconstitutional discrimination against a gay or lesbian public school teacher . The U.S. District Court held that a state statute that authorized school districts to fire teachers for " immorality " was unconstitutionally vague , and awarded monetary damages to the teacher . The court refused to reinstate the teacher , and the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed that refusal by a 2 to 1 vote . Burton v. Cascade School District , 353 F. Supp . 254 ( D. Or . 1972 ) , aff 'd 512 F.2d 850 ( 1975 ) . In 1973 the ACLU created the Sexual Privacy Project ( later the Gay and Lesbian Rights Project ) which combated discrimination against homosexuals . This support continues even today . After then @-@ Senator Larry Craig was arrested for soliciting sex in a public bathroom , the ACLU wrote an amicus brief for Craig , saying that sex between consenting adults in public places was protected under privacy rights . 
 Rights of the poor was another area that was expanded by the ACLU . In 1966 and again in 1968 , activists within the ACLU encouraged the organization to adopt a policy overhauling the welfare system , and guaranteeing low @-@ income families a baseline income ; but the ACLU board did not approve the proposals . The ACLU played a key role in the 1968 King v. Smith decision , where the Supreme Court ruled that welfare benefits for children could not be denied by a state simply because the mother cohabited with a boyfriend . 
 = = = Privacy = = = 
 The right to privacy is not explicitly identified in the U.S. Constitution , but the ACLU led the charge to establish such rights in the indecisive 1961 Poe v. Ullman case , which addressed a state statute outlawing contraception . The issue arose again in Griswold v. Connecticut ( 1965 ) , and this time the Supreme Court adopted the ACLU 's position , and formally declared a right to privacy . The New York affiliate of the ACLU pushed to eliminate anti @-@ abortion laws starting in 1964 , a year before Griswold was decided , and in 1967 the ACLU itself formally adopted the right to abortion as a policy . The ACLU led the defense in United States v. <unk> which expanded the right of physicians to determine when abortions were necessary . These efforts culminated in one of the most controversial Supreme Court decisions of all time , Roe v. Wade , which legalized abortion in the first three months of pregnancy . The ACLU successfully argued against state bans on interracial marriage , in the case of Loving v. Virginia ( 1967 ) . 
 Related to privacy , the ACLU engaged in several battles to ensure that government records about individuals were kept private , and to give individuals the right to review their records . The ACLU supported several measures , including the 1970 Fair Credit Reporting Act required credit agencies to divulge credit information to individuals ; the 1973 Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act , which provided students the right to access their records ; and the 1974 Privacy Act which prevented the federal government from disclosing personal information without good cause . 
 = = = Allegations of bias = = = 
 In the early 1970s , conservatives and libertarians began to criticize the ACLU for being too political and too liberal . Legal scholar Joseph W. Bishop wrote that the ACLU 's trend to partisanship started with its defense of Dr. Spock 's anti @-@ war protests . Critics also blamed the ACLU for encouraging the Supreme Court to embrace judicial activism . Critics claimed that the ACLU 's support of controversial decisions like Roe v. Wade and Griswold v. Connecticut violated the intention of the authors of the Bill of Rights . The ACLU became an issue in the 1988 presidential campaign , when Republican candidate George H. W. Bush accused Democratic candidate Michael Dukakis ( a member of the ACLU ) of being a " card carrying member of the ACLU " . 
 = = = The Skokie case = = = 
 It is the policy of the ACLU to support the civil liberties of defendants regardless of their ideological stance . The ACLU takes pride in defending individuals with unpopular viewpoints , such as George Wallace , George Lincoln Rockwell , and KKK members . The ACLU has defended American Nazis many times , and their actions often brought protests , particularly from American Jews . 
 In 1977 , a small group of American Nazis , led by Frank Collin , applied to the town of Skokie , Illinois for permission to hold a demonstration in the town park . Skokie at the time had a majority population of Jews , totaling 40 @,@ 000 of 70 @,@ 000 citizens , some of whom were survivors of Nazi concentration camps . Skokie refused to grant permission , and an Illinois judge supported Skokie and prohibited the demonstration . Skokie immediately passed three ordinances aimed at preventing the group from meeting in Skokie . The ACLU assisted Collin and appealed to federal court . The appeal dragged on for a year , and the ACLU eventually prevailed in Smith v. Collin , 447 F.Supp. 676 . 
 The Skokie case was heavily publicized across America , partially because Jewish groups such as the Jewish Defense League and Anti Defamation League strenuously objected to the demonstration , leading many members of the ACLU to cancel their memberships . The Illinois affiliate of the ACLU lost about 25 % of its membership and nearly one @-@ third of its budget . The financial strain from the controversy led to layoffs at local chapters . After the membership crisis died down , the ACLU sent out a fund @-@ raising appeal which explained their rationale for the Skokie case , and raised over $ 500 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @,@ 952 @,@ 499 in 2016 dollars ) . 
 = = = Reagan era = = = 
 The inauguration of Ronald Reagan as president in 1981 , ushered in an eight @-@ year period of conservative leadership in the U.S. government . Under his leadership , the government pushed a conservative social agenda , including outlawing abortion , inserting prayer in schools , banning pornography , and resisting gay rights . 
 Fifty years after the Scopes trial , the ACLU found itself fighting another classroom case , the Arkansas 1981 creationism statute , which required schools to teach the biblical account of creation as a scientific alternative to evolution . The ACLU won the case in the McLean v. Arkansas decision . 
 In 1982 , the ACLU became involved in a case involving the distribution of child pornography ( New York v. Ferber ) . In an amicus brief , the ACLU argued that child pornography that violates the three prong obscenity test should be outlawed , but that the law in question was overly restrictive because it outlawed artistic displays and otherwise non @-@ obscene material . The court did not adopt the ACLU 's position . 
 During the 1988 presidential election , Vice President George H. W. Bush noted that his opponent Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis had described himself as a " card @-@ carrying member of the ACLU " and used that as evidence that Dukakis was " a strong , passionate liberal " and " out of the mainstream " . The phrase subsequently was used by the organization in an advertising campaign . 
 In 1990 the ACLU defended Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North , whose conviction was tainted by coerced testimony – a violation of his fifth amendment rights – during the Iran – Contra affair , where Oliver North was involved in illegal weapons sales to Iran in order to illegally fund the Contra guerillas . 
 = = Modern era = = 
 = = = 1990 to 2000 = = = 
 In 1997 , ruling unanimously in the case of Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union , the Supreme Court voted down anti @-@ indecency provisions of the Communications Decency Act ( the CDA ) , finding they violated the freedom of speech provisions of the First Amendment . In their decision , the Supreme Court held that the CDA 's " use of the undefined terms ' indecent ' and ' patently offensive ' will provoke uncertainty among speakers about how the two standards relate to each other and just what they mean . " 
 The ACLU 's position on spam is considered controversial by a broad cross @-@ section of political points of view . In 2000 , Marvin Johnson , a legislative counsel for the ACLU , stated that proposed anti @-@ spam legislation infringed on free speech by denying anonymity and by forcing spam to be labeled as such , " Standardized labeling is compelled speech . " He also stated , " It 's relatively simple to click and delete . " The debate found the ACLU joining with the Direct Marketing Association and the Center for Democracy and Technology in criticizing a bipartisan bill in the House of Representatives in 2000 . As early as 1997 the ACLU had taken a strong position that nearly all spam legislation was improper , although it has supported " opt @-@ out " requirements in some cases . The ACLU opposed the 2003 CAN @-@ SPAM act suggesting that it could have a chilling effect on speech in cyberspace . 
 In November 2000 , 15 African @-@ American residents of Hearne , Texas , were indicted on drug charges after being arrested in a series of " drug sweeps " . The ACLU filed a class action lawsuit , Kelly v. Paschall , on their behalf , alleging that the arrests were unlawful . The ACLU contended that 15 percent of Hearne 's male African American population aged 18 to 34 were arrested based on the " uncorroborated word of a single unreliable confidential informant coerced by police to make cases . " On May 11 , 2005 , the ACLU and Robertson County announced a confidential settlement of the lawsuit , an outcome which " both sides stated that they were satisfied with . " The District Attorney dismissed the charges against the plaintiffs of the suit . The 2009 film American Violet depicts this case . 
 In 2000 , the ACLU 's Massachusetts affiliate represented the North American Man Boy Love Association ( NAMBLA ) , on first amendment grounds , in the Curley v. NAMBLA wrongful death civil suit that was based solely on the fact that a man who raped and murdered a child had visited the NAMBLA website . Also In 2000 , the ACLU lost the Boy Scouts of America v. Dale case , which had asked the Supreme Court to require the Boy Scouts of America to drop their policy of prohibiting homosexuals from becoming Boy Scout leaders . 
 = = = Twenty @-@ first century = = = 
 In March 2004 , the ACLU , along with Lambda Legal and the National Center for Lesbian Rights , sued the state of California on behalf of six same @-@ sex couples who were denied marriage licenses . That case , Woo v. Lockyer , was eventually consolidated into In re Marriage Cases , the California Supreme Court case which led to same @-@ sex marriage being available in that state from June 16 , 2008 until Proposition 8 was passed on November 4 , 2008 . 
 During the 2004 trial regarding allegations of Rush Limbaugh 's drug abuse , the ACLU argued that his privacy should not have been compromised by allowing law enforcement examination of his medical records . In June 2004 , the school district in Dover , Pennsylvania , required that its high school biology students listen to a statement which asserted that the theory of evolution is not fact and mentioning intelligent design as an alternative theory . Several parents called the ACLU to complain , because they believed that the school was promoting a religious idea in the classroom and violating the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment . The ACLU , joined by Americans United for Separation of Church and State , represented the parents in a lawsuit against the school district . After a lengthy trial , Judge John E. Jones III ruled in favor of the parents in the Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District decision , finding that intelligent design is not science and permanently forbidding the Dover school system from teaching intelligent design in science classes . 
 In April 2006 , Edward Jones and the ACLU sued the City of Los Angeles , on behalf of Robert Lee <unk> and five other homeless people , for the city 's violation of the 8th and 14th Amendments to the U.S. Constitution , and Article I , sections 7 and 17 of the California Constitution ( supporting due process and equal protection , and prohibiting cruel and unusual punishment ) . The Court ruled in favor of the ACLU , stating that , " the LAPD cannot arrest people for sitting , lying , or sleeping on public sidewalks in Skid Row . " Enforcement of section 41 @.@ 18 ( d ) 24 hours a day against persons who have nowhere else to sit , lie , or sleep , other than on public streets and sidewalks , is breaking these amendments . The Court said that the anti @-@ camping ordinance is " one of the most restrictive municipal laws regulating public spaces in the United States " . Jones and the ACLU wanted a compromise in which the LAPD is barred from enforcing section 41 @.@ 18 ( d ) ( arrest , seizure , and imprisonment ) in Skid Row between the hours of 9 : 00 p.m. and 6 : 30 a.m. The compromise plan permits the homeless to sleep on the sidewalk , provided they are not " within 10 feet of any business or residential entrance " and only between these hours . One of the motivations for the compromise is the shortage of space in the prison system . Downtown development business interests and the Central City Association ( CCA ) were against the compromise . Police Chief William Bratton said the case had slowed the police effort to fight crime and clean up Skid Row , and that when he was allowed to clean up Skid Row , real estate profited . On September 20 , 2006 , the Los Angeles City Council voted to reject the compromise . On October 3 , 2006 , police arrested Skid Row 's transients for sleeping on the streets for the first time in months . 
 In 2006 , the ACLU of Washington State joined with a pro @-@ gun rights organization , the Second Amendment Foundation , and prevailed in a lawsuit against the North Central Regional Library District ( <unk> ) in Washington for its policy of refusing to disable restrictions upon an adult patron 's request . Library patrons attempting to access pro @-@ gun web sites were blocked , and the library refused to remove the blocks . In 2012 , the ACLU sued the same library system for refusing to temporarily , at the request of an adult patron , disable Internet filters which blocked access to Google Images . 
 In 2006 , the ACLU challenged a Missouri law that prohibited picketing outside of veterans ' funerals . The suit was filed in support of the Westboro Baptist Church and Shirley Phelps @-@ Roper , who were threatened with arrest . The Westboro Baptist Church is well known for their picket signs that contain messages such as , " God Hates Fags " , " Thank God for Dead Soldiers " and " Thank God for 9 / 11 " . The ACLU issued a statement calling the legislation a " law that infringes on Shirley Phelps @-@ Roper 's rights to religious liberty and free speech " . The ACLU prevailed in the lawsuit . In 2008 , the ACLU was part of a consortium of legal advocates , including Lambda Legal and the National Center for Lesbian Rights , that challenged California 's Proposition 8 , which declared same @-@ sex marriages illegal . The ACLU and its allies prevailed . 
 In light of the Supreme Court 's Heller decision recognizing that the Constitution protects an individual right to bear arms , ACLU of Nevada took a position of supporting " the individual 's right to bear arms subject to constitutionally permissible regulations " and pledged to " defend this right as it defends other constitutional rights " . Since 2008 , the ACLU has increasingly assisted gun owners recover firearms that have been seized illegally by law enforcement . 
 In 2009 , the ACLU filed an amicus brief in Citizens United v. FEC , arguing that the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 violated the First Amendment right to free speech by curtailing political speech . This stance on the landmark Citizens United case caused considerable disagreement within the organization , resulting in a discussion about its future stance during a quarterly board meeting in 2010 . On March 27 , 2012 , the ACLU reaffirmed its stance in support of the Supreme Court 's Citizens United ruling , at the same time voicing support for expanded public financing of election campaigns and stating the organization would firmly oppose any future constitutional amendment limiting free speech . 
 In 2010 the ACLU of Illinois was inducted into the Chicago Gay and Lesbian Hall of Fame as a Friend of the Community . 
 In 2011 the ACLU started its Don 't Filter Me project , countering LGBT @-@ related Internet censorship in public schools in the United States . 
 On January 7 , 2013 , the ACLU reached a settlement with the federal government in Collins v. United States that provided for the payment of full separation pay to servicemembers discharged under " don 't ask , don 't tell " since November 10 , 2004 , who had previously been granted only half that . Some 181 were expected to receive about $ 13 @,@ 000 each . 
 = = = Anti @-@ terrorism issues = = = 
 After the September 11 , 2001 attacks , the federal government instituted a broad range of new measures to combat terrorism , including the passage of the Patriot Act . The ACLU challenged many of the measures , claiming that they violated rights regarding due process , privacy , illegal searches , and cruel and unusual punishment . An ACLU policy statement states : 
 Our way forward lies in decisively turning our backs on the policies and practices that violate our greatest strength : our Constitution and the commitment it embodies to the rule of law . Liberty and security do not compete in a zero @-@ sum game ; our freedoms are the very foundation of our strength and security . The ACLU 's National Security Project advocates for national security policies that are consistent with the Constitution , the rule of law , and fundamental human rights . The Project <unk> cases relating to detention , torture , discrimination , surveillance , censorship , and secrecy . 
 During the ensuing debate regarding the proper balance of civil liberties and security , the membership of the ACLU increased by 20 % , bringing the group 's total enrollment to 330 @,@ 000 . The growth continued , and by August 2008 ACLU membership was greater than 500 @,@ 000 . It remained at that level through 2011 . 
 The ACLU has been a vocal opponent of the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 , the PATRIOT 2 Act of 2003 , and associated legislation made in response to the threat of domestic terrorism . In response to a requirement of the USA PATRIOT Act , the ACLU withdrew from the Combined Federal Campaign charity drive . The campaign imposed a requirement that ACLU employees must be checked against a federal anti @-@ terrorism watch list . The ACLU has stated that it would " reject $ 500 @,@ 000 in contributions from private individuals rather than submit to a government ' blacklist ' policy . " 
 In 2004 , the ACLU sued the federal government in American Civil Liberties Union v. Ashcroft on behalf of Nicholas Merrill , owner of an Internet service provider . Under the provisions of the Patriot Act , the government had issued national security letters to Merrill to compel him to provide private Internet access information from some of his customers . In addition , the government placed a gag order on Merrill , forbidding him from discussing the matter with anyone . 
 In January 2006 , the ACLU filed a lawsuit , ACLU v. NSA , in a federal district court in Michigan , challenging government spying in the NSA warrantless surveillance controversy . On August 17 , 2006 , that court ruled that the warrantless wiretapping program is unconstitutional and ordered it ended immediately . However , the order was stayed pending an appeal . The Bush administration did suspend the program while the appeal was being heard . In February 2008 , the U.S. Supreme Court turned down an appeal from the ACLU to let it pursue a lawsuit against the program that began shortly after the September 11 terror attacks . 
 The ACLU and other organizations also filed separate lawsuits around the country against telecommunications companies . The ACLU filed a lawsuit in Illinois ( Terkel v. AT & T ) which was dismissed because of the state secrets privilege and two others in California requesting injunctions against AT & T and Verizon . On August 10 , 2006 , the lawsuits against the telecommunications companies were transferred to a federal judge in San Francisco . 
 The ACLU represents a Muslim @-@ American who was detained but never accused of a crime in Ashcroft v. al @-@ Kidd , a civil suit against former Attorney General John Ashcroft . In January 2010 , the American military released the names of 645 detainees held at the Bagram Theater Internment Facility in Afghanistan , modifying its long @-@ held position against publicizing such information . This list was prompted by a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit filed in September 2009 by the ACLU , whose lawyers had also requested detailed information about conditions , rules and regulations . 
 The ACLU has also criticized targeted killings of American citizens who fight against the United States . In 2011 the ACLU criticized the killing of radical Muslim cleric Anwar al @-@ Awlaki on the basis that it was a violation of his Fifth Amendment right to not be deprived of life , liberty , or property without due process of law . 
 = = = Archives = = = 
 American Civil Liberties Union of Washington . 1942 – 1996 . 136 @.@ 66 cubic feet ( including 13 microfilm reels and 1 videocassette ) plus 62 cartons and 2 rolled posters . Labor Archives of Washington . University of Washington Special Collections . 
 American Civil Liberties Union of Michigan : Detroit Branch Records 1952 @-@ 1966 . This collection documents the early years of the Detroit ACLU branch . The collection contains documents related to academic freedom ; censorship ; church and state ; civil liberties ; police brutality ; HUAC ; and legal assistance to prisoners . Walter P. Reuther Library , Detroit , Michigan . 
 American Civil Liberties Union of Oakland County , Michigan 1970 @-@ 1984 . This collection illustrates that the branch was formed to address issues such as Oakland County jail conditions , lie detector use , senior housing rights , and attempts to reinstate the death penalty . Walter P. Reuther Library , Detroit , Michigan . 
 = = = Selected works sponsored or published by the ACLU = = = 
 Annual Report - American Civil Liberties Union , American Civil Liberties Union , 1921 . 
 Black Justice , ACLU , 1931 . 
 How Americans Protest , American Civil Liberties Union , 1963 . 
 Secret detention by the Chicago police : a report , American Civil Liberties Union , 1959 . 
 Report on lawlessness in law enforcement , Wickersham Commission , Patterson Smith , 1931 . This report was written by the ACLU but published under the auspices of the Wickersham Commission . 
 Miller , Merle , ( 1952 ) , The Judges and the Judged , Doubleday . 
 ACLU organization records , 1947 – 1995 . Princeton University Library , Mudd Manuscript Library . 
 The Dangers of Domestic Spying by Federal Law Enforcement , American Civil Liberties Union , 2002 . 
 = Concerto delle donne = 
 The concerto delle donne ( lit. consort of ladies ) was a group of professional female singers in the late Renaissance court of Ferrara , Italy , renowned for their technical and artistic virtuosity . The ensemble was founded by Alfonso II , Duke of Ferrara , in 1580 and was active until the court was dissolved in 1597 . Giacomo Vincenti , a music publisher , praised the women as " <unk> <unk> " ( young <unk> ) , echoing the sentiments of contemporaneous diarists and commentators . 
 The origins of the ensemble lay in an amateur group of high @-@ placed courtiers who performed for each other within the context of the Duke 's informal musica secreta in the 1570s . The ensemble evolved into an all @-@ female group of professional musicians , the concerto delle donne , who performed formal concerts for members of the inner circle of the court and important visitors . Their signature style of florid , highly ornamented singing brought prestige to Ferrara and inspired composers of the time . 
 The concerto delle donne revolutionized the role of women in professional music , and continued the tradition of the Este court as a musical center . Word of the ladies ' ensemble spread across Italy , inspiring imitations in the powerful courts of the Medici and Orsini . The founding of the concerto delle donne was the most important event in secular Italian music in the late sixteenth century ; the musical innovations established in the court were important in the development of the madrigal , and eventually the seconda <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 At the court in Ferrara , a collection of ladies skilled in music inspired the composer <unk> Luzzaschi and caught the Duke 's interest . This group , which led to the formation of the concerto delle donne , performed within the context of the Duke 's musica secreta , a regular series of chamber music concerts performed for an exclusive audience . This preliminary group was originally made up of talented but amateur members of the court : the sisters Lucrezia and Isabella <unk> , Leonora <unk> , and Vittoria Bentivoglio . They were joined by bass Giulio Cesare Brancaccio , who was specifically brought to the court in 1577 for his singing ability . The preliminary ensemble was active throughout the 1570s , and its membership solidified in 1577 . Only later did professionals replace these original singers . 
 The Duke did not announce the creation of a professional , all @-@ female ensemble ; instead , the group infiltrated and gradually dominated the musica secreta , so that after the dismissal of Brancaccio for insubordination in 1583 , no more male members of the musica secreta were hired . Even when Brancaccio was performing with the consort it was referred to as a ladies ' ensemble , because women singing together was the most exciting aspect of the group . This new ensemble , the concerto delle donne , was created by Alfonso in part to amuse his young new wife , Margherita Gonzaga d 'Este ( she was only fourteen when they wed in 1579 ) , and in part to help the Duke achieve his artistic goals for the court . According to <unk> , a contemporary correspondent , " Signora <unk> [ Lucrezia ] , Signora Isabella , and Signora Vittoria have abandoned the field , having lost the backing of Luzzaschi " . The first recorded performance by the professional ladies was on November 20 , 1580 ; by carnival season in 1581 , they were performing together regularly . 
 This new " consort of ladies " was viewed as an extraordinary and novel phenomenon ; most witnesses did not connect the second period of the concerto delle donne with the group of ladies who sang in the musica secreta . Today , however , the earlier group is viewed as a crucial part of the creation and development of the social and vocal genre of the concerto delle donne . 
 = = = Roster and duties = = = 
 The most prominent member of the new ensemble was Laura Peverara , followed by Livia d 'Arco and Anna Guarini , daughter of the prolific poet Giovanni Battista Guarini . Giovanni wrote poems for many of the madrigals which were set for the ensemble , and choreographed scenes for the <unk> delle donne . Judith Tick believes Tarquinia Molza sang with the group , but Anthony Newcomb says she was involved solely as an advisor and instructor . Whether Tarquinia Molza ever performed with them or not , she was ousted from any role in the group after her affair with the composer <unk> de Wert came to light in 1589 . <unk> Luzzaschi directed and composed music to showcase the ensemble , and accompanied them on the harpsichord . Ippolito <unk> was the maestro di capella , in charge of the entire court 's musical activities . In addition to his duties to the overall court , he accompanied the concerto on the lute . Vittorio Baldini was brought to the court as ducal music printer in 1582 . 
 The singers of the second era of the concerto delle donne were officially ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting of Duchess Margherita Gonzaga d 'Este , but were hired primarily as singers . Peverara 's musical abilities prompted the Duke to specifically ask his wife Margherita to bring Peverara from Mantua as part of her retinue . The new singers played instruments , including the lute , harp , and viol , but focused their energies on developing vocal virtuosity . This skill became highly prized in the mid @-@ sixteenth century , beginning with basses like Brancaccio , but by the end of the century virtuosic bass singing went out of style , and higher voices came into vogue . The ladies ' musical duties included performing with the duchess ' <unk> delle donne , a group of female dancers who frequently <unk> . Despite their upper @-@ class background , the singers would not have been welcomed into the court 's inner circle had they not been such skilled performers . D 'Arco belonged to the nobility , but a minor family only . Peverara was the daughter of a wealthy merchant , and Molza came from a prominent family of artists . 
 The women performed up to six hours a day , either singing their own florid repertoire from memory , sight @-@ reading from <unk> , or participating in the <unk> as singers and dancers . <unk> <unk> posits that the women of the concerti delle donne provided sexual favors for members of the court , but there is no evidence for this , and the circumstances of their marriages and dowries argues against this interpretation . The women were paid salaries and received other benefits , such as dowries and apartments in the ducal palace . Peverara received 300 scudi a year and lodging in the ducal palace for herself , her husband , and her mother - as well as a dowry of 10 @,@ 000 scudi upon her marriage . 
 Despite having married three times in the hopes of producing an heir , Alfonso II died in 1597 without issue , legitimate or otherwise . His cousin Cesare inherited the Duchy , but the city of Ferrara , which was legally a Papal fief , was annexed to the Papal States in 1598 through a combination of " firm diplomacy and unscrupulous pressure " by Pope Clement VIII . The Este court had to abandon Ferrara in disarray and the concerto delle donne was disbanded . 
 = = Music = = 
 The greatest musical innovation of the concerto delle donne was the multiplication of the ornamented upper voices , from one voice singing diminutions above an instrumental accompaniment to two or three voices singing varying diminutions at once . This practice , which listeners found remarkable , was imitated by many composers , including Carlo Gesualdo , Luca <unk> and Claudio Monteverdi . 
 These composers wrote music either inspired by the concerto delle donne or specifically for them . Such works are characterized by a high tessitura , a virtuosic and florid style , and a wide range . Lodovico Agostini 's third book of madrigals was perhaps the first publication fully dedicated to the new singing style . Agostini dedicated songs to Guarini , Peverara , and Luzzaschi . Gesualdo wrote music for the group in 1594 while visiting Ferrara to marry the Duke 's niece Leonora d 'Este . De Wert 's Seventh Book of Madrigals à 5 and <unk> 's First Book à 6 were the first true musical monuments to the new concerto delle donne . Monteverdi 's <unk> a tre voci was probably influenced by the " Ladies of Ferrara " . Although the only works clearly intended for or inspired by the concerto delle donne were works for multiple high voices executing written @-@ out diminutions , in practice concerts with the concerto delle donne included the older style of solo ornamented madrigals with instrumental accompaniment . Peverara was singularly lauded for her skill in this genre . Works written for the concerto delle donne were not limited to music : Torquato Tasso and G.B. Guarini wrote poems dedicated to the ladies in the concerto , some of which were later set by composers . Tasso wrote over seventy @-@ five poems to Peverara alone . 
 Luzzaschi 's book of madrigals for one , two , and three sopranos with keyboard accompaniment , published in 1601 , comprises works written throughout the 1580s . This music may have been kept back from publication in order to maintain the secrecy of Alfonso 's musica secreta , and to maintain control over it . Newcomb considers this publication the exemplar of the ladies ' signature musical style . In 1584 , Alessandro Striggio , responding to requests from Francesco I de ' Medici , Grand Duke of Tuscany , described the ladies and composed pieces imitating their style so that Francesco could start his own concerto delle donne . Striggio mentioned an ornamented four voice madrigal for three sopranos and a dialogue with imitative diminutions for two sopranos . He added that he had forgotten the <unk> for the madrigal in Mantua , and noted that the skilled singer Giulio Caccini could play the bass part on either lute or harpsichord . This indicates both that male singers were probably not used after Brancaccio , and that instrumental accompaniments were a common and acceptable means of filling in the counterpoint . 
 The output of the ducal printer , Baldini , consisted largely of music written for the concerto delle donne , including the works of the foremost madrigalists : Luzzaschi , Gesualdo , and Alfonso Fontanelli . His first publication for the Duke was Il <unk> secco ( 1582 ) , which was followed by Il <unk> verde ( 1583 ) , both containing music by the leading composers of Rome and Northern Italy . Music in honor of the concerto was printed as far away as Venice , with Paolo <unk> 's First Book à 5 , published by Giacomo Vincenti and Ricciardo Amadino containing the madrigal which begins <unk> <unk> <unk> e <unk> <unk> / Amor <unk> e dolce / Ch <unk> cor <unk> <unk> . This capitalization is in the original , clearly spelling out the equivalent of the names Anna Guarini , Laura Peverara , Livia d 'Arco , and Tarquinia Molza . 
 With the obvious exception of Brancaccio , all the singers in the concerto were female sopranos . Although the music written for the concerto focused on high voices , there is no evidence that the ensemble used either castrati or <unk> . This fact is surprising , considering that castrati were shortly to become the biggest stars of a new art form , opera . In 1607 , Monteverdi 's Orfeo featured four castrato roles out of a cast of nine , showing the new dominance of this vocal type . It also contrasts with Margherita 's father 's court , where Guglielmo Gonzaga actively sought out eunuchs . 
 Polyphonic arrangements called for the women to sing diminutions ( melodic divisions of longer notes ) and other ornaments in consort . <unk> were traditionally improvised in performance . However , to coordinate their voices , they transcribed and rehearsed the music in advance , transforming these improvisations into highly developed musical forms that composers would emulate . The singers may have used the more traditional practice in their solo repertoire , performing ornaments extemporaneously . Specific ornaments used by the concerto delle donne , mentioned in a source from 1581 , were such popular sixteenth @-@ century devices as <unk> ( division of a long note into many shorter notes , usually stepwise ) , <unk> ( decoration of the penultimate note , sometimes quite elaborate ) , and <unk> ( rapid scales ) . <unk> ( connection of two longer notes , using dotted rhythms ) , a staple of early Baroque music , are absent from the list . In 1592 Caccini claimed that Alfonso II asked him to teach his ladies the new <unk> and <unk> styles . 
 = = = Styles = = = 
 There are two separate styles of madrigals written for and inspired by the concerto delle donne . The first is the " luxuriant " style of the 1580s . The second is music in the style of the seconda <unk> , written in the 1590s . Luzzaschi wrote music in both of these styles . The style of the earlier period , as exemplified in the works of Luzzaschi , involves the use of madrigal texts written by poets within the Ferrarese sphere , such as Tasso and G.B. Guarini . These poems tend to be short and witty with single sections . Musically , Luzzaschi 's works are highly <unk> and based on melodic themes , rather than harmonic structures . Luzzaschi lessens the <unk> effect of his compositional techniques by weakening cadences . His tendency to reiterate melodies in different voices , including the bass voice , leads to tonal creations which are sometimes bewildering . These aspects make Luzzaschi 's music much more polyphonic than Monteverdi 's later compositions , and thus more conservative ; however , Luzzaschi 's use of jarring melodic leaps and harmonic dissonance are individualistic . These dissonances , which contrast sharply with the careful treatment of dissonance during most of the 16th century , is closely connected with the ornamented polyphonic madrigals of the concerto delle donne . In Giovanni <unk> 's <unk> dialogue , the character defending Monteverdi connects haphazard treatment of dissonance with ornamental singing . 
 = = = Performance = = = 
 The concerto delle donne transformed the musica secreta . In the past , members of the audience would perform , and performers would become audience members . During the ascendancy of the concerto delle donne the roles within the musica secreta became fixed , as did the roster of those who performed for the Duke 's pleasure every night . 
 The elite , hand @-@ selected audience members favored with admission to performances by the concerto delle donne demanded diversions and entertainment beyond the pleasures of beautiful music alone . During the concerts , members of the concerto 's audience would sometimes play cards . Orazio Urbani , ambassador of the Grand Duke of Tuscany , having waited several years to see the concerto , complained that he was forced not only to play cards , distracting him from the performance , but also simultaneously admire and praise the women 's music to their patron Alfonso . After at least one concert , to continue the entertainment , a dwarf couple danced . Alfonso was not as interested in these peripheral entertainments , and in one instance excused himself from the party to go sit under a tree to listen to the ladies , and follow along with the madrigal texts and musical scores , including embellishments , which were made available to listeners . 
 = = Influence = = 
 The concerto delle donne was a revolutionary musical establishment that helped effect a shift in women 's role in music ; its success took women from obscurity to " the apex of the profession " . Women were openly brought to court to train as professional musicians , and by 1600 , a woman could have a viable career as a musician , independent of her husband or father . New women 's ensembles inspired by the concerto delle donne resulted in more positions for women as professional singers and more music for them to perform . 
 Despite the dissolution of the court in 1597 , the musical style which was inspired by the concerto delle donne spread throughout Europe , and remained prominent for almost fifty years . The concerto delle donne was so influential and often imitated that it became a cliché of northern Italian courts . The concerto brought Alfonso and his court international prestige , as the ladies ' reputation spread throughout Italy and southern Germany . It functioned as a powerful tool of propaganda , projecting an image of strength and affluence . 
 Having seen the concerto delle donne in Ferrara , Caccini created a rival group made up of his family and a pupil . This ensemble was sponsored by the Medici , and traveled as far abroad as Paris to perform for Marie de ' Medici . Francesca Caccini had much success composing and singing in the style of the concerto delle donne . Beginning in 1585 , rival groups were created in Florence by the Medici , Rome by the Orsini , and Mantua by the Gonzaga . There was even a rival group in Ferrara based in the Castello Estense , the very palace where the concerto delle donne performed . This group was formed by Alfonso 's sister Lucrezia d 'Este , Duchess of Urbino . She had lived at the Este court since 1576 , and shortly after Margherita 's marriage to Alfonso in 1579 , Alfonso and his henchmen killed Lucrezia 's lover . Lucrezia was unhappy about being replaced as the matron of the house by Margherita , and upset by the murder of her lover , leading to her desire to be separate from the rest of her family during her evening entertainments . 
 Barbara Strozzi was among the last composers and performers in this style , which by the mid @-@ seventeenth century was considered archaic . 
 = Hildegard von Krone = 
 Hildegard von Krone ( <unk> ・ フォン ・ <unk> , <unk> fon <unk> ) , Hilde ( <unk> , <unk> ) / <unk> / for short , is a fictional character in the Soul series of video games . Created by Namco 's Project Soul division , she first appeared in Soulcalibur IV and its subsequent sequels , later appearing in various merchandise related to the series . She is voiced by Yūko Kaida in Japanese . 
 A princess in the fictional European country of Wolfkrone , in Soulcalibur IV she finds her kingdom under attack by Nightmare and his forces . With her father driven insane , she takes control of the kingdom 's army and seeks to revive an ancient " Hero King " , Algol , in order to bring peace to the land . In Soulcalibur : Broken Destiny , the game 's Gauntlet storyline ( non @-@ canon ) revolves around her search for ingredients necessary to cure her father , interacting with various characters in the series . As a video game character , Hilde 's fighting style is unique to others in the Soul series , allowing players to " charge " attack command inputs to increase the strength of their offensive strikes . 
 Since her introduction , IGN heavily praised the character , citing her gameplay and stating approval for the contrast of her design against other female characters in the series . Other sources stated similar , with some such as Edge and Game Informer describing her as the best new character introduced in the game or its predecessor , Soulcalibur III . 
 = = Conception and design = = 
 Hilde 's look derived from the development team 's desire to make a fully clothed " sexy " female character for Soulcalibur IV , and encasing her in armor as a result . Her characteristics and personality were developed after deciding what weapons she would use , a spear and short sword . While fully armored , they endeavored to keep her appearing feminine , shaping the appearance of the armor thus and giving " peeks " of her figure beneath it . When it was pointed out to lead animator Yusuke Shibata that her short sword and related attacks appeared to display her femininity , he agreed , though added that her spear was another matter entirely . After developing her appearance and character model , her backstory was developed by a team led by Yoshihiro Nakagawa , and during this process they worked out how to tie Hilde into the plot of the series . In interviews , Soulcalibur IV director Katsutoshi Sasaki has called Hilde " the ' most alluring ' " female character in the title , designed as an opposite to characters such as Ivy and characters that " always have their boobs popping out " . He added that he felt that as gaming became more accepted , characters similar to Hilde would become more common . 
 Hilde appears as a slender woman with long , red hair . Her primary appearance encases her fully in form @-@ fitting body armor , with red and black fabric underneath . A wolf 's head , the character 's family symbol , extends from the right pauldron and covers her helmet 's visor , while the left pauldron is covered by red fabric , fastened to the center of her breastplate 's collar underneath a large brooch . Beneath the armor , a red coat covers her torso , the tail of which extends past her waist . Her alternate character design consists of a long , blue dress , extending to her feet and neck , exposing her shoulders and angled towards her right leg . White gloves , shoes , and stockings cover her arms and legs , while a darker colored sash surrounds her waist and midsection , also angled to the right . 
 = = In video games = = 
 Hilde is the daughter of the king of Wolfkrone , a fictional European kingdom under assault by series antagonist Nightmare 's forces . After her father was driven insane by the Evil Seed event brought upon by the cursed sword Soul Edge ( which took place seven years before the events of Soulcalibur IV ) , Hilde was forced to take the throne of Wolfkrone despite her young age . She took the responsibilities to protect her people and lead her armies in the front lines against Nightmare . As a desperate measure , Hilde seeks the Sword of Resurrection , Soul Calibur , to bring back an ancient king who once restored peace to the world . Eventually , both Nightmare and Soul Edge are destroyed for good by Soul Calibur , wielded by Hilde 's friend , Siegfried , thus ending the long @-@ term war . However , the Wolfkrone is still at turmoil , and Hilde must search for a new land for her people to settle . Throughout seventeen years , Hilde goes from nation to nation to search for territory , where she also become a mother of two children . Eventually , the Wolfkrone manages to find a land and live at peace , but Hilde is alarmed by Siegfried that an army of <unk> have challenged wars upon the kingdom . Thus , Hilde allies herself with Siegfried 's group of mercenaries , <unk> , to defend her kingdom , regardless of the possibility that she might lose her life in the process . 
 In Soulcalibur : Broken Destiny 's Gauntlet storyline , a non @-@ canon side story set after the events of Soulcalibur IV , the plot revolves around Hilde and her ally Cassandra , who search for ingredients to develop a potion to cure Hilde 's father . To this end they force the protagonist to assist them , and later recruit another person , Dampierre , after Hilde is briefly kidnapped . 
 = = = Gameplay = = = 
 Sasaki described her fighting style as revolving around her dual weapons , comparing her to previous series character Cervantes but with the combination of her spear and short sword weapons allowing for both long distance and close @-@ quarters combat . Control of her weapons is mapped to different inputs from the player 's controller , allowing the attacks to be combined and create different horizontal and vertical strikes . However , as a result at long range Hilde 's attacks become limited to entirely linear strikes . 
 Several of her attacks can also be " charged " by holding controller inputs , a feature unique in the series to the character . Doing so results in a stronger blow , but also creates a window of vulnerability due to the delay , <unk> by performing the controller input during other attacks . Hilde 's strongest attack , Mystic Star and Moonlight Dance , can be triggered through this method and will be both <unk> and do a high amount of damage if they hit the opponent , though at the cost of a twenty @-@ five second delay while charging the attack . 
 = = Promotion and reception = = 
 Hilde is visible on both Soulcalibur IV arcade joysticks for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 . To explain the new features of Soulcalibur IV , Namco released an omake manga featuring Hilde and Cassandra . Written in a humorous tone , Cassandra , representing a veteran of the series , " taught " Hilde about the game 's features , while introducing the audience to aspects of Hilde 's character . Hilde was also featured in a promotional comic bundled with the North American release of Soulcalibur IV 's Premium Edition . Drawn by Udon Entertainment for DC Comics , it served as a prelude to the events of the game . 
 IGN stated her armored appearance makes her more alluring , as well as commented on her gameplay . They additionally listed Hilde as one of the series ' top ten fighters at number ten . They cited her as a fierce opponent and " hell of a lot of fun to control " , adding " ... we tend to sit up and take notice when a new character shows promise ... we expect she 'll stick around for the long haul . " In a similar list , Complex enlisted the 20 best characters from the series , ranking her the 17th best character . Comparison was also made to the other female characters in the game such as Ivy , calling it a " stark contrast " . Additional praise was given in their review of Soulcalibur IV , stating an approval of her design combined with her personality , and a preference for her over the game 's unlockable characters . 
 Other publications have also praised the character . Game Informer called her the best of any of the new characters introduced in either Soul Calibur III or IV . Edge described her as the best of the new characters in Soulcalibur IV , calling her fighting style a worthy rival to another series character , <unk> iafrica.com described her as the " standout newcomer " of the title , describing her fighting style as unusual and " unwieldy to watch " , but easy to get into . Ars Technica also called her a standout addition to the game , describing her fighting style as good for skilled players . Good Game described her as an interesting character , and further named her " the hottest [ ... ] girl in the game " . Shacknews stated that her combination of close and long range attacks made for " a refreshingly dynamic fighting style " . Topless Robot named her one of the " 11 Most <unk> Videogame Heroines " , suggesting that her presence in the game was added to offset the other female characters and praising the lack of " ridiculous romantic contrivances " in her character background . <unk> praised her design an " unbelievably awesome outfit " , adding that despite the lack of exposed skin , " she will win you over " . GameDaily featured her as one of their " Babes of the Week " , stating approval for her contrast to the other females , and praised the contrast of her fighting style to other characters in the series . 
 = Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis = 
 Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis , known in Japan as Biohazard 3 : Last Escape , is a survival horror video game developed by Capcom and originally released for the PlayStation video game console in 1999 . It is the third installment in the Resident Evil video game series and takes place before and after the events of Resident Evil 2 . The story of the game follows Resident Evil protagonist Jill Valentine and her efforts to escape from a city that has been infected with a new type of biological weapon secretly developed by the pharmaceutical company Umbrella . The game uses the same engine as its predecessors and features 3D models over pre @-@ rendered backgrounds with fixed camera angles . 
 Unlike previous Resident Evil games , Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis was designed to have more action @-@ oriented gameplay . It features a larger number of enemies for the player to defeat and introduces the eponymous Nemesis creature , which periodically pursues the player from one area to the next until the end of the game . The game was a critical and commercial success , selling more than three million units worldwide . Most critics praised the graphics for being detailed and the Nemesis creature as an intimidating villain , but some criticized the game 's short length and story . After its release on the PlayStation console , Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis was subsequently ported to the Dreamcast , Microsoft Windows and GameCube systems . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis is a survival horror game where the player controls the protagonist Jill Valentine from a third @-@ person perspective to interact with the environment and enemies . Aside from Jill , the player takes control of another character for a brief portion of the game . To advance through the game , the player has to explore a city while avoiding , outsmarting and defeating various types of enemies . The player can interact with the environment in several ways , such as opening doors , pushing objects or climbing obstacles . Scattered throughout the city are weapons , ammunition and other items , which can be collected and put in the player 's inventory . Items can be examined , used , or combined with others . The inventory is limited to a certain number of slots , and the player must often move items from the inventory to a storage box located in special rooms to manage space . 
 The player can use a variety of firearms to defeat enemies , ranging from pistols to a rocket launcher . Aside from enemies , parts of the environment , such as explosive barrels , can be targeted and shot at , causing them to explode and damage nearby enemies . The game also introduces the ability for players to dodge attacks or perform a quick 180 degree turn to evade enemies . The player has a certain amount of health which decreases when attacked by enemies . Health is regained with herbs , which can be used separately or mixed together to increase their healing effect . The game also features an ammunition creation system that allows players to create new ammunition from different varieties of gunpowder . In addition to engaging in combat , the player must often solve puzzles that focus on logical and conceptual challenges . 
 During certain situations the player will be put in a perilous situation , where they will be prompted to choose between two possible actions or suffer a certain penalty , if not instant death . These choices affect how the story unfolds and which ending is achieved . Additionally , a creature called Nemesis is encountered multiple times throughout the game as a recurring boss . Nemesis is considerably more powerful than the player and has the ability to use a rocket launcher as a weapon , dodge incoming fire , and pursue the player from one area to the next . During one of these encounters , the player can choose to either fight Nemesis or run until he is evaded . A variety of encounters are possible , with some being mandatory , and some varying in nature and location based on certain choices made by the player . Even if evaded or defeated during one of these encounters , Nemesis will inevitably continue to pursue the player until the end of the game . 
 Upon completing the main story mode , a minigame titled " The Mercenaries : Operation Mad Jackal " is unlocked . In Mad Jackal , the player must control one of three members of the Umbrella Biohazard Countermeasure Service that Jill encounters during the main game and run from one side of the city to the other within a limited amount of time and resources . However , the starting time limit given is insufficient to actually perform this task directly , and the player must continuously receive time extensions by performing certain actions such as defeating enemies , rescuing civilians and exploring hidden areas . Completing the main game also unlocks alternate costumes for Jill and epilogue files that detail the activities of different characters following the events of the game . The mercenaries minigame and alternate costumes for Jill are available from the start of the game in the Microsoft Windows and Dreamcast versions of the game . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis begins 24 hours prior to the events of Resident Evil 2 . Jill Valentine , a former Special Tactics And Rescue Service ( S.T.A.R.S. ) member , attempts to escape from Raccoon City . Nearly all of Raccoon City 's citizens have been transformed into zombies by an outbreak of the T @-@ virus , a new type of biological weapon secretly developed by the pharmaceutical company Umbrella . On her way to the Raccoon City Police Department , Jill runs into fellow team member Brad Vickers , who is killed by a new enemy . This creature , named Nemesis , is a bio @-@ organic weapon programmed to target surviving S.T.A.R.S. members , witnesses of Umbrella 's experiments . As she evades Nemesis , Jill encounters three surviving members of the Umbrella Biohazard Countermeasure Service ( <unk> ) : Carlos Oliveira , Mikhail Victor and Nicholai <unk> . Nicholai explains to Jill and Carlos that a rescue helicopter can be contacted if they manage to reach the city 's Clock Tower and ring the bell . 
 As they make their way to the tower , Nicholai disappears and is presumed dead , while Nemesis corners the remaining members of the group on the cable car headed to the tower . Mikhail sacrifices himself with a grenade , causing the car to crash into the tower 's main courtyard and separating Jill and Carlos briefly . At the Clock Tower , Jill summons the helicopter by ringing the Clock Tower 's bell before being confronted by Nemesis , which destroys the helicopter and infects Jill with the T @-@ virus . Jill manages to temporarily defeat Nemesis but falls unconscious due to the T @-@ Virus . Carlos finds Jill and takes her to safety within the Clock Tower . Three days later , he manages to find a cure for Jill 's T @-@ Virus infection in the Raccoon City General Hospital . He returns to Jill and injects her with a vaccine , saving her . 
 After she regains consciousness , Jill proceeds towards the Raccoon Park and enters the park caretaker 's cabin . There , she runs into Nicholai , who is alive . Nicholai is revealed to be one of the " supervisors " sent into Raccoon City to gather combat data of Umbrella 's bio @-@ weapons . Nicholai retreats , and Jill is confronted by a massive worm @-@ like creature . Jill defeats the creature and escapes to an abandoned factory at the rear of the park . Inside the factory , Jill meets up with Carlos , who tells her that the US government is planning to launch a nuclear missile into Raccoon City to eradicate the T @-@ Virus infestation . After confronting Nemesis and grabbing a keycard needed to escape , Jill learns from the factory 's control tower that the missile attack on Raccoon City has begun , with only a short time left before the city is destroyed . 
 Depending on the path taken by the player , Jill 's final encounter with Nicholai will differ . In one version of the events , Nicholai will attempt to start a gunfight with Jill , only to be taken by surprise by Nemesis . In another event , Nicholai will hijack Jill 's intended escape chopper , and the player must choose to either reason with Nicholai or destroy the helicopter . If Jill negotiates with Nicholai , he reveals that he has killed the other supervisors and boasts about collecting the bounty placed on Jill by Umbrella before escaping . Regardless of Nicholai 's fate , Jill makes her way to the rear yard and confronts Nemesis one last time . After an intense battle , Jill defeats Nemesis with the help of a prototype railgun before meeting up with Carlos and escaping the city via a helicopter . If the previous escape chopper was stolen by Nicholai , Jill and Carlos will instead meet up with S.T.A.R.S. Alpha Team 's weapons specialist Barry Burton , who helps them escape in his own helicopter instead . The final cutscene of the game shows the nuclear missile vaporizing the Raccoon City and its infected populace . 
 = = Development = = 
 Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis was developed by Capcom and produced by Shinji Mikami , who previously worked on the original Resident Evil and Resident Evil 2 . After the release of Resident Evil 2 , Capcom was working on multiple Resident Evil projects and had a team led by Hideki Kamiya developing what was planned to be the next main installment in the Resident Evil series . According to Resident Evil 3 scenario writer Yasuhisa Kawamura , the intended game " was loosely set on a luxury cruise liner and had a general plot where <unk> was attempting to bring back a sample of the G @-@ Virus " featured in Resident Evil 2 . However , Capcom realised that the game would not be completed in time for a PlayStation release due to Sony 's announcement of the PlayStation 2 , so the project was ultimately cancelled . As Capcom did not want fans to wait some years for a new game , the company promoted one of its other projects as the third main canonical game while Kamiya 's team was moved onto developing Resident Evil 4 . 
 The selected project was a spin @-@ off that was being developed by an inexperienced team under director Kazuhiro Aoyama . The spin @-@ off was originally intended to introduce a new character who would have to escape from an infected Raccoon City . However , after the promotion , Capcom decided that Resident Evil protagonist Jill Valentine would be the main character and Raccoon City would be destroyed . Unlike the majority of the early scripts in the series , the scenario of the game was not created by Capcom 's Flagship studio but by internal Capcom writer Yasuhisa Kawamura , who had very little experience with the Resident Evil series at the time . Kawamura noted that he had to play the original game to familiarize himself with the series ' fictional universe immediately . Nevertheless , the story was proofread and sanctioned by Flagship to avoid continuity errors with other installments in the series , an issue that was also given attention in monthly meetings between all directors and producers . 
 Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis uses the same game engine as its predecessors . The environments consist of 2D pre @-@ rendered backgrounds while moving objects such as enemies and some interactive elements consist of 3D polygon graphics . The developers chose this technique because having full 3D graphics would not allow them to create graphically rich and detailed environments . According to project supervisor Yoshiki Okamoto , " the number of polygons allocated for the enemies would not be sufficient . We did not want to have blocky , pixelated zombies . " Interaction with the environment was improved so that the player could shoot objects like explosive barrels to damage enemies . Developers also added more variety of zombies , who can take the form of policemen , doctors , and ordinary citizens , among others . 
 Unlike previous Resident Evil games , which take place inside buildings , Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis takes place in Raccoon City . The developers noted that the city setting allowed them to create more varied environments . Capcom also decided to give the game a more action @-@ oriented style , which resulted in the 180 @-@ degree turn and the introduction of a dodge feature so that the player can avoid enemy attacks . Additionally , the developers designed the game so that up to nine enemies can appear at the same time and improved their artificial intelligence to hunt the player up and down stairs . The eponymous Nemesis creature was inspired by the liquid @-@ metal T @-@ 1000 Terminator from Terminator 2 : Judgment Day . According to Mikami , " I wanted to introduce a new kind of fear into the game , a persistent feeling of paranoia . The Nemesis brings that on in spades . When it disappears after the first confrontation , you live in constant dread of the next attack . The idea is to make you feel like you 're being stalked . " 
 The game was developed in tandem with the Dreamcast version of Resident Evil Code : Veronica and was originally referred to as Biohazard 1 @.@ 9 due to its setting between the first two Resident Evil games , although the codename Biohazard 1 @.@ 5 was also used . Although Code : Veronica takes place after Resident Evil 2 , Okamoto explained that Capcom wanted Nemesis to be the third numbered game in the series to keep the titles of the PlayStation games consistent . Development of the game began with a team of 20 people . However , as the game was getting closer to its release date , the development team gradually increased to between 40 and 50 staff members . Unlike Resident Evil 2 , which features two discs with two different protagonists , Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis is a single @-@ CD game that centers mainly on Jill Valentine . Capcom chose Jill as the protagonist of the game because she was " the only suitable character remaining " , noting that Resident Evil protagonists Claire Redfield and Chris Redfield were previously chosen for Code : Veronica . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis was featured at the Tokyo Game Show in March 1999 . A playable version of the game was available at the Electronic Entertainment Expo in 1999 . At the time , the dodging feature had not been completed and was absent from the demo . To promote the game , Capcom included a brief demo of Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis in the US shipments of their earlier game Dino Crisis , which had a successful launch in Japan . Prior to the release of the game , Capcom spent US $ 20 million on advertisement campaigns for Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis and Dino Crisis , as well as the Nintendo 64 version of Resident Evil 2 . The marketing campaign included dedicated television advertising , print advertising , and incentives to the consumer . A double soundtrack album for the game , composed by Masami Ueda , Saori Maeda and Shusaku Uchiyama , was released on September 22 , 1999 . Additionally , a novelization of the game titled Nemesis and written by S. D. Perry was published in 2000 . 
 Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis was first released for the PlayStation video game console on September 22 , 1999 in Japan and November 10 , 1999 in North America . The first 500 @,@ 000 units of the game included additional demo discs of Dino Crisis . According to NPD , Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis was the top selling game for the PlayStation in the US during the first two weeks of November 1999 . The game was eventually released on March 17 , 2000 in Europe and became a bestseller in the UK . As of May 2008 , a total of 3 @.@ 5 million copies of the PlayStation version had been sold according to Capcom . After its original release on the PlayStation , Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis was subsequently ported to the Microsoft Windows , Dreamcast , and GameCube systems , featuring enhanced 3D character models and higher resolution graphics . As of November 2003 , 41 @,@ 395 copies of the GameCube version had been sold in the US . Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis was digitally released on the PlayStation Network in Japan in 2008 and North America in 2009 , allowing PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable users to play any version of the game via emulation . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon release , the original PlayStation version of Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis received very positive reviews from video game critics . GameSpot reviewer James Mielke described it as the most sophisticated and accomplished Resident Evil game for the PlayStation console in terms of both graphics and gameplay . Official UK PlayStation Magazine called Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis " a modern @-@ day classic " , concluding that the game " creates a believable environment , populates it with a host of evil adversaries and uses Raccoon City 's urban sprawl to enhance the <unk> puzzles . " Computer and Video Games remarked that the game preserves the best features of its predecessors and " adds some exciting new elements " . 
 The game 's pre @-@ rendered backgrounds were credited for their rich details and dismal art style . According to IGN editor Doug Perry , " Crashed cars , rubbish and rubble , totally destroyed city streets , and scattered broken glass and debris , all are housed in a suburban area that truly looks devastated in the worst possible way . " GameSpot felt that the 3D modeling of the protagonist Jill Valentine " [ looks ] light years ahead of the comparatively blocky models in the original game . " The music and sound effects received similar praise , with GamePro remarking that the game " keeps the action hot by hiding what you shouldn 't see , but telling you about it through the audio . " The introduction of the Nemesis creature was highly praised . Official UK PlayStation Magazine described the first encounter as shocking , while Computer and Video Games observed that the creature increases the tension level " to an insane degree ; you never know when he 's going to show up and cause mayhem . " 
 GameSpot highlighted positively the prompted choices during certain points in the game as they encourage replay value , but also admitted that the game length is too short compared to Resident Evil 2 because it only features one disc with one protagonist . IGN praised the live action choice feature , stating that it " speeds up the pace , increases the tension , and forces a decision that varies the following scene . " Writing for GameCritics , Dale Weir felt that the fact that players can mix different types of gunpowder to create ammunition adds a new layer of strategy and customizability to the game . Both the 180 degree turn and dodge move were seen by IGN as welcome and necessary additions . In contrast , Official US PlayStation Magazine criticized the dodge feature for being impractical and for relying too much on timing , resulting in doing more harm to the player than against opponents . Other aspects of the game were not positively received : Official US PlayStation Magazine criticized the story of the game for being lacking , while Game Revolution pointed out that the voice acting was poor . The game was a runner up for GameSpot 's 1999 Adventure Game of the Year . 
 Critical reception for the Microsoft Windows , Dreamcast , and GameCube ports of the game was not as positive . Writing for GameSpot , Ron Dulin criticized the saving system of the Microsoft Windows version for not letting players save their progress at any time , but found the higher resolution backgrounds and 3D character models praiseworthy . IGN stated similar pros for the Dreamcast version of the game , but noted that some backgrounds were not improved , resulting in them looking not as good as the PlayStation version 's due to the Dreamcast 's clearer and sharper graphics . The GameCube version , released more than three years later than the original PlayStation version , received mixed to negative reviews from critics . It was mainly criticized for its relatively high retail price and outdated graphics . 
 = Hermética = 
 Hermética was an Argentine thrash metal band from San Martín , Buenos Aires . It was formed by bassist Ricardo Iorio in 1987 after his previous band V8 disbanded . Hermética was signed to the independent record label Radio Trípoli Discos throughout their career . The band 's initial lineup consisted of Iorio , vocalist Claudio O 'Connor , drummer Fabián Spataro and guitarist Antonio Romano . Spataro left the band in 1988 and was replaced by Antonio Scotto . This lineup recorded their eponymous album , the first thrash metal album recorded in Argentina . At this point of their career , Hermética performed mainly in Argentina , except for one concert held in Uruguay . In 1990 , they released Intérpretes — an extended play which included covers of Argentine rock and tango songs . Both albums were released by Radio Trípoli Discos as a single CD when digital technology became available . 
 Scotto left the band in 1991 and was replaced by drummer Claudio Strunz . This lineup recorded the band 's second studio album , Ácido Argentino . Hermética opened for Black Sabbath and Motörhead during their visits to Argentina , but had to cancel their headlining tour in Paraguay . They recorded a live album , En vivo 1993 Argentina , and took part in a concert at a penal facility . They participated in the first Argentine Monsters of Rock festival , which featured Black Sabbath , Slayer , and Kiss . Their last studio album , Víctimas del Vaciamiento , was released in 1994 . To promote the album , the group held a concert at the Obras Sanitarias stadium later that year . 
 Hermética disbanded at the end of 1994 , a few days before their second concert in Obras . Ricardo Iorio , who performed lead vocals on a number of tracks , formed a new band Almafuerte and served as its vocalist . The remaining ex @-@ members of Hermética hired a new bassist and created the band Malón . Both bands began a mutual rivalry after their respective establishment . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years and Hermética ( 1987 – 1989 ) = = = 
 Ricardo Iorio was the frontman and bassist of the band V8 , which broke up in 1987 . After its disbandment , Iorio formed Hermética , which had a similar musical style to V8 . Initially , he tried to work with Martín <unk> , a former member of Kamikaze , but after two meetings , the idea was abandoned . Iorio then appointed the guitarist Antonio Romano from the band <unk> , who had been previously considered for V8 . Iorio wanted Romano to be both a vocalist and bassist , but his manager Marcelo Tommy persuaded Iorio to hire someone else . Iorio eventually chose Claudio O 'Connor for vocals and Fabián Spataro from the band Mark as drummer . They began to practice at Villa Ballester in 1987 . The name of the band is a reference to hermeticism ; Iorio saw similarities between the hermetic doctrine and the context of the Argentine heavy metal . 
 The first songs composed by Iorio were " <unk> Civil " , " Masa <unk> " , and " <unk> <unk> " . The band 's first show was in a pub called " Helloween " in San Martín , on May 7 , 1988 . Although <unk> had been established before Hermética by Osvaldo Civile — a fellow member of V8 — Hermética was the first of the two bands to perform a live concert . Spataro left the band in 1988 because of a labor dispute . He was replaced by drummer Tony Scotto , who was introduced by friends of the band . He performed his first concert with the band in August at the " Sáenz Peña " club — where Spataro played for the last time . The fanzine <unk> organized a free concert at the main plaza of Lomas de Zamora , but it was canceled because of the failed military uprising of the Carapintadas insurgents . 
 Hermética made regular appearances at the <unk> theater in San Telmo in 1989 . They were the first heavy metal band to play there . They performed with the bands Doppler , 666 , Militia , <unk> , <unk> , Cross , Legión , and <unk> . Hermética wanted to record their first album but the national economic crisis had a negative impact on the project . The fanzine " Rebellion Rock " proposed an independent production , which would be sold at Parque Centenario , but the band rejected this offer . They also rejected working for EMI and instead signed for a new label , Radio Trípoli Discos . They signed a contract in May 1989 , and two months later the band began to record the LP at the <unk> studios . The eponymous album Hermética was released in November 1989 . It was the first thrash metal album to be recorded in Argentina . Ricardo Iorio made his debut as lead vocalist on the song " Desde el Oeste " . Hermética performed a concert in Córdoba , with the band Hammer . Alberto <unk> , a former singer with V8 , made a guest appearance during a concert in <unk> . Hermética ended the year by performing two concerts with <unk> 's new band <unk> & The <unk> . 
 = = = Intérpretes and Ácido Argentino ( 1990 – 1992 ) = = = 
 Hermética performed their only concert outside of Argentina in the early 1990s at the " Club <unk> " in Montevideo , Uruguay . They played with <unk> and <unk> , — two bands from Uruguay . Hermética had to spend the night in the street because of the faulty Uruguayan production . Once they returned to Argentina , they performed at several locations in Buenos Aires and in Mar del Plata with <unk> , Los <unk> , <unk> and Rata Blanca . They were offered a chance to record an EP with only 27 hours of recording time . They accepted the proposal , and recorded improvised cover versions of songs by V8 , Patricio Rey y sus <unk> de <unk> , Enrique Santos Discépolo , Motörhead , and Manal . Iorio , a fan of a band called Budgie , made deliberate similarities to Metallica 's cover EP , The $ 5 @.@ 98 E.P. : Garage Days Re @-@ Revisited — which included a cover version of a song by that band . Hermética performed at the " Metal en <unk> " festival at the José <unk> stadium , sharing the bill with 2112 , Lethal , <unk> , Kamikaze , <unk> , and Riff . 
 The band searched for a new concert venue because the <unk> was becoming too small for their growing audience . They moved to Cemento , where most of the 1991 concerts took place . They played with the bands Todos <unk> muertos , Pobres <unk> , Nepal , Militia , <unk> , Rapier , and <unk> <unk> . Their albums Hermética and Intérpretes — which had been released as LP records and cassettes , were released by Tripoli on a single compact disc . Tony Scotto left the band because of creative differences and was replaced by Claudio Strunz . Strunz , drummer of the band Heinkel and owner of Hermética 's rehearsal room , had already played with the band during practice sessions when Scotto was absent . He made his debut at <unk> . The band appeared in two television programs , La <unk> del ' 90 and Siglo XX <unk> and recorded their second full @-@ length album , Ácido Argentino , with 150 hours of recording time at the Aguilar studios . It was released at Cemento on December 27 . 
 Following an avalanche at San Carlos Minas in January 1992 , Hermética joined a charity music festival held at the Chateau Carreras stadium . Hermética played only a few songs at a concert with Riff — the headline band — , which ended with minor riots . Hermética were the opening act for Black Sabbath at Obras Sanitarias ; Black Sabbath 's frontman Ronnie James Dio thanked the band for playing with them . The band leased 25 % of the copyright of their songs to Daniel <unk> , the businessman who brought rock bands to Argentina to play with Black Sabbath . In October 1992 , they were the supporting band for Motörhead in Obras . They were offered a concert in Paraguay , but once in the country the show 's producers tried to pay less money than had been agreed . Unable to find an alternative location , the band refused to play and returned to Argentina . 
 = = = Live albums and Víctimas del Vaciamiento ( 1993 – 1994 ) = = = 
 Hermética toured Patagonia at the beginning of 1993 . In March that year , Ácido Argentino was certified gold by the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers ( CAPIF ) , having shipped 30 @,@ 000 copies in Argentina . Tripoli invited them to produce a new studio album in Miami or Los Ángeles but the band refused , preferring to stay in Argentina . Hermética was scheduled to support Megadeth , but their guitarist / vocalist Dave Mustaine had health problems which forced the band to cancel the concert . They received proposals to play with Metallica , but rejected the required terms of the contract . After touring in Rosario and Greater Buenos Aires , Hermética performed their first concert in Buenos Aires on May 15 , 1993 , at Stadium , a new concert hall with a capacity of 5 @,@ 000 . They recorded the live album En vivo 1993 Argentina and a home video . The album included a heavy metal cover version of " Si se <unk> el cantor " , a song first recorded by folk singer José Larralde . This album ended the contract with Radio Trípoli , which was renewed . Hermética performed at the Olmos penal facility on August 17 , along with Lethal , <unk> , Massacre , <unk> 77 , Pilsen and the British UK Subs . The concert was presented by the radio host Norberto <unk> , and was recorded and released on a live CD named " Radio Olmos " . The band performed another concert at Stadium on September 4 , and began to produce their third studio album . 
 Hermética was part of the 1994 edition of the Monsters of Rock festival in Buenos Aires , alongside Black Sabbath , Slayer , and Kiss . Shortly after , they released their third studio album , Víctimas del Vaciamiento . As the Stadium 's hall was not big enough to accommodate the audience , they held a concert at Estadio Obras Sanitarias . Hermética recorded their performance and released it as a live album titled Lo último . Meanwhile , their newest studio album received gold certification . The band recorded a cover version of a folk song , " De los <unk> del tiempo " , also by Larralde . The band had received proposals to play at Obras the previous year , which the accepted with the condition that they would organize it themselves . 
 = = = Disbandment = = = 
 Hermética 's last concert was held in Mar del Plata . Their second concert in Obras was canceled ; rumors that Iorio had contracted hepatitis B turned out to be false . The other members sent him a formal request to attend the concert but Iorio refused and the band broke up . Iorio did not attend any meeting since then and ordered the other band members to stop using the name Hermética , which Iorio had invented . Iorio gave his first interviews after the break @-@ up to the Clarín newspaper and the other members to the music magazine Madhouse . Iorio said that the band had always been united , but few weeks before their final concert , the members were not talking to each other . He said he had lied about having hepatitis B , expecting to end the hostilities , but it did not work . Iorio flew from Mar del Plata to Buenos Aires to avoid seeing the other members , who returned by bus . O 'Connor , Romano , and Strunz stated in Madhouse magazine that the harsh relation was because Iorio had not consulted the others about the decisions he was making , that he received most of the money , and that he avoided meeting them when they were discussing the problems in the band . 
 The concert in Obras was filmed and released as a live album . The first edition was released under the name Lo Último with a black front @-@ cover ; it was edited in studio to match the quality of a regular studio CD . It was later reissued as a double album titled " En Concierto " ; this version was not edited in the studio and reinstated the raw sound of the band 's live performance . 
 Ricardo Iorio started a new band , Almafuerte , with guitarist Claudio Marciello and drummer Claudio <unk> . Iorio took lead vocal duties and included covers of Hermética and V8 songs in his new band 's repertoire . O 'Connor , Romano , and Strunz hired a new bassist , Karlos Cuadrado , and formed the band Malón . The bands became rivals ; Hermética 's popularity was inherited by both bands . A 1995 poll among readers of Madhouse was led by members or works of both bands in all national categories . 
 Hermética remained a popular band in the Argentine heavy metal scene , even among the younger fans who had never seen the band live . Since their disbandment , the band 's members have not attempted any reunion . At the 2011 reunion of Malón , Claudio O 'Connor said that their personal conflicts with Iorio would not allow it and that they would not reunite the band if the four members do not have a good personal relationship . 
 = = Style and lyrics = = 
 Hermética was a thrash metal band , drawing influences from Motörhead , Megadeth , and Black Sabbath . Their music was composed primarily by bassist Ricardo Iorio with occasional input from guitarist Antonio Romano , who composed the guitar solos . The band used a counterpoint between the singing styles of their two vocalists ; lead singer Claudio O 'Connor 's vocals were high pitched , while Iorio had a raucous style of singing . Iorio sang segments of some songs but rarely performed songs in their entirety . Iorio thought that his singing style in Hermética was inferior to his later work with Almafuerte because the songs had not been composed specifically for him . The success of Hermética 's second studio album Ácido Argentino allowed the band to increase the budget for the production of its follow @-@ up , Víctimas del Vaciamiento . Iorio proposed re @-@ recording the band 's first album with drummer Claudio Strunz and a higher budget , but the label refused his proposal . 
 The musical style of Hermética was considered to be " old @-@ fashioned " . The band achieved success as a result of their introspective lyrics . Unlike most heavy metal bands , Hermética 's music was appealing to poor people . Iorio wrote about his thoughts and concerns from a personal perspective . He stated that some of his lyrics were inspired by 1940s Argentine tango music . Hermética was part of the Rock <unk> movement within Argentine rock ; their music was influenced by Argentine nationalism , family values and neighbourhood @-@ centered localism . Iorio said that he does not support racism or fascism . The lyrics , except for covers , were always written in Spanish because Iorio does not approve of artists who write in English to gain foreign audience . The first two albums addressed a variety of topics ; the track " Memoria de siglos " ( " Memory of centuries " ) references the cult of personality , buck passing , peace through strength , and wage slavery . Each song from their third album is devoted to a different subject . 
 = = Members = = 
 = = = Last line @-@ up = = = 
 Ricardo Iorio - bass guitar , occasional vocalist ( 1987 – 1994 ) 
 Antonio Romano - guitar ( 1987 – 1994 ) 
 Claudio O 'Connor - lead vocals ( 1987 – 1994 ) 
 Claudio Strunz - drums ( 1991 – 1994 ) 
 = = = Former members = = = 
 Fabián Spataro - drums ( 1987 – 1988 ) 
 Antonio Scotto - drums ( 1988 – 1991 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 Hermética ( 1989 ) 
 Intérpretes ( 1990 ) 
 Ácido Argentino ( 1991 ) 
 Víctimas del Vaciamiento ( 1994 ) 
 = = = Live albums = = = 
 En vivo 1993 Argentina ( 1993 ) 
 Lo último / En Concierto Parte I & II ( 1995 ) 
 = = = VHS = = = 
 En Vivo 1993 ( 1993 ) 
 = = = Compilation albums = = = 
 Sentimiento Argentino ( 1998 ) 
 = Charles Darwin = 
 Charles Robert Darwin , FRS FRGS <unk> <unk> ( / <unk> / ; 12 February 1809 – 19 April 1882 ) was an English naturalist and geologist , best known for his contributions to the science of evolution . He established that all species of life have descended over time from common ancestors , and in a joint publication with Alfred Russel Wallace introduced his scientific theory that this branching pattern of evolution resulted from a process that he called natural selection , in which the struggle for existence has a similar effect to the artificial selection involved in selective breeding . 
 Darwin published his theory of evolution with compelling evidence in his 1859 book On the Origin of Species , overcoming scientific rejection of earlier concepts of transmutation of species . By the 1870s , the scientific community and much of the general public had accepted evolution as a fact . However , many favoured competing explanations and it was not until the emergence of the modern evolutionary synthesis from the 1930s to the 1950s that a broad consensus developed in which natural selection was the basic mechanism of evolution . In modified form , Darwin 's scientific discovery is the unifying theory of the life sciences , explaining the diversity of life . 
 Darwin 's early interest in nature led him to neglect his medical education at the University of Edinburgh ; instead , he helped to investigate marine invertebrates . Studies at the University of Cambridge ( Christ 's College ) encouraged his passion for natural science . His five @-@ year voyage on HMS Beagle established him as an eminent geologist whose observations and theories supported Charles Lyell 's uniformitarian ideas , and publication of his journal of the voyage made him famous as a popular author . 
 Puzzled by the geographical distribution of wildlife and fossils he collected on the voyage , Darwin began detailed investigations and in 1838 conceived his theory of natural selection . Although he discussed his ideas with several naturalists , he needed time for extensive research and his geological work had priority . He was writing up his theory in 1858 when Alfred Russel Wallace sent him an essay that described the same idea , prompting immediate joint publication of both of their theories . Darwin 's work established evolutionary descent with modification as the dominant scientific explanation of diversification in nature . In 1871 he examined human evolution and sexual selection in The Descent of Man , and Selection in Relation to Sex , followed by The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals . His research on plants was published in a series of books , and in his final book , The Formation of Vegetable Mould , through the Actions of Worms ( published 1881 ) , he examined earthworms and their effect on soil . 
 Darwin has been described as one of the most influential figures in human history ; and was honoured by burial in Westminster Abbey . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Charles Robert Darwin was born in Shrewsbury , Shropshire , England , on 12 February 1809 at his family 's home , The Mount . He was the fifth of six children of wealthy society doctor and financier Robert Darwin , and of Susannah Darwin ( née Wedgwood ) . He was the grandson of two prominent abolitionists : Erasmus Darwin on his father 's side , and Josiah Wedgwood on his mother 's side . 
 Both families were largely Unitarian , though the <unk> were adopting Anglicanism . Robert Darwin , himself quietly a freethinker , had baby Charles baptised in November 1809 in the Anglican St Chad 's Church , Shrewsbury , but Charles and his siblings attended the Unitarian chapel with their mother . The eight @-@ year @-@ old Charles already had a taste for natural history and collecting when he joined the day school run by its preacher in 1817 . That July , his mother died . From September 1818 , he joined his older brother Erasmus attending the nearby Anglican Shrewsbury School as a boarder . 
 Darwin spent the summer of 1825 as an apprentice doctor , helping his father treat the poor of Shropshire , before going to the University of Edinburgh Medical School ( at the time the best medical school in the UK ) with his brother Erasmus in October 1825 . He found lectures dull and surgery distressing , so neglected his studies . He learned taxidermy in around 40 daily hour @-@ long sessions from John Edmonstone , a freed black slave who had accompanied Charles Waterton in the South American rainforest . 
 In Darwin 's second year at the university he joined the Plinian Society , a student natural @-@ history group featuring lively debates in which radical democratic students with materialistic views challenged orthodox religious concepts of science . He assisted Robert Edmond Grant 's investigations of the anatomy and life cycle of marine invertebrates in the Firth of Forth , and on 27 March 1827 presented at the Plinian his own discovery that black spores found in oyster shells were the eggs of a skate leech . One day , Grant praised Lamarck 's evolutionary ideas . Darwin was astonished by Grant 's audacity , but had recently read similar ideas in his grandfather Erasmus ' journals . Darwin was rather bored by Robert Jameson 's natural @-@ history course , which covered geology - including the debate between <unk> and <unk> . He learned the classification of plants , and assisted with work on the collections of the University Museum , one of the largest museums in Europe at the time . 
 Darwin 's neglect of medical studies annoyed his father , who shrewdly sent him to Christ 's College , Cambridge , to study for a Bachelor of Arts degree as the first step towards becoming an Anglican parson . As Darwin was unqualified for the Tripos , he joined the ordinary degree course in January 1828 . He preferred riding and shooting to studying . His cousin William Darwin Fox introduced him to the popular craze for beetle collecting ; Darwin pursued this zealously , getting some of his finds published in Stevens ' Illustrations of British entomology . He became a close friend and follower of botany professor John Stevens Henslow and met other leading parson @-@ naturalists who saw scientific work as religious natural theology , becoming known to these dons as " the man who walks with Henslow " . When his own exams drew near , Darwin focused on his studies and was delighted by the language and logic of William Paley 's Evidences of Christianity ( 1794 ) . In his final examination in January 1831 Darwin did well , coming tenth out of 178 candidates for the ordinary degree . 
 Darwin had to stay at Cambridge until June 1831 . He studied Paley 's Natural Theology or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity ( first published in 1802 ) , which made an argument for divine design in nature , explaining adaptation as God acting through laws of nature . He read John Herschel 's new book , Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy ( 1831 ) , which described the highest aim of natural philosophy as understanding such laws through inductive reasoning based on observation , and Alexander von Humboldt 's Personal Narrative of scientific travels in 1799 @-@ 1804 . Inspired with " a burning zeal " to contribute , Darwin planned to visit Tenerife with some classmates after graduation to study natural history in the tropics . In preparation , he joined Adam Sedgwick 's geology course , then travelled with him in the summer for a fortnight , in order to map strata in Wales . 
 = = = Voyage of the Beagle = = = 
 After a week with student friends at Barmouth , Darwin returned home on 29 August to find a letter from Henslow proposing him as a suitable ( if unfinished ) gentleman naturalist for a self @-@ funded supernumerary place on HMS Beagle with captain Robert FitzRoy , more as a companion than a mere collector . The ship was to leave in four weeks on an expedition to chart the coastline of South America . Robert Darwin objected to his son 's planned two @-@ year voyage , regarding it as a waste of time , but was persuaded by his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Josiah Wedgwood , to agree to ( and fund ) his son 's participation . Darwin took care to remain in a private capacity to retain control over his collection : the ship 's surgeon Robert McCormick expected to be the official naturalist . 
 After delays , the voyage began on 27 December 1831 ; it lasted almost five years . As FitzRoy had intended , Darwin spent most of that time on land investigating geology and making natural history collections , while the Beagle surveyed and charted coasts . He kept careful notes of his observations and theoretical speculations , and at intervals during the voyage his specimens were sent to Cambridge together with letters including a copy of his journal for his family . He had some expertise in geology , beetle collecting and dissecting marine invertebrates , but in all other areas was a novice and ably collected specimens for expert appraisal . Despite suffering badly from seasickness , Darwin wrote copious notes while on board the ship . Most of his zoology notes are about marine invertebrates , starting with plankton collected in a calm spell . 
 On their first stop ashore at St Jago in Cape Verde , Darwin found that a white band high in the volcanic rock cliffs included seashells . FitzRoy had given him the first volume of Charles Lyell 's Principles of Geology , which set out uniformitarian concepts of land slowly rising or falling over immense periods , and Darwin saw things Lyell 's way , theorising and thinking of writing a book on geology . 
 When they reached Brazil , Darwin was delighted by the tropical forest , but detested the sight of slavery . McCormick left the ship at this point , feeling that Darwin had supplanted him as naturalist . 
 The survey continued to the south in Patagonia . They stopped at Bahía Blanca , and in cliffs near Punta Alta Darwin made a major find of fossil bones of huge extinct mammals beside modern seashells , indicating recent extinction with no signs of change in climate or catastrophe . He identified the little @-@ known Megatherium by a tooth and its association with bony armour , which had at first seemed to him to be like a giant version of the armour on local armadillos . The finds brought great interest when they reached England . 
 On rides with gauchos into the interior to explore geology and collect more fossils , Darwin gained social , political and anthropological insights into both native and colonial people at a time of revolution , and learnt that two types of rhea had separate but overlapping territories . Further south , he saw stepped plains of shingle and seashells as raised beaches showing a series of elevations . He read Lyell 's second volume and accepted its view of " centres of creation " of species , but his discoveries and theorising challenged Lyell 's ideas of smooth continuity and of extinction of species . 
 Three <unk> on board had been seized during the first Beagle voyage , then during a year in England were educated as missionaries . Darwin found them friendly and civilised , yet at Tierra del Fuego he met " miserable , degraded savages " , as different as wild from domesticated animals . He remained convinced that , despite this diversity , all humans were interrelated with a shared origin and potential for improvement towards civilisation . Unlike his scientist friends , he now thought there was no unbridgeable gap between humans and animals . A year on , the mission had been abandoned . The Fuegian they had named Jemmy Button lived like the other natives , had a wife , and had no wish to return to England . 
 Darwin experienced an earthquake in Chile and saw signs that the land had just been raised , including mussel @-@ beds stranded above high tide . High in the Andes he saw seashells , and several fossil trees that had grown on a sand beach . He theorised that as the land rose , oceanic islands sank , and coral reefs round them grew to form atolls . 
 On the geologically new Galápagos Islands , Darwin looked for evidence attaching wildlife to an older " centre of creation " , and found mockingbirds allied to those in Chile but differing from island to island . He heard that slight variations in the shape of tortoise shells showed which island they came from , but failed to collect them , even after eating tortoises taken on board as food . In Australia , the marsupial rat @-@ kangaroo and the platypus seemed so unusual that Darwin thought it was almost as though two distinct Creators had been at work . He found the Aborigines " good @-@ humoured & pleasant " , and noted their depletion by European settlement . 
 The Beagle investigated how the atolls of the Cocos ( Keeling ) Islands had formed , and the survey supported Darwin 's theorising . FitzRoy began writing the official Narrative of the Beagle voyages , and after reading Darwin 's diary he proposed incorporating it into the account . Darwin 's Journal was eventually rewritten as a separate third volume , on natural history . 
 In Cape Town , Darwin and FitzRoy met John Herschel , who had recently written to Lyell praising his uniformitarianism as opening bold speculation on " that mystery of mysteries , the replacement of extinct species by others " as " a natural in contradistinction to a miraculous process " . When organising his notes as the ship sailed home , Darwin wrote that , if his growing suspicions about the mockingbirds , the tortoises and the Falkland Islands fox were correct , " such facts undermine the stability of Species " , then cautiously added " would " before " undermine " . He later wrote that such facts " seemed to me to throw some light on the origin of species " . 
 = = = Inception of Darwin 's evolutionary theory = = = 
 When the Beagle reached Falmouth , Cornwall , on 2 October 1836 , Darwin was already a celebrity in scientific circles as in December 1835 Henslow had fostered his former pupil 's reputation by giving selected naturalists a pamphlet of Darwin 's geological letters . Darwin visited his home in Shrewsbury and saw relatives , then hurried to Cambridge to see Henslow , who advised him on finding naturalists available to catalogue the collections and agreed to take on the botanical specimens . Darwin 's father organised investments , enabling his son to be a self @-@ funded gentleman scientist , and an excited Darwin went round the London institutions being fêted and seeking experts to describe the collections . Zoologists had a huge backlog of work , and there was a danger of specimens just being left in storage . 
 Charles Lyell eagerly met Darwin for the first time on 29 October and soon introduced him to the up @-@ and @-@ coming anatomist Richard Owen , who had the facilities of the Royal College of Surgeons to work on the fossil bones collected by Darwin . Owen 's surprising results included other gigantic extinct ground sloths as well as the Megatherium , a near complete skeleton of the unknown <unk> and a hippopotamus @-@ sized rodent @-@ like skull named <unk> resembling a giant capybara . The armour fragments were actually from Glyptodon , a huge armadillo @-@ like creature as Darwin had initially thought . These extinct creatures were related to living species in South America . 
 In mid @-@ December , Darwin took lodgings in Cambridge to organise work on his collections and rewrite his Journal . He wrote his first paper , showing that the South American landmass was slowly rising , and with Lyell 's enthusiastic backing read it to the Geological Society of London on 4 January 1837 . On the same day , he presented his mammal and bird specimens to the Zoological Society . The ornithologist John Gould soon announced that the Galapagos birds that Darwin had thought a mixture of blackbirds , " gros @-@ beaks " and finches , were , in fact , twelve separate species of finches . On 17 February , Darwin was elected to the Council of the Geological Society , and Lyell 's presidential address presented Owen 's findings on Darwin 's fossils , stressing geographical continuity of species as supporting his uniformitarian ideas . 
 Early in March , Darwin moved to London to be near this work , joining Lyell 's social circle of scientists and experts such as Charles Babbage , who described God as a programmer of laws . Darwin stayed with his freethinking brother Erasmus , part of this Whig circle and a close friend of the writer Harriet Martineau , who promoted <unk> underlying the controversial Whig Poor Law reforms to stop welfare from causing overpopulation and more poverty . As a Unitarian , she welcomed the radical implications of transmutation of species , promoted by Grant and younger surgeons influenced by Geoffroy . Transmutation was anathema to Anglicans defending social order , but reputable scientists openly discussed the subject and there was wide interest in John Herschel 's letter praising Lyell 's approach as a way to find a natural cause of the origin of new species . 
 Gould met Darwin and told him that the Galápagos mockingbirds from different islands were separate species , not just varieties , and what Darwin had thought was a " wren " was also in the finch group . Darwin had not labelled the finches by island , but from the notes of others on the Beagle , including FitzRoy , he allocated species to islands . The two rheas were also distinct species , and on 14 March Darwin announced how their distribution changed going southwards . 
 By mid @-@ March , Darwin was speculating in his Red Notebook on the possibility that " one species does change into another " to explain the geographical distribution of living species such as the rheas , and extinct ones such as the strange <unk> , which resembled a giant guanaco . His thoughts on lifespan , asexual reproduction and sexual reproduction developed in his " B " notebook around mid @-@ July on to variation in offspring " to adapt & alter the race to changing world " explaining the Galápagos tortoises , mockingbirds and rheas . He sketched branching descent , then a genealogical branching of a single evolutionary tree , in which " It is absurd to talk of one animal being higher than another " , discarding Lamarck 's independent lineages progressing to higher forms . 
 = = = <unk> , illness , and marriage = = = 
 While developing this intensive study of transmutation , Darwin became mired in more work . Still rewriting his Journal , he took on editing and publishing the expert reports on his collections , and with Henslow 's help obtained a Treasury grant of £ 1 @,@ 000 to sponsor this multi @-@ volume Zoology of the Voyage of H.M.S. Beagle , a sum equivalent to about £ 82 @,@ 000 in 2014 . He stretched the funding to include his planned books on geology , and agreed to unrealistic dates with the publisher . As the Victorian era began , Darwin pressed on with writing his Journal , and in August 1837 began correcting printer 's proofs . 
 Darwin 's health suffered under the pressure . On 20 September he had " an uncomfortable <unk> of the heart " , so his doctors urged him to " knock off all work " and live in the country for a few weeks . After visiting Shrewsbury he joined his Wedgwood relatives at Maer Hall , Staffordshire , but found them too eager for tales of his travels to give him much rest . His charming , intelligent , and cultured cousin Emma Wedgwood , nine months older than Darwin , was nursing his invalid aunt . His uncle Jos pointed out an area of ground where cinders had disappeared under loam and suggested that this might have been the work of earthworms , inspiring " a new & important theory " on their role in soil formation , which Darwin presented at the Geological Society on 1 November . 
 William Whewell pushed Darwin to take on the duties of Secretary of the Geological Society . After initially declining the work , he accepted the post in March 1838 . Despite the grind of writing and editing the Beagle reports , Darwin made remarkable progress on transmutation , taking every opportunity to question expert naturalists and , unconventionally , people with practical experience such as farmers and pigeon fanciers . Over time , his research drew on information from his relatives and children , the family butler , neighbours , colonists and former shipmates . He included mankind in his speculations from the outset , and on seeing an orangutan in the zoo on 28 March 1838 noted its childlike behaviour . 
 The strain took a toll , and by June he was being laid up for days on end with stomach problems , headaches and heart symptoms . For the rest of his life , he was repeatedly incapacitated with episodes of stomach pains , vomiting , severe boils , palpitations , trembling and other symptoms , particularly during times of stress , such as attending meetings or making social visits . The cause of Darwin 's illness remained unknown , and attempts at treatment had little success . 
 On 23 June , he took a break and went " <unk> " in Scotland . He visited Glen Roy in glorious weather to see the parallel " roads " cut into the hillsides at three heights . He later published his view that these were marine raised beaches , but then had to accept that they were shorelines of a proglacial lake . 
 Fully recuperated , he returned to Shrewsbury in July . Used to jotting down daily notes on animal breeding , he scrawled rambling thoughts about career and prospects on two scraps of paper , one with columns headed " Marry " and " Not Marry " . Advantages included " constant companion and a friend in old age ... better than a dog anyhow " , against points such as " less money for books " and " terrible loss of time . " Having decided in favour , he discussed it with his father , then went to visit Emma on 29 July . He did not get around to proposing , but against his father 's advice he mentioned his ideas on transmutation . 
 = = = = Malthus and natural selection = = = = 
 Continuing his research in London , Darwin 's wide reading now included the sixth edition of Malthus 's An Essay on the Principle of Population , and on 28 September 1838 he noted its assertion that human " population , when unchecked , goes on doubling itself every twenty five years , or increases in a geometrical ratio " , a geometric progression so that population soon exceeds food supply in what is known as a Malthusian catastrophe . Darwin was well prepared to compare this to de Candolle 's " warring of the species " of plants and the struggle for existence among wildlife , explaining how numbers of a species kept roughly stable . As species always breed beyond available resources , favourable variations would make organisms better at surviving and passing the variations on to their offspring , while unfavourable variations would be lost . He wrote that the " final cause of all this wedging , must be to sort out proper structure , & adapt it to changes " , so that " One may say there is a force like a hundred thousand wedges trying force into every kind of adapted structure into the gaps of in the economy of nature , or rather forming gaps by thrusting out weaker ones . " This would result in the formation of new species . As he later wrote in his Autobiography : 
 In October 1838 , that is , fifteen months after I had begun my systematic enquiry , I happened to read for amusement Malthus on Population , and being well prepared to appreciate the struggle for existence which everywhere goes on from long @-@ continued observation of the habits of animals and plants , it at once struck me that under these circumstances favourable variations would tend to be preserved , and unfavourable ones to be destroyed . The result of this would be the formation of new species . Here , then , I had at last got a theory by which to work ... " 
 By mid December , Darwin saw a similarity between farmers picking the best stock in selective breeding , and a Malthusian Nature selecting from chance variants so that " every part of newly acquired structure is fully practical and perfected " , thinking this comparison " a beautiful part of my theory " . He later called his theory natural selection , an analogy with what he termed the artificial selection of selective breeding . 
 On 11 November , he returned to Maer and proposed to Emma , once more telling her his ideas . She accepted , then in exchanges of loving letters she showed how she valued his openness in sharing their differences , also expressing her strong Unitarian beliefs and concerns that his honest doubts might separate them in the afterlife . While he was house @-@ hunting in London , bouts of illness continued and Emma wrote urging him to get some rest , almost prophetically remarking " So don 't be ill any more my dear Charley till I can be with you to nurse you . " He found what they called " Macaw Cottage " ( because of its gaudy interiors ) in Gower Street , then moved his " museum " in over Christmas . On 24 January 1839 , Darwin was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society ( FRS ) . 
 On 29 January , Darwin and Emma Wedgwood were married at Maer in an Anglican ceremony arranged to suit the Unitarians , then immediately caught the train to London and their new home . 
 = = = Geology books , barnacles , evolutionary research = = = 
 Darwin now had the framework of his theory of natural selection " by which to work " , as his " prime hobby " . His research included extensive experimental selective breeding of plants and animals , finding evidence that species were not fixed and investigating many detailed ideas to refine and substantiate his theory . For fifteen years this work was in the background to his main occupation of writing on geology and publishing expert reports on the Beagle collections . 
 When FitzRoy 's Narrative was published in May 1839 , Darwin 's Journal and Remarks was such a success as the third volume that later that year it was published on its own . Early in 1842 , Darwin wrote about his ideas to Charles Lyell , who noted that his ally " denies seeing a beginning to each crop of species " . 
 Darwin 's book The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs on his theory of atoll formation was published in May 1842 after more than three years of work , and he then wrote his first " pencil sketch " of his theory of natural selection . To escape the pressures of London , the family moved to rural Down House in September . On 11 January 1844 , Darwin mentioned his theorising to the botanist Joseph Dalton Hooker , writing with melodramatic humour " it is like confessing a murder " . Hooker replied " There may in my opinion have been a series of productions on different spots , & also a gradual change of species . I shall be delighted to hear how you think that this change may have taken place , as no presently conceived opinions satisfy me on the subject . " 
 By July , Darwin had expanded his " sketch " into a 230 @-@ page " Essay " , to be expanded with his research results if he died prematurely . In November , the anonymously published sensational best @-@ seller Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation brought wide interest in transmutation . Darwin scorned its amateurish geology and zoology , but carefully reviewed his own arguments . Controversy erupted , and it continued to sell well despite contemptuous dismissal by scientists . 
 Darwin completed his third geological book in 1846 . He now renewed a fascination and expertise in marine invertebrates , dating back to his student days with Grant , by dissecting and classifying the barnacles he had collected on the voyage , enjoying observing beautiful structures and thinking about comparisons with allied structures . In 1847 , Hooker read the " Essay " and sent notes that provided Darwin with the calm critical feedback that he needed , but would not commit himself and questioned Darwin 's opposition to continuing acts of creation . 
 In an attempt to improve his chronic ill health , Darwin went in 1849 to Dr. James Gully 's Malvern spa and was surprised to find some benefit from hydrotherapy . Then , in 1851 , his treasured daughter Annie fell ill , reawakening his fears that his illness might be hereditary , and after a long series of crises she died . 
 In eight years of work on barnacles ( <unk> ) , Darwin 's theory helped him to find " homologies " showing that slightly changed body parts served different functions to meet new conditions , and in some genera he found minute males parasitic on hermaphrodites , showing an intermediate stage in evolution of distinct sexes . In 1853 , it earned him the Royal Society 's Royal Medal , and it made his reputation as a biologist . In 1854 he became a Fellow of the Linnean Society of London , gaining postal access to its library . He began a major reassessment of his theory of species , and in November realised that divergence in the character of descendants could be explained by them becoming adapted to " diversified places in the economy of nature " . 
 = = = Publication of the theory of natural selection = = = 
 By the start of 1856 , Darwin was investigating whether eggs and seeds could survive travel across seawater to spread species across oceans . Hooker increasingly doubted the traditional view that species were fixed , but their young friend Thomas Henry Huxley was firmly against the transmutation of species . Lyell was intrigued by Darwin 's speculations without realising their extent . When he read a paper by Alfred Russel Wallace , " On the Law which has Regulated the Introduction of New Species " , he saw similarities with Darwin 's thoughts and urged him to publish to establish precedence . Though Darwin saw no threat , on 14 May 1856 he began writing a short paper . Finding answers to difficult questions held him up repeatedly , and he expanded his plans to a " big book on species " titled Natural Selection , which was to include his " note on Man " . He continued his researches , obtaining information and specimens from naturalists worldwide including Wallace who was working in Borneo . In mid @-@ 1857 he added a chapter heading ; " Theory applied to Races of Man " , but then left out this topic . On 5 September 1857 , Darwin sent the American botanist Asa Gray a detailed outline of his ideas , including an abstract of Natural Selection , which omitted human origins and sexual selection . In December , Darwin received a letter from Wallace asking if the book would examine human origins . He responded that he would avoid that subject , " so surrounded with prejudices " , while encouraging Wallace 's theorising and adding that " I go much further than you . " 
 Darwin 's book was only partly written when , on 18 June 1858 , he received a paper from Wallace describing natural selection . Shocked that he had been " forestalled " , Darwin sent it on that day to Lyell , as requested by Wallace , and although Wallace had not asked for publication , Darwin suggested he would send it to any journal that Wallace chose . His family was in crisis with children in the village dying of scarlet fever , and he put matters in the hands of his friends . After some discussion , Lyell and Hooker decided on a joint presentation at the Linnean Society on 1 July of On the Tendency of Species to form Varieties ; and on the Perpetuation of Varieties and Species by Natural Means of Selection . On the evening of 28 June , Darwin 's baby son died of scarlet fever after almost a week of severe illness , and he was too distraught to attend . 
 There was little immediate attention to this announcement of the theory ; the president of the Linnean Society remarked in May 1859 that the year had not been marked by any revolutionary discoveries . Only one review rankled enough for Darwin to recall it later ; Professor Samuel Haughton of Dublin claimed that " all that was new in them was false , and what was true was old " . Darwin struggled for thirteen months to produce an abstract of his " big book " , suffering from ill health but getting constant encouragement from his scientific friends . Lyell arranged to have it published by John Murray . 
 On the Origin of Species proved unexpectedly popular , with the entire stock of 1 @,@ 250 copies oversubscribed when it went on sale to booksellers on 22 November 1859 . In the book , Darwin set out " one long argument " of detailed observations , inferences and consideration of anticipated objections . In making the case for common descent , he included evidence of homologies between humans and other mammals . Having outlined sexual selection , he hinted that it could explain differences between human races . He avoided explicit discussion of human origins , but implied the significance of his work with the sentence ; " Light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history . " His theory is simply stated in the introduction : 
 As many more individuals of each species are born than can possibly survive ; and as , consequently , there is a frequently recurring struggle for existence , it follows that any being , if it vary however slightly in any manner profitable to itself , under the complex and sometimes varying conditions of life , will have a better chance of surviving , and thus be naturally selected . From the strong principle of inheritance , any selected variety will tend to propagate its new and modified form . 
 At the end of the book he concluded that : 
 There is grandeur in this view of life , with its several powers , having been originally breathed into a few forms or into one ; and that , whilst this planet has gone cycling on according to the fixed law of gravity , from so simple a beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been , and are being , evolved . 
 The last word was the only variant of " evolved " in the first five editions of the book . " <unk> " at that time was associated with other concepts , most commonly with embryological development , and Darwin first used the word evolution in The Descent of Man in 1871 , before adding it in 1872 to the 6th edition of The Origin of Species . 
 = = = Responses to publication = = = 
 The book aroused international interest , with less controversy than had greeted the popular Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation . Though Darwin 's illness kept him away from the public debates , he eagerly scrutinised the scientific response , commenting on press cuttings , reviews , articles , satires and caricatures , and corresponded on it with colleagues worldwide . The book did not explicitly discuss human origins , but included a number of hints about the animal ancestry of humans from which the inference could be made . The first review asked , " If a monkey has become a man – what may not a man become ? " and said it should be left to theologians as it was too dangerous for ordinary readers . Amongst early favourable responses , Huxley 's reviews swiped at Richard Owen , leader of the scientific establishment Huxley was trying to overthrow . In April , Owen 's review attacked Darwin 's friends and condescendingly dismissed his ideas , angering Darwin , but Owen and others began to promote ideas of supernaturally guided evolution . Patrick Matthew drew attention to his 1831 book which had a brief appendix suggesting a concept of natural selection leading to new species , but he had not developed the idea . 
 The Church of England 's response was mixed . Darwin 's old Cambridge tutors Sedgwick and Henslow dismissed the ideas , but liberal clergymen interpreted natural selection as an instrument of God 's design , with the cleric Charles Kingsley seeing it as " just as noble a conception of Deity " . In 1860 , the publication of Essays and Reviews by seven liberal Anglican theologians diverted clerical attention from Darwin , with its ideas including higher criticism attacked by church authorities as heresy . In it , Baden Powell argued that miracles broke God 's laws , so belief in them was atheistic , and praised " Mr Darwin 's masterly volume [ supporting ] the grand principle of the self @-@ evolving powers of nature " . Asa Gray discussed teleology with Darwin , who imported and distributed Gray 's pamphlet on theistic evolution , Natural Selection is not inconsistent with natural theology . The most famous confrontation was at the public 1860 Oxford evolution debate during a meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science , where the Bishop of Oxford Samuel Wilberforce , though not opposed to transmutation of species , argued against Darwin 's explanation and human descent from apes . Joseph Hooker argued strongly for Darwin , and Thomas Huxley 's legendary retort , that he would rather be descended from an ape than a man who misused his gifts , came to symbolise a triumph of science over religion . 
 Even Darwin 's close friends Gray , Hooker , Huxley and Lyell still expressed various reservations but gave strong support , as did many others , particularly younger naturalists . Gray and Lyell sought reconciliation with faith , while Huxley portrayed a polarisation between religion and science . He campaigned <unk> against the authority of the clergy in education , aiming to overturn the dominance of clergymen and aristocratic amateurs under Owen in favour of a new generation of professional scientists . Owen 's claim that brain anatomy proved humans to be a separate biological order from apes was shown to be false by Huxley in a long running dispute parodied by Kingsley as the " Great Hippocampus Question " , and discredited Owen . 
 Darwinism became a movement covering a wide range of evolutionary ideas . In 1863 Lyell 's Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man popularised prehistory , though his caution on evolution disappointed Darwin . Weeks later Huxley 's Evidence as to Man 's Place in Nature showed that anatomically , humans are apes , then The Naturalist on the River Amazons by Henry Walter Bates provided empirical evidence of natural selection . Lobbying brought Darwin Britain 's highest scientific honour , the Royal Society 's Copley Medal , awarded on 3 November 1864 . That day , Huxley held the first meeting of what became the influential " X Club " devoted to " science , pure and free , untrammelled by religious dogmas " . By the end of the decade most scientists agreed that evolution occurred , but only a minority supported Darwin 's view that the chief mechanism was natural selection . 
 The Origin of Species was translated into many languages , becoming a staple scientific text attracting thoughtful attention from all walks of life , including the " working men " who flocked to Huxley 's lectures . Darwin 's theory also resonated with various movements at the time and became a key fixture of popular culture . Cartoonists parodied animal ancestry in an old tradition of showing humans with animal traits , and in Britain these droll images served to popularise Darwin 's theory in an unthreatening way . While ill in 1862 Darwin began growing a beard , and when he reappeared in public in 1866 caricatures of him as an ape helped to identify all forms of evolutionism with Darwinism . 
 = = = Descent of Man , sexual selection , and botany = = = 
 Despite repeated bouts of illness during the last twenty @-@ two years of his life , Darwin 's work continued . Having published On the Origin of Species as an abstract of his theory , he pressed on with experiments , research , and writing of his " big book " . He covered human descent from earlier animals including evolution of society and of mental abilities , as well as explaining decorative beauty in wildlife and diversifying into innovative plant studies . 
 Enquiries about insect pollination led in 1861 to novel studies of wild orchids , showing adaptation of their flowers to attract specific moths to each species and ensure cross fertilisation . In 1862 Fertilisation of Orchids gave his first detailed demonstration of the power of natural selection to explain complex ecological relationships , making testable predictions . As his health declined , he lay on his sickbed in a room filled with inventive experiments to trace the movements of climbing plants . Admiring visitors included Ernst Haeckel , a zealous proponent of <unk> incorporating Lamarckism and Goethe 's idealism . Wallace remained supportive , though he increasingly turned to Spiritualism . 
 The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication of 1868 was the first part of Darwin 's planned " big book " , and included his unsuccessful hypothesis of pangenesis attempting to explain heredity . It sold briskly at first , despite its size , and was translated into many languages . He wrote most of a second part , on natural selection , but it remained unpublished in his lifetime . 
 Lyell had already popularised human prehistory , and Huxley had shown that anatomically humans are apes . With The Descent of Man , and Selection in Relation to Sex published in 1871 , Darwin set out evidence from numerous sources that humans are animals , showing continuity of physical and mental attributes , and presented sexual selection to explain impractical animal features such as the peacock 's plumage as well as human evolution of culture , differences between sexes , and physical and cultural racial characteristics , while emphasising that humans are all one species . His research using images was expanded in his 1872 book The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals , one of the first books to feature printed photographs , which discussed the evolution of human psychology and its continuity with the behaviour of animals . Both books proved very popular , and Darwin was impressed by the general assent with which his views had been received , remarking that " everybody is talking about it without being shocked . " His conclusion was " that man with all his noble qualities , with sympathy which feels for the most debased , with benevolence which extends not only to other men but to the humblest living creature , with his god @-@ like intellect which has penetrated into the movements and constitution of the solar system – with all these exalted powers – Man still bears in his bodily frame the indelible stamp of his lowly origin . " 
 His evolution @-@ related experiments and investigations led to books on Orchids , <unk> Plants , The Effects of Cross and Self Fertilisation in the Vegetable Kingdom , different forms of flowers on plants of the same species , and The Power of Movement in Plants . His botanical work was interpreted and popularised by various writers including Grant Allen and H. G. Wells , and helped transform plant science in the late C19 and early <unk> . In his last book he returned to The Formation of Vegetable Mould through the Action of Worms . 
 = = = Death and funeral = = = 
 In 1882 he was diagnosed with what was called " angina pectoris " which then meant coronary thrombosis and disease of the heart . At the time of his death , the physicians diagnosed " <unk> attacks " , and " heart @-@ failure " . 
 He died at Down House on 19 April 1882 . His last words were to his family , telling Emma " I am not the least afraid of death – Remember what a good wife you have been to me – Tell all my children to remember how good they have been to me " , then while she rested , he repeatedly told Henrietta and Francis " It 's almost worth while to be sick to be nursed by you " . He had expected to be buried in St Mary 's churchyard at Downe , but at the request of Darwin 's colleagues , after public and parliamentary petitioning , William Spottiswoode ( President of the Royal Society ) arranged for Darwin to be honoured by burial in Westminster Abbey , close to John Herschel and Isaac Newton . The funeral was held on Wednesday 26 April and was attended by thousands of people , including family , friends , scientists , philosophers and dignitaries . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Darwin had convinced most scientists that evolution as descent with modification was correct , and he was regarded as a great scientist who had revolutionised ideas . Though few agreed with his view that " natural selection has been the main but not the exclusive means of modification " , he was honoured in June 1909 by more than 400 officials and scientists from across the world who met in Cambridge to commemorate his centenary and the fiftieth anniversary of On the Origin of Species . During this period , which has been called " the eclipse of Darwinism " , scientists proposed various alternative evolutionary mechanisms which eventually proved untenable . Ronald Fisher , an English statistician finally united Mendelian genetics with natural selection between 1918 and his 1930 book The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection , giving the theory a mathematical footing and bringing broad scientific consensus that it was the basic mechanism of evolution , founding the basis for population genetics and the modern evolutionary synthesis , with J.B.S. Haldane and Sewall Wright , which set the frame of reference for modern debates and refinements of the theory . 
 = = = Commemoration = = = 
 During Darwin 's lifetime , many geographical features were given his name . An expanse of water adjoining the Beagle Channel was named Darwin Sound by Robert FitzRoy after Darwin 's prompt action , along with two or three of the men , saved them from being marooned on a nearby shore when a collapsing glacier caused a large wave that would have swept away their boats , and the nearby Mount Darwin in the Andes was named in celebration of Darwin 's 25th birthday . When the Beagle was surveying Australia in 1839 , Darwin 's friend John Lort Stokes sighted a natural harbour which the ship 's captain Wickham named Port Darwin : a nearby settlement was renamed Darwin in 1911 , and it became the capital city of Australia 's Northern Territory . 
 More than 120 species and nine genera have been named after Darwin . In one example , the group of tanagers related to those Darwin found in the Galápagos Islands became popularly known as " Darwin 's finches " in 1947 , fostering inaccurate legends about their significance to his work . 
 Darwin 's work has continued to be celebrated by numerous publications and events . The Linnean Society of London has commemorated Darwin 's achievements by the award of the Darwin – Wallace Medal since 1908 . Darwin Day has become an annual celebration , and in 2009 worldwide events were arranged for the bicentenary of Darwin 's birth and the 150th anniversary of the publication of On the Origin of Species . 
 Darwin has been commemorated in the UK , with his portrait printed on the reverse of £ 10 banknotes printed along with a hummingbird and HMS Beagle , issued by the Bank of England . 
 A life size seated statue of Darwin can be seen in the main hall of the Natural History Museum in London . 
 A seated statue of Darwin , unveiled 1897 , stands in front of Shrewsbury Library , the building that used to house Shrewsbury School , which Darwin attended as a boy . Another statue of Darwin as a young man is situated in the grounds of Christ 's College , Cambridge . 
 Darwin College , a postgraduate college at Cambridge University , is named after the Darwin family . 
 = = Children = = 
 The Darwins had ten children : two died in infancy , and Annie 's death at the age of ten had a devastating effect on her parents . Charles was a devoted father and uncommonly attentive to his children . Whenever they fell ill , he feared that they might have inherited weaknesses from inbreeding due to the close family ties he shared with his wife and cousin , Emma Wedgwood . He examined this topic in his writings , contrasting it with the advantages of crossing amongst many organisms . Despite his fears , most of the surviving children and many of their descendants went on to have distinguished careers ( see Darwin @-@ Wedgwood family ) . 
 Of his surviving children , George , Francis and Horace became Fellows of the Royal Society , distinguished as astronomer , botanist and civil engineer , respectively . All three were knighted . Another son , Leonard , went on to be a soldier , politician , economist , eugenicist and mentor of the statistician and evolutionary biologist Ronald Fisher . 
 = = Views and opinions = = 
 = = = Religious views = = = 
 Darwin 's family tradition was nonconformist Unitarianism , while his father and grandfather were freethinkers , and his baptism and boarding school were Church of England . When going to Cambridge to become an Anglican clergyman , he did not doubt the literal truth of the Bible . He learned John Herschel 's science which , like William Paley 's natural theology , sought explanations in laws of nature rather than miracles and saw adaptation of species as evidence of design . On board the Beagle , Darwin was quite orthodox and would quote the Bible as an authority on morality . He looked for " centres of creation " to explain distribution , and related the antlion found near kangaroos to distinct " periods of Creation " . 
 By his return , he was critical of the Bible as history , and wondered why all religions should not be equally valid . In the next few years , while intensively speculating on geology and the transmutation of species , he gave much thought to religion and openly discussed this with his wife Emma , whose beliefs also came from intensive study and questioning . The theodicy of Paley and Thomas Malthus vindicated evils such as starvation as a result of a benevolent creator 's laws , which had an overall good effect . To Darwin , natural selection produced the good of adaptation but removed the need for design , and he could not see the work of an omnipotent deity in all the pain and suffering , such as the ichneumon wasp paralysing caterpillars as live food for its eggs . He still viewed organisms as perfectly adapted , and On the Origin of Species reflects theological views . Though he thought of religion as a tribal survival strategy , Darwin was reluctant to give up the idea of God as an ultimate lawgiver . He was increasingly troubled by the problem of evil . 
 Darwin remained close friends with the vicar of Downe , John Brodie Innes , and continued to play a leading part in the parish work of the church , but from around 1849 would go for a walk on Sundays while his family attended church . He considered it " absurd to doubt that a man might be an ardent theist and an evolutionist " and , though reticent about his religious views , in 1879 he wrote that " I have never been an atheist in the sense of denying the existence of a God . – I think that generally ... an agnostic would be the most correct description of my state of mind " . 
 The " Lady Hope Story " , published in 1915 , claimed that Darwin had reverted to Christianity on his sickbed . The claims were repudiated by Darwin 's children and have been dismissed as false by historians . 
 = = = Human society = = = 
 Darwin 's views on social and political issues reflected his time and social position . He grew up in a family of Whig reformers who , like his uncle Josiah Wedgwood , supported electoral reform and the emancipation of slaves . Darwin was passionately opposed to slavery , while seeing no problem with the working conditions of English factory workers or servants . His taxidermy lessons in 1826 from the freed slave John Edmonstone , who he long recalled as " a very pleasant and intelligent man " , reinforced his belief that black people shared the same feelings , and could be as intelligent as people of other races . He took the same attitude to native people he met on the Beagle voyage . These attitudes were not unusual in Britain in the 1820s , much as it shocked visiting Americans . British society became more racist in mid century , but Darwin remained strongly against slavery , against " ranking the so @-@ called races of man as distinct species " , and against ill @-@ treatment of native people . He valued European civilisation and saw colonisation as spreading its benefits , with the sad but inevitable effect that savage peoples who did not become civilised faced extinction . Darwin 's theories presented this as natural , and were cited to promote policies that went against his humanitarian principles . 
 He thought men 's eminence over women was the outcome of sexual selection , a view disputed by Antoinette Brown Blackwell in The Sexes Throughout Nature . 
 Darwin was intrigued by his half @-@ cousin Francis Galton 's argument , introduced in 1865 , that statistical analysis of heredity showed that moral and mental human traits could be inherited , and principles of animal breeding could apply to humans . In The Descent of Man , Darwin noted that aiding the weak to survive and have families could lose the benefits of natural selection , but cautioned that withholding such aid would endanger the instinct of sympathy , " the noblest part of our nature " , and factors such as education could be more important . When Galton suggested that publishing research could encourage intermarriage within a " caste " of " those who are naturally gifted " , Darwin foresaw practical difficulties , and thought it " the sole feasible , yet I fear utopian , plan of procedure in improving the human race " , preferring to simply publicise the importance of inheritance and leave decisions to individuals . Francis Galton named this field of study " eugenics " in 1883 . 
 = = Evolutionary social movements = = 
 Darwin 's fame and popularity led to his name being associated with ideas and movements that , at times , had only an indirect relation to his writings , and sometimes went directly against his express comments . 
 Thomas Malthus had argued that population growth beyond resources was ordained by God to get humans to work productively and show restraint in getting families , this was used in the 1830s to justify workhouses and laissez @-@ faire economics . Evolution was by then seen as having social implications , and Herbert Spencer 's 1851 book Social <unk> based ideas of human freedom and individual liberties on his Lamarckian evolutionary theory . 
 Soon after the Origin was published in 1859 , critics derided his description of a struggle for existence as a Malthusian justification for the English industrial capitalism of the time . The term Darwinism was used for the evolutionary ideas of others , including Spencer 's " survival of the fittest " as free @-@ market progress , and Ernst Haeckel 's racist ideas of human development . Writers used natural selection to argue for various , often contradictory , ideologies such as laissez @-@ faire dog @-@ eat dog capitalism , racism , warfare , colonialism and imperialism . However , Darwin 's holistic view of nature included " dependence of one being on another " ; thus pacifists , socialists , liberal social reformers and anarchists such as Peter Kropotkin stressed the value of co @-@ operation over struggle within a species . Darwin himself insisted that social policy should not simply be guided by concepts of struggle and selection in nature . 
 After the 1880s , a eugenics movement developed on ideas of biological inheritance , and for scientific justification of their ideas appealed to some concepts of Darwinism . In Britain , most shared Darwin 's cautious views on voluntary improvement and sought to encourage those with good traits in " positive eugenics " . During the " Eclipse of Darwinism " , a scientific foundation for eugenics was provided by Mendelian genetics . Negative eugenics to remove the " <unk> " were popular in America , Canada and Australia , and eugenics in the United States introduced compulsory sterilization laws , followed by several other countries . Subsequently , Nazi eugenics brought the field into disrepute . 
 The term " Social Darwinism " was used infrequently from around the 1890s , but became popular as a derogatory term in the 1940s when used by Richard Hofstadter to attack the laissez @-@ faire conservatism of those like William Graham Sumner who opposed reform and socialism . Since then , it has been used as a term of abuse by those opposed to what they think are the moral consequences of evolution . 
 = = Works = = 
 Darwin was a prolific writer . Even without publication of his works on evolution , he would have had a considerable reputation as the author of The Voyage of the Beagle , as a geologist who had published extensively on South America and had solved the puzzle of the formation of coral atolls , and as a biologist who had published the definitive work on barnacles . While On the Origin of Species dominates perceptions of his work , The Descent of Man and The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals had considerable impact , and his books on plants including The Power of Movement in Plants were innovative studies of great importance , as was his final work on The Formation of Vegetable Mould through the Action of Worms . 
 = Ohio State Route 257 = 
 State Route 257 ( SR 257 , OH 257 ) is a 26 @.@ 19 @-@ mile ( 42 @.@ 15 km ) north - south state highway in the central portion of the U.S. state of Ohio . The highway 's southern terminus is in the northwestern Columbus suburb of Dublin at a signalized intersection with U.S. Route 33 ( US 33 ) and SR 161 . This mainly two @-@ lane highway follows the eastern side of the Scioto River from Dublin to its junction with US 42 . After crossing over the river with the U.S. highway , SR 257 parallels the river 's western bank . SR 257 has its northern terminus at a T @-@ intersection with SR 47 on the western village limits of Prospect . SR 257 was created in 1926 , and extended in 1935 and 1937 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Along its way , SR 257 travels primarily north through northwestern Franklin County , western Delaware County and the extreme southern part of Marion County , following the Scioto River for most of the way . There are no segments of SR 257 that are included within the National Highway System ( NHS ) . The NHS is a network of highways identified as being most important for the economy , mobility and defense of the nation . 
 SR 257 starts at the intersection of US 33 / SR 161 . The route moves north intersecting with Emerald Parkway , which is currently being built eastward . SR 257 continues north to Hard Road , and the entrance to Thaddeus Kosciuszko Park ( about 200 yards up Hard Rd . ) After crossing the Franklin – Delaware county line , the next major junction is with SR 750 at the Columbus Zoo and Aquarium and the O 'Shaughnessy Dam . From here to US 42 the route follows the eastern bank of O 'Shaughnessy Reservoir . The next intersection is Seldom Seen Road . Two miles later , SR 257 meets Home Road at a traffic circle . Home Road provides access to SR 745 heading west and to Sawmill Parkway and Liberty Rd heading east . 
 SR 257 continues north to signaled intersection with US 42 and runs concurrently with US 42 for about 1 mile within Concord Township . The route travels southwest with US 42 across the Scioto River . At the signalized northern terminus of SR 745 the concurrency ends , as SR 257 turns north . SR 257 passes through the former communities of <unk> ( Concord Township ) and White Sulfur Springs Station ( Scioto Township ) on the way to intersecting with US 36 about 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) north of US 42 . Continuing north , SR 257 crosses SR 37 at a flashing red light . After nine miles , the route crosses into Marion County prior to ending at OH 47 in Prospect , crossing minor roads within Thompson Township in between . 
 = = History = = 
 The SR 257 designation was applied in 1926 . Originally , the highway was routed along its present southernmost alignment along the eastern banks of the Scioto River between Dublin and its northeastern junction with US 42 . 
 In 1935 , SR 257 was extended via a short concurrency with US 42 across the Scioto River , then north along its present alignment along the western side of the river to a new northern terminus at SR 37 west of Delaware . Then , two years after its first northward extension , SR 257 was extended to the north again , this time to its present northern terminus at SR 47 in Prospect . 
 SR 257 was designated the General Thaddeus Kosciusko Memorial Highway in December 1975 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = The Sea of Monsters = 
 The Sea of Monsters is a fantasy @-@ adventure novel based on Greek mythology written by Rick Riordan published in 2006 . It is the second novel in the Percy Jackson & the Olympians series and the sequel to The Lightning Thief . This book chronicles the adventures of thirteen @-@ year @-@ old demigod Percy Jackson as he and his friends rescue his satyr friend Grover from the Cyclops Polyphemus and save the camp from a Titan 's attack by bringing the Golden Fleece to cure Thalia 's poisoned pine tree . 
 The Sea of Monsters was released on April 1 , 2006 , by Miramax Books , an imprint of Hyperion Books for Children and thus Disney Publishing ( succeeded by the Disney Hyperion imprint ) . It was generally well – received and was nominated for numerous awards , including the 2006 Book Sense Top Ten Summer Pick and the 2009 Mark Twain Award . It sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies in paperback with over one million copies total and was released in audiobook format on September 6 , 2006 . The Sea of Monsters is followed by The Titan 's Curse , the third book of the five in the series . 
 A film adaptation of the book , Percy Jackson : Sea of Monsters , was released on August 7 , 2013 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Percy Jackson has been having nightmares about Grover , the first involving him running from an unseen force and taking refuge in a wedding dress shop . At school , a group of <unk> attack Percy and his classmates in a fiery game of dodge @-@ ball , but he is saved by his half @-@ brother Tyson ( a young Cyclops ) . Annabeth takes Percy and Tyson to Camp Half @-@ Blood by the taxi of the Gray Sisters , but they arrive to find the camp under attack by two bronze Colchis bulls which Tyson defeats . Thalia 's tree has been poisoned , leaving the camp vulnerable to enemy attacks and Chiron is suspected of poisoning it ( largely because of his family connection to the titan Kronos ) . 
 Percy tells Annabeth about his dreams , and she deduces that Grover has found the Golden Fleece , which can cure Thalia 's poisoned tree . After the campers are attacked at a chariot race by <unk> birds , Tantalus ( who was replacing Chiron as camp counsellor ) sends Clarisse on a quest to find the Golden Fleece , as Percy , Annabeth , and Tyson run away from camp in order to try to find Grover . Hermes gives them gifts to help them on their quest and tells them to call on some <unk> , who carry them to a passing cruise ship , the Princess Andromeda . Once aboard , they discover that the ship appears to be deserted , but find fully stocked cabins to sleep in . In the morning , they wake to find the ship full of tourists , but also populated with monsters . They are captured by Luke Castellan , whom the ship belongs to , transporting an army of monsters . Luke sends them to be fed to a <unk> in the hold , but they escape on a lifeboat and eventually find land , a marshy swamp area . They find one of many hideouts that Luke , Thalia , and Annabeth built . Percy and Annabeth talk about Luke briefly while Tyson looks for powdered doughnuts , but he soon returns , with an actual box of doughnuts . They find a doughnut shop ( Monster Donut ) , but a hydra appears , having tracked them . After a brief fight , it is about to kill them , when they are saved by Clarisse , who is sailing on a confederate battleship called the CSS Birmingham . 
 En route to the Sea of Monsters , the CSS Birmingham is destroyed by the monster Charybdis and then attacked by Scylla . Presuming Tyson and Clarisse are dead , Percy and Annabeth escape to a nearby island , where they find " CC 's Spa and Resort " . CC has an assistant give Annabeth a tour of the resort , saying that Percy needs a full makeover . She shows Percy the best version of himself with magic , and gives him a magical drink . However , when he drinks it , he is turned into a guinea pig and CC puts him into a cage with six ' mean looking ' others . When Annabeth returns , the spa resort 's owner is revealed to be the sorceress Circe , who turns men into guinea pigs and put them in a cage . Annabeth asks for a moment alone with Percy , and then uses Hermes ' anti @-@ magic vitamins to protect herself from Circe 's magic , and turn Percy and the others , who are revealed to be the crew of the notorious pirate Blackbeard ( the demigod son of Ares ) , back to normal . Percy and Annabeth then manage to escape Circe 's island by stealing Blackbeard 's ship , the Queen Anne 's Revenge . 
 Percy and Annabeth reach Polyphemus ' island , where they are reunited with Tyson and Clarisse , who survived the shipwreck . They rescue Grover and find the Golden Fleece , and are returned to the mainland by <unk> . Clarisse returns to Camp Half @-@ Blood with the Fleece by plane . Percy and company are captured by Luke and taken to the Princess Andromeda . Percy manages to contact Camp Half @-@ Blood through an Iris Message and tricks Luke into admitting that he poisoned Thalia 's tree , proving Chiron 's innocence in front of the entire camp . Luke duels Percy , beats him , and is about to kill them , but before he does , Chiron and the Party Ponies , a large group of centaurs armed with modern weapons such as paint @-@ ball guns appears , and rescues them . 
 Returning to the camp , Chiron is given his job back and the Golden Fleece heals Thalia 's tree . However , the Golden Fleece revives Thalia Grace , who is pushed out of the tree . 
 = = = Prophecy = = = 
 The prophecy given by the oracle to Clarisse reads : 
 = = = Meaning = = = 
 1 . Clarisse 's father , Ares gave her a steamship crewed with undead Confederate sailors 
 2 . She does find and retrieves the Fleece 
 3 . Clarisse was trapped in Polyphemus 's cave with Grover 
 4 . Annabeth , Percy , and Tyson help Clarisse escape Polyphemus and get on a plane to Camp Half @-@ Blood with the Fleece 
 = = Major characters = = 
 Percy Jackson : The son of Poseidon ; a 13 @-@ year @-@ old demigod who travels to the island of Polyphemus in the Bermuda Triangle to find Grover and recover the Golden Fleece . He is accompanied by Annabeth and Tyson , his half @-@ brother , on the quest . He is successful in the end ; and gives Clarisse the Fleece while he is attacked by Luke on his way to the Camp . However , he and his friends are rescued by Chiron and the Party Ponies . 
 Annabeth Chase : The daughter of Athena . A demigod who is 13 years old and a friend of Percy . She accompanies him to the island and helps him in his quest by rescuing Percy from Circe 's island . Annabeth is injured by Polyphemus and recovers with the help of the Golden Fleece . She accompanies Percy to Camp after Chiron succeeds in rescuing them from the hands of Luke and the Titan army . 
 Grover Underwood : The guard for Percy given by the gods , a satyr who has been captured by Polyphemus during his search for the wild god Pan . Due to his poor eyesight , Polyphemus mistakes Grover for a female Cyclops . He is rescued by his friends Percy and Annabeth . 
 Clarisse La Rue : Daughter of Ares who was given the quest of retrieving the Golden Fleece . With the help of Percy and his friends , she is successful in her quest . Percy gives her the Fleece that she takes to Camp Half Blood . Polyphemus wishes to wed her after it is revealed to him that Grover is a male satyr . 
 Luke Castellan : The main antagonist , now 20 ; he works for Kronos . He captures Percy and the rest before being thwarted by Chiron and his brethren , the Party Ponies . 
 Tyson the Cyclops : Percy 's half brother ; he is initially portrayed as a homeless child before Annabeth helps Percy realize that he is a Cyclops . He accompanies Percy and Annabeth in their quest and befriends a hippocampus whom he names Rainbow . He is very big and has one brown eye . When Clarisse 's ship explodes , he is presumed dead until it is learned that he survived due to his immunity to fire . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The Sea of Monsters received generally positive reviews with reviewers praising the storyline , the themes and the author 's style of writing . " In a feat worthy of his heroic subjects , Riordan crafts a sequel stronger than his compelling debut , " said a Publishers Weekly review . School Library Journal singled out the novel 's plot and main character , stating , " Percy is an appealing kid , and the subject of a chilling prophecy may resonate with readers . " Child magazine wrote , " Featuring the cliff @-@ hangers and sassy attitude kids loved in The Lightning Thief – plus a surprising new family secret – this outstanding sequel should win over a fresh legion of fans . " Children 's Literature called the writing extraordinary and added , " This book , sequel to The Lightning Thief , is an amazing mixture of mythology and young adult fiction . " Matt Berman , of Common Sense Media , praised the book , saying " The Percy Jackson series continues to be pure fun , with the author doing nearly everything right to produce a book that few kids will be able to resist . " Norah <unk> of <unk> lauded the style of the book , and noted similarities with its prequel . It sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies in hardcover by the time paperback copies were released in April 2007 . 
 However , Kirkus was critical of the book , writing , " it 's doubtful Percy wouldn 't guess Tyson 's otherworldly connection immediately after the dodgeball game ... some of the humor will zip over the heads of the target audience " although they added , " Percy 's sardonic narration and derring @-@ do would keep the pages turning . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 2006 Book Sense Top Ten Summer Pick 
 2006 Child magazine Best Book 
 2006 Kirkus Reviews Best Fantasy Sequel 
 2006 Barnes & Noble Best of 2006 for Kids & Teens 
 2006 Voice of Youth Advocates ( VOYA ) Top Shelf Fiction Pick for Middle School Readers 
 2007 Cooperative Children 's Book Center choice 
 2007 Young Adult Library Services Association ( YALSA ) Best Book for Young Adults 
 2009 Mark Twain Award ( Riordan 's The Lightning Thief won the previous year ) 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Audiobook = = = 
 On September 6 , 2006 , a seven @-@ hour and 54 minute audiobook version of The Sea of Monsters , read by actor Jesse Bernstein , who also narrated The Lightning Thief 's audiobook , was published worldwide by Listening Library . 
 AudioFile magazine praised the audio book , raving , " This action @-@ packed book ( second in a series ) will delight fans of Percy Jackson , the half @-@ blood son of Poseidon , as Percy once again battles mythical monsters in modern @-@ day settings while on his mission to save the tree that guards Camp Half @-@ Blood . " They praised Bernstein , saying " Narrator Jesse Berns helps listeners slip right into the oddly engaging world that Riordan creates , in which contemporary teen characters and those from classical mythology intermingle " and that he could successfully portray teenagers , while keeping the pace fast allowing listeners time to revel in the book 's humor . Auditions have already been cast for this yet to be blockbuster . There may still be a few spaces for extras , though . The magazine Publishers Weekly raved about Bernstein 's " snappy delivery and all the right funny touches " that made the " action @-@ packed fantasy such fun . " 
 = = = Film adaptation = = = 
 Following the box office and DVD success of the movie , Percy Jackson & the Olympians : The Lightning Thief , a film adaptation of The Sea of Monsters was first reported in early 2011 . In fall 2011 , it was confirmed that 20th Century Fox would release the film on March 27 , 2013 . Filming began in April 2012 . In February 2012 , Mary Birdsong , Missi Pyle and Yvette Nicole Brown were cast as the Gray Sisters . In March 2012 , Nathan Fillion joined the cast as Hermes and Anthony Head , replacing Pierce Brosnan , as Chiron . In April 2012 , Paloma Kwiatkowski was cast as Thalia and The Hunger Games star Leven Rambin has been cast as Clarisse La Rue . It was announced on May 8 , 2012 that the film had moved up to March 15 , 2013 . But later it was postponed for an August 16 , 2013 release . Fox decided on a final release date for August 7 , 2013 . Logan Lerman returned as Percy Jackson in the movie . Jake Abel also returned to the role of Luke Castellan . On January 2012 The Secret Circle star Grey Damon was cast as Chris Rodriguez . According to Alexandra Daddario , the film would be more similar to the book than the first film . 
 = = = Graphic novel = = = 
 It has been published as a graphic novel . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 The novel was followed by The Titan 's Curse , released on May 1 , 2007 . In The Titan 's Curse , Percy , Grover , Annabeth and Thalia go to a school to recruit two powerful demigods . Like its predecessors , this book was well received and reviewers praised its humorous style and the plot of the story . 
 = Cliché ( Hush Hush ) ( song ) = 
 " Cliché ( Hush Hush ) " is a song recorded by Romanian recording artist Alexandra Stan for her Japan @-@ only reissue of the same name ( 2013 ) . Written and produced by Marcel Prodan and Andrei Nemirschi , it was released for digital download on 3 October 2012 through MediaPro . Described as a dance @-@ pop track that features eurodance elements into its sound , " Cliché ( Hush Hush ) " discusses different themes of love . An accompanying music video for the single was posted onto YouTube on 27 September 2012 , being filmed by Iulian Moga at Palatul Snagov . It was generally praised by music critics , with Los 40 Principales citing it under their list of Stan 's best clips . Particularly , a scene of the video was compared to vampire movies for teenagers , while another one to 1970s film works . The track peaked at number 11 in Japan and within the top 50 in her native country and Italy ; it was promoted by several live performances , including a tour throughout the United States and an appearance at French music event <unk> 2012 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 According to Romanian sources , " Cliché ( Hush Hush ) " is a " dynamic " dance @-@ pop track that incorporates influences of eurodance into its sound ; its lyrics speak about love . About the message of the song , Stan confessed that it " shows love in different ways and portrays as well relationships between obvious couples , which fall into a certain pattern . Love can transform everyone and everything in the most wonderful and important thing in the universe " . Alvaro from Spanish music website <unk> pointed out major differences between the dance style of the track and that of its predecessor , " <unk> " ( 2012 ) , while Mia , writing for Romanian portal Info Music , drew comparisons with the Pussycat Dolls ' single " Hush Hush ; Hush Hush " ( 2009 ) . 
 = = Music video = = 
 An accompanying music video for the song was uploaded onto the YouTube channel of Stan 's label , Maan Studio , on 27 September 2012 , after teasing it on 19 September . The clip was filmed by Iulian Moga at Palatul Snagov It commences with Stan entering a party hall in sepia while being pictured by a photographer . Following her flirting with the man , she leaves the room and the video introduces to pool @-@ party in normal color , where Stan dances along with fellow background dancers sporting a pink outfit . Next , the singer is shown in a dark hall , sitting on an old @-@ fashioned couch . Following this , Stan is portrayed in a church , with her body and face being covered by a red robe ; fellow black @-@ clothed people surround her . Subsequently , scenes with the singer and her love interest from a hotel room are shown , after which the clip ends with the people from the church scene getting out of disguise and running through the hall in white lingerie , followed by Stan dancing around a fire after letting candles falling down at a date with her boyfriend . 
 Alexandra Necula , writing for music website Info Music , compared the opening scene of the video to 1970s films , while stating that some parts of the clip did not match with the song 's message . She went on to compare the church scene to vampire films for teenagers ; Necula stated that one of the outfits sported by Stan were inspired by S & M fetish . <unk> felt that the " 80s vibe of the video coincided with the melodic line " . Los 40 Principales cited the video as one of Stan 's best clips ever . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In order to promote " Cliché ( Hush Hush ) " , Stan embarked on a tour in the United States . She also provided live performances of the song throughout her concert tours that promoted the Japan @-@ only reissue . Furthermore , Stan sang the song in a medley with " Mr. Saxobeat " , " Get Back ( ASAP ) " and " Lemonade " at French event <unk> 2012 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Cliché ( Hush Hush ) and The Collection . 
 Alexandra Stan – lead vocals 
 Iulian Moga – director 
 Andrei Nemirschi – songwriter , producer , photography 
 Maan Studio – recording studio 
 Marcel Prodan – songwriter , producer 
 <unk> Drago – artists and repertoire 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Andriamanelo = 
 Andriamanelo ( 1540 – 1575 ) was King of Alasora in the central highlands region of Madagascar . He is generally considered by historians to be the founder of the Kingdom of Imerina and originator of the Merina royal line that , by the 19th century , had extended its rule over virtually all of Madagascar . The son of a Vazimba mother and a man of the newly arrived Hova people originating in southeast Madagascar , Andriamanelo ultimately led a series of military campaigns against the Vazimba , beginning a several @-@ decade process to drive them from the Highlands . The conflict that defined his reign also produced many lasting innovations , including the development of fortified villages in the highlands and the use of iron weapons . Oral tradition furthermore credits Andriamanelo with establishing a ruling class of nobles ( andriana ) and defining the rules of succession . Numerous cultural traditions , including the ritual of circumcision , the wedding custom of vodiondry and the art of Malagasy astrology ( sikidy ) are likewise associated with this king . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Andriamanelo was the oldest son of the reigning Vazimba queen ( alternately given in the oral histories as Rafohy or Rangita ) and her Hova husband <unk> , who may have had origins in the Zafiraminia people of Anosy . At the time of the marriage between Rafohy and <unk> , the Hova were a minority clan who had recently moved into the Vazimba @-@ dominated highlands from their ancestral homeland in the southeast . The marriage produced two sons , Andriamanelo and his younger brother Andriamananitany , as well as a sister named Rafotsindrindramanjaka . In a bid to counteract further fracturing of their kingdom , Rafohy and Rangita decided that while the Vazimba had historically been ruled by queens , Andriamanelo would inherit the crown upon his mother 's death and would be succeeded not by his own child but by his younger brother . This system of succession , ordered by the queens to be followed for all time , was called <unk> <unk> ( " organized government " ) and applied to families as well : in any instance where there was an elder child and a younger one , the parents would designate an elder child to assume authority within the family upon their death , and that authority would be handed to the designated younger child in the event of the death of the elder child . The queen gave the village of Alasora to Andriamanelo to rule as his territory while she still lived , while Andriamananitany was given the village of <unk> . 
 = = Reign = = 
 Among the distinguishing features of Andriamanelo 's reign was the expansion of his territory around the sacred hill of Alasora through a military campaign against the Vazimba to push these legendary , primitive first settlers of Madagascar toward the west of the island . After Andriamanelo had successfully expanded his kingdom to include Alasora to the south and <unk> to the north , the continued presence of a Vazimba stronghold at Analamanga ( located between the two halves of his realm and effectively separating them ) posed too great a threat to the unity of his kingdom to allow the situation to stand . He resolved to capture Analamanga and drive the Vazimba from his territory , an ambition partially realized during his reign . Popular legend attributes Andriamanelo 's military successes to several innovations , including the discovery of iron smelting and propagation of the iron @-@ tipped spear against the Vazimba who fought with weapons of clay . He also fortified his capital at Alasora by creating hadivory ( dry moats ) , <unk> ( defensive trenches ) and vavahady ( town gates protected by a large rolled stone disc acting as a barrier ) , thereby rendering the town more resistant to Vazimba attacks . However , his attempt to establish Merina dominance in the central Highlands was thwarted when he proved unable to seize Analamanga ; this Vazimba stronghold would not fall until at last conquered by Andriamanelo 's grandson , Andrianjaka . 
 Warfare was not the only strategy by which Andriamanelo sought to expand the territory under his control . Several years into his reign ( after the death of his younger brother ) Andriamanelo married a maternal cousin named Ramaitsoanala ( " Green Forest " ) who was a princess through her astrologer father , King Rabiby ( for whom his capital , the village of Ambohidrabiby , is named ) , and her mother <unk> who is described in legends as a Vazimba water goddess . Through this union Andriamanelo ensured he would become master of the lands around Ambohidrabiby upon the death of his wife 's father . Ramaitsoanala took the name Randapavola upon her marriage and then became known as Queen <unk> upon the birth of the couple 's seventh and final son , Ralambo — the only one of Andriamanelo 's children to survive to adulthood . Six earlier pregnancies ended in stillbirth or the death of the child in infancy . 
 Andriamanelo is typically portrayed as a civilizing king in contrast to the primitive Vazimba against whom he waged war . As such , oral history credits him with discovering such diverse arts as silversmithing and astrology ( sikidy ) in addition to iron working . He reputedly introduced knowledge about the construction and use of pirogues , and was the first in the highlands to transform lowland swamps into irrigated rice paddies through the construction of dikes in the valleys around Alasora . The Merina rite of circumcision , described by Bloch ( 1986 ) in great detail , continued to be practiced by the Merina monarchy through the end of the 19th century in precisely the way first established by Andriamanelo generations before . Many elements of these rituals continue to form part of the circumcision traditions of Merina families in the 21st century . 
 Many of the innovations attributed to Andriamanelo were not his personal invention . Rather , their origins can be traced back to the southeastern part of the island that the Hova had left behind as they migrated into the central highlands . Astrology , for instance , had been introduced early to the island by way of trade contacts between coastal Malagasy communities and Arab seafarers . Similarly , archaeological evidence proves the existence of iron implements in Madagascar at least four centuries prior to the war between Andriamanelo and the Vazimba , suggesting that while the technology was not discovered during his reign , Andriamanelo may have been among the first sovereigns in Imerina to make wide @-@ scale use of it in military campaigns . 
 = = = Rules of succession = = = 
 Andriamanelo 's antecedents , Rafohy and Rangita , had jointly decreed a system of social order whereby the designated heir should have a younger sibling who would succeed him . However , this decree proved challenging upon the first instance of its application . According to oral tradition , upon Rafohy 's designation of elder son Andriamanelo as her successor , her younger son Andriamananitany initially claimed to accept her decree . However , Andriamananitany soon began building a new village immodestly named <unk> ( " Village of God " ) and copied the system of fortifications introduced by his older brother at Alasora , reportedly constructing them even faster than Andriamanelo . Word spread that Andriamananitany wished to undermine his older brother 's rule . Upon learning of Andriamanelo 's consequent wrath , Andriamananitany promptly abandoned his " Village of God " and sought permission from his brother to build a village called <unk> ( " Village of Submission " ) where , according to one version of the oral history , he may have imprudently attempted to construct another defensive trench . Due to this provocative behavior , <unk> was murdered by a group of Hova , possibly at Andriamanelo 's command . 
 Consumed with remorse , the king sought to rectify the situation by arranging a marriage between his brother 's orphaned son and Andriamanelo 's own sister ( the orphan 's aunt ) , Rafotsindrindramanjaka . He declared that the child from this union would , if female , be wed to his own son Ralambo ; if male , he would become Ralambo 's successor . A girl was born , and she was promised to Ralambo as his future wife with the stipulation that the child born of their union would rule after Ralambo . In this way Andriamanelo established a tradition of succession that indirectly respected the queens ' decree by ensuring that a child of his brother 's line ( and his own ) would rule after him . Because of this decree , Ralambo 's first son by his second wife was passed over in the line of succession in favor of Andrianjaka , Ralambo 's son by Rafotsindrindramanjaka . Andriamanelo was also reportedly the first to formally establish the andriana as a caste of Merina nobles , thereby laying the foundation for a stratified and structured society . From this point forward , the term Hova was used to refer only to the non @-@ noble free people of the society which would later be renamed Merina by Andriamanelo 's son Ralambo . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The marriage tradition of the vodiondry , still practiced to this day throughout the Highlands , is said to have originated with Andriamanelo . According to oral history , after the sovereign had successfully contracted a marriage with Ramaitsoanala , sole daughter of Vazimba King Rabiby , Andriamanelo sent her a variety of gifts including vodiondry — meat from the hindquarters of a sheep — which he believed to be the tastiest portion . The value placed on this cut of meat was reaffirmed by Ralambo who , upon discovering the edibility of zebu meat , declared the hindquarters of every slaughtered zebu throughout the kingdom to be his royal due . From the time of Andriamanelo forward , it became a marriage tradition for the groom to offer vodiondry to the bride 's family . Over time the customary offerings of meat have been increasingly replaced by a symbolic piastre , sums of money and other gifts . 
 = = Death and succession = = 
 Andriamanelo ruled until his death at an advanced age around 1575 and was succeeded by his only surviving son , Ralambo . He was buried in Alasora in an earthen ditch . According to oral tradition , the placement of his tomb may have been to the south @-@ east of the royal compound rather than to the north as was customary . This anomaly may have been intended to symbolically indicate Andriamanelo 's " otherness " as a man of mixed ethnic background . A similar tomb to the north of the Alasora compound may have been that of Andriamanelo 's mother . These two earthen tombs are considered the oldest known royal @-@ style tombs in Imerina . 
 = M @-@ 20 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 20 is a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan that runs from New Era to Midland . It crosses through rural Lower Peninsula forest land between the two ends . The highway serves the college towns of Big Rapids and Mt . Pleasant , home of the main campuses of Ferris State University and Central Michigan University , both located near the trunkline . 
 Originally in July 1919 , M @-@ 20 was routed farther north along a corridor now used by US Highway 10 ( US 10 ) . The M @-@ 20 designation was shifted south to the corridor it now follows . It previously connected to Bay City , and in 1958 , a freeway was opened from Bay City to Midland . The former M @-@ 20 along Midland Road , going through Auburn , was returned to local control at that time . In 1960 , the M @-@ 20 freeway became US 10 , moving M @-@ 20 's terminus to Midland . Prior to 1969 , M @-@ 20 extended on the west end to Muskegon before it was rerouted from White Cloud to New Era . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 20 starts near Lake Michigan at the US 31 freeway in New Era where it runs east through the Manistee National Forest , crossing the North Branch of the White River near Ferry and the South Branch near Hesperia on the way to White Cloud . There it turns south along M @-@ 37 and then east along a new routing following Baseline and <unk> roads north of the Hardy Dam to meet the US 131 freeway at exit 131 near Stanwood . M @-@ 20 turns north , running concurrently along the US 131 freeway to Big Rapids and joins Business US 131 ( Bus . US 131 ) at exit 139 . The section along the freeway is listed on the National Highway System ( NHS ) , a system of highways important to the nation 's economy , defense and mobility . Together Bus . US 131 / M @-@ 20 runs along the Perry Street commercial corridor to State Street near the main campus of Ferris State University . The business loop turns north by the campus and at Michigan Street , M @-@ 20 turns eastward to cross the Muskegon River in downtown Big Rapids , north of the campus . M @-@ 20 zig @-@ zags southeast of town bypassing the Canadian Lakes area and turns due east through rural Remus in Isabella County and the Isabella Indian Reservation . 
 In Mt . Pleasant , M @-@ 20 runs near the campus of Central Michigan University crossing the Chippewa River , and the trunkline joins Bus . US 127 along the Mission Street business area to Pickard Road . The highway turns east on Pickard and passes under the US 127 freeway near the Soaring Eagle Casino . From Mt . Pleasant to Midland , M @-@ 20 is designed as a four – lane highway with a continuous center turn lane passing through rural forest land . M @-@ 20 picks up inclusion on the NHS from this point east . 
 Once M @-@ 20 reaches Midland on Jerome Street , it crosses the Tittabawassee River north of the <unk> , a three @-@ legged bridge over the confluence of the Tittabawassee and Chippewa rivers . There it joins Business US 10 ( Bus . US 10 ) on a pair of one @-@ way streets : Indian Street ( westbound ) and <unk> Street ( eastbound ) . The two streets pass by Dow Diamond , home to the Great Lakes Loons , the city 's minor league baseball team . Bus . US 10 / M @-@ 20 then passes some Dow Chemical Company buildings and curves into a freeway stub connecting with the US 10 freeway on the east side of town . This short section of business loop freeway has two interchanges before terminating at one final interchange . At this junction , both Bus . US 10 and M @-@ 20 have a common eastern terminus . Traffic headed eastbound on the business loop defaults onto eastbound US 10 , and traffic destined for the business loop is fed from the westbound direction of the freeway only . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous designation = = = 
 On July 1 , 1919 , M @-@ 20 was routed from Ludington to Bay City , Michigan by way of Reed City and Clare . This routing was redesignated as US 10 on November 11 , 1926 . M @-@ 20 would be moved to a new routing . 
 = = = Current designation = = = 
 The M @-@ 20 designation was moved to a new alignment , roughly today 's current routing from Midland through Mt . Pleasant , Big Rapids and White Cloud continuing to Muskegon . The western terminus was extended to end at Muskegon State Park in 1932 . The last paving would be completed along M @-@ 20 in 1957 in Newaygo County . 
 The eastern end of M @-@ 20 was converted to freeway between Midland and Bay City in 1958 . The former alignment along Midland Road , from Midland , going through Auburn , and ending at Euclid Avenue in Bay City , at the junction of what was then US 23 , was returned to local control at the time . US 10 was rerouted along this freeway section and the I @-@ 75 / US 23 freeway in 1960 . M @-@ 20 was truncated back to Midland with the US 10 rerouting . The west end was rerouted through Muskegon to end at US 16 in 1961 . The former routing connecting to Muskegon State Park became a new M @-@ 213 until it was removed from the trunkline system in 1970 . M @-@ 20 was completely rerouted on the west end in 1969 from White Cloud replacing M @-@ 82 to US 31 in New Era . 
 The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) swapped jurisdiction of M @-@ 20 and B @-@ 88 with Mecosta and Newaygo counties . The swap was finalized on October 1 , 1998 . M @-@ 20 was rerouted south from Big Rapids , along US 131 from exit 139 to exit 131 at Stanwood . There M @-@ 20 replaced B @-@ 88 westward to M @-@ 37 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 All exits are unnumbered . 
 = Bullet Club = 
 The Bullet Club ( <unk> , <unk> ) , sometimes shortened to BC , is a professional wrestling group , primarily appearing in the Japanese promotion New Japan Pro Wrestling ( NJPW ) . In the U.S. , the group appears most notably in Ring of Honor ( ROH ) . 
 The group was formed in May 2013 , when Irish wrestler Prince Devitt turned on his partner Ryusuke Taguchi and came together with American wrestler Karl Anderson and Tongan wrestlers Bad Luck Fale and Tama Tonga to form a villainous stable of foreigners , which they subsequently named " Bullet Club " . Before the end of the year , the stable was also joined by three other Americans ; The Young Bucks ( Matt Jackson and Nick Jackson ) and Doc Gallows . Wrestlers from the Mexican Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre ( CMLL ) promotion have also worked tours of NJPW as members of Bullet Club , which led to the formation of an offshoot group named Bullet Club Latinoamerica in CMLL in October 2013 . At the end of 2013 , Bullet Club held both the IWGP Junior Heavyweight and IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championships , while also having conquered three of NJPW 's five annual tournaments . The stable marked a major turning point for the career of Devitt , a longtime fan favorite , who began his ascent out of the junior heavyweight division and into the IWGP Heavyweight Championship picture . 
 In April 2014 , Devitt left NJPW and was replaced in Bullet Club by American wrestler A.J. Styles . The following month , Bullet Club received its first Japanese member , when Yujiro Takahashi joined and helped Styles capture the IWGP Heavyweight Championship . The following June , members of Bullet Club also won the IWGP Intercontinental and NEVER Openweight Championships , meaning that the stable had now held all titles NJPW had to offer . When NJPW added a seventh title , the NEVER Openweight 6 @-@ Man Tag Team Championship , at the start of 2016 , Bullet Club quickly won that as well . The stable continued adding members , most notably Canadian Kenny Omega , who took over its leadership in early 2016 , when Styles , Anderson , and Gallows all left NJPW for WWE — with this trio appearing in WWE as " The Club " in reference to the group . 
 = = Concept = = 
 Bullet Club was conceived by New Japan Pro Wrestling ( NJPW ) in early 2013 , following a positive fan response to a storyline , where Prince Devitt turned on his longtime tag team partner Ryusuke Taguchi to form a villainous partnership with Bad Luck Fale . Originally , Devitt and Fale were scheduled to go on as a duo , but the storyline was altered with them instead coming together with Karl Anderson and Tama Tonga to form an all @-@ gaijin ( foreigner ) stable . Devitt came up with the name Bullet Club , which was in reference to his finger gun hand gesture and " Real Shooter " nickname and Anderson 's nickname , " The Machine Gun " . In naming the group , Devitt has stated that he specifically did not want the word " the " in front of the name or a name consisting of just three letters . Other names considered for the group included " Bullet Parade " and " Bullet League " . As of May 2016 , the Bullet Club trademark is owned by NJPW . Behind the scenes , the four founding members of Bullet Club were best friends and travel partners . 
 The group has been compared to the World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) stable New World Order ( nWo ) . As a way of paying homage to the nWo , members of Bullet Club began using the stable 's signature " Too Sweet " hand gesture . In March 2015 , WWE filed a trademark application for the hand gesture . Some , including Matt and Nick Jackson , suggested this was done due to Bullet Club 's popularity . The application was ultimately abandoned by WWE . In August 2015 , after Devitt had joined WWE as " Finn Bálor " , WWE released " Bálor Club " merchandise playing off Bullet Club . WWE recognized Bullet Club in the first week of January 2016 , when discussing rumors about members of the stable joining the promotion , preceding A.J. Styles ' debut in the WWE as a 2016 Royal Rumble contestant . In April 2016 , the former Bullet Club tag team of Karl Anderson and Luke Gallows debuted for WWE , with their NJPW background again being acknowledged by the company , eventually forming " The Club " with Styles . 
 nWo 's founding member Kevin Nash has praised Bullet Club as a more athletic version of the nWo , stating that there is mutual respect between the two stables , and informally passing the torch from his stable to Bullet Club . Jeff Jarrett , who has represented both Bullet Club and nWo , has named in @-@ ring ability as the main difference between the two stables , stating " Bullet Club is off the charts bell to bell more talented " . Former NJPW wrestler Matt Bloom has stated that Bullet Club 's popularity helped the promotion become global . 
 Bullet Club 's matches often involve excessive outside interference , ref bumps and other tactics , which are more common in " American " professional wrestling and are rarely seen in Japanese puroresu , even in matches involving other villainous acts . This disregard for Japanese traditions and culture got the stable over as a top act . Bullet Club has garnered a substantial amount of worldwide popularity , especially among American professional wrestling fans . As of March 2016 , the stable 's original " Bone Soldier " shirt was the top selling shirt on the Pro Wrestling Tees store , outselling all top independent wrestlers and WWE veterans that are affiliated with the site . Bullet Club 's popularity in the United States has led to members of the stable working as <unk> at events held in the country . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation ( 2013 ) = = = 
 On February 3 , 2013 , IWGP Junior Heavyweight Champion Prince Devitt pinned IWGP Heavyweight Champion Hiroshi Tanahashi in a tag team match , where he and Karl Anderson faced Tanahashi and Devitt 's longtime Apollo 55 tag team partner Ryusuke Taguchi . This led to a match between Devitt and Tanahashi on March 3 at NJPW 's 41st anniversary event . Though neither man 's title was on the line in the match , Tanahashi vowed to relinquish the IWGP Heavyweight Championship in case Devitt was victorious . After defeating Devitt , Tanahashi went to help his opponent up , but was pushed away by the disappointed Junior Heavyweight Champion . The following weeks , Devitt began portraying a more cocky and villainous persona , regularly disrespecting both partners and opponents , with the exception of Ryusuke Taguchi , whom he tried to get to go along with his new attitude . However , this changed on April 7 at the Invasion Attack pay @-@ per @-@ view , when Devitt turned on Taguchi , after the two had failed to recapture the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championship from the Time Splitters ( Alex Shelley and Kushida ) . During the attack , Devitt was helped by the returning King Fale , who attacked not only Taguchi , but also Shelley , Kushida and Captain New Japan , whom Devitt then proceeded to unmask . Following the attack , Devitt took a microphone , introduced Fale as his new " bouncer " , giving him the new name " The <unk> " Bad Luck Fale and dubbed himself the " Real Rock ' n ' Rolla " . At the following pay @-@ per @-@ view , Wrestling Dontaku 2013 on May 3 , Devitt and Fale teamed up for the first time to defeat Taguchi and Captain New Japan in a tag team match . Later in the event , Devitt and Fale entered the ring to attack the now former IWGP Heavyweight Champion Hiroshi Tanahashi , after he had defeated Karl Anderson in a singles match . Anderson first went to stop Devitt and Fale , but then turned on Tanahashi , hitting him with the Gun Stun . As the three men continued their attack on Tanahashi , they were also joined by Tama Tonga , with whom Anderson had formed a partnership during the past two weeks . In a post @-@ match interview , the four men announced the formation of an all @-@ gaijin stable named " Bullet Club " . 
 = = = Prince Devitt 's leadership ( 2013 – 2014 ) = = = 
 The four members of Bullet Club wrestled their first match together on May 22 , when they defeated Captain New Japan , Hiroshi Tanahashi , Manabu Nakanishi and Ryusuke Taguchi in an eight @-@ man tag team match . Two days later , Devitt entered the 2013 Best of the Super Juniors tournament , where he won his block with a clean record of eight wins and zero losses , advancing to the knockout stage on June 9 , where he first defeated Kenny Omega in the semifinals and then Alex Shelley in the finals to win the tournament , after which he proceeded to challenge Hiroshi Tanahashi . Devitt 's old tag team partner Ryusuke Taguchi had originally earned a spot in the semifinals of the tournament , but a legitimate hip injury forced him to pull out . During the following day 's press conference , Devitt also mentioned a move to the heavyweight division , aiming to become the first wrestler to hold the IWGP Junior Heavyweight and IWGP Heavyweight Championships simultaneously . On June 22 at Dominion 6 @.@ 22 , Devitt defeated Tanahashi , again following interference from the rest of the Bullet Club , to earn his first @-@ ever shot at the IWGP Heavyweight Championship . The reigning champion , Kazuchika Okada , accepted Devitt 's challenge for the title later in the event on the condition that he first defend the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship against his Chaos stablemate Gedo . Bullet Club 's feud with Tanahashi continued at the July 5 Kizuna Road 2013 pay @-@ per @-@ view , where Tama Tonga and visiting Mexican wrestler Terrible lost the Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre ( CMLL ) World Tag Team Championship to Tanahashi and Jushin Thunder Liger . Terrible worked also the rest of his two @-@ week NJPW tour as a member of Bullet Club . After successfully defending his IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship against Gedo , Devitt received his match for the IWGP Heavyweight Championship on July 20 , but was defeated by Okada , despite interference from the rest of Bullet Club . From August 1 to 11 , both Devitt and Anderson took part in the 2013 G1 Climax , wrestling in separate round @-@ robin blocks . During the tournament , Devitt picked up big wins , albeit through outside interference , over reigning IWGP Heavyweight Champion Kazuchika Okada and former champions Hiroshi Tanahashi , Satoshi Kojima and Togi Makabe , but failed to advance from his block . Meanwhile , Anderson entered the final day with a chance to reach the finals , but a loss against Tetsuya Naito eliminated him from the tournament . On September 5 , Rey Bucanero , another CMLL wrestler , started a NJPW tour working as a member of Bullet Club . On September 14 , the rest of Bullet Club helped Bucanero and Tama Tonga defeat Hiroshi Tanahashi and Jushin Thunder Liger for the CMLL World Tag Team Championship . The rivalry between Devitt and Tanahashi culminated in a Lumberjack Deathmatch on September 29 at Destruction , where Tanahashi was victorious . 
 On October 11 , Tonga and Bucanero returned to CMLL , where they formed " Bullet Club Latinoamerica " with CMLL World Heavyweight Champion Terrible and female wrestler and manager La Comandante . However , a week later , Tonga and Bucanero were stripped of the CMLL World Tag Team Championship , when they were unable to defend the title against La Máscara and Rush due to Bucanero being sidelined with an injury . On October 25 , American tag team The Young Bucks ( Matt Jackson and Nick Jackson ) made their NJPW debut as the newest members of Bullet Club by entering the 2013 Super Jr . Tag Tournament . In early November , The Young Bucks first defeated the Forever Hooligans ( Alex Koslov and Rocky Romero ) in the finals to win the tournament , and then Suzuki @-@ gun ( Taichi and Taka Michinoku ) to become the new IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Champions . On November 11 , NJPW announced the participating teams in the 2013 World Tag League . In the tournament , Bullet Club would be represented by two teams in separate blocks ; Devitt and Fale in block A and Anderson and the debuting American Doc Gallows in block B. On December 7 , both teams entered the final day of the round @-@ robin portion of the tournament with a chance to advance to the semifinals . Anderson and Gallows won their block with a record of four wins and two losses by defeating NWA World Tag Team Champions The <unk> ( Jax Dane and Rob Conway ) , while Devitt and Fale were eliminated with a record of three wins and three losses , after losing to Captain New Japan and Hiroshi Tanahashi , who had lost all their other matches in the tournament . The following day , Anderson and Gallows first defeated Togi Makabe and Tomoaki Honma in the semifinals and then Hiroyoshi <unk> and Satoshi Kojima in the finals to win the tournament . This led to a match on January 4 , 2014 , at Wrestle Kingdom 8 in Tokyo Dome , where they defeated K.E.S. ( Davey Boy Smith Jr. and Lance Archer ) to win the IWGP Tag Team Championship . During the same event , Devitt lost the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship to Kota Ibushi , ending his fourteen @-@ month reign . 
 February 's The New Beginning tour featured Bullet Club defending both of their tag team championships and the re @-@ ignition of a rivalry between Devitt and his former partner Ryusuke Taguchi , who returned from an eight @-@ month injury break . Devitt dominated his encounters with Taguchi for most of the tour , including pinning him in his return eight @-@ man tag team match on February 2 , but at the tour ending event , The New Beginning in Osaka , Taguchi pinned his former partner in a tag team match , where he teamed with Togi Makabe and Devitt with Fale . In March , Bad Luck Fale made it to the finals of the 2014 New Japan Cup , but was defeated there by Shinsuke Nakamura . As the one @-@ year anniversary of the break @-@ up of Apollo 55 approached , the rivalry between Devitt and Taguchi escalated , leading to Taguchi challenging his rival to a Loser Leaves Town match . The stipulation , however , was never made official for their April 6 Invasion Attack 2014 match . During the match , Devitt got into an argument with The Young Bucks , after the two repeatedly interfered in the match despite his orders not to do so . This led to The Young Bucks turning on Devitt , who responded by diving onto his Bullet Club stablemates . After Taguchi defeated Devitt , the two men shook hands , ending their rivalry with each other and Devitt 's association with Bullet Club . Devitt 's resignation from NJPW was announced the following day . 
 = = = Rebirth and championship dominance ( 2014 – 2015 ) = = = 
 Later at Invasion Attack 2014 , American wrestler A.J. Styles debuted as the newest member of Bullet Club , attacking IWGP Heavyweight Champion Kazuchika Okada . Styles , who knew Okada from their days working together for the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion , claimed that Okada was still the same " young boy " ( rookie ) he had known in TNA and asserted himself as the next challenger for his title . Following Invasion Attack 2014 , with Styles still working a full schedule on the American independent circuit and only booked to work NJPW 's larger events , Anderson was positioned as the new leader of Bullet Club . However , Styles was considered the leader of the Ring of Honor ( ROH ) version of Bullet Club , a role which was also given to him by NJPW by the end of 2015 . On May 3 at Wrestling Dontaku 2014 , Styles defeated Okada to become the new IWGP Heavyweight Champion , when Yujiro Takahashi turned on Okada and the Chaos stable and jumped to Bullet Club , becoming its first Japanese member . With Bullet Club capturing NJPW 's top title , while also holding both of its tag team titles , and adding new members , this was billed as a " rebirth " for the stable , which was celebrating its one @-@ year anniversary during the event . 
 Later in the month , Bullet Club took part in NJPW 's North American tour , produced in collaboration with ROH . On June 21 at Dominion 6 @.@ 21 , The Young Bucks ' seven @-@ month reign as the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Champions came to an end , when they were defeated by the Time Splitters in their sixth defense . Later that same event , Bad Luck Fale defeated Shinsuke Nakamura to become the new IWGP Intercontinental Champion . On June 29 , Yujiro Takahashi brought another title over to the Bullet Club , when he defeated Tomohiro Ishii with help from his stablemates for the NEVER Openweight Championship . With the win , Bullet Club had won every title in NJPW , now simultaneously holding all four of its heavyweight titles . 
 From July 21 to August 8 , five members of Bullet Club took part in the 2014 G1 Climax with Fale and Gallows wrestling in block A and Anderson , Styles and Takahashi in block B. All five failed to advance from their blocks with Fale finishing third and Gallows ninth in their block of eleven and Styles finishing second , Anderson third and Takahashi tied sixth in their block . Styles was eliminated due to losing to block winner Okada in their head @-@ to @-@ head match . On August 10 , Global Force Wrestling ( GFW ) founder Jeff Jarrett joined Bullet Club , attacking Hiroshi Tanahashi after he had defeated Styles in a non @-@ title match . On September 21 at Destruction in Kobe , Fale lost the IWGP Intercontinental Championship back to Shinsuke Nakamura in his first defense . Bullet Club lost their two remaining singles titles on October 13 at King of Pro @-@ Wrestling with Takahashi losing the NEVER Openweight Championship back to Tomohiro Ishii in his second title defense , while in the main event Styles lost the IWGP Heavyweight Championship to Hiroshi Tanahashi in his third defense , after Jeff Jarrett 's outside interference was stopped by the returning Yoshitatsu . 
 On November 8 at Power Struggle , Kenny Omega , who had joined NJPW at the beginning of the month , became the newest member of Bullet Club , challenging Ryusuke Taguchi to a match for the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship . Omega had earlier dismissed the idea of joining Bullet Club as he did not consider himself a gaijin after six years of living in Japan , but now claimed he had lied and only wanted money and the title . Refusing to speak Japanese despite being fluent in the language , Omega dubbed himself " The Cleaner " with the idea of him being there to " clean up " the junior heavyweight division . From November 22 to December 5 , three Bullet Club teams took part in the 2014 World Tag League ; Anderson and Gallows and Styles and Takahashi in block A and Fale and Tonga in block B. Anderson and Gallows won their block with a record of five wins and two losses , while Styles and Takahashi finished close behind with four wins and three losses . Styles and Takahashi were victorious over the reigning IWGP Tag Team Champions in the head @-@ to @-@ head match between the Bullet Club teams , but were left behind them in the final standings due to losing to Okada and Yoshi @-@ Hashi on the final day . Meanwhile , Fale and Tonga finished at the bottom of their block with a record of three wins and four losses . On December 7 , Anderson and Gallows were defeated in the finals of the tournament by Hirooki Goto and Katsuyori Shibata . 
 On January 4 , 2015 , at Wrestle Kingdom 9 in Tokyo Dome , Omega , in his first match as a member of Bullet Club , defeated Ryusuke Taguchi to become the new IWGP Junior Heavyweight Champion , while Anderson and Gallows lost the IWGP Tag Team Championship to Goto and Shibata , ending their year @-@ long reign in their seventh defense . The following day , Cody Hall , the son of nWo founding member Scott Hall , joined Bullet Club as the stable 's personal " young boy " with Anderson stating that he would have to earn his spot as a full @-@ fledged member . Later that month , NJPW relaunched Bullet Club Latin America in time for the Fantastica Mania 2015 tour , co @-@ produced by NJPW and CMLL . On January 18 , during the fifth day of Fantastica Mania 2015 , CMLL wrestler Mephisto joined Bullet Club , prior to successfully defending his Mexican National Light Heavyweight Championship against Stuka Jr . On February 11 at The New Beginning in Osaka , The Young Bucks regained the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championship by defeating defending champions reDRagon ( Bobby Fish and Kyle O 'Reilly ) and Time Splitters in a three @-@ way match . Later that same event , Anderson and Gallows regained the IWGP Tag Team Championship from Goto and Shibata , while in the main event A.J. Styles defeated Hiroshi Tanahashi to also bring the IWGP Heavyweight Championship back to Bullet Club . Both of Bullet Club 's tag team championship reigns ended in their first title defenses on April 5 at Invasion Attack 2015 with The Young Bucks being defeated by Roppongi Vice ( Beretta and Rocky Romero ) and Anderson and Gallows by the ROH tag team The Kingdom ( Matt Taven and Michael Bennett ) . 
 The Young Bucks regained the title on May 3 at Wrestling Dontaku 2015 in a three @-@ way match with Roppongi Vice and reDRagon . Also during the event , Bullet Club was involved in the first NJPW match to feature female wrestlers in over twelve years , where Karl Anderson , Doc Gallows and his wife Amber Gallows were defeated by Maria Kanellis , Matt Taven and Michael Bennett in a six @-@ person intergender tag team match . On July 5 at Dominion 7 @.@ 5 in Osaka @-@ jo Hall , Kenny Omega lost the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship to the 2015 Best of the Super Juniors winner Kushida in his fourth defense , while Anderson and Gallows defeated Bennett and Taven in a rematch to win the IWGP Tag Team Championship for the third time . In the main event , Styles lost the IWGP Heavyweight Championship to Kazuchika Okada in his second defense . From July 20 to August 15 , five members of Bullet Club took part in the 2015 G1 Climax with Fale , Gallows and Styles in block A and Anderson and Takahashi in block B. Both Styles and Anderson entered their last round @-@ robin matches with a chance to advance to the finals , but were eliminated after losing to Hiroshi Tanahashi and Satoshi Kojima , respectively . On August 16 , The Young Bucks lost the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championship to reDRagon in their second defense . From September 4 to 6 , Styles and The Young Bucks represented Bullet Club in American promotion Chikara 's 2015 King of Trios tournament , where they made it to the finals , before losing to Team AAA ( Aero Star , Drago and Fénix ) . On September 23 at Destruction in Okayama , Omega defeated Kushida , following outside interference from Anderson , to regain the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship . On October 23 , Chase Owens became the newest member of Bullet Club . 
 = = = Kenny Omega 's leadership ; The Elite ( 2016 – present ) = = = 
 On January 4 , 2016 , at Wrestle Kingdom 10 in Tokyo Dome , Bullet Club was involved in five championship matches . In the first , The Young Bucks defeated reDRagon , Roppongi Vice and the team of Matt Sydal and Ricochet to regain the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championship . In the following match , Fale , Takahashi and Tonga were defeated by Toru Yano and the ROH tag team The Briscoe Brothers ( Jay Briscoe and Mark Briscoe ) in a match to determine the inaugural NEVER Openweight 6 @-@ Man Tag Team Champions . This was followed by two title matches , where Bullet Club lost two of their championships with Omega losing the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship back to Kushida and Anderson and Gallows losing the IWGP Tag Team Championship to Togi Makabe and Tomoaki Honma . In Bullet Club 's final title match of the event , Styles unsuccessfully challenged Shinsuke Nakamura for the IWGP Intercontinental Championship . Hours after the event it was reported that Anderson , Gallows and Styles had all given their notice to NJPW and would be leaving the promotion for WWE . The following day , the rest of Bullet Club turned on Styles and kicked him out of the group with Omega taking over the leadership . Omega also announced his graduation from the junior heavyweight division , stating that he did not want a rematch with Kushida , but instead a match with Nakamura for the IWGP Intercontinental Championship . 
 In the aftermath of Omega taking over Bullet Club 's leadership , he and The Young Bucks formed their own subgroup within the stable , called " The Elite " . Omega and The Young Bucks came up with the idea for The Elite themselves , feeling the need to create something new after being forced by NJPW into Bullet Club and what Omega called a " ' Too Sweet , ' ' Suck it ' parody of the NWO " . Omega stated that he and The Young Bucks were The Elite , but accepted if NJPW continued calling them Bullet Club " in parentheses " as the stable was their " cash cow " . He explained the name change by stating that following Anderson , Gallows and Styles ' departures from NJPW , " Bullet Club [ was not ] so much the Bullet Club anymore " , adding that the stable " had all sorts of wrestlers come and go . Some were good , some were bad , some were god @-@ awful " , but that " there 's a place you can go to watch the most ridiculous and entertaining stuff in pro wrestling , and it 's The Elite " . Omega later added his opinion that Anderson , Gallows and Styles ' departures had " watered down " Bullet Club 's ranks , which is why he wanted to push The Elite to the forefront , claiming that when people said that " Bullet Club [ had ] been doing some really cool stuff " , they always meant him and The Young Bucks and not the other members of the group . 
 On February 11 at The New Beginning in Osaka , Fale , Takahashi and Tonga defeated the Briscoes and Yano in a rematch to capture the NEVER Openweight 6 @-@ Man Tag Team Championship . Later that same event , The Young Bucks lost the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championship to Matt Sydal and Ricochet in a three @-@ way match , also involving reDRagon . Three days later at The New Beginning in Niigata , Fale , Takahashi and Tonga lost the NEVER Openweight 6 @-@ Man Tag Team Championship back to the Briscoes and Yano . Also during the event , Anderson and Gallows received a rematch for the IWGP Tag Team Championship , but were again defeated by Makabe and Honma , who were afterwards challenged by Tonga , who stated that his partner would be a new member of Bullet Club . In the main event of the show , Omega defeated Hiroshi Tanahashi to win the IWGP Intercontinental Championship , which had been vacated following Shinsuke Nakamura 's departure from NJPW . On February 20 at Honor Rising : Japan 2016 , Anderson and Gallows wrestled their final NJPW match , an eight @-@ man tag team match , where they , along with Fale and Tonga , were defeated by Bobby Fish , Hirooki Goto , Katsuyori Shibata and Kyle O 'Reilly . Later that same event , Omega and The Young Bucks defeated the Briscoes and Yano to bring the NEVER Openweight 6 @-@ Man Tag Team Championship back to Bullet Club , while also making Omega a double champion in the process . 
 On March 12 , Tonga revealed that his partner for the upcoming IWGP Tag Team Championship match and the newest member of Bullet Club was his real @-@ life brother Tevita <unk> , who was two days later given the ring name " Tanga Roa " , with the tag team between him and Tonga dubbed " Guerrillas of Destiny " ( GOD ) . On April 10 at Invasion Attack 2016 , The Elite lost the NEVER Openweight 6 @-@ Man Tag Team Championship to Hiroshi Tanahashi , Michael Elgin and Yoshitatsu . Later that same event , Guerrillas of Destiny defeated Togi Makabe and Tomoaki Honma to win the IWGP Tag Team Championship . On May 3 at Wrestling Dontaku 2016 , The Elite regained the NEVER Openweight 6 @-@ Man Tag Team Championship from Tanahashi , Elgin and Yoshitatsu . Five days later at the NJPW and ROH co @-@ produced Global Wars show , Adam Cole was revealed as the newest member of Bullet Club as he helped the Guerrillas of Destiny and The Young Bucks take over the ring in a show @-@ closing angle . The following day , during the first show on the War of the Worlds tour , Adam Page also joined Bullet Club . In NJPW , Page was given the ring name " Hangman Page " , which he eventually also began using in ROH . On June 19 at Dominion 6 @.@ 19 in Osaka @-@ jo Hall , The Young Bucks won the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championship for the fifth time by defeating Matt Sydal and Ricochet , reDRagon and Roppongi Vice in a four @-@ way elimination match . Later that same event , Bullet Club lost two titles , with the Briscoe Brothers defeating the Guerrillas of Destiny for the IWGP Tag Team Championship and Michael Elgin defeating Kenny Omega for the IWGP Intercontinental Championship in NJPW 's first ever ladder match . On July 3 , Omega and The Young Bucks lost the NEVER Openweight 6 @-@ Man Tag Team Championship to Matt Sydal , Ricochet and Satoshi Kojima . 
 = = Other media = = 
 In January 2016 , NJPW announced a DVD chronicling the history of Bullet Club and featuring interviews with members of the stable . The DVD was released on March 30 , 2016 . 
 = = Members = = 
 = = = Current = = = 
 = = = Former = = = 
 = = = Part @-@ time / associates = = = 
 = = = Sub @-@ groups = = = 
 Timeline 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Triple @-@ team finishing moves 
 Omega and The Young Bucks 
 Tiger Hattori Special ( Rolling fireman 's carry slam into a springboard moonsault by Omega followed by a high @-@ angle senton bomb by Nick followed by a 450 ° splash by Matt ) 
 Styles and The Young Bucks 
 Double superkick ( The Young Bucks ) / Styles Clash ( Styles ) combination 
 Double @-@ team finishing moves 
 Anderson and Gallows 
 Magic Killer ( Aided snap swinging neckbreaker ) 
 Fale and Tonga 
 Dawn Raid ( Lariat ( Fale ) / Spear ( Tonga ) combination ) 
 Roa and Tonga 
 Guerrilla Warfare ( Aided double arm DDT ) 
 The Young Bucks 
 <unk> ( Springboard spike kneeling reverse piledriver ) 
 Meltzer Driver ( Springboard somersault spike kneeling reverse piledriver ) 
 More Bang 4 Your Buck ( Rolling fireman 's carry slam by Matt followed by a 450 ° splash by Nick followed by a moonsault by Matt ) 
 Anderson 's finishing moves 
 Gun Stun ( Cutter ) 
 Devitt 's finishing moves 
 Bloody Sunday ( Lifting single underhook DDT , sometimes from the top rope ) 
 Reverse Bloody Sunday ( Lifting inverted DDT ) 
 Fale 's finishing moves 
 Bad Luck Fall ( Throwing crucifix powerbomb ) 
 Grenade ( Chokeslam transitioned into a thumb thrust to the opponent 's throat ) 
 Gallows ' finishing moves 
 Gallows Pole / Hangman 's Noose ( Chokebomb , sometimes from the top rope ) 
 Hall 's finishing moves 
 Razor 's Edge ( Crucifix powerbomb ) 
 Mephisto 's finishing moves 
 Devil 's Wings ( Lifting double underhook facebuster , sometimes from the second rope ) 
 Omega 's finishing moves 
 <unk> 's Wrath ( Electric chair dropped into a bridging German suplex ) 
 <unk> no Tenshi / One @-@ Winged Angel ( One @-@ handed electric chair driver ) 
 V @-@ Trigger ( Running knee strike ) 
 Owens ' finishing moves 
 Package piledriver 
 Page 's finishing moves 
 The Adam 's Apple ( Slingshot lariat ) 
 Rite of Passage ( Kneeling back @-@ to @-@ belly piledriver ) 
 Roa 's finishing moves 
 Running Samoan drop 
 Styles ' finishing moves 
 Calf Killer ( Calf slicer ) 
 Styles Clash ( Belly @-@ to @-@ back inverted mat slam , sometimes from the second rope ) 
 Takahashi 's finishing moves 
 Miami Shine ( Modified Death Valley bomb ) 
 Tokyo Pimps ( Sitout inverted front powerslam ) 
 Tonga 's finishing moves 
 Headshrinker / Veleno ( Double arm DDT ) 
 Nicknames 
 " Bullet @-@ gun " ( Japanese for " Bullet Army " ) 
 " Biz <unk> " 
 " Good Brothers " 
 Entrance themes 
 " Last Chance Saloon " by Deviant and Naive Ted 
 " Shot <unk> " by [ Q ] Brick 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre 
 CMLL World Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) – Terrible 
 CMLL World Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – Terrible and Tonga ( 1 ) and Bucanero and Tonga ( 1 ) 
 Mexican National Light Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) – Mephisto 
 Family Wrestling Entertainment 
 FWE Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) – Styles 
 FWE Tag Team Championship ( 1 time , current ) – The Young Bucks 
 National Wrestling Alliance 
 NWA World Women 's Championship ( 1 time , current ) – Amber Gallows 
 New Japan Pro Wrestling 
 IWGP Heavyweight Championship ( 2 times ) – Styles 
 IWGP Intercontinental Championship ( 2 times ) – Fale ( 1 ) and Omega ( 1 ) 
 IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship ( 3 times ) – Devitt ( 1 ) and Omega ( 2 ) 
 IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championship ( 5 times , current ) – The Young Bucks 
 IWGP Tag Team Championship ( 4 times ) – Anderson and Gallows ( 3 ) , Roa and Tonga ( 1 ) 
 NEVER Openweight Championship ( 1 time ) – Takahashi 
 NEVER Openweight 6 @-@ Man Tag Team Championship ( 3 times ) – Fale , Takahashi and Tonga ( 1 ) and Omega / Young Bucks ( 2 ) 
 Best of the Super Juniors ( 2013 ) – Devitt 
 Super Jr . Tag Tournament ( 2013 ) – The Young Bucks 
 World Tag League ( 2013 ) – Anderson and Gallows 
 Ring of Honor 
 ROH World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – The Young Bucks 
 Squared Circle Wrestling 
 2CW Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – The Young Bucks 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter 
 Best Wrestling Maneuver ( 2014 ) The Young Bucks ' Meltzer Driver 
 Best Wrestling Maneuver ( 2015 ) A.J. Styles ' Styles Clash 
 Match of the Year ( 2014 ) A.J. Styles vs. Minoru Suzuki on August 1 
 Most Outstanding Wrestler ( 2014 , 2015 ) A.J. Styles 
 Tag Team of the Year ( 2014 , 2015 ) The Young Bucks 
 Wrestler of the Year ( 2015 ) A.J. Styles 
 = Battle of Anzen = 
 The Battle of Anzen or Dazimon was fought on 22 July 838 at Anzen or Dazimon ( now <unk> , Turkey ) between the Byzantine Empire and the forces of the Abbasid Caliphate . The Abbasids had launched a huge expedition with two separate armies in retaliation for the Byzantine emperor Theophilos 's successes the previous year , and aimed to sack Amorion , one of Byzantium 's largest cities . Theophilos with his army confronted the smaller Muslim army , under the Iranian vassal prince Afshin , at Dazimon . 
 The numerically superior Byzantine army was initially successful , but when Theophilos resolved to lead an attack in person , his absence from his usual post caused panic among the Byzantine troops , who feared that he had been killed . Coupled with a fierce counterattack by Afshin 's Turkish horse @-@ archers , the Byzantine army broke and fled . Theophilos and his guard were besieged for a while in a hill , before making good their escape . The defeat opened the way for the brutal sack of Amorion a few weeks later , one of the most serious blows Byzantium suffered in the centuries @-@ long Arab – Byzantine Wars . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 829 , as the young Theophilos ( reigned 829 – 842 ) ascended the Byzantine throne , the Arab – Byzantine wars had continued on and off for almost two centuries . An ambitious man and a convinced iconoclast , Theophilos sought to bolster his regime and gain support for his religious policies by military success against the Abbasid Caliphate , Byzantium 's major antagonist . Throughout the 830s , Theophilos launched a series of campaigns against the Caliphate . These were only moderately successful , but sufficient for the imperial propaganda to portray Theophilos in the traditional Roman manner as a " victorious emperor " . In 837 , Theophilos personally led a major campaign to the region of the upper Euphrates , sacking the cities of Arsamosata and Sozopetra – which some sources claim as Abbasid Caliph al @-@ Mu 'tasim ( r . 833 – 842 ) own birthplace – and forcing the city of Melitene to pay tribute and deliver hostages in return for being spared . 
 In response , al @-@ Mu 'tasim decided to launch a major punitive expedition against Byzantium , aiming to capture the two major Byzantine cities of central Anatolia , Ancyra and Amorion . The latter was probably the largest city in Anatolia at the time , as well as the birthplace of the reigning Amorian dynasty and consequently of particular symbolic importance ; according to the chronicles , al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's soldiers painted the word " Amorion " on their shields and banners . A vast army was gathered at Tarsus ( 80 @,@ 000 men according to Treadgold ) , which was then divided into two main forces . The northern force , under the Iranian vassal prince of Usrushana Afshin , would invade the Armeniac theme from the region of Melitene , joining up with the forces of the city 's emir , Omar al @-@ Aqta . The southern , main force , under the Caliph himself , would pass the Cilician Gates into Cappadocia and head to Ancyra . After the city was taken , the Arab armies would join and march to Amorion . Afshin 's force included , according to John Skylitzes , the entire army of the vassal Armenian princes , and numbered an estimated 20 @,@ 000 ( Haldon ) to 30 @,@ 000 men ( Treadgold ) , among whom were some 10 @,@ 000 Turkish horse @-@ archers . 
 On the Byzantine side , Theophilos became soon aware of the Caliph 's intentions , and set out from Constantinople in early June . His army included the men from the Anatolian and possibly also the European themes , the elite tagmata regiments , as well as a contingent of Persian and Kurdish Khurramites . Under their leader Nasr ( converted to Christianity and baptized as Theophobos ) , these people had fled religious persecution in the Caliphate , deserted to the Empire in the previous years , and formed the so @-@ called " Persian <unk> " . Setting up camp at Dorylaion , the Emperor divided his forces : a strong corps was sent to reinforce the garrison of Amorion , while he himself set out with the remainder ( circa 25 @,@ 000 according to Haldon and 40 @,@ 000 according to Treadgold ) to interpose himself between the Cilician Gates and Ancyra . 
 = = Battle = = 
 In mid @-@ June , Afshin crossed the Anti @-@ Taurus Mountains and encamped at the fort of Dazimon ( Greek : <unk> , modern <unk> ) , between <unk> and Tokat , a strategically important location which served as a concentration point ( <unk> ) for the Byzantines too . A few days later , on 19 June , the vanguard of the main Abbasid army also invaded Byzantine territory , followed two days after by the Caliph with the main body . Theophilos was informed of these movements in mid @-@ July . Afshin 's force was smaller , but also threatened to cut off his supply lines . Consequently , the Emperor left a small covering force against the Caliph 's army and marched east to confront Afshin . On 21 July , the imperial army came into view of the Arab force , and encamped on a hill in the plain of <unk> south of the fort of Dazimon , named Anzen ( Greek : <unk> ) . 
 Although Theophilos 's principal commanders , Theophobos and the Domestic of the Schools Manuel , both advised for a surprise night attack , the Emperor sided with the opinion of the other officers and resolved to wait and launch his attack on the next day . The Byzantine army attacked at dawn , and initially made good progress : they drove back one wing of the opposite army , inflicting 3 @,@ 000 casualties on the Arabs . Near noon , Theophilos resolved to reinforce the other wing , and detached 2 @,@ 000 Byzantines and the Kurdish contingent to do so , abandoning his post and passing behind his own army 's lines . At this point , however , Afshin launched his Turkish horse @-@ archers in a ferocious counter @-@ attack which stymied the Byzantine advance and allowed the Arab forces to regroup . The Byzantine troops then noticed the emperor 's absence , and , thinking he had been killed , began to waver . This soon turned into a disorderly retreat ; some men fled as far as Constantinople , bringing with them the rumour that the Emperor had been killed . Some units , however , were apparently able to retreat in good order and assemble at a place called Chiliokomon . 
 Theophilos found himself isolated with his tagmata and the Kurds on the hill of Anzen . The Arabs proceeded to surround the hill , but the Byzantines were saved by a sudden rain , which loosened the strings of the Turkish bows , rendering them useless . Afshin then sent for catapults to be brought up to batter the Byzantine position . At the same time , Theophilos 's officers , afraid of treachery by the Kurdish troops , persuaded him to withdraw . Breaking through the Arab lines and suffering many wounds in the process ( the sources variously credit Manuel , who was severely wounded and possibly died soon after , and Theophobos for saving the Emperor ) , Theophilos and his small escort managed to reach safety at Chiliokomon , where he gradually re @-@ assembled the remnants of his army . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the aftermath of this defeat , and with rumours circulating in Constantinople of his death , Theophilos 's position was precarious . He abandoned the campaign and withdrew to Dorylaion , whence he soon departed for the imperial capital . Ancyra itself was left abandoned , and plundered by the Arab army on 27 July . Then the united Abbasid army marched unopposed to Amorion , which fell after a siege of two weeks . Out of its entire population of some 70 @,@ 000 , only about half survived the brutal sack , to be sold as slaves . The fall of the city was one of the heaviest blows Byzantium suffered in the entire 9th century , both in material and symbolic terms . Fortunately for the Empire , news of a rebellion in the Caliphate forced al @-@ Mu 'tasim to withdraw soon after . 
 At the same time , Theophilos had to deal with a revolt by Theophobos and his Kurds . When rumours of Theophilos 's death reached the capital , the name of Theophobos , who was related to the Emperor by marriage and apparently an iconodule , was put forward by some as the new emperor . On returning to the city , Theophilos recalled his general , but the latter , fearful of being punished , fled with his loyal Kurds to Sinope , where he was proclaimed emperor . In the event , however , Theophobos was persuaded to surrender peacefully in the next year , while the " Persian " corps was disbanded and its men dispersed throughout the themes . 
 Tragic though they were for the Byzantines at the time , the defeat at Anzen and the subsequent sack of Amorion were militarily of no long @-@ term importance to the Empire , since the Abbasids failed to follow up on their success . They did , however , play a crucial role in discrediting iconoclasm , which had always relied on military success to maintain its validity . Shortly after Theophilos 's sudden death in 842 , the veneration of icons was restored as part of the Triumph of Orthodoxy throughout the Empire . The Battle of Anzen is also notable for illustrating the difficulties faced by the Byzantine military of the time against horse @-@ archers , a remarkable change from the army of the 6th – 7th centuries , when such skills formed a core part of Byzantine tactical doctrine . It is also remarkable for being the first confrontation of the middle Byzantine army with the Turkic nomads from Central Asia , whose descendants , the Seljuq Turks , would emerge as Byzantium 's major antagonists from the mid @-@ 11th century on . 
 = Neil Barrett ( footballer ) = 
 Neil William Barrett ( born 24 December 1981 ) is an English semi @-@ professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for Isthmian League Premier Division club Metropolitan Police . 
 Barrett started his career in the youth system of Chelsea , before joining Portsmouth in 2001 . He made over 20 appearances in his first season with Portsmouth , but having not played over a season @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half he moved to Dundee on loan . He joined them permanently in 2004 , but left a year later following their relegation from the Scottish Premier League . Following a period with Livingston , he signed for Conference National club Woking in 2007 . After half a season with them he joined Ebbsfleet United , and played for them in their victory in the 2008 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium . 
 Barrett left Ebbsfleet after two seasons to sign for York City in 2009 and played for them in the 2010 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final at Wembley . He was released by York in 2011 and after a short spell with Havant & Waterlooville in the Conference South he returned to Ebbsfleet United . After their relegation to the Conference South in 2013 he signed for their divisional rivals Basingstoke Town , but was released by them after one season . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Chelsea and Portsmouth = = = 
 Born in Tooting , London , Barrett started his career as a trainee in the Chelsea youth system . While at the club he was an England schools international . He joined First Division team Portsmouth on 25 June 2001 on a free transfer and he made his first team debut in a 1 – 0 victory at Stockport County on 25 August . His first goal for Portsmouth came with the equaliser against Gillingham on 8 September 2001 with a header from a Robert <unk> cross , in a game that finished as a 2 – 1 victory . Barrett was offered a new contract with Portsmouth in October 2001 after impressing in the first team . He finished the 2001 – 02 season with 26 appearances and two goals , despite not playing any games for Portsmouth from March 2002 . 
 Barrett was taken to hospital with a suspected broken knee suffered during a reserve team game against Bristol City in September 2002 , although an X @-@ ray later confirmed there was no break . However , tests were carried out and he was expected to be out of the team for six weeks to recover from the injury . Having fallen out of favour at Portsmouth , he had a trial at Notts County in December 2002 and manager Bill Dearden commented that Barrett " could be a reasonable prospect " . He finished the 2002 – 03 season with no appearances for Portsmouth and was told by manager Harry Redknapp he was surplus to requirements . He had a one @-@ week trial with Wimbledon in August 2003 , having been told he could leave Portsmouth . 
 = = = Dundee = = = 
 Having made no appearances for Portsmouth up to that point during the 2003 – 04 season , Barrett joined Scottish Premier League ( SPL ) team Dundee on loan until the end of the season on 23 January 2004 . His debut came two days later in the 2 – 1 victory over Dundee United in a Dundee derby match , in which he made a reasonable contribution and was cautioned for a " bone @-@ crunching " challenge on Charlie Miller . He scored his first two goals for Dundee in the Scottish League Cup against Motherwell , with a shot set up by Sebastian <unk> and a header , although Dundee went on to lose 5 – 3 . He finished the loan period with 13 appearances and two goals , during which he had to deal with a " serious " ankle injury . 
 He joined Dundee permanently on 18 July 2004 , signing a one @-@ year contract , after having his contract at Portsmouth cancelled . He scored his first goal of the 2004 – 05 season on 18 December 2004 with a 57th @-@ minute goal against Aberdeen that was set up by Fabián Caballero , which earned his team a 1 – 0 victory . He finished the season with 32 appearances and two goals while Dundee were relegated to the Scottish First Division , and was released by the club in May 2001 . 
 = = = Livingston = = = 
 Barrett had a trial with Major League Soccer team the New York / New Jersey <unk> , and claimed he was offered a two @-@ year contract , although this claim was denied by an organisation spokesman . He started a trial with League Two club Oxford United in August 2005 and in his first game was substituted after six minutes after sustaining a head injury . He resumed playing in the SPL after signing for Livingston on 9 September 2005 , on a contract until January 2006 , with the option of it being extended for a further three years , following a successful trial . He made his debut two days later in a 4 – 1 defeat to Hearts , during which he conceded a penalty kick . He made 11 appearances for Livingston , with his last coming in December 2005 . Conference National team Exeter City handed him a one @-@ week trial in September 2006 , and after training with them for six weeks he was offered a contract until January 2007 . 
 = = = Woking = = = 
 He eventually signed for another Conference National club , Woking , in January 2007 after being recommended to the club by former Dundee teammate Tom Hutchinson and he made his debut in a 2 – 0 victory over Altrincham on 20 January , in which he had a goal disallowed that was adjudged to be offside . Barrett missed some games because of injury and he finished the 2006 – 07 season with seven appearances for Woking , and manager Frank Gray wanted him to return to the club for pre @-@ season training . 
 = = = Ebbsfleet United = = = 
 He signed for Conference Premier rivals Ebbsfleet United on a free transfer on 19 June 2007 as a replacement for Mark <unk> . He made his debut in a 2 – 1 victory over Northwich Victoria on 11 August 2007 . He sustained an ankle injury in the second game of the 2007 – 08 season , which meant he was expected to be unable to play for six weeks , before he made a " surprise " return after four weeks in a 1 – 1 draw with Burton Albion . He scored his first goal with a shot from 20 yards , which was Ebbsfleet 's first goal in a 4 – 1 victory over Grays Athletic . He went on to score goals in two consecutive games , with strikes in victories over Burton and Weymouth . Barrett played for Ebbsfleet in the 2008 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium on 10 May 2008 , which the team won 1 – 0 against Torquay United . He finished the season with 44 appearances and three goals , after which he signed a new one @-@ year contract with Ebbsfleet . He played for Ebbsfleet in their 3 – 2 defeat to Stevenage Borough in the semi @-@ final first @-@ leg of the FA Trophy on 14 March 2009 , during which he sustained a broken jaw while scoring a goal , which ruled him out for the remainder of the 2008 – 09 season . He finished the season with 37 appearances for Ebbsfleet , scoring seven goals . 
 = = = York City = = = 
 Barrett signed for fellow Conference Premier team York City on a free transfer on 29 June 2009 . He made his debut in a 2 – 1 defeat to Oxford on 8 August 2009 , before scoring his first goal for the club with the opener in a 1 – 1 draw with Luton Town on 20 October with a shot in the bottom corner . He scored the opening goal in a 3 – 1 defeat to Premier League team Stoke City in the FA Cup third round on 2 January 2010 , with a header from an Alex Lawless free kick . He picked up a hamstring injury during March 2010 , missing one match before making his return in a 1 – 0 victory over Mansfield Town later that month . He played in both legs of York 's play @-@ off semi @-@ final victory over Luton , which finished 2 – 0 on aggregate . He signed a new one @-@ year contract with York on 13 May 2010 . He started in the 2010 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final at Wembley on 16 May , being substituted on 81 minutes , with York losing 3 – 1 to Oxford . He finished the 2009 – 10 season with 51 appearances and five goals for York . 
 Barrett made his first appearance of the 2010 – 11 season in the second game , starting in a 0 – 0 draw at Grimsby Town on 17 August 2010 . He scored his first goal of the season with an effort from six yards out to score the final goal in a 4 – 0 victory at Rushden & Diamonds on 20 November 2010 . He finished the season with 25 appearances and two goals before being released on 23 June 2011 after being told he could find another club . 
 = = = Havant & Waterlooville = = = 
 Following his release by York , Barrett went on trial with Luton and played the first half of their first friendly of the 2011 – 12 pre @-@ season , a 4 – 2 victory away at Hitchin Town . He subsequently went on trial with Kingstonian of the Isthmian League Premier Division and played in a friendly against former club Woking . His next move came on 9 September 2011 , when he signed for Havant & Waterlooville of the Conference South on non @-@ contract terms , making his debut the following day after starting in a 2 – 2 draw at home to Sutton United . He was released by Havant in October 2011 after making seven appearances for the club . 
 = = = Return to Ebbsfleet United = = = 
 Barrett returned to Conference Premier side Ebbsfleet United on non @-@ contract terms on 4 November 2011 after contacting manager Liam Daish over the possibility of signing . His second debut for the club came the following day in a 1 – 0 away win over Newport County , and scored his first goal of the 2011 – 12 season came with a header in a 3 – 2 win at Gateshead on 3 March 2012 . Barrett made 28 appearances and score done goal as Ebbsfleet finished 14th in the Conference Premier , before signing a new one @-@ year contract with the club in July 2012 . He missed only four matches for Ebbsfleet in the 2012 – 13 season , making 45 appearances and scoring one goal , as the team were relegated to the Conference South after ranking 23rd in the Conference Premier table . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Barrett signed for Conference South team Basingstoke Town on 1 July 2013 . His debut came in Basingstoke 's 2 – 1 win away against Concord Rangers on 17 August 2013 , before scoring his first goal for the club in a 2 – 0 home win over Eastleigh on 24 August . He made 28 appearances and scored four goals in the 2013 – 14 season as Basingstoke finished in 14th place in the Conference South table . He was released by the club in May 2014 . 
 Barrett joined Isthmian League Premier Division club Leatherhead during the 2014 – 15 season and made his debut as a 73rd @-@ minute substitute in their 2 – 1 away defeat to Maidstone United on 9 December 2014 . He made 11 appearances as they achieved an 11th @-@ place finish in the Isthmian League Premier Division table . Barrett signed for Leatherhead 's divisional rivals Metropolitan Police in September 2015 , and made his debut in a 1 – 1 home draw with VCD Athletic on 19 September . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Barrett plays as a central midfielder and provides " plenty of drive in midfield " . He has described himself as being " one to get in the box " and having " a bit of a knack of being in the right place at the right time " . He has been described as being " not afraid of sticking his foot in " . Ebbsfleet manager Liam Daish commented " He will bring a physical presence to our midfield and is capable of getting his name on the score sheet . " and while at the club was pivotal in midfield . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Barrett 's wife Rebecca , whom he married in Leatherhead , Surrey on 29 May 2010 , works as a flight attendant for Virgin Atlantic and he has a son called George . He combined playing with being Ebbsfleet 's commercial manager during 2011 – 12 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 26 March 2016 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Ebbsfleet United 
 FA Trophy : 2007 – 08 
 = Oslo Tunnel = 
 The Oslo Tunnel ( Norwegian : <unk> ) is a 3 @,@ 632 @-@ meter ( 11 @,@ 916 ft ) , double @-@ track , railway tunnel which runs between Olav <unk> plass and Oslo Central Station ( Oslo S ) in Oslo , Norway . The tunnel constitutes the eastern @-@ most section of the Drammen Line and runs below the central business district of Oslo . It features the four @-@ track Nationaltheatret Station , Norway 's second @-@ busiest railway station , where the Oslo Tunnels lies directly beneath the Common Tunnel of the Oslo Metro . At Frogner , the Elisenberg Station was built , but has never been used . The tunnel is the busiest section of railway line in Norway and serves all west @-@ bound trains from Oslo , including many services of the Oslo Commuter Rail and the Airport Express Train . 
 Traditionally , Oslo had two stations , the larger Oslo East Station ( or Oslo Ø , located at the spot of the current Oslo S ) and Oslo West Station ( Oslo V ) , which served the Drammen Line . This caused a physical barrier between the two parts of the railway network , only connected by the Oslo Port Line which ran partly in city streets . Formal planning of a central station and a tunnel connecting the Drammen Line to Oslo Ø started in 1938 , and the final plans were approved in 1968 . The Oslo Tunnel opened on 1 June 1980 , and made it possible to close Oslo V in 1989 . Nationaltheatret saw a major upgrade in 1999 , when it was expanded to four tracks , and from 2008 to 2010 , the tunnel will see a major technical upgrade . There are plans to build a second tunnel to increase train capacity west of Oslo . 
 = = Route = = 
 The tunnel constitutes the easternmost 3 @,@ 632 meters ( 11 @,@ 916 ft ) of the Drammen Line , and runs between Oslo S and Skøyen . At Oslo S , 12 of the 19 tracks ( platforms 2 through 13 ) connect to the tunnel , which is shaped as a funnel , eventually merging the twelve tracks into two . The tunnel runs below some important heritage buildings in Oslo , including <unk> , the Parliament of Norway Building and Oslo Cathedral . 
 Nationaltheatret Station is the second @-@ busiest railway station in the country , and is located below the Oslo Metro station with the same name . The station has four tracks and two 250 @-@ meter ( 820 ft ) long island platforms , serving the central business district of Oslo . Through this section , the line runs below the Common Tunnel of the Oslo Metro for 280 meters ( 920 ft ) . At this point , the line is 18 meters ( 59 ft ) below the surface . 
 Elisenberg Station , located in Frogner , is partially built , including a 220 @-@ meter ( 720 ft ) long island platform and one of the entrances . The line follows Bygdøy <unk> and surfaces just west of Olav <unk> plass . Immediately afterwards , the Skøyen – Filipstad Line merges into the Drammen Line . The next station along the line is Skøyen Station . 
 = = Service = = 
 The Oslo Tunnel is the most heavily trafficked section of mainline railway in Norway . It has a theoretical capacity of 40 trains per hour in each direction , and an applied capacity of 24 trains per hour in each direction . In rush hour , there are up to 20 trains operating through the tunnel , with a capacity of 8 @,@ 000 passengers per hour . 
 All eight line of the Oslo Commuter Rail have some or all of their services operate through the tunnel , although many of these terminate at Skøyen . The Airport Express Train operates three hourly services through the tunnel and the Norwegian State Railways operate regional trains along the Vestfold Line and intercity trains along the Sørland Line and Bergen Line through the tunnel . Freight trains along the Sørland Line operate through the tunnel , although only at night , while freight trains along the Bergen Line do not , instead using the Roa – Hønefoss Line . 
 = = History = = 
 By the 1930s , Oslo had two main railway stations , Oslo East Station and Oslo West Station . The Drammen Line , consisting of commuter trains , and regional and intercity trains from the Sørland Line and the Vestfold Line , terminated at Oslo V. The Østfold , Trunk and Gjøvik Lines terminated at Oslo Ø . Between the two stations ran the Oslo Port Line , which in part ran in the city streets and was only used for a limited number of freight trains . Several plans had been launched to connect the two stations , with the most prominent being a line running west of Oslo and merging with the Gjøvik Line at Grefsen , and an elevated line from Oslo V to <unk> plass , in a tunnel under Akershus Fortress and again as an elevated line past Oslo Stock Exchange to Oslo Ø . 
 In 1938 , the Station Committee of 1938 was established to look into a possible connection of the Drammen Line to Oslo Ø and extension of the railway station . Led by Axel Grenholm , the committee recommended one of two alternatives : either establish a branch from the Drammen Line and built a tunnel under the city center , in which all trains would terminate at Oslo Ø . The tunnel was proposed run from <unk> gate west of Oslo V to Fred . Olsens gate , with an intermediate station close to the location of Oslo V. The proposed tunnel would be 1 @,@ 660 meters ( 1 @.@ 03 mi ) long and largely run through clay , making construction more difficult and expensive . Alternatively , a branch of Drammen Line should be built around the city and connect with the Gjøvik Line at Grefsen . Commuter trains would continue to run to Oslo V , while regional and intercity trains would run to Oslo Ø . The committee stated that it preferred the former suggestion . 
 In 1946 , the Planning Office for Oslo Central Station , led by Fin <unk> , was established by the government . In 1950 , they presented a new report , which recommended that a new route for the tunnel be considered to ease construction and increase safety . This was in part based on an engineering report from 1949 , which had made the first detailed plans for the line . It was a compromise between the Norwegian State Railways ' need for a line as straight as possible , and Oslo Municipality 's demands that the construction should not be a risk to buildings in the area . The ground in Oslo consists of clay @-@ filled grooves up to 30 meters ( 98 ft ) deep . The area also contains alum shale , which expands when it comes into contact with air and water and can attack concrete , argillaceous schist , cracks with clay and water , and hard volcanic rocks . 
 Another committee , led by Oddvar Halvorsen , was established in 1960 to look at the matter again . Also it recommended a tunnel and a central station . However , it felt that the tunnel should be longer and intersect with the Drammen Line at a point between Skarpsno and Skøyen , and build a second station at Frogner . The proposal was presented to the Parliament of Norway on 4 November 1961 , along with several other matters related to rail transport investments . Construction of the Oslo Tunnel and Oslo Central Station was passed unanimously . 
 Another planning office was established in 1962 , initially led by Erik Himle . The final plans for the route were passed by parliament in 1968 , and construction started in 1971 . The main contractors were <unk> Thor Furuholmen , <unk> Kaare Backer , NSB , <unk> Oslo <unk> and <unk> . Consultants included <unk> Bonde & Co . , Peer <unk> 's arkitektkontor and the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute . 
 The tunnel was officially opened on 30 May 1980 by Minister of Transport and Communications , Ronald Bye , and officially taken into use on 1 June . When it opened , it was the eighth @-@ longest railway tunnel in Norway , although since 2005 it has been the thirteenth @-@ longest . The tunnel cost 625 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) , of which Oslo Municipality had paid NOK 170 million . At first , the tunnel was used by commuter trains from Lillestrøm to Drammen and Spikkestad , and trains from Eidsvoll and Årnes used the tunnel and turned at Skøyen . Oslo Central Station was taken into use on 26 November 1986 . On 27 May 1989 , Oslo West Station was closed and all traffic transferred to Oslo S. 
 In October 1997 , construction of an upgraded Nationaltheatret Station started and was taken into use on 16 December 2009 . The work expanded the station from two to four platforms , thus increasing the applied capacity for the whole tunnel from 16 to 24 trains per direction per hour . The expansion cost NOK 920 million , which included blasting 110 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 3 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of rock and pouring 33 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of concrete . The work resulted in 830 meters ( 2 @,@ 720 ft ) of new tunnel , a new entrance hall and art . The station was designed for 40 @,@ 000 passengers daily . 
 In 2008 , the old section of Nationaltheatret Station was renovated . Upgrades included new lighting , a new public address system , new escalators , a more powerful fire safety system , improved emergency exits and replacement of cables . The upgrade made the old section lighter , as it was previously painted in dark red , and visually similar to the new section . Between 2008 and 2012 , the Norwegian National Rail Administration is performing a major upgrade to the section between Lysaker and Etterstad , including the Oslo Tunnel . Among the upgrades are axle counters , mounting of an overhead conductor rail , new switches , switch heaters at the tunnel openings and new tracks . 
 = = Future = = 
 The Oslo Tunnel is the largest bottle @-@ neck in the railway system in Norway , and delays caused around the tunnel can spread throughout the whole network . The local rail lines have only one or two departures per hour , where more is wished in order to attract people who want to find departure times matching work hours . The National Rail Administration has stated that until at the earliest 2040 , it is unnecessary with more capacity through the West Corridor , i.e. running west of Oslo . This includes possible ungraded to the railway lines around Oslo , such as high @-@ speed lines along the Østfold and Vestfold Lines , and to Lillehammer . In 2012 , after the completion of the Asker Line , a new schedule plan has been proposed . NSB , the Airport Express Train and CargoNet have all asked for more slots through the tunnel than is available . One possible solution is to decrease the reserve capacity , thus increasing the capacity from 24 to 30 trains per hour per direction . However , the tunnel is already characterized as " critically overloaded " . 
 Should a new tunnel be built , it would not necessarily run next to the Oslo Tunnel . One proposal from the National Rail Administration calls for a separate commuter train station to be built underground , at the location of Oslo Bus Terminal , within walking distance of Oslo S. This proposal involves the line connecting to the existing route before reaching Nationaltheatret . The lobby organisation Norsk Bane have called for a line to run further north , and serve Majorstuen , where there is a major metro and tramway hub . Norsk Bane also call for the tunnel to be built for higher speeds , and state that it is necessary to build high @-@ speed rail to Bergen and Stavanger . Combined with a new line from Drammen to the tunnel , it would allow travel time from Drammen and Oslo to be reduced to 18 minutes . 
 = Job Fair ( The Office ) = 
 " Job Fair " is the seventeenth episode of the fourth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's seventieth episode overall . Written by Lee Eisenberg and Gene Stupnitsky and directed by Tucker Gates , the episode first aired in the United States on May 8 , 2008 on NBC . The episode featured Trevor Einhorn as a guest star . 
 In the episode , Michael and a few employees go to a high school 's job fair to find a summer intern for Dunder Mifflin . However , very few students seem interested in the internship . Meanwhile , Jim attempts to make an important sale by golfing with a potential client . At first the client claims to be not interested in talking about business , but after much negotiation , Jim lands the sale . Back at the office , Dwight is left in charge . Everyone leaves except his ex @-@ girlfriend Angela , leading to an awkward day . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) gives Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) a warning about his job performance , Jim tries to land his biggest client ever ( Phil Reeves ) . He takes the potential client golfing , bringing along co @-@ workers Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) and Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) . When Jim tries to talk business , the client reveals that he is not interested in switching paper suppliers . But after much persistence and negotiation , Jim lands the account . 
 Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) , Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) , Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) and Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) set up a booth at a local job fair to find a student for Dunder Mifflin ’ s summer internship but while other companies are prepared and have provided materials and products for their booth , Michael only brought a single white piece of Dunder @-@ Mifflin paper . The fair proves unsuccessful , as Michael drives away the only interested student , Justin ( Trevor Einhorn ) because Justin is not cool enough for him . After everyone else either ignores the booth or tells Michael to piss off , Michael tries to recruit Justin as their intern , only for Justin to call Michael out for treating him badly and walk away . Michael then makes such a commotion that the teacher ( Lori Murphy Saux ) calls security and has him removed from the fair . After , Pam ventures to a booth advertising graphic design , where she discovers that she has yet to learn many graphic design programs . The man working at the booth recommends she goes to either Philadelphia or New York City to learn about the graphic design technology . 
 Meanwhile , Michael has left Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) in charge of the office , but none of the employees obey his wishes . When most of the employees leave in the middle of the day , Dwight is left alone except for ex @-@ girlfriend Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) , causing the two to interact awkwardly for the rest of the day . When Jim and Pam meet up again in the office , they share two long , passionate kisses having accomplished both of their goals ( Jim making the sale and Pam finding out the next step for her future in graphic design ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 This episode was the third episode of the series directed by Tucker Gates . Gates had previously directed the third season episodes " Branch Closing " and " Women 's Appreciation " . " Job Fair " was written by Gene Stupnitsky and Lee Eisenberg . 
 In order to create the blisters that Andy had on his hands during the episode , the make @-@ up crew had to use Ben Nye sunburn colors , <unk> scar making material , and acetone . The process took twenty to thirty minutes , in which the sunburn colors were applied first and the scar making material was applied last . Angela Kinsey was pregnant during shooting . Her character wasn 't pregnant , so items ( such as a copy machine ) were placed between her stomach and the camera to hide her pregnancy . Writer Lee Eisenberg recalled that during editing " I asked if we had any wider shots . Both Gene ( Stupnitsky ) and Dave Rogers ( the editor ) reminded me that we were shooting around Angela 's enormous belly " . Kinsey later gave birth on May 3 , five days before the episode premiered . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Job Fair " received 3 @.@ 6 / 9 in the ages 18 – 49 demographic in the Nielsen ratings . This means that 3 @.@ 6 percent of all households with an 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old living in it watched the episode , and nine percent had their televisions tuned to the channel at any point . The episode was watched by 7 @.@ 22 million viewers . 
 Reviews for this episode were mixed . Travis Fickett , of IGN , criticized parts of the episode , saying that the situation between Dwight and Angela was " played out so minimalist that virtually nothing develops " and even though Michael " gets up and makes an ass of himself " the resolution " isn 't much of a pay @-@ off " . Fickett did say that although " this may not be the funniest episode , it shows how the series is capable of subtlety and depth . " BuddyTV 's Oscar Dahl thought that " Job Fair " " had some nice moments , but it was a bit lacking in the comedy department " . Jay Black , from TV Squad , wrote that Andy " stole the show " . 
 = Jeremy Thorpe = 
 John Jeremy Thorpe , PC ( 29 April 1929 – 4 December 2014 ) was a British politician who served as Member of Parliament for North Devon from 1959 to 1979 , and as leader of the Liberal Party between 1967 and 1976 . In May 1979 he was tried at the Old Bailey on charges of conspiracy and incitement to murder , based on his earlier relationship with Norman Scott , a former model . Thorpe was acquitted on all charges , but the case ended his political career . 
 Thorpe was the son and grandson of Conservative MPs , but decided to align with the small and ailing Liberal Party . After studying at Oxford University he became one of the Liberals ' brightest stars in the 1950s . He entered parliament at the age of 30 , made a rapid mark , and was elected party leader in 1967 . After an uncertain start during which the party lost ground , Thorpe capitalised on the growing unpopularity of the Conservative and Labour parties to lead the Liberals through a period of notable electoral success . This culminated in the general election of February 1974 , when the party won 6 million votes . Under the first @-@ past @-@ the @-@ post electoral system this gave them only 14 seats , but with neither of the main parties attaining a majority ( " Hung parliament " ) , Thorpe was in a strong position . He was offered a cabinet post by the Conservative prime minister , Edward Heath , if he would bring the Liberals into a coalition . His price for such a deal , reform of the electoral system , was rejected by Heath , who resigned in favour of a minority Labour government . 
 The February 1974 election proved to be the high water @-@ mark of Thorpe 's career . Thereafter his and his party 's fortunes declined , particularly from late 1975 when rumours of his involvement in a plot to murder Scott began to multiply . Thorpe finally resigned the leadership in May 1976 , when his position became untenable . When the matter came to court three years later , Thorpe chose not to give evidence on the grounds that the prosecution had not established its case . This stance left many questions unanswered ; despite his acquittal , Thorpe was discredited and could not return to public life . From the mid @-@ 1980s he was disabled by Parkinson 's disease . During his long retirement he gradually recovered the affections of his party , and by the time of his death was honoured by a later generation of leaders , who drew attention to his record as an internationalist , a supporter of human rights , and an opponent of apartheid and all forms of racism . 
 = = Family background and early childhood = = 
 Thorpe was born in South Kensington , London , on 29 April 1929 . His father was John Henry Thorpe , a lawyer and politician who was the Conservative MP for Manchester Rusholme between 1919 and 1923 . His mother , Ursula , née Norton @-@ Griffiths , was the daughter of another Conservative MP , Sir John Norton @-@ Griffiths , widely known as " Empire Jack " because of his passionate imperialism . The Thorpe family claimed kinship with distant forbears carrying the name , including Sir Robert Thorpe who was briefly Lord Chancellor in 1372 , and Thomas Thorpe who was Speaker of the House of Commons in 1453 – 54 . 
 The more recent Thorpe ancestors were Irish . Jeremy Thorpe 's great @-@ grandfather , William Thorpe , was a Dublin policeman who rose to the rank of superintendent . One of his many sons , John Thorpe , became an Anglican priest and served as Archdeacon of Macclesfield from 1922 to 1932 . The archdeacon 's marriage in 1884 to a daughter of the prosperous Anglo @-@ Irish Aylmer family brought considerable wealth to the <unk> , as did his daughter Olive 's wedding into the influential Christie @-@ Miller family of Cheshire . Both John Henry and Jeremy Thorpe would benefit from this connection , as the Christie @-@ Millers paid the costs of their education . 
 Jeremy was his parents ' third child , following two sisters . His upbringing was privileged and protected , under the care of nannies and <unk> until , in 1935 , he began attending Wagner 's day school in Queen 's Gate . He became a proficient violinist , and often performed at school concerts . Although John Henry Thorpe was no longer in parliament , he had maintained many of his political contacts and friendships , and leading politicians were regularly entertained at the Thorpe home . Among the strongest of these friendships was that with the Lloyd George family — Ursula Thorpe was a close friend of the former Liberal prime minister 's daughter , Megan , who became Jeremy 's godmother . The former prime minister David Lloyd George , an occasional visitor , became Jeremy 's political hero and role model , and helped form his ambitions for a political career in the Liberal Party . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Schooling = = = 
