 In January 1938 Jeremy went to <unk> House , a school in Oxfordshire that prepared boys for entry to Eton . By summer 1939 war looked likely , and the Thorpe family moved from London to the Surrey village of Limpsfield where Jeremy attended a local school . War began in September 1939 ; in June 1940 , with invasion threatening , the Thorpe children were sent to live with their American aunt , Kay Norton @-@ Griffiths , in Boston . In September that year Jeremy began at The Rectory School in Pomfret , Connecticut . He remained there for three generally happy years ; his main extracurricular task , he later recalled , was looking after the school 's pigs . In 1943 it was thought safe for the children to return to England , and John Henry used his political connections to secure for Jeremy a passage in the Royal Navy cruiser HMS Phoebe . 
 Thorpe started at Eton in September 1943 . He proved an indifferent scholar , he lacked sporting aptitude , and although superficially a rebel against conformity , his frequent toadying to authority earned him the nickname " Oily Thorpe " . He also annoyed his fellow @-@ pupils by parading his acquaintance with a range of famous and important people . He offended the school 's traditionalists by resigning from the school 's cadet force , and shocked others by expressing his intention to marry Princess Margaret , then second in line to the British throne . Thorpe has revealed little about his Eton years , beyond his membership of the school orchestra and his winning a cup for his violin playing — he briefly considered the possibility of a career as a professional violinist . The Eton years were marred by the death of <unk> 's father in 1944 , at the age of 57 , worn out by his heavy workload within the war administration . 
 = = = Oxford = = = 
 Having secured a place at Trinity College , Oxford , Thorpe left Eton in March 1947 . In September he began his eighteen months ' National Service , but within six weeks was discharged on medical grounds after collapsing while attempting an assault course . As his place at Oxford was unavailable until the following year , Thorpe worked as a temporary preparatory school teacher before his admission to Trinity on 8 October 1948 . 
 Thorpe was reading law , but his primary interests at Oxford were political and social . From his earliest undergraduate days he drew attention to himself by his flamboyant behaviour ; according to Thorpe 's biographer Michael Bloch , his " pallid appearance , dark hair and eyes and angular features , gave him a <unk> air " . He was quick to seek political office , initially in the Oxford University Liberal Club ( <unk> ) which , despite the doldrums affecting the Liberal Party nationally , was a thriving club with over 800 members . Thorpe was elected to the club 's committee at the end of his first term ; in November 1949 he became its president . Outside Oxford , Thorpe showed a genuine commitment to Liberalism in his enthusiastic contributions to the party 's national election campaigns , and on reaching his 21st birthday in April 1950 , applied to have his name added to the party 's list of possible parliamentary candidates . 
 Beyond the <unk> , Thorpe achieved the presidency of the Oxford University Law Society , although his principal objective was the presidency of the Oxford Union , an office frequently used as a stepping @-@ stone to national prominence . Normally , would @-@ be presidents first served in the Union 's junior offices , as Secretary , Treasurer or Librarian , but Thorpe , having impressed as a confident and forceful debater , decided early in 1950 to try directly for the presidency . He was easily defeated by the future broadcaster Robin Day . His single @-@ minded pursuit of office , and the dubious strategies he sometimes employed , led to some acrimonious campaigns , but he gained many supporters , and later in 1950 beat two formidable contenders — the socialist Dick Taverne and the Conservative William Rees @-@ Mogg — to secure the presidency for the Hilary term of 1951 . 
 Thorpe 's term as president was marked by the range of distinguished guest speakers that he recruited , among them Lord Hailsham , the jurist and former Liberal MP Norman Birkett , and the humorist Stephen Potter . The time @-@ consuming nature of his various offices meant that Thorpe required a fourth year to complete his law studies , which ended in the summer of 1952 with a third @-@ class honours degree . 
 At Oxford Thorpe enjoyed numerous friendships with his contemporaries , many of whom later achieved distinction . These were almost exclusively with men ; even so , he was not identified as a member of any of Oxford 's homosexual sets . He confided to a friend that politics provided him with the necessary level of emotional excitement , thus making sexual relationships unnecessary . Thus , Bloch suggests , he was accepted by his fellow @-@ students as " a basically asexual character , wrapped up in politics and his career " . 
 = = Early career = = 
 = = = Parliamentary candidate = = = 
 Having been accepted as a potential Liberal parliamentary candidate , Thorpe looked for a constituency . The general elections of 1950 and 1951 had seen the party 's MPs fall , first to nine , then six ; some commentators saw little future except " further attrition and further losses to the two major parties " . The journalist Julian Glover writes that Thorpe 's determination to stay with the party , despite its woes , showed a more principled commitment to Liberalism than many critics have acknowledged ; his prospects of reaching parliament would have been considerably greater within either the Conservative or Labour parties . 
 Initially the young would @-@ be candidate was offered the opportunity of succeeding the party leader , Clement Davies , in the Welsh seat of Montgomeryshire , when Davies decided to retire . There being no immediate prospect of that , Thorpe looked elsewhere , in particular to Devon and Cornwall , where the party had long @-@ standing traditions and had polled respectably in 1950 and 1951 . In these elections Thorpe had assisted the Liberal candidate for North Cornwall , Dingle Foot , whose agent recommended him to the neighbouring North Devon constituency . The Torrington local party was also anxious to adopt Thorpe as their candidate , while Foot saw him as a possible successor in North Cornwall . Thorpe chose to fight North Devon , a seat once held by the Liberals although , in 1951 , the party finished in third place behind Conservative and Labour , with less than 20 % of the vote . 
 Thorpe was adopted as North Devon 's Liberal candidate in April 1952 . His political stance matched that of other young activists , who believed that the party should offer a radical non @-@ socialist alternative to the Conservative government . He and others founded the Radical Reform Group , to drive the party in that direction . He spent much of his spare time cultivating the voters in North Devon ; at rallies and on the doorstep he mixed local concerns with conspicuously liberal views on larger , international issues such as colonialism and apartheid . When Anthony Eden , who had succeeded Winston Churchill as prime minister , called a snap general election in April 1955 , Thorpe fought an energetic local campaign . He succeeded in halving the Conservative majority in the constituency , and restoring the Liberals to second place . 
 = = = Barrister @-@ at @-@ law and television journalist = = = 
 In need of paid employment , Thorpe opted for the law , and in February 1954 , after completing his pupillage , was called to the bar in the Inner Temple . Initially he found it difficult to earn a living from his fees ; he needed another source of income , and found it in the medium of television journalism . Thorpe was employed by Associated Rediffusion , at first as chairman of a science discussion programme , The Scientist Replies , and later as an interviewer on the station 's major current affairs vehicle This Week . Among various assignments for This Week he travelled to Ghana in 1957 to cover the country 's independence celebrations , and in 1958 he reported from Jordan on a plot to assassinate King Hussein . Thorpe was a skilful broadcaster , and in addition to his television work he became a regular guest on the BBC radio programme Any Questions ? In 1959 he was offered the post of chief commentator by Associated Rediffusion , but as the condition was that he gave up his parliamentary candidature , he declined . 
 Through the later 1950s Thorpe juggled his legal and television work with his political duties in North Devon , where he worked tirelessly to build up support . From September 1956 the Liberal Party was led by Jo Grimond , a more up @-@ to @-@ date figure than his elderly predecessor Davies , and more in tune with the ideas of Thorpe and the Radical Reform Group . After an uncertain beginning — the Liberals lost one of their six seats to Labour in a February 1957 by @-@ election — Grimond 's leadership began to produce results . The party polled well in a series of by @-@ elections during 1957 and 1958 , culminating in a victory at Torrington in March 1958 — a seat which the party had not even contested in the 1955 general election . Thorpe , who had figured prominently in the Torrington campaign , saw this victory in an adjoining Devon constituency as a harbinger of his own future success . 
 Thorpe 's television and radio work had brought him a measure of celebrity , and his colourful and individualistic campaigning style was widely admired . The journalist Christopher Booker recalled : " He had an extraordinary ability both to cheer up his followers and send up his opponents " . However , throughout the 1950s Thorpe was leading a secret homosexual life , at a time when all such activity was illegal in the United Kingdom , and subject to heavy penalties ; exposure would have ended his political prospects instantly . This sexual preference , concealed from the wider public , was known and tolerated in North Devon , and was at least suspected by many in the Liberal Party . 
 = = Member of Parliament = = 
 Thorpe 's efforts in North Devon came to fruition in the October 1959 general election , when he won the seat with a majority of 362 over his Conservative opponent — the Liberal Party 's solitary gain in what was generally an electoral triumph for Harold Macmillan 's Conservative government . On 10 November 1959 he made his maiden speech , during a debate on the government 's local employment bill . He highlighted poor communications as the principal reason for the lack of employment opportunities in North Devon , and called for urgent government action . After the speech a Conservative member looked forward to " many very useful contributions from the hon . Member for Devon , North on any subject to which he turns his agile legal brain " . 
 Thorpe was a diligent MP , active in promoting local issues — a new general hospital , and a link road to the Exeter @-@ Taunton motorway — and campaigned successfully to save the Barnstaple @-@ to @-@ Exeter railway line from the Beeching axe . On broader questions he made no secret of his anti @-@ hanging , pro @-@ immigrant , pro @-@ Europe opinions , largely not shared by his constituents . He championed freedom from colonial and minority rule , and was an outspoken opponent of regimes he considered oppressive such as those in South Africa and the short @-@ lived Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland . He was also noted for his verve and wit ; when in 1962 , after a series of by @-@ election disasters , Macmillan sacked a third of his cabinet , Thorpe 's reported comment , an inversion of the biblical verse John 15 : 13 , was " Greater love hath no man than this , that he lay down his friends for his life " . 
 Within the Liberal Party , Thorpe helped to found an informal organisation known as " <unk> Seats " , which directed energy and funding to selected target constituencies . This strategy led to some notable by @-@ election performances during 1961 – 62 , culminating in March 1962 with victory in Orpington , where a 14 @,@ 760 Conservative majority was turned into a Liberal majority of 7 @,@ 855 . These results were accompanied by substantial Liberal gains in municipal elections ; national opinion polls briefly showed the party on equal terms with the Labour and Conservative parties . This advance was barely reflected in the results of the October 1964 general election ; the party nearly doubled its share of the national vote , to 11 @.@ 2 % , but secured a net gain of only two seats . One of the new Liberals was Peter Bessell , who won the Cornish seat of Bodmin . In North Devon , Thorpe increased his personal majority to over 5 @,@ 000 . 
 After the election , which Labour won with a small majority , Thorpe was seen by many as Grimond 's natural successor ; his speeches were generally the highlights of the party 's annual assemblies , and he strengthened his position when , in 1965 , he secured the important post of party treasurer . He proved to be an excellent fund @-@ raiser , although his insistence on personal control of much of the party 's funds aroused criticism and resentment . In July 1965 , after the end of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland , Thorpe toured Central and East Africa , visiting both Zambia and Rhodesia . On his return he advised the prime minister , Harold Wilson , that the all @-@ white Rhodesian government under Ian Smith would make a unilateral declaration of independence ( UDI ) before the end of the year , unless deterred by the threat of armed intervention . Wilson would not countenance the use of troops ; the UDI took place on 11 November . In a speech to the Liberal assembly in September 1966 , Thorpe condemned Wilson 's handling of the Rhodesia issue ( " misjudged and <unk> " ) , and called for the bombing by United Nations aircraft of the rail link through which the post @-@ UDI Rhodesian government received its oil supplies . The speech delighted the more radical elements in the Liberal Party but outraged many Conservatives , who used the derisive nickname " Bomber Thorpe " for the rest of Thorpe 's parliamentary career . 
 In March 1966 Wilson called an election , hoping to improve his tiny parliamentary majority . He did so , increasing it to almost 100 . The Liberals , although their overall share of the vote fell to 8 @.@ 5 % , increased their number of MPs from nine to twelve , an indication of success in selective campaigning under the " <unk> Seats " strategy . Thorpe suffered a personal disappointment in North Devon , where his majority dropped to 1 @,@ 166 . 
 = = Party leader = = 
 = = = First phase , 1967 – 70 = = = 
 After the 1966 election , Grimond confided to senior party officials that he wished soon to step down from the leadership . Thorpe was now the senior Liberal MP after Grimond , and the party 's highest @-@ profile member , although Timothy Beaumont , chairman of the party 's organising committee , noted in his diary : " I am pretty certain that he has little popularity within the Parliamentary Party " . When Grimond finally resigned , on 17 January 1967 , an election to replace him was arranged to take place within 48 hours , leaving little time for manoeuvring . The 12 Liberal MPs formed the whole electorate ; after the first ballot , Thorpe had secured six votes against three each for Eric Lubbock , the Orpington MP , and Emlyn Hooson who had succeeded to the Montgomeryshire seat . On 18 January Lubbock and Hooson withdrew their candidacies , and Thorpe was declared the winner . 
 As Liberal leader , Thorpe provided a clear contrast with the pedestrian images of Wilson and Edward Heath , the Conservative leader since March 1965 . He was considerably younger , and much more telegenic . His first years of leadership were problematic ; he found himself at odds with the Young Liberals , who were advocating policies far to the left of the Liberal mainstream . Their demands for workers ' control in nationalised industries , British withdrawal from NATO , and massive cuts in the defence budget , caused bitter disputes within the party and damaged its public image . At this time the political climate was not conducive to radical policies ; the Wilson government 's rapid descent into unpopularity brought a sharp swing to the right among voters . The beneficiaries were the Conservatives , who made spectacular by @-@ election gains at Labour 's expense while the Liberals failed to make any real impact . Discontent against Thorpe 's leadership was being voiced within a year of his election , culminating in June 1968 when disaffected senior party members combined with Young Liberals in an attempt to depose him . Thorpe had just married Caroline <unk> , and was abroad on honeymoon when the plotters struck . The timing of their attempted coup , widely seen in and out of the party as treachery , ensured that on Thorpe 's return the party executive backed him by 48 votes to 2 . 
 Thorpe 's marriage provided him with a period of emotional stability ; a son was born in April 1969 . Shortly afterwards , Thorpe received a political boost when the Liberals unexpectedly won a by @-@ election at Birmingham Ladywood , in a previously safe Labour seat . This was , however , a solitary success , and the party faced the general election of June 1970 with little confidence . The results justified their gloomy premonitions ; the party 's share of the vote fell to 7 @.@ 5 % , and seven of its thirteen seats , including Ladywood , were lost . Thorpe barely hung on in North Devon , his majority reduced to 369 . Three of his colleagues had comparably small majorities ; only Grimond and Hooson were relatively safe . Heath 's Conservatives secured a 30 @-@ seat majority . 
 = = = Second phase 1970 – 74 = = = 
 After the Liberals ' poor election performance Thorpe came under fire , but such criticisms were stifled when , ten days after the election , Caroline Thorpe was killed in a car accident . For the rest of 1970 and for much of 1971 , Thorpe was preoccupied with his loss and his plan for a permanent memorial to Caroline . Meanwhile , the party began to recover , chiefly through its adoption of " community politics " — engagement with local rather than national issues — and achieved modest gains in the 1971 local elections . 
 By early 1972 , with the monument to Caroline erected on <unk> Hill , Thorpe was fully re @-@ engaged in political life . In February he assisted the passage through the House of Commons of Heath 's European Communities Bill , approving the United Kingdom 's accession to the European Economic Community . The bill was opposed by Labour and by some Conservatives . By aligning his party with the government , Thorpe ensured a majority of eight for the bill 's second reading , and it duly became law . By mid @-@ 1972 the Liberals ' fortunes were rising significantly ; the public was equally disenchanted with both major parties , and community politics were proving popular . Impressive local election results were followed by sensational by @-@ election results . In October 1972 Rochdale was won from Labour , and in the next year four victories were achieved over the Conservatives : Sutton , Isle of Ely , Ripon and Berwick @-@ upon @-@ Tweed . 
 On 14 March 1973 Thorpe married Marion Stein , a concert pianist and the former wife of George Lascelles , 7th Earl of Harewood . The couple had been brought together a year earlier by a mutual acquaintance , the pianist Moura Lympany . The year ended less happily for Thorpe , when the secondary banking firm of London & County Securities , of which he had been a director since May 1971 , collapsed amid rumours of mismanagement and fraud , marking the start of the secondary banking crisis of 1973 – 75 ; the details were not revealed until 1976 . In February 1974 Heath , whose government had been plagued by industrial unrest , called a general election on the issue of " Who governs Britain ? " . During the election campaign there was evidence of disaffection with both Heath and Wilson , and of a surge in Liberal support . Thorpe was confident that the party would make a significant breakthrough ; on election day , 28 February , it secured its highest national vote to date , 6 million , and its highest share of the vote ( 19 @.@ 3 ) since 1929 . However , under the first @-@ past @-@ the @-@ post voting system , these figures translated into just 14 seats . Thorpe 's majority in North Devon rose to 11 @,@ 072 . 
 = = = Coalition negotiations = = = 
 The February 1974 general election produced a hung parliament ; neither Labour , with 301 seats , nor the Conservatives , with 297 seats , achieved an overall majority . Because the Conservatives had won a slightly bigger share of the national vote than Labour ( 37 @.@ 9 % against 37 @.@ 1 % ) , Heath did not resign , hoping to persuade the Liberals into a Conservative @-@ led coalition . He met Thorpe on 2 March to discuss possible bases for co @-@ operation , Heath 's preferred option being a formal coalition in which Thorpe would be given a cabinet post , and junior ministries would be allocated to other senior Liberals . As the combined Conservative @-@ Liberal vote amounted to 57 % of the electorate , such a government would , Heath thought , have some moral legitimacy . If Thorpe would not accept coalition , a less formal basis of inter @-@ party co @-@ operation might be agreed which would enable the Conservative government to retain office . 
 The next day , after discussions with senior colleagues , Thorpe advised Heath that a commitment to electoral reform would be a prerequisite to any arrangement between the two parties . Thorpe proposed that Heath establish a Speaker 's Conference whose recommendations on electoral reform would , if acceptable to the Liberals , form the basis of subsequent legislation with full cabinet approval . After further consultations with their parties , the two leaders met again ; Heath reported that while his party would not object to a Speaker 's Conference , they could not commit themselves in advance to accepting its recommendations , which would be subject to a free House of Commons vote . This was unacceptable to Thorpe , who then made a separate proposal that an all @-@ party " Government of national unity " be formed to tackle the urgent economic problems facing the country . This idea was rejected by Heath , who resigned on Monday 4 March . 
 Thorpe later admitted that a coalition agreement would have torn the party apart ; the more radical elements , in particular , the Young Liberals would never have accepted it . Furthermore , " even with our support Heath wouldn 't have had a parliamentary majority " ; without some arrangements with the Scottish Nationalists or the Ulster Unionists , the coalition could have been brought down by the first vote on the Queen 's Speech . Following Heath 's resignation , Wilson formed a minority Labour government . 
 = = = Declining fortunes = = = 
 As Harold Wilson did not have an overall majority after the February 1974 election , he was widely expected to call another election before too long ; he did so in September 1974 . Thorpe anticipated a turning point in the Liberals ' fortunes and campaigned under the slogan " one more heave " , aiming for a complete breakthrough with entering a coalition a last resort . The phrase is attributed to advertising agent and Liberal parliamentary candidate Adrian Slade . The slogan was memorable , but considered uninspiring . Future Liberal Party leader David Steel called the whole campaign " a slightly less successful re @-@ run of February . " In the October 1974 general election , the Liberals received over 700 @,@ 000 fewer votes and returned 13 MPs , down one , with Wilson achieving an overall majority of three . 
 Thorpe and the Liberals were deflated by the outcome of the October 1974 election . Wilson 's majority , albeit slim , denied Thorpe the role of kingmaker , leaving the Liberals without a clear role ; as Dutton observes , apart from being neither Conservative or Labour , the Liberals lacked a distinctive identity and their policies were largely unknown to the public . A further problem for the party was the divergence between its activists , who were radicals well to the left of the official party , and a large section of its recent supporters who were disgruntled Conservatives . Thorpe , whose personal majority in North Devon had fallen to under 7 @,@ 000 in October , confided to an associate that , unless the party were soon to make a significant impact , his days as leader might be numbered . 
 In the months following the election the danger represented by Scott continued to preoccupy Thorpe who , according to Holmes , felt " he would never be safe with that man around " . From late 1974 Holmes took the lead in furthering plans to silence Scott ; through various intermediaries he found Andrew Newton , an airline pilot , who said he would dispose of Scott for a fee of between £ 5 @,@ 000 and £ 10 @,@ 000 . Meanwhile , Thorpe procured £ 20 @,@ 000 from Sir Jack Hayward , the Bahamas @-@ based millionaire businessman who had previously donated to the Liberal Party , stating that this was to cover election expenses incurred during 1974 . Thorpe arranged for these funds to be secretly channelled to Holmes rather than into the party 's coffers . He later denied that this money had been used to pay Newton , or anyone else , as part of a conspiracy . 
 Outside his private affairs , Thorpe campaigned during 1975 for electoral reform , citing the " Great Vote Robbery " of the year before . He argued that electoral reform on a proportional basis would bring about a centrist stability to British politics that would favour British business . In the June 1975 referendum on Britain 's continuing membership of the EEC , Thorpe campaigned for a " yes " vote alongside the pro @-@ Europeans of both major parties , appearing with Heath ( recently replaced as Conservative leader by Margaret Thatcher ) at the Oxford Union . The referendum resulted in a two @-@ to @-@ one approval of Britain 's membership . However , Thorpe failed to stem the decline in his party 's electoral fortunes . In the Woolwich West by @-@ election on 26 June 1975 the party lost more than two @-@ thirds of its October 1974 vote , a " major humiliation " according to The Guardian . 
 = = = Relationship with Norman Scott = = = 
 Thorpe 's homosexual activities from time to time came to the attention of the authorities , and were investigated by the police ; information was added to his MI5 file , but in no case was action taken against him . In 1971 he survived a party inquiry after a complaint against him by Norman Scott , a riding instructor and would @-@ be male model . Scott maintained that in the early 1960s he had been in a sexual relationship with Thorpe , who had subsequently mistreated him . The inquiry dismissed the allegations . 
 Scott ( known then as Norman Josiffe ) had first met Thorpe early in 1961 when the former was a 20 @-@ year @-@ old groom working for one of Thorpe 's wealthy friends . The initial meeting was brief , but nearly a year later Scott , by then in London and destitute , called at the House of Commons to ask the MP for help . Thorpe later acknowledged that a friendship had developed , but denied any physical relationship ; Scott , on the other hand , claimed that he had been seduced by Thorpe on the night following the Commons meeting . Over the following years Thorpe made numerous attempts to help Scott to find accommodation and work , but instead of repaying these favours with gratitude , Scott became increasingly resentful against Thorpe , believing that he was the source of all his ills and threatening him with exposure . 
 In 1965 Thorpe asked his parliamentary colleague Peter Bessell to help him resolve the problem . Bessell met Scott and warned him that his threats against Thorpe might be considered as blackmail ; he did , however , offer to help Scott obtain a new National Insurance card , the lack of which had been a long @-@ running source of aggravation . This quietened matters for a while , but within a year Scott was causing trouble again . With Thorpe 's agreement , Bessell began paying Scott a " retainer " of £ 5 a week , supposedly as compensation for the welfare benefits that Scott had been unable to obtain because of his missing card . Bessell later stated that by 1968 Thorpe was considering ways in which Scott might be permanently silenced ; he thought his old Oxford friend David Holmes might organise this . Holmes had been best man at Thorpe 's wedding , and was completely loyal to him . 
 When Scott unexpectedly married in 1969 , it appeared that the problem might be over , but by 1970 the marriage had ended ; Scott convinced himself that Thorpe was to blame . Early in 1971 Scott moved to the village of Talybont , in North Wales , where he befriended a widow , Gwen Parry @-@ Jones , to whom he recounted his tale of ill @-@ treatment at the hands of Thorpe . She passed the information to Emlyn Hooson , who was MP for the adjoining Welsh constituency ; Hooson precipitated the party enquiry which cleared Thorpe and left Scott feeling bitter and humiliated . After Parry @-@ Jones 's death the following year , Scott fell into a depression and for a while was quiescent . In time , however , he began to tell his story to anyone who would listen . By 1974 Thorpe , at the crest of the Liberal revival , was terrified of exposure that might lose him the Liberal leadership . As Dominic <unk> observes in his history of the times : " The stakes had never been higher ; silencing Scott had never been more urgent " . 
 = = = Resignation = = = 
 Over the years Scott made several attempts to publicise his story , but no newspapers were interested . The satirical magazine Private Eye decided in late 1972 that the story " was defamatory , <unk> , and above all was ten years old " . Even when , in October 1975 , Newton 's bungled attempt to shoot Scott resulted in the death of the latter 's Great Dane , Rinka , and Newton 's arrest on charges of possession of a firearm with intent to endanger life , the press remained muted , possibly awaiting the bigger story that they hoped would break . Their reticence ended in January 1976 when Scott , in court on a minor social security fraud charge , claimed he was being hounded because of his previous sexual relationship with Thorpe . This statement , made in court and thus protected from the libel laws , was widely reported . 
 On 29 January the Department of Trade published its report into the collapse of London & County Securities . The report criticised Thorpe 's failure to inform himself of the true nature of the company before involving himself , " a cautionary tale for any leading politician " . Thorpe received some relief when his former colleague Bessell , who had resigned from parliament and relocated to California to escape from a string of business failures , re @-@ emerged in early February after discovery by the Daily Mail . Bessell gave muddled accounts of his involvement with Scott , but insisted that his former chief was innocent of any wrongdoing . 
 On 16 March 1976 Newton 's trial began at Exeter Crown Court , where Scott repeated his allegations against Thorpe despite the efforts of the prosecution 's lawyers to silence him . Newton was found guilty and sentenced to two years ' imprisonment , but did not incriminate Thorpe . The erosion of public support for the Liberal Party continued with several poor by @-@ election results in March , which the former leader Grimond attributed to increasing lack of confidence in Thorpe . On 14 March , The Sunday Times printed Thorpe 's answer to Scott 's various allegations , under the heading " The Lies of Norman Scott " . Nevertheless , many of the party 's senior figures now felt that Thorpe should resign . 
 Thorpe 's problems multiplied when Bessell , alarmed by his own position , confessed to the Daily Mail on 6 May that in his earlier statements he had lied to protect his former leader . Scott was threatening to publish personal letters from Thorpe who , to forestall him , arranged for the Sunday Times to print two letters from 1961 . Although these did not conclusively indicate wrongdoing , their tone indicated that Thorpe had not been frank about the true nature of his friendship with Scott . On 10 May 1976 , amid rising criticism , Thorpe resigned the party leadership , " convinced that a fixed determination to destroy the Leader could itself result in the destruction of the Party " . 
 = = Post @-@ resignation = = 
 = = = Interlude = = = 
 Thorpe 's resignation brought him a period of temporary calm . The new Liberal leader , David Steel , made him party spokesman on foreign affairs , with responsibility for European issues . Wilson had by this time retired as prime minister , and been replaced by James Callaghan . Thorpe lobbied the government hard for legislation to introduce direct elections to the European Parliament ; at that time MEPs were appointed by member nations ' parliaments . 
 By @-@ election losses eroded and finally removed Labour 's small parliamentary majority , and in March 1977 Callaghan was in danger of losing a confidence vote that would have precipitated a general election . Opinion polls indicated that an election at that time would have been equally disastrous for the Labour and Liberal parties ; to ensure mutual survival , a " Lib @-@ Lab pact " was agreed , whereby in return for certain policy concessions the Liberals would support the Government . Thorpe used his influence to insist that legislation for direct elections to the European Parliament was part of the pact , but was unable to secure his principal objective , a commitment to a proportional basis in these elections . In parliament , Thorpe spoke in favour of Scottish and Welsh devolution , arguing that there was no alternative to home rule except total separation . In the various debates related to the unresolved issue of Rhodesia , Thorpe pressed for the involvement of representatives from the African nationalists , in the form of the Patriotic Front , in negotiations for a peaceful settlement to the long @-@ running Rhodesian Bush War . 
 Although the press was generally quiet after Thorpe 's resignation , reporters were still investigating him . The most persistent of these were Barry Penrose and Roger <unk> , collectively known as " Pencourt " , who had begun by believing that Thorpe was a target of South African intelligence agencies , until their investigations led them to Bessell in California . Bessell , no longer covering for Thorpe , gave the reporters his version of the conspiracy to murder Scott , and Thorpe 's role in it . Pencourt 's progress was covered in Private Eye , to Thorpe 's extreme vexation ; when the pair attempted to question him outside his Devon home early in 1977 , he threatened them with prosecution . 
 Thorpe 's relatively peaceful interlude ended in October 1977 when Newton , released from prison , sold his story to the London Evening News . Newton 's claim that he had been paid " by a leading Liberal " to kill Scott caused a sensation , and led to a prolonged police investigation . Throughout this period Thorpe endeavoured to continue his public life , in and out of parliament . In the House of Commons on 1 August 1978 , when it appeared certain he would face criminal charges , he asked the Attorney @-@ General what sum of capital possessed by an applicant would prevent him from receiving legal aid . The next day he made his final speech in the House , during a debate on Rhodesia . 
 On 4 August Thorpe , along with Holmes and two of Holmes 's associates , were charged with conspiracy to murder Scott . Thorpe was additionally charged with incitement to murder , on the basis of his alleged 1968 discussions with Bessell and Holmes . After being released on bail , Thorpe declared his innocence and his determination to refute the charges . Although he remained North Devon 's MP he withdrew almost completely from public view , except for a brief theatrical appearance at the Liberals ' 1978 annual assembly on 14 September — to the annoyance of the party 's leaders who had asked him to stay away . 
 = = = Committal , electoral defeat = = = 
 In November 1978 , Thorpe , Holmes and two of the latter 's business acquaintances — John le Mesurier and George Deakin — appeared before magistrates at Minehead , Devon , in a committal hearing to determine whether they should stand trial . The court heard evidence of a conspiracy from Scott , Newton and Bessell ; it also learned that Bessell was being paid £ 50 @,@ 000 by The Sunday Telegraph for his story . At the conclusion , the four defendants were committed for trial at the Old Bailey . This was set to begin on 30 April 1979 , but when in March the government fell , and a general election was called for 3 May , the trial was postponed until 8 May . 
 Thorpe accepted the invitation of his local party to fight the North Devon seat , against the advice of friends who were certain he would lose . His campaign was largely ignored by the national party ; of its leading figures only John Pardoe , the MP for North Cornwall visited the constituency . Thorpe , supported by his wife , his mother and some loyal friends , fought hard , although much of his characteristic vigour was missing . He lost to his Conservative opponent by 8 @,@ 500 votes . Overall , the Conservatives obtained a majority of 43 seats , and Margaret Thatcher became prime minister . Afterwards , Thorpe confessed to the Daily Mail that he had not " expected to get hammered . You never do " . The Liberal Party 's share of the national vote fell to 13 @.@ 8 % , and its total seats from 13 to 11 . Dutton attributes much of the fall in the Liberal vote to the lengthy adverse publicity generated by the Thorpe affair . 
 = = Trial and acquittal = = 
 The trial , which lasted for six weeks , began on 8 May 1979 , under Sir Joseph Cantley . For his defence Thorpe engaged George Carman for what was the lawyer 's first high @-@ profile case . Carman quickly undermined Bessell 's credibility by revealing that he had a significant interest in Thorpe 's conviction ; in the event of an acquittal , Bessell would receive only half of his newspaper fee . During his cross @-@ examination of Scott on 22 May , Carman asked : " You knew Thorpe to be a man of homosexual tendencies in 1961 ? " This oblique admission of his client 's sexuality was a stratagem to prevent the prosecution from calling witnesses who would testify to Thorpe 's sex life . Nevertheless , Carman insisted , there was no reliable evidence of any physical sexual relationship between Thorpe and Scott , whom Carman dismissed as " this inveterate liar , social climber and scrounger " . 
 After weeks in which the court heard the prosecution 's evidence from the committal hearings , the defence opened on 7 June . Deakin testified that although he introduced Newton to Holmes , he had thought that this was to help deal with a blackmailer — he knew nothing of a conspiracy to kill . Deakin was the only defendant to testify ; Thorpe and the others chose to remain silent and call no witnesses , on the basis that the testimonies of Bessell , Scott and Newton had failed to make the prosecution 's case . 
 On 18 June , after closing speeches from prosecution and defence counsels , the judge began his summing @-@ up . While emphasising Thorpe 's distinguished public record , he was scathing about the principal prosecution witnesses : Bessell was a " humbug " , Scott a fraud , a sponger , a whiner , a parasite — " but of course he could still be telling the truth . " Newton was " determined to milk the case as hard as he can . " On 20 June the jury retired ; they returned two days later and acquitted the four defendants on all charges . In a brief public statement , Thorpe said that he considered the verdict " a complete vindication . " Scott said he was " unsurprised " by the outcome , but was upset by the aspersions on his character made by the judge from the safety of the bench . 
 In a BBC investigative documentary broadcast in December 2014 , an antique firearms collector named Dennis Meighan claimed that he had been hired by an unidentified senior Liberal to kill Scott , for a fee of £ 13 @,@ 500 . Instead , he had passed the job on to his associate , Newton , and provided him with the gun . Meighan said that he had given a statement to the authorities in 1975 , but that this was significantly altered by the police to remove all references to Thorpe . Meighan was not called to give evidence at the subsequent trial . " It was a cover @-@ up , no question , but it suited me fine " , he said . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After his acquittal , Thorpe announced that he proposed to attend the 1979 Liberal assembly and the forthcoming Liberal International Congress in Canada . However , his failure to explain himself under oath was widely criticised in the press , and the public perception was that he had been fortunate to have " got off " . Reluctantly , Thorpe accepted that there was no future role for him within the Liberal Party , and informed the North Devon association that he would not seek to fight the seat again . Steel expressed the hope that Thorpe would , " after a suitable period of rest and recuperation ... find many avenues where his great talents may be used . " 
 In his search for a new career Thorpe applied unsuccessfully for the posts of administrator of the Aldeburgh festival , and race relations adviser to the Greater London Council . His attempts to restart a career in television also came to nothing . In February 1982 it was announced that he was to become director of the British section of Amnesty International , but the appointment was opposed by many of the organisation 's membership , and after a month of controversy Thorpe withdrew from the post . He kept his position as chairman of the political committee of the United Nations Association , but in 1985 the progression of Parkinson 's disease , which had first been diagnosed in 1979 , led to the curtailment of most of his public activity . He continued to live in North Devon , and in 1987 accepted the honorary presidency of the North Devon Liberal Democrat association , formed after the Liberal – SDP merger . He thought he might return to parliament via a life peerage in the House of Lords , but although friends lobbied on his behalf , the merged party 's leadership refused to recommend him . Within the party generally , feelings towards him warmed , and when he attended the 1997 annual conference he received a standing ovation . 
 In 1999 Thorpe published an anecdotal memoir , In My Own Time , an anthology of his experiences in public life . In the book he repeated his denial of any sexual relationship with Scott , and maintained that the decision not to offer evidence was made to avoid prolonging the trial , since it was clear that the prosecution 's case was " shot through with lies , inaccuracies and admissions " . In the 2005 general election campaign Thorpe appeared on television , attacking both the Conservative and Labour parties for supporting the Iraq war . Three years later , in 2008 , he gave interviews to The Guardian and to the Journal of Liberal History . York <unk> , the Liberal journal 's interviewer , found Thorpe able to communicate only in a barely audible whisper , but with his brain power unimpaired . Thorpe asserted that he " still had steam in my pipes " ; reviewing the current political situation , he considered the Labour prime minister Gordon Brown " dour and unimpressive " , and dubbed the Conservative leader David Cameron " a phoney ... a Thatcherite trying to appear progressive " . Some of Thorpe 's Europeanism had been eroded over the years ; he now thought that the European Union had become too powerful , and insufficiently accountable . 
 = = Final years and death = = 
 Thorpe 's last public appearance was in 2009 , at the unveiling of a bust of himself in the Grimond Room at the House of Commons . Thereafter he was confined to his home , nursed by Marion until she became too infirm . She died on 6 March 2014 ; Thorpe survived her for nine months , dying on 4 December . At his funeral , at St Margaret 's , Westminster on 17 December , the mourners were led by five of his successors to the Liberal / Liberal Democrat leadership : Steel , Paddy Ashdown , Charles Kennedy , Menzies Campbell and Nick Clegg . 
 = = Appraisal = = 
 Most assessments of Thorpe 's career emphasise his downfall rather than his political achievements , " a fall unparalleled in British political history " , according to the Daily Telegraph obituarist . While Thorpe hoped that acquittal would ensure he would be remembered primarily for his revival of Liberal fortunes in the 1960s and 1970s , the trial shattered his reputation irretrievably . The prosecuting counsel at the Old Bailey likened the case to " a tragedy of truly Greek or Shakespearian proportions — the slow but inevitable destruction of a man by the stamp of one defect . " 
 After Thorpe 's death , sympathetic commentators drew attention to his internationalism and social liberalism , highlighting his long involvement with the anti @-@ apartheid movement , his denunciations of dictators , his opposition to the death penalty , and his rejection of racism . There is wide agreement that he was an outstanding political campaigner — persuasive , witty , and warm : " his astonishing memory for faces persuaded voters that they were intimate friends ... his resourceful mind afforded quips and stunts for every occasion . " A different perspective on Thorpe , quoted by Bloch , was given by a former friend , the art expert David <unk> , at the time of the trial : " Self @-@ centred ... <unk> entertaining , slightly sinister . Said to be witty , but ... if one doesn 't care for impersonations , he 's really a bit of a bore " . 
 In assessing Thorpe 's ten years as party leader , Clegg credits him with providing " the driving force that continued the Liberal revival that began under Jo Grimond " , and Douglas Murray , writing for The Spectator , recognises his strategy of identifying and concentrating on winnable seats as the basis for the major Liberal Democrat breakthrough in the 1997 election . Dutton , in his party history , takes a more qualified view , suggesting that in spite of Thorpe 's bold style and charisma , " the party drifted without a sense of conviction and underlying purpose ... [ and was ] dominated by tactics rather than ideas " . Thorpe positioned the Liberals in the " moderate centre " , equidistant from Labour and Conservative , a strategy which was very successful in February 1974 when dissatisfaction with the two main parties was at its height , but which left the party 's specific identity obscure , and its policies largely unknown . 
 Thorpe never discussed his sexuality publicly , although throughout his political career he led a double life — responsible politician by day while , according to Murray , " by night he was not only very gay but rather carefree about being so . " The writer and broadcaster Jonathan Fryer , who was a gay activist within the Liberal Party in the 1970s , maintained that in the repressive climate of the time Thorpe " couldn 't have come out , even if he 'd wanted to " . However , his double standard irritated and alienated the gay Liberals : " He wanted the best of both worlds — his fun and a family . " 
 Indeed Michael Bloch , in his biography of Thorpe , published a year after his death , said that he had conducted affairs with men , whilst Labour MP Chris Mullin describes Thorpe as a ' repressed homosexual ' who had a ' sexual relationship with a young man ' . 
 In his review of Bloch 's biography , Murray writes : " Jeremy Thorpe had hoped to be remembered as a great political leader . I suppose they all do . And perhaps he will be remembered longer than many other politicians of his age or ours . But it will always be for the same thing . Jeremy , Jeremy , bang , bang , woof , woof . " 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Online = = = 
 = Stord Bridge = 
 The Stord Bridge ( Norwegian : <unk> ) is a suspension bridge which crosses Digernessundet between the islands of Stord and Føyno in Stord , Norway . The bridge is 1 @,@ 077 meters ( 3 @,@ 533 ft ) long , has a main span of 677 meters ( 2 @,@ 221 ft ) and a clearance below of 18 meters ( 59 ft ) . It carries two lanes of European Route E39 and a combined pedestrian and bicycle pathway . It is part of the Triangle Link , a fixed link which connects Stord to Bømlo , and both to the mainland . In 2010 , the bridge had an average 5 @,@ 021 vehicles per day . The bridge and the link was a toll road from the opening until 30 May 2013 . 
 Plans for a crossing arose in the 1960s ; and until the 1990s proposals were for a pontoon bridge further north . The Stord Bridge was conceived after the decision to combine the crossing with the Bømlafjord Tunnel . The project was resisted both by local environmental groups and the Norwegian Public Roads Administration , the latter because the new plans would delay completion . Construction was undertaken by a joint venue between NCC and HBG Steel Structures . Construction started in 1999 and was the first bridge in Norway to have the cables spun on @-@ site . The bridge cost 442 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) and was taken into use on 27 December 2000 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The motivation for the Triangle Link was the desire to have a fixed link between the islands of Stord and Bømlo . The first documented proposals were made in the 1960s and involved building a pontoon bridge across Stokksundet , inspired by the plans to build what would become the Nordhordland Bridge north of Bergen . In 1973 , the municipal councils of Bømlo , Stord and Fitjar decided to launch a planning process , which concluded that a pontoon bridge between Sørstokken and Foldrøyholmen would be optimal . The report also considered bridges across the Fitjar Archipelago and a crossing via Spissøy and Føyno . There were protests from the shipping industry , who wished to continue to use the strait for ship traffic . The islands were connected with a network of five ferry services : Skjersholmane – Valevåg connected Stord and Sveio , Skjersholmane – <unk> connected Stord and <unk> , <unk> – <unk> connected Stord and <unk> , and Bømlo was connected to the mainland both by the <unk> – Valevåg Ferry and the Langevåg – Buavåg Ferry . 
 In the early 1980s , plans for Stord Airport , Sørstokken were launched . Thus the plans for a bridge crossing Stokksundet were again raised in 1982 , this time by the industry on Bømlo , who would have to travel by ferry to reach the new airport . A committee was established in May 1983 , which gave Engineer Harald <unk> the assignment of producing a new report . He launched three proposals : a pontoon or suspension bridge between Foldrøyholmen and <unk> ; a suspension bridge between <unk> and <unk> , which would terminate just south of the new airport ; and a combined fixed link between Spissøy and Digernes , without passing via the Fitjar Archipelago . The latter proposal was the first time a fixed link to the mainland was proposed . The Norwegian Civil Aviation Administration protested against a possible suspension bridge near the airport , but stated that one further away would be fine . 
 Surveys of traffic patterns on Bømlo were undertaken by Hordaland Public Roads Administration in 1984 . Based on it and other feedback , the agency stated that it preferred a pontoon bridge between Foldrøyholmen and Sørstokken , north of the ferry between Bømlo and Stord . It was estimated to cost NOK 190 million , in addition to auxiliary roads for NOK 40 million . In 1982 , plans were launched for a fixed link to the mainland further south , which would include a bridge over Digernessundet , a causeway and low bridge across Spissøysundet and a low bridge over Gassasundet . In addition , a tunnel would have to be built from Føyno to Sveio . This proposal was similar to the finalized Triangle Link . In 1985 , an all @-@ tunnel proposal , following the same route , was proposed . Hordaland Public Roads Administration stated that the proposals were unrealistic . The limited company Ytre Sunnhordland Bru- og Tunnelselskap AS ( SBT ) was founded in October 1986 by the municipalities of Bømlo , Stord , Fitjar and Sveio , Hordaland County Municipality and five banks . 
 In December 1986 , the Public Road Administration recommended a bridge solution . SBT changed its name to Sunnhordland Bru- og Tunnelselskap , and a majority of the board shifted towards being in favor of a fixed link . The Norwegian Coastal Administration stated that they would not allow a pontoon bridge . On 26 June 1987 , SBT decided to work towards permission to collect advanced tolls on the ferry services . The board unanimously supported the triangular proposal on 16 September , which was estimated to cost NOK 660 million . This was criticized by Hordaland Public Roads Administration , who stated that it would take longer time to plan , and thus complete , the Triangle Link . 
 From 1988 , environmentalists started actively opposing the Triangle Link . The most active were the local chapter of the Norwegian Society for the Conservation of Nature and Nature and Youth , who stated that the road would have serious consequences for the local boat traffic to the recreational islands of Føyno and Nautøy . Instead , they recommended that the municipalities chose a pontoon bridge . Another opponent to the project was the Action Committee Against a Hasty Construction of the Triangle Link , who argued to delay the decision until after the 1991 municipal elections , to ensure that the municipal councils had backing in the public . Gisle Tjong stated that the risk in the project was large and that it was uncertain how long the tolls would last : they could just as well be 60 as 15 years . He instead wanted to collect tolls in advance . 
 The Triangle Link was passed by the various municipal councils in February and March 1988 . Hordaland Public Roads Administration still supported a pontoon bridge , and stated that two and a half years of work on a master plan had been wasted . A new master plan for the Triangle Link was published in early 1989 . During late 1989 , advance tolls on the ferries was approved by the municipal councils and the county council . They recommended that collection start on 1 July 1990 , but this was not immediately supported by the government . 
 In July 1991 , the master plan was passed by the Council of State . On 10 December 1992 , Parliament approved advanced payment of tolls on the ferry , which were made effective from 1 January 1993 . Ticket prices increased with between NOK 10 and 12 . This resulted in protests from the ferry employees who stated that they would have to collect the tolls which would remove their jobs . Work on the development plan started in 1992 . It included safety and environmental improvements which increased the project 's cost by NOK 200 million . In May 1994 , the plans was made subject to consultative statements . In May , SBT proposed building a culvert on Digernes as a compromise to avoid a new plan which could have postponed the project several years . On 11 June 1996 , Parliament approved with 144 against 20 votes to build the Triangle Link . The original name proposal for the bridge was <unk> ; this was later changed to <unk> after input from the municipal councils and name committees . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The construction of the Stord Bridge was undertaken as part of the same contract as the Bømla Bridge , which was awarded in December 1998 to Triangle Contractors , a joint venture between NCC and HBG Steel Structures . Most of the work was carried out by NCC with HBG having responsibility for the steel parts of the deck and the cables . HBG had previously built the steel for the Osterøy Bridge , which opened in 1997 . The responsibility for the cables was given to Brown Beach Associates and Hordaland Mekaniske Verksted . Construction started on 20 February 1999 . After the pylons were completed on 25 September 1999 , two catwalks were erected between them , with the constructors choosing two continuous catwalks instead of three separate pairs . Extra stability to the catwalks was achieved by building connections between the two . 
 The cables were spun on @-@ site using a reel because of the problems which had arisen using a bundle on the Great Belt Bridge in Denmark . This also allowed for cost savings , as the reels could be used two times . The cables were spun using air spinning with controlled tension , which allowed spinning with little space and with a crew with limited spinning experience . This involved installing a carrier which shuttles forward and back over the catwalk ; it spins the upper side of the cable in the one direction and the lower side in the other direction . The system has two reel racks , each with four reels of wire . Each rack only uses one reel at a time , allowing for minimum down @-@ time when changing reels . Wires were connected using pressure casing . The balance in the system is kept in place using a counterbalance tower . Spinning of the main cable started on 2 March 2000 and was concluded on 14 April . In all 11 @,@ 600 kilometers ( 7 @,@ 200 mi ) of steel wire were used to create the cables . The two bridges were the first time that on @-@ site spinning was chosen in Norway , and it gave a cost saving of NOK 10 to 11 million . 
 The cables consist of seven bundles which consist of 420 wires — each with a diameter of 5 @.@ 35 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 211 in ) . When compressed , this gives a diameter of 320 millimeters ( 13 in ) and a quality of 1 @,@ 570 megapascals . The fastening poles were delivered five weeks after schedule ; a new mounting method was developed which allowed them to be installed in a quarter of the time , in part by using a helicopter , and the whole five @-@ week delay was eradicated . This allowed the deck sections to be installed as scheduled . There arose problems with small holes being created in the coating ; as these had also been found on the Great Belt Bridge , it was decided that nothing would be done with the issue . 
 The deck sections were produced by HBG in Schiedam , Netherlands , and transported by Barge to Stord . Each section is 36 meters ( 118 ft ) long and consisted of two welded subsections . They were mounted using the crane ship <unk> , allowing up to nine and an average of four sections to be installed per day and completed in June 2000 . The section of the bridge built as a beam bridge on the Føyno side was built by filling in the shallow fjord under the bridge with earthwork , building the bridge and then removing the earthwork again . Construction took 700 @,@ 000 man @-@ hours and cost NOK 442 million . The bridge was taken into use along with the Bømlafjord Tunnel on 27 December 2000 . The bridge allowed , along with the rest of the Triangle Link , four ferry services to terminate . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The Stord Bridge is a 1 @,@ 077 @-@ meter ( 3 @,@ 533 ft ) long suspension bridge with a 677 @-@ meter ( 2 @,@ 221 ft ) long main span . It carries two lanes of European route E39 and a combined pedestrian and bicycle path across Digernessundet , connecting the islands of Stord and Føyno . The bridge has a width of 13 @.@ 5 meters ( 44 ft ) and a clearance below of 18 meters ( 59 ft ) . It has two concrete pylons , each 97 meters ( 318 ft ) tall , one on <unk> on Stord , the other on a small islet just off Føyno . The pylons consist of 2 @,@ 800 cubic meters ( 99 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of concrete and 700 tonnes ( 690 long tons ; 770 short tons ) of steel . The deck between the towers consists of 19 pre @-@ built steel sections , each 36 meters ( 118 ft ) long and 2 @.@ 6 meters ( 8 ft 6 in ) tall . They are connected to the main suspended cable , which is 360 millimeters ( 14 in ) thick and 1 @,@ 142 meters ( 3 @,@ 747 ft ) long , by vertical cables every 12 meters ( 39 ft ) . The bridge 's vertical curvature has a radius of 11 @,@ 640 meters ( 38 @,@ 190 ft ) . In 2012 , the bridge had an average 5 @,@ 284 vehicles per day . The bridge was paid off and the tolls removed on 30 April 2013 . 
 = Seated Liberty dollar = 
 The Seated Liberty dollar was a dollar coin struck by the United States Mint from 1840 to 1873 and designed by its chief engraver , Christian Gobrecht . It was the last silver coin of that denomination to be struck before passage of the Coinage Act of 1873 , which temporarily ended production of the silver dollar for American commerce . The coin 's obverse is based on that of the Gobrecht dollar , which had been minted experimentally from 1836 to 1839 . However , the soaring eagle used on the reverse of the Gobrecht dollar was not used ; instead , the United States Mint ( Mint ) used a heraldic eagle , based on a design by late Mint Chief Engraver John Reich first utilized on coins in 1807 . 
 Seated Liberty dollars were initially struck only at the Philadelphia Mint ; in 1846 , production began at the New Orleans facility . In the late 1840s , the price of silver increased relative to gold because of an increase in supply of the latter caused by the California Gold Rush ; this led to the hoarding , export , and melting of American silver coins . The Coinage Act of 1853 decreased the weight of all silver coins of five cents or higher , except for the dollar , but also required a supplemental payment from those wishing their bullion struck into dollar coins . As little silver was being presented to the US Mint at the time , production remained low . In the final years of the series , there was more silver produced in the US , and mintages increased . 
 In 1866 , " In God We Trust " was added to the dollar following its introduction to United States coinage earlier in the decade . Seated Liberty dollar production was halted by the Coinage Act of 1873 , which authorized the trade dollar for use in foreign commerce . Representatives of silver interests were unhappy when the metal 's price dropped again in the mid @-@ 1870s ; they advocated the resumption of the free coinage of silver into legal tender , and after the passage of the Bland – Allison Act in 1878 , production resumed with the Morgan dollar . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Mint Act of 1792 made both gold and silver legal tender ; specified weights of each was equal to a dollar . The United States Mint struck gold and silver only when depositors supplied metal , which was returned in the form of coin . The fluctuation of market prices for commodities meant that either precious metal would likely be overvalued in terms of the other , leading to hoarding and melting ; in the decades after 1792 , it was usually silver coins which met that fate . In 1806 , President Thomas Jefferson officially ordered all silver dollar mintage halted , though production had not occurred since 1804 . This was done in part to prevent the coins from being exported to foreign nations for melting , causing a strain on the fledgling Mint for little gain . Over the next quarter century , the silver coin usually struck for bullion depositors was the half dollar . In 1831 , Mint Director Samuel Moore requested that President Andrew Jackson lift the restriction against dollar coin production ; the president obliged in April of that year . Despite the approval to strike the coins , no silver dollars were minted until 1836 . 
 The Bureau of the Mint in the 1830s was undergoing a period of significant change , as new technologies were adopted . In 1828 , the Mint , whose authorization had been subject to periodic renewal by Congress since its inception in 1792 , was given permanent status . A new building to house the Philadelphia Mint was authorized by Congress , and opened in 1832 . Congress adjusted the precious @-@ metal content of US coins in 1834 and 1837 , and was able to achieve a balance whereby US coins remained in circulation alongside those of foreign nations ( mostly Spanish colonial pieces ) . In 1836 , the first steam machinery was introduced at the Mint ; previously coins had been struck by muscle power . Congress had in 1835 authorized branch mints at Dahlonega in Georgia , Charlotte in North Carolina , and at New Orleans in Louisiana . The Charlotte and Dahlonega mints only struck gold , catering to miners in the South who sought to deposit that metal , but the New Orleans facility would also strike silver coins , including the Seated Liberty dollar . 
 = = Gobrecht dollar = = 
 In mid @-@ 1835 , newly appointed Mint Director Robert M. Patterson engaged artists Titian Peale and Thomas Sully to create new designs for American coinage . In an August 1 , 1835 , letter , Patterson proposed that Sully create an obverse design consisting of Liberty seated on a boulder , holding a " liberty pole " in her right hand topped by a pileus , the headgear given by the Romans to an emancipated slave . He also asked Sully to create a reverse design consisting of an " eagle flying , and rising in flight , amidst the constellation irregularly dispersed of twenty @-@ four stars " . Patterson requested that the bird appear natural ; he criticized the eagle designs then in use on the nation 's coinage as being unnatural primarily because of the shield placed on the eagle 's breast . Mint Chief Engraver William Kneass prepared a sketch based on Patterson 's conception , but suffered a stroke , leaving him partially paralyzed . Later in 1835 , Christian Gobrecht was hired at the Mint as a draftsman , die sinker , and assistant engraver to Kneass . Although nominally a subordinate , Gobrecht would perform much of the engraving work for the Mint until Kneass ' death in 1840 , when Gobrecht was appointed chief engraver . 
 Sully prepared sketches of the artwork , which Gobrecht used as a guide in engraving copper plates . The plates were approved by various government officials , and the production of trial strikes began . The design was not free from controversy ; former Mint Director Samuel Moore had deprecated the use of the pileus . Quoting former president Thomas Jefferson , Moore had written to Secretary of the Treasury Levi Woodbury , " We are not emancipated slaves . " 
 Following a series of trial strikes and modifications through 1836 , the first of what would come to be known as the Gobrecht dollars were minted in December of that year . The dollars of 1836 were minted with a silver fineness of .892 ( 89 @.@ 2 % ) silver , a specification set forth in the 1792 act . The mandated fineness of US silver coins was changed from .892 to .900 ( 90 % ) by the Coinage Act of 1837 , passed on January 18 , 1837 ; subsequent Gobrecht dollars were struck in .900 silver . Beginning in 1837 , an adaptation of the obverse of the Gobrecht dollar , depicting a seated Liberty , was used on the smaller silver coins ( from half dime to half dollar ) , with Gobrecht 's modification of Reich 's heraldic eagle on the reverse of the quarter and half dollar . Except on the half dime , abolished in 1873 , the designs would remain on those coins for over 50 years . 
 Coinage continued in small amounts until 1839 , when official production of the Gobrecht dollar ceased . The coins had been struck as a trial to gauge public acceptance . The Mint acquired a portrait lathe in 1837 , which allowed Gobrecht to work in large models for the later versions of the Gobrecht dollar , and for the Seated Liberty dollar . The lathe , a pantograph @-@ like device , mechanically reduced the design from the model to a coin @-@ size hub , from which working dies could be produced . Prior to 1837 , the engraver had to cut the design onto the die face by hand . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Prior to full @-@ scale production of a dollar coin in 1840 , Patterson reviewed the designs then in use , including the Gobrecht dollar 's . The director opted to replace Gobrecht 's soaring eagle reverse with a left @-@ facing bald eagle based on a design by former Mint engraver John Reich , a design first used on silver and gold coinage in 1807 . Although the reverse for the dollar was probably selected to match that of the quarter and half dollar , it is not known why the flying eagle design was not used for the lower denominations in the first place . Numismatic historian Walter Breen speculates that a Treasury official might have preferred the Reich design . 
 The obverse of the Gobrecht dollar was in high relief , but Mint officials felt that this should be lowered for the new coin , which was to be struck in much larger quantities . Patterson hired Robert Ball Hughes , a Philadelphia artist , to modify the design . As part of Hughes ' modifications , Liberty 's head was enlarged , the drapery was thickened , and the relief was lowered overall . Thirteen stars were also included on the obverse . On the Gobrecht dollar , with its high relief , the depiction of Liberty appears like a statue on a plinth ; the flatter Seated Liberty decreased relief appears more like an engraving . 
 Art historian Cornelius Vermeule tied the appearance of the obverse to neoclassicism , noting the resemblance of Gobrecht 's Liberty to the marble statues of ancient Rome . The neoclassical school was popular in the first half of the 19th century , and not only among official artists ; Vermeule noted , " it becomes almost painfully evident that similar sources were consulted both by the engravers of United States coins in Philadelphia and by the cutters of tombstones from Maine to Illinois " . The reverse retained the shield upon the eagle 's breast . Art historian Vermeule described it as " the same old unnatural , <unk> eagle with shield on his stomach , like a baseball umpire 's protector ... to clutch branch and olives in one foot , arrows of war in the other oversized set of claws " . According to numismatic historian David Lange , the Reich @-@ Gobrecht reverse design is known among some coin collectors as the " sandwich @-@ board eagle " . Breen , in his comprehensive volume on US coins , complains of " the ' improvements ' inflicted by [ Hughes ] on a hapless Ms. Liberty . Compared with the original Sully @-@ Gobrecht conception of 1836 – 39 , this is a sorry mess indeed . " 
 = = = Release = = = 
 A small production run of 12 @,@ 500 was minted in July 1840 to allow bullion depositors to become familiar with the new coins before having their silver struck into dollars . The process of bringing the new coin to public hands was made easier by a congressional authorization in 1837 for a fund that allowed the Mint a " float " , permitting it to give depositors payment in coin without waiting for their metal to go through the minting process . Bullion producers began depositing the silver required to initiate heavier production later in 1840 ; 41 @,@ 000 pieces were minted in November , followed by a mintage of 7 @,@ 505 in December . Deposits increased the following year , which saw a mintage of 173 @,@ 000 pieces . All coins were produced at the Philadelphia Mint until 1846 , when 59 @,@ 000 were struck at the Mint at New Orleans . 
 Following the discovery of gold in California , a large amount of gold coins began appearing in American commercial channels . The influx caused the price of gold relative to silver to decrease , making silver coins worth more as bullion than as currency . They were exported abroad , or else melted locally for their bullion value . As it was profitable to export silver , little was presented at the Mint , which resulted in low mintage numbers for the silver dollar ; 1 @,@ 300 and 1 @,@ 100 were struck in 1851 and 1852 respectively . The rarity of these dates was recognized by the late 1850s ; Mint employees made surreptitious restrikes to sell to collectors . 
 Congress passed the Coinage Act of 1853 in February of that year . The act lowered the silver weight of the coins ranging from the half dime to half dollar by 6 @.@ 9 % , though the dollar remained unaffected . The 1853 act eliminated the practice of depositing silver bullion to be struck into coin , except into the dollar for which a coining charge of .5 % was imposed . According to the Senate report filed with the bill which became the Coinage Act , these changes were intended as a temporary expedient , with the free coinage of silver to be restored when bullion prices became stable . Sources vary in their explanation as to why Congress chose to exempt the dollar from the silver coinage overhaul : numismatic historian R.W. Julian suggests that it was done due to its status as the " flagship " of American coins . According to Don Taxay in his history of the Mint and coinage , " the silver dollar , which it [ the act ] left unchanged to preserve a bi @-@ metallic currency , continued to be exported and was rarely used in commerce . Without realizing it , the country had entered onto the gold standard . " Julian agreed , noting that the act instituted a de facto gold standard in the United States , because it required silver coinage to be paid for in gold . The silver dollar continued to circulate little ; quantities were sent west beginning in 1854 to serve as " small change " in California . Silver prices remained high into the 1860s , and little silver bullion was presented for striking into dollars . To serve collectors , individual specimens were made available to the public by the Mint at a cost of $ 1 @.@ 08 . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 Numismatist and coin dealer Q. David Bowers believes that most Seated Liberty dollars produced after 1853 were shipped to China to pay for luxury goods , including tea and silk . R. W. Julian argued to the contrary , that continued production of the dollar had little to do with trade with the Orient ( where goods were paid for in silver ) , suggesting instead that the coins were sent to the West for use there . However , although the Mint 's Engraving Department sent dies for the dollar to the San Francisco facility repeatedly from 1858 on , the California mint used them only once before 1870 , striking 20 @,@ 000 dollars in 1859 , a year in which 255 @,@ 700 were struck at Philadelphia and 360 @,@ 000 at New Orleans . Production at New Orleans was disrupted after 1860 by the Civil War ; it did not strike silver dollars again until 1879 , after the end of the Seated Liberty series . After the outbreak of the war in 1861 , inflationary greenbacks were introduced , and precious @-@ metal coins vanished from circulation . In April 1863 , new Mint Director James Pollock argued that the silver dollar be eliminated , noting in a letter that the coin " no longer enters into our monetary system . The few pieces made are for Asiatic and other foreign trade and are not seen in circulation . " 
 In November 1861 , Reverend M. R. Watkinson suggested in a letter that some sort of religious motto should be placed on American coinage to reflect the increasing religiosity of United States citizens following the outbreak of the Civil War . In an October 21 , 1863 , report to Treasury Secretary Salmon P. Chase , Pollock expressed his own desire to <unk> American coins with a religious motto . The Mint began producing patterns bearing various mottoes , including " God Our Trust " and " In God We Trust " ; the latter was ultimately selected , and its first use was on the two @-@ cent piece in <unk> following year , a law was passed allowing the Treasury to place the motto upon any coin at its discretion . The motto was placed on the silver dollar , as well as various other silver , gold and base metal coins , in 1866 . 
 The coin shortage continued after the end of the Civil War , due largely to the large war debt incurred by the federal government . As a result , silver coinage began to trade at a significant premium to the now ubiquitous greenbacks . Accordingly , the government was reluctant to issue silver coins . Nevertheless , the Mint continued striking silver , to be stored in vaults until such time as they could enter the marketplace . The Seated Liberty dollar was the first coin to be struck at the Carson City Mint ; the first to be issued were 2 @,@ 303 pieces paid to a Mr. A. Wright on February 11 , 1870 . The dollar was struck at Carson City from 1870 to 1873 , with the largest mintage , 11 @,@ 758 , in 1870 . The largest quantity struck at any mint was in 1872 at Philadelphia : 1 @,@ 105 @,@ 500 , though the mintage in 1871 had also exceeded a million . 
 = = Abolition and aftermath = = 
 Beginning in 1859 , large quantities of silver were found in Nevada Territory and elsewhere in the American West . In 1869 , Director of the Mint Henry Linderman began advocating the end of the acceptance of silver bullion deposits to be struck into dollars . Although silver dollars were not coined in large numbers , Linderman saw that mining in the West would increase after the completion of the transcontinental railroad , which it did , as US silver production increased from 10 million troy ounces in 1867 to more than 22 million five years later . Linderman foresaw that these activities would increase the supply of silver , causing its price to drop below the $ 1 @.@ 2929 per ounce at which the precious metal in the standard silver dollar is worth $ 1 @.@ 00 . He anticipated that silver suppliers would turn to the Mint to dispose of their product by striking it into dollars . The monetization of that cheap silver , Linderman feared , would inflate the currency and drive gold from commerce because of Gresham 's law . Although silver advocates later called the resulting law the " Crime of ' 73 " and claimed that it had been passed in a deceitful manner , the bill was discussed during five different sessions of Congress , read in full by both the House of Representatives and the Senate and printed in full on multiple occasions . Once it passed both houses of Congress , it was signed into law by President Ulysses S. Grant on February 12 , 1873 . 
 The Coinage Act of 1873 ended production of the standard silver dollar and authorized creation of the Trade dollar , thus concluding the Seated Liberty dollar series . The Trade dollar was slightly heavier than the standard dollar and was intended for use in payments in silver to merchants in China . Although not meant for use in the United States , a last @-@ minute rider gave it legal tender status there up to $ 5 . When silver prices plummeted in the mid @-@ 1870s , millions appeared in circulation , at first in the West and then throughout the United States , causing problems in commerce when banks insisted on the $ 5 legal tender limit . Other abuses followed , such as purchase by companies for bullion value ( by then about $ 0 @.@ 80 ) for use in pay packets . Workers had little option but to accept them as dollars . In response to complaints , Congress ended any status as legal tender in 1876 , halted production of the Trade dollar ( except for collectors ) in 1878 , and agreed to redeem any which had not been <unk> in 1887 . 
 The 1873 act eliminated the provisions allowing depositors of silver bullion to have their metal struck into standard silver dollars ; they could now only receive Trade dollars , which were not legal tender beyond $ 5 . As the price of silver then was about $ 1 @.@ 30 per ounce , there was no outcry from silver producers . Beginning in 1874 , however , the price dropped ; silver would not again sell for $ 1 @.@ 2929 or more on the open market in the United States until 1963 . Advocates of silver both sought a market for the commodity and believed that " free silver " or bimetallism would boost the economy and make it easy for farmers to repay debts . Many in Congress agreed , and the first battle over the issue resulted in a partial victory for silver forces , as the 1878 Bland – Allison Act required the Mint to purchase large quantities of silver on the open market and strike the bullion into dollar coins . The Mint did so , using a new design by Assistant Engraver George T. Morgan , which came to be known as the Morgan dollar . The issue of what monetary standard would be used occupied the nation for the rest of the 19th century , becoming most acute in the 1896 presidential election . In that election , the unsuccessful Democratic candidate , William Jennings Bryan , campaigned on " free silver " , having electrified the Democratic National Convention with his Cross of Gold speech , decrying the gold standard . The issue was settled for the time by the Gold Standard Act of 1900 , making that standard the law of the land . 
 = = Collecting = = 
 Considerable private melting in the early years of the series makes many dates rare ; more melting took place when large quantities that had accumulated at the New York Sub @-@ Treasury were sent to Philadelphia in 1861 and 1862 for restriking into smaller denominations . R. S. Yeoman 's 2014 edition of A Guide Book of United States Coins lists no Seated Liberty dollar in collectable condition ( very good or better ) at less than $ 280 . 
 The key dates of the series include the 1866 variety which lacks the motto " In God We Trust " , of which only two are known ; one sold at auction in 2005 for $ 1 @,@ 207 @,@ 500 . Another rarity is the 1870 struck at San Francisco ( 1870 @-@ S ) , of which the mintage is not known as their striking was not recorded in that mint 's records . Those records indicate that in May 1870 , the San Francisco Mint returned two dollar reverse dies to Philadelphia as mistakenly sent without mint mark , and received two proper replacements . There is no record of any 1870 @-@ dated obverse dies for the dollar being sent to San Francisco ; nevertheless , the coins exist . Breen , writing in 1988 , lists twelve examples known , which he speculates may have been presentation pieces , meant to be inserted in a cornerstone . One sold at auction for $ 1 @,@ 092 @,@ 500 in 2003 . A similar mystery attends the 1873 @-@ S , which despite the stated mintage of 700 , is not known to exist . Two of the pieces were routinely sent to Philadelphia for examination at the 1874 meeting of the United States Assay Commission , but apparently were not preserved . Breen suggests that the remaining mintage may have been melted along with obsolete silver coins . 
 = Cross @-@ country skiing = 
 Cross @-@ country skiing is a form of skiing where skiers rely on their own locomotion to move across snow @-@ covered terrain , rather than using ski lifts or other forms of assistance . Cross @-@ country skiing is widely practised as a sport and recreational activity , however some still use it as a means of transportation . Variants of cross @-@ country skiing are adapted to a range of terrain which spans unimproved , sometimes mountainous terrain to groomed courses that are specifically designed for the sport . 
 Modern cross @-@ country skiing is similar to the original form of skiing , from which all skiing disciplines evolved , including alpine skiing , ski jumping and Telemark skiing . Skiers propel themselves either by striding forward ( classic style ) or side @-@ to @-@ side in a skating motion ( skate skiing ) , aided by arms pushing on ski poles against the snow . It is practised in regions with snow @-@ covered landscapes , including Northern Europe , Canada , Russia and regions in the United States . Competitive cross @-@ country skiing is one of the Nordic skiing sports . Cross @-@ country skiing and rifle marksmanship are the two components of biathlon , ski @-@ orienteering is a form of cross @-@ country skiing , which includes map navigation along snow trails and tracks . 
 = = History = = 
 The word ski comes from the Old Norse word " <unk> " which means stick of wood . Skiing started as a technique for traveling cross @-@ country over snow on skis , starting almost five millennia ago with beginnings in Scandinavia . It may have been practised as early as 600 BCE in <unk> <unk> , in what is now China . Early historical evidence includes Procopius ' ( around CE 550 ) description of Sami people as <unk> translated as " ski running <unk> " . <unk> argues that the Sami people have practiced skiing for more than 6000 years , evidenced by the very old Sami word <unk> for skiing . Egil <unk> 's 950 CE saga describes King Haakon the Good 's practice of sending his tax collectors out on skis . The Gulating law ( 1274 ) stated that " No moose shall be disturbed by skiers on private land . " Cross @-@ country skiing evolved from a utilitarian means of transportation to being a world @-@ wide recreational activity and sport , which branched out into other forms of skiing starting in the mid @-@ 1800s . 
 Early skiers used one long pole or spear in addition to the skis . The first depiction of a skier with two ski poles dates to 1741 . Traditional skis , used for snow travel in Norway and elsewhere into the 1800s , often comprised one short ski with a natural fur traction surface , the <unk> , and one long for gliding , the <unk> — one being up to 100 cm ( 39 in ) longer than the other — allowing skiers to propel themselves with a scooter motion . This combination has a long history among the Sami people . Skis up to 280 cm have been produced in Finland , and the longest recorded ski in Norway is 373 cm . 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 Ski warfare , the use of ski @-@ equipped troops in war , is first recorded by the Danish historian Saxo Grammaticus in the 13th century , who were reportedly able to cover distances comparable to that of light cavalry . The garrison in Trondheim used skis at least from 1675 , and the Danish @-@ Norwegian army included specialized skiing battalions from 1747 — details of military ski exercises from 1767 are on record . Skis were used in military exercises in 1747 . In 1799 French traveller Jacques de la <unk> recorded his visit to Norway in his travel diary : Norwegian immigrants used skis ( " Norwegian snowshoes " ) in the US midwest from around 1836 . Norwegian immigrant " Snowshoe Thompson " transported mail by skiing across the Sierra Nevada between California and Nevada from 1856 . In 1888 Norwegian explorer Fridtjof Nansen and his team crossed the Greenland icecap on skis . Norwegian workers on the Buenos Aires - Valparaiso railway line introduced skiing in South America around 1890 . In 1910 Roald Amundsen used skis on his South Pole Expedition . In 1902 the Norwegian consul in Kobe imported ski equipment and introduced skiing to the Japanese , motivated by the death of Japanese soldiers during a snow storm . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 Norwegian skiing regiments organized military skiing contests in the 18th century , divided in four classes : shooting at a target while skiing at " top speed , " downhill racing among trees , downhill racing on large slopes without falling , and " long racing " on " flat ground . " An early record of a public ski competition occurred in Tromsø , 1843 . In Norwegian , langrenn refers to " competitive skiing where the goal is to complete a specific distance in groomed tracks in the shortest possible time . " In Norway , ski touring competitions ( Norwegian : turrenn ) are long @-@ distance cross @-@ country competitions open to the public , competition is usually within age intervals . 
 A new technique , skate skiing , was experimented with early in the 20th Century , but was not widely adopted until the 1980s . Johan <unk> used the skating technique at the 1931 World Championship in Oberhof , one of the earliest recorded use of skating in competitive cross @-@ country skiing . This technique was later used in ski orienteering in the 1960s on roads and other firm surfaces . It became widespread during the 1980s after the success of Bill Koch ( USA ) in 1982 Cross @-@ country Skiing Championships drew more attention to the skating style . Norwegian skier Ove <unk> started using the technique in 1984 , when he found it to be much faster than classic style . Finnish skier , Pauli <unk> , developed a one @-@ sided variant of the style in the 1970s , leaving one ski in the track while skating to the side with the other one during endurance events ; this became known as the " marathon skate . " 
 = = = Terminology = = = 
 While the noun ski originates from the Norwegian language , unlike the English skiing there is no corresponding verb in Norwegian . <unk> Nansen , for instance , describes the crossing of Greenland as På ski over Grønland , literally " On skis across Greenland " , while the English edition of the report was titled , The first crossing of Greenland . Nansen referred to the activity of traversing snow on skis as Norwegian : <unk> ( he used the term also in the English translation ) , which may be translated as ski running . Nansen used <unk> , regarding all forms of skiing , but noted that ski jumping is purely a competitive sport and not for amateurs . He further noted that in some competitions the skier " is also required to show his skill in turning his ski to one side or the other within given marks " at full speed on a steep hill . Nansen regarded these forms ( i.e. , jumping and slalom ) as " special arts " , and believed that the most important branch of skiing was travel " in an ordinary way across the country . " In Germany , Nansen 's Greenland report was published as Auf <unk> durch Grönland ( literally " On snowshoes through Greenland " ) . The German term , <unk> , was supplanted by the borrowed Norwegian word , Ski , in late 19th century . The Norwegian encyclopedia of sports also uses the term , <unk> , ( literally " ski running " ) for all forms of skiing . Around 1900 the word <unk> was used in German in the same sense as Norwegian : <unk> . In modern Norwegian , a variety of terms refer to cross @-@ country skiing , including : 
 gå på ski ( literally " walk on skis " ) — a general term for self @-@ propelled skiing 
 <unk> på ski ( literally " hiking on skis " ) — refers to ski touring as recreation 
 langrenn ( literally " long competition " ) — refers to cross @-@ country ski racing 
 In contrast , alpine skiing is referred to as <unk> på ski ( literally " stand on skis " ) . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Recreational cross @-@ country skiing includes ski touring and groomed @-@ trail skiing , typically at resorts or in parklands . It is an accessible form of recreation for persons with vision and mobility impairments . A related form of recreation is dog skijoring — a winter sport where a cross @-@ country skier is assisted by one or more dogs . 
 = = = Ski touring = = = 
 Ski touring takes place off @-@ piste and outside of ski resorts . Tours may extend over multiple days . Typically , skis , bindings , and boots allow for free movement of the heel to enable a walking pace , as with Nordic disciplines and unlike Alpine skiing . Ski touring 's subgenre ski mountaineering involves independently navigating and route finding through potential avalanche terrain and often requires familiarity with meteorology along with skiing skills . Ski touring can be faster and easier than summer hiking in some terrain , allowing for traverses and ascents that would be harder in the summer . Skis can also be used to access backcountry alpine climbing routes when snow is off the technical route , but still covers the hiking <unk> some countries , organizations maintain a network of huts for use by cross @-@ country skiers in wintertime . For example , the Norwegian Trekking Association maintains over 400 huts stretching across thousands of kilometres of trails which hikers can use in the summer and skiers in the winter . 
 = = = <unk> @-@ trail skiing = = = 
 <unk> trail skiing occurs at facilities , such as Nordmarka ( Oslo ) , Royal Gorge Cross Country Ski Resort and Gatineau Park , Quebec , where trails are laid out and groomed for both classic and skate @-@ skiing . Such grooming and track setting ( for classic technique ) requires specialized equipment and techniques that adapt to the condition of the snow . Trail preparation employs snow machines that tow snow compaction , texturing and track @-@ setting devices . <unk> must adapt such equipment to the condition of the snow — crystal structure , temperature , degree of compaction , moisture content , etc . Depending on the initial condition of the snow , grooming may achieve an increase in density for new @-@ fallen snow or a decrease in density for icy or compacted snow . Cross @-@ country ski facilities may incorporate a course design that meets homologation standards for such organizations as the International Olympic Committee , the International Ski Federation or national standards . Standards address course distances , degree of difficulty with maximums in elevation difference and steepness — both up and downhill , plus other factors . Some facilities have night @-@ time lighting on select trails — called <unk> ( light trails ) in Norwegian and <unk> ( electric light trails ) in Swedish . The first <unk> were opened in 1946 in Nordmarka and at <unk> ( Trondheim ) . 
 = = Competition = = 
 Cross @-@ country ski competition encompasses a variety of formats for races over courses of varying lengths according to rules sanctioned by the International Ski Federation ( FIS ) and by national organizations , such as the U.S. Ski and Snowboard Association and Cross Country Ski Canada . It also encompasses cross @-@ country ski marathon events , sanctioned by the Worldloppet Ski Federation , cross @-@ country ski orienteering events , sanctioned by the International Orienteering Federation , and Paralympic cross @-@ country skiing , sanctioned by the International Paralympic Committee . 
 = = = FIS @-@ sanctioned competition = = = 
 The FIS Nordic World Ski Championships have been held in various numbers and types of events since 1925 for men and since 1954 for women . From 1924 to 1939 , the World Championships were held every year , including the Winter Olympic Games . After World War II , the World Championships were held every four years from 1950 to 1982 . Since 1985 , the World Championships have been held in odd @-@ numbered years . Notable cross @-@ country ski competitions include the Winter Olympics , the FIS Nordic World Ski Championships , and the FIS World Cup events ( including the Holmenkollen ) . 
 = = = Other sanctioned competition = = = 
 Cross @-@ country ski marathons — races with distances greater than 40 kilometers — have two cup series , the Ski Classics , which started in 2011 , and the Worldloppet . Skiers race in classic or free @-@ style ( skating ) events , depending on the rules of the race . Notable ski marathons , include the <unk> in Sweden , Birkebeineren in Norway , the Engadin <unk> in Switzerland , the American Birkebeiner , the Tour of Anchorage in Anchorage , Alaska , and the Boreal <unk> , held in Forestville , Quebec , Canada . 
 Biathlon combines cross @-@ country skiing and rifle shooting . Depending on the shooting performance , extra distance or time is added to the contestant 's total running distance / time . For each shooting round , the biathlete must hit five targets ; the skier receives a penalty for each missed target , which varies according to the competition rules . 
 Ski orienteering is a form of cross @-@ country skiing competition that requires navigation in a landscape , making optimal route choices at racing speeds . Standard orienteering maps are used , but with special green overprinting of trails and tracks to indicate their navigability in snow ; other symbols indicate whether any roads are snow @-@ covered or clear . Standard skate @-@ skiing equipment is used , along with a map holder attached to the chest . It is one of the four orienteering disciplines recognized by the International Orienteering Federation . Upper body strength is especially important because of frequent double poling along narrow snow trails . 
 Paralympic cross @-@ country ski competition is an adaptation of cross @-@ country skiing for athletes with disabilities . Paralympic cross @-@ country skiing includes standing events , sitting events ( for wheelchair users ) , and events for visually impaired athletes under the rules of the International Paralympic Committee . These are divided into several categories for people who are missing limbs , have amputations , are blind , or have any other physical disability , to continue their sport . 
 = = Techniques = = 
 Cross @-@ country skiing has two basic propulsion techniques , which apply to different surfaces : classic ( undisturbed snow and tracked snow ) and skate skiing ( firm , smooth snow surfaces ) . The classic technique relies on a wax or texture on the ski bottom under the foot for traction on the snow to allow the skier to slide the other ski forward in virgin or tracked snow . With the skate skiing technique a skier slides on alternating skis on a firm snow surface at an angle from each other in a manner similar to ice skating . Both techniques employ poles with baskets that allow the arms to participate in the propulsion . Specialized equipment is adapted to each technique and each type of terrain . A variety of turns are used , when descending . 
 Both poles can be used simultaneously ( " double @-@ poling " ) , or alternating , in classic the alternating technique is most common ( the " diagonal stride " ) while in the skating technique double poles are more common . 
 = = = Classic = = = 
 The classic style is often used on prepared trails ( pistes ) that have pairs of parallel grooves ( tracks ) cut into the snow . It is also the most usual technique where no tracks have been prepared . With this technique , each ski is pushed forward from the other stationary ski in a striding and gliding motion , alternating foot to foot . With the " diagonal stride " variant the poles are planted alternately on the opposite side of the forward @-@ striding foot ; with the " kick @-@ double @-@ pole " variant the poles are planted simultaneously with every other stride . At times , especially with gentle descents , double poling is the sole means of propulsion . On uphill terrain , techniques include the " side step " for steep slopes , moving the skis perpendicular to the fall line , the " herringbone " for moderate slopes , where the skier takes alternating steps with the skis splayed outwards , and , for gentle slopes , the skier uses the diagonal technique with shorter strides and greater arm force on the poles . 
 = = = Skate skiing = = = 
 With skate skiing , the skier provides propulsion on a smooth , firm snow surface by pushing alternating skis away from one another at an angle , in a manner similar to ice skating . Skate @-@ skiing usually involves a coordinated use of poles and the upper body to add impetus , sometimes with a double pole plant each time the ski is extended on a temporarily " dominant " side ( " V1 " ) or with a double pole plant each time the ski is extended on either side ( " V2 " ) . Skiers climb hills , using these techniques , by widening the angle of the " V " and by making more frequent , shorter strides and more forceful use of poles . A variant of the technique is the " marathon skate , " where the skier leaves one ski in the track while skating outwards to the side with the other ski . 
 = = = Turns = = = 
 Turns , used while descending or for braking , include the snowplough ( or " Wedge Turn " ) , the stem Christie ( or " Wedge Christie " ) , parallel turn , and the Telemark turn . The step turn is used for maintaining speed during descents or out of track on flats . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 Equipment comprises skis , poles , boots and bindings ; these vary according to : 
 Technique , classic vs skate 
 Terrain , which may vary from groomed trails to wilderness 
 Performance level , from recreational use to competition at the elite level 
 = = = Skis = = = 
 Skis used in cross @-@ country are lighter and narrower than those used in alpine skiing . Ski bottoms are designed to provide a gliding surface and , for classic skis , a traction zone under foot . The base of the gliding surface is a plastic material that is designed both to minimize friction and , in many cases , to accept waxes . Glide wax may be used on the tails and tips of classic skis and across the length of skate skis . 
 = = = = Types = = = = 
 Each type of ski is sized and designed differently . Length affects maneuverability ; camber affects pressure on the snow beneath the feet of the skier ; side @-@ cut affects the ease of turning ; width affects forward friction ; overall area on the snow affects bearing capacity ; and tip geometry affects the ability to penetrate new snow or to stay in a track . Each of the following ski types has a different combination of these attributes : 
 Classic skis : Designed for skiing in tracks . For adult skiers ( between 155 cm / 50 kg and 185 cm / 75 kg ) , recommended lengths are between 180 to 210 centimetres ( approximately 115 % of the skier 's height ) . Traction comes from a “ grip zone ” underfoot that when bearing the skier ’ s weight engages either a textured gripping surface or a grip wax . Accordingly , these skis are classified as " <unk> " or " waxless . " Recreational waxless skis generally require little attention and are adapted for casual use . <unk> skis , if prepared correctly , provide better grip and glide . 
 When the skier ’ s weight is distributed on both skis , the ski ’ s camber diminishes the pressure of the grip zone on the snow and promotes bearing on the remaining area of the ski — the " glide zone " . A test for stiffness of camber is made with a piece of paper under the skier 's foot , standing on skis on a flat , hard surface — the paper should be pinned throughout the grip zone of the ski on which all the skier 's weight is placed , but slide freely when the skier 's weight is bearing equally on both skis . 
 Skate skis : Designed for skiing on groomed surfaces . Recommended lengths are between 170 to 200 centimetres ( up to 110 % of the skier 's height ) for adult skiers . The entire bottom of each skate ski is a glide zone — prepared for maximum glide . Traction comes from the skier pushing away from the edge of the previous ski onto the next ski . 
 Back country skis : Designed for ski touring on natural snow conditions . Recommended lengths are between 150 to 195 centimeters for adult skiers , depending on height and weight of the user . Back country skis are typically heavier and wider than classic and skate skis ; they often have metal edges for better grip on hard snow ; and their greater <unk> helps to carve turns . 
 The geometry of a back country ski depends on its purpose — skis suited for forested areas where loose powder can predominate may be shorter and wider than those selected for open , exposed areas where compacted snow may prevail . <unk> on Telemark skis promotes turning in forest and rugged terrain . Width and short length aid turning in loose and deep snow . Longer , narrower and more rigid skis with sharp edges are suited for snow that has been compacted by wind or freeze @-@ thaw . Touring ski design may represent a general @-@ purpose compromise among these different ski conditions , plus being acceptable for use in groomed tracks . Traction may come from a textured or waxed grip zone , as with classic skis , or from ski skins , which are applied to the ski bottom for long , steep ascents and have hairs or mechanical texture that prevents sliding backwards . 
 = = = = Gliding surface = = = = 
 Glide waxes enhance the speed of the gliding surface , and are applied by ironing them onto the ski and then polishing the ski bottom . Three classes of glide wax are available , depending on the level of desired performance with higher performance coming at higher cost . Hydrocarbon glide waxes , based on paraffin are common for recreational use . Race waxes comprise a combination of fluorinated hydrocarbon waxes and fluorocarbon overlays . <unk> decrease surface tension and surface area of the water between the ski and the snow , increasing speed and glide of the ski under specific conditions . Either combined with the wax or applied after in a spray , powder , or block form , fluorocarbons significantly improve the glide of the ski and are widely used in cross @-@ country ski races . 
 = = = = Traction surface = = = = 
 Skis designed for classic technique , both in track and in virgin snow , rely on a traction zone , called the " grip zone " or " kick zone , " underfoot . This comes either from a ) texture , designed to slide forward but not backwards , that is built into the grip zone of waxless skis , or from applied devices , e.g. climbing skins , or b ) from grip waxes . Grip waxes are classified according to their hardness : harder waxes are for colder and newer snow . An incorrect choice of grip wax for the snow conditions encountered may cause ski slippage ( wax too hard for the conditions ) or snow sticking to the grip zone ( wax too soft for the conditions ) . Grip waxes generate grip by interacting with snow crystals , which vary with temperature , age and compaction . Hard grip waxes don 't work well for snow which has metamorphosed to having coarse grains , whether icy or wet . In these conditions , skiers opt for a stickier substance , called <unk> . 
 = = = Boots and bindings = = = 
 Ski boots are attached to the ski only at the toe , leaving the heel free . Depending on application , boots may be lightweight ( performance skiing ) or heavier and more supportive ( back @-@ country skiing ) . 
 <unk> connect the boot to the ski . There are three primary groups of binding systems used in cross @-@ country skiing ( in descending order of importance ) : 
 Standardized system : Boots and bindings have an integrated connection , typically a bar across the front end of the sole of the boot , and platform on which the boot rests . Two families of standards prevail : <unk> ( New Nordic Norm ) and SNS ( Salomon Nordic System ) <unk> . Both systems have variants for skiing on groomed surfaces and in back country . These systems are the most common type of binding . 
 Three @-@ pin : The boot @-@ gripping system comprises three pins that correspond to three holes in the sole of the boot 's toe , used primarily for back @-@ country skiing . 
 Cable : A cable secures the free @-@ moving heel and keeps the toe of the boot pushed into a boot @-@ gripping section , used primarily for back @-@ country and <unk> skiing . 
 = = = Poles = = = 
 Ski poles are used for balance and propulsion . Modern cross @-@ country ski poles are made from aluminium , fibreglass @-@ reinforced plastic , or carbon fibre , depending on weight , cost and performance parameters . Formerly they were made of wood or bamboo . They feature a foot ( called a basket ) near the end of the shaft that provides a pushing platform , as it makes contact with the snow . Baskets vary in size , according to the expected softness / firmness of the snow . Racing poles feature smaller , lighter baskets than recreational poles . Poles designed for skating are longer than those designed for classic skiing . Traditional skiing in the 1800s used a single pole for both cross @-@ country and downhill . The single pole was longer and stronger than the poles that are used in pairs . In competitive cross @-@ country poles in pairs were introduced around 1900 . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Paul McDermott = 
 Paul Anthony Michael McDermott ( born 13 May 1962 ) is an Australian comedian , actor , writer , director , singer , artist and television personality . As a comedian , he is best known both for Good News Week and for his role as a member of the musical comedy group the Doug Anthony All Stars , which disbanded in 1994 but reformed in 2014 ; he has also performed individually and as a part of GUD . He has frequently appeared at the Melbourne International Comedy Festival and taken part in its two major televised productions , the Comedy Festival Gala and the Great Debate . He has also hosted two other ABC programs and briefly featured on Triple J as a morning radio presenter between 1996 and 1997 . He hosted Good News Week until 2012 , and has since pursued his painting career , and given a series of concerts featuring self @-@ penned songs of a more serious nature . 
 McDermott is a published author , having released several books both in collaboration with the Doug Anthony All Stars and individually . He has written as a columnist for a number of Australian newspapers and a selection of his columns have been compiled into a book , The Forgetting of Wisdom . He has also written and illustrated two storybooks , both of which have been adapted into short films with McDermott scripting , directing , performing and painting all of the animations . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 McDermott was born in Adelaide , South Australia , a fraternal twin and one of six children in a Catholic family . His father , John , was a senior public servant and his mother , Betty , a home manager . The family moved to Canberra when McDermott was three . He attended Marist College Canberra , where he describes himself as having been painfully shy and a " bit of a loner " ; Dickson College ; and the Canberra School of Art at the Australian National University , where he studied art for four years . He describes painting as his first love , and still considers his final year piece at art school to be his finest work . Indeed , he only started performing at the age of 25 because he needed money to buy canvases . " It was either that or waiting on tables and I thought I 'd soon get pissed off with people doing that , " he says . Privately , McDermott maintains his interest in art through painting , drawing and hand @-@ crafting books . He works under the alias of artist ' Young Master Paul ' . 
 He has criticised the war on drugs and society 's tendency to ignore the large drug subculture that involves people of all ages . " It 's out there and it happens , but there 's still a fear of talking about it , " he says . " In cities like Manchester , with unemployment problems , there are no @-@ alcohol venues where five thousand people under the age of sixteen are <unk> 'd off their heads every Saturday night . " 
 He has one son , Xavier , with his partner Melissa Lyne . He is also the first cousin of retired Adelaide Crows AFL footballer and current Adelaide media personality Chris McDermott . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Doug Anthony All Stars = = = 
 McDermott began busking in 1985 , which he says equipped him with useful experience and the ability to cope with most situations when he later started performing in clubs . He joined a group called Gigantic Fly which performed at a new Canberra club called Cafe Boom Boom . It was here that he got to know Tim Ferguson and Richard Fidler of the musical comedy group the Doug Anthony All Stars ( DAAS ) . McDermott was asked to join the group when the third member , Robert Piper , left due to other commitments . His primary reason for joining , he says , was monetary : " I 'd been stealing canvas from the bins around the art school . " Initially busking and performing live in clubs , with McDermott writing the majority of their material and songs , DAAS achieved success at the 1986 Adelaide Fringe Festival and subsequently travelled to Britain for the Edinburgh Fringe festival , where they were nominated for the Perrier Award . They toured both nationally and internationally , appearing on British television and playing at the opening of the Barcelona Olympics . After initially struggling to gain success in Australia , in 1989 DAAS was picked up to perform on the ABC show The Big Gig , on which they became a popular feature . They appeared frequently on the show until 1991 , when the group premiered their own series on the ABC , DAAS Kapital , which ran for two seasons . McDermott says that he liked performing with DAAS because it allowed him to bring together a range of his interests — he got to write , perform , sing , create costumes and paint backdrops . 
 The group split up in 1995 after a final farewell tour of Australia . Rumours of a falling out among the trio persisted for many years , but all three maintained that they had parted on good terms and that it had simply been time to move on , as they had wanted to pursue careers in different directions . Ferguson has since revealed that the break @-@ up was in large part due to his being diagnosed with multiple sclerosis in 1995 . In the two years following the break @-@ up of DAAS , McDermott wrote two film scripts and the stage show MOSH ! . He says that he was not particularly interested in returning to comedy , which he came to regard as an " aberration , something that had been good to do for eight years but now it was over , " until in 1996 he was recruited as host of the satirical news @-@ based quiz show Good News Week . 
 In 2014 , McDermott and Tim Ferguson reunited to tour Australia as the Doug Anthony All Stars , with frequent collaborator Paul Livingston ( also known as " Flacco " ) replacing Richard Fidler as guitarist due to Fidler 's radio commitments . 
 = = = Television career = = = 
 In 1996 , McDermott was recruited by director Ted Robinson , with whom he had previously worked on The Big Gig , to host Good News Week , which aired on the ABC from 1996 to 1998 , and on Network Ten from 1999 to 2000 and then returned in 2008 for a new series . He hosted the AFI awards in 2002 , and in 2004 and 2005 presented the ABC show Strictly Dancing . McDermott reunited with Robinson in 2007 when he was named host of a new ABC variety program , The Sideshow , a show described as a successor to The Big Gig . It premiered on 21 April 2007 , and quickly built a strong cult audience . However , due in part to poor programming , the show did not rate well and was cancelled after its initial run of 26 episodes . McDermott says he was saddened by The Sideshow 's cancellation as he believed it was an excellent venue for performers of alternative work which would have achieved ratings success if it had been allowed to continue . 
 McDermott returned to regular television hosting in July 2015 as the host of Room 101 , an Australian version of the long running British TV Show of the same name , airing on SBS One . 
 = = = = Good News Week = = = = 
 McDermott hosted Good News Week from 1996 until its cancellation in 2000 , as well as its two spinoffs , Good News Weekend ( 1998 ) and <unk> Night Lite ( 1999 ) , and reprised this role when the series returned in 2008 . A comedic quiz show with a similar format to that of the British program Have I Got News for You , it features two teams , with two permanent captains and four guests , competing to answer questions based on recent news events . McDermott opens each show with a humorous monologue based on the news on the week and is responsible for posing questions and awarding points to teams . " I 'm sort of judge , jury and executioner , " he says of his role . The show premiered on the ABC , but moved to Network Ten in 1999 . 
 The ABC was initially apprehensive about Robinson 's choice of McDermott as host . He had dreadlocks at the time , and was best known for the crude , aggressive " bad boy " character he had played in the Doug Anthony All Stars , which many tended to confuse with his actual personality . In addition , it was doubted that he was capable of ad libbing and speaking well , as in past interviews he had usually allowed his fellow band members to do most of the talking . McDermott cut off his dreadlocks for the show and succeeded in broadening his appeal by showing a gentler , more charming side as host . He has said that although he feels there are still elements of his more aggressive character in Good News Week , they are " toned down ... I 've got to be the generous host now , spin @-@ the @-@ wheel sort of thing . I 'm basing myself on Mike Brady now . I 'm the disciplinarian . " 
 He would regularly sing on the program , particularly on Good News Weekend and <unk> Night Lite , including some of his own original songs . In one episode , McDermott performed the self @-@ penned " Shut Up / Kiss Me " as a duet with Fiona Horne . It was met with such a warm reception from viewers that it was eventually released as a single . Some of his other musical performances from the series are featured on the CD Good News Week Tapes Volume 2 , and a collection of his monologues from the start of the show appear on Good News Week Tapes Volume 1 . 
 McDermott expressed his relief when the show was cancelled in 2000 , saying that he could not have maintained the relentless production schedule for much longer . " I 'm just so tired , I don 't feel I have been human for five years , " he said . Network Ten had initially intended only to bring back Good News Week as a one @-@ off special , but decided to expand it after the short supply of US shows resulting from the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike caused the network to take an interest in developing more local programs . The revived series premiered on 11 February 2008 with McDermott reprising his role as host . 
 In 2010 , McDermott was nominated for a Gold Logie Award for Most Popular Personality on Australian Television . 
 = = = Live comedy = = = 
 McDermott describes his performance style as " in your face and unapologetic , grotesque , offensive , loud . But it 's all essentially me with the amp turned up — I don 't own that many great acting skills . " He has stated that he does not consider any subject out of bounds in terms of comedy , which is " one of [ his ] problems " . " I honestly believe you can make a joke about anything if you have something to say , " he says . " It really depends on the motivation ... The moral objective , I suppose . " He is interested in topical humour and targets issues about which he feels passionately , including the detainment of David Hicks , the AWB scandal , torture and the War on Terror . 
 In 1995 he wrote , directed and performed in a stage show entitled MOSH ! , which he says is based on " my drug @-@ addled observations when I 've been abusing substances " . MOSH ! received a range of responses ; it won the award for best fringe show at the Adelaide festival and was described by one reviewer as " often hilarious " , but was savaged by other critics as being " gratuitously offensive " . Columbia Artists expressed interest in the show , but after nearly a decade of international travel with the Doug Anthony All Stars , McDermott did not wish to go to New York to do an off @-@ Broadway show . 
 He reappeared in the Melbourne International Comedy Festival from 2002 with Cameron Bruce and Mick Moriarty in a music @-@ based comedy trio called GUD . The group uses topical humour in its music ; their act includes songs about Osama bin Laden , the transportation of live animal stock and what they describe as contemporary Australian " folk heroes " such as Chopper Read , Rene Rivkin and convicted serial killer Ivan <unk> . McDermott says that GUD is in a similar vein to the Doug Anthony All Stars in that it revolves around music , comedy and the inter @-@ relationships between the band members onstage . According to McDermott , the group is named GUD in mockery of the way American people pronounce the word " god " , " because that 's who Americans thank at awards ceremonies , and I thought someone should be taking the credit . " Their 2003 show , " Gud Ugh " , won The Age Critic 's Choice Award for best Australian show of the festival . 
 In 2002 , he also performed a solo stand @-@ up show entitled <unk> , a deconstruction of comedy , comedic techniques and what makes people laugh . He has frequently participated in the televised Comedy Festival Gala , appearing in 2008 as its host , and has often captained one of the two competing teams in the festival 's Great Debate since his first debate appearance in 1994 . 
 = = = Other projects = = = 
 McDermott has written as a columnist for The Sydney Morning Herald , The Sun @-@ Herald , The Weekend Australian and The Age . In late 2000 , a selection of his columns were published in his first solo book , The Forgetting of Wisdom . Prior to this , he had coauthored books with the Doug Anthony All Stars ( Book , DAAS Kapital and Trip ) and the writers of Good News Week ( Good News Week Books One and Two ) . 
 He has also written and illustrated two children 's books , The Scree and The Girl Who Swallowed Bees , both of which have been adapted into short films with McDermott scripting , directing , performing and painting all of the animations . McDermott describes the stories as " little Gothic , dark , morality tales " which draw on the dark children 's tales he consumed during his own childhood , such as the Brothers Grimm 's fairy tales . The 2004 film adaptation of The Scree won Best Film at the 2005 <unk> International Film Festival and was nominated for an AFI Award for Best Short Fiction Film , while The Girl Who Swallowed Bees ( 2007 ) won the AFI Award for Best Short Animation . McDermott says he enjoys filmmaking because it brings together all of his skills . He reportedly has plans to work on a third short film , entitled Crab Boy and the Girl in the Shell , and has expressed an interest in moving into feature films . He also voiced characters in the 2009 short film Tegan the Vegan . 
 McDermott has also had roles in Australian film , musical theatre and radio . In 2002 , he appeared in the Australian theatre production of The Witches of Eastwick in the role of Darryl Van Horne . Despite having sworn he would never do a musical , McDermott says he was interested in the show because " it was still forming , still shaping . It 's more challenging than doing a musical that 's already in place . " He has also had small acting roles in several Australian films , including that of the band manager in The Night We Called It a Day and Trevor in the TV miniseries Through My Eyes : The Lindy Chamberlain Story . Between 1996 and 1997 he co @-@ hosted the breakfast radio program on Triple J with Mikey Robins , Steve Abbott and later Jen <unk> . 
 Since the end of Good News Week , McDermott has toured in a series of concerts called " Paul Sings " , in which he performed a number of serious songs , most of which were previously aired on Good News Week or The Sideshow . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Discography = = = 
 DAAS Icon ( 1990 ) 
 Dead & Alive ( 1993 ) 
 The Last Concert ( 1995 ) 
 Unplugged - The Good News Week Tapes Volume 1 ( 1998 ) 
 Shut Up / Kiss Me ( 1998 ) 
 Live Songs - The Good News Week Tapes Volume 2 ( 2000 ) 
 = = = Filmography = = = 
 Live at the National Theatre ( 1990 ) 
 The Edinburgh Years ( 1990 ) 
 DAAS Kapital ( 1991 @-@ 1992 ) 
 Dead & Alive ( 1993 ) 
 Good News Week ( 1996 – 2000 , 2008 – 2012 ) 
 Good News Week : Unseen and Obscene ( 1998 ) 
 The Night We Called it a Day ( 2003 ) 
 Medusa : First Date ( 2004 ) 
 The Scree ( 2004 ) 
 Through My Eyes : The Lindy Chamberlain Story ( 2004 ) 
 The Girl Who Swallowed Bees ( 2007 ) 
 The Unlimited <unk> Sterling Deluxe Edition ( 2008 ) 
 Tegan the Vegan ( 2011 ) 
 Wentworth Prison ( 2013 ) 
 Della <unk> : <unk> Adventures ( 2015 ) 
 = Polish October = 
 Polish October , also known as October 1956 , Polish thaw , or Gomułka 's thaw , marked a change in the politics of Poland in the second half of 1956 . Some social scientists term it the Polish October Revolution , which , while less dramatic than the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 , might have had an even deeper impact on the Eastern Bloc and on the Soviet Union 's relationship to its satellite states in Eastern Europe . 
 For the People 's Republic of Poland , 1956 was a year of transition . The international situation significantly weakened the hard @-@ line Stalinist faction in Poland ; Polish communist leader Bolesław Bierut died in March ; it was three years since Stalin had died and his successor at the Soviet Union 's helm , Nikita Khrushchev , denounced him in February . Protests by workers in June in Poznań had highlighted the people 's dissatisfaction with their situation . In October , the events set in motion resulted in the rise in power of the reformers ' faction , led by Władysław Gomułka . After brief , but tense , negotiations , the Soviets gave permission for Gomułka to stay in control and made several other concessions resulting in greater autonomy for the Polish government . For Polish citizens this meant a temporary liberalization . Eventually though , hopes for full liberalization were proven false , as Gomułka 's regime became more oppressive . Nonetheless , the era of Stalinization in Poland had ended . 
 = = Development = = 
 Gomułka 's thaw was caused by several factors . The death of Joseph Stalin in 1953 and the resulting de @-@ Stalinization and the Khrushchev Thaw prompted debates about fundamental issues throughout the entire Eastern Bloc . Nikita Khrushchev 's speech , On the Personality Cult and its Consequences , had wide implications for the Soviet Union and other Communist countries as well . 
 In Poland , in addition to criticism of the cult of personality , popular topics of debate centered on the right to steer a more independent course of " local , national socialism " instead of following the Soviet model in every detail . For example , many members of the Polish United Workers ' Party ( PZPR ) criticized Stalin 's execution of older Polish Communists during the Great Purge . Several other factors contributed to the destabilization of Poland . These included the widely publicized defection in 1953 of high @-@ ranking Polish intelligence agent Józef Światło , resulting in the weakening of the Ministry of Public Security of Poland ( Polish secret police ) . In addition , the unexpected death in Moscow in 1956 of Bolesław Bierut , the PZPR First Secretary ( known as the " Stalin of Poland " ) , led to increased rivalry between various factions of Polish communists and to growing tensions in Polish society , culminating in the Poznań 1956 protests ( also known as June ' 56 ) . 
 The PZPR Secretariat decided that Khrushchev 's speech should have wide circulation in Poland , a unique decision in the Eastern Bloc . Bierut 's successors seized on Khrushchev 's condemnation of Stalinist policy as a perfect opportunity to prove their reformist , democratic credentials and their willingness to break with the Stalinist legacy . In late March and early April , thousands of Party meetings were held all over Poland , with Politburo and Secretariat blessing . Tens of thousands took part in such meetings . The Secretariat 's plan succeeded beyond what they expected . During this period , the political atmosphere in Poland shifted as questions were increasingly asked about taboo subjects like the Polish Communists ' legitimacy , responsibility for Stalin 's crimes , the arrest of the increasingly popular Gomułka , and issues in Soviet – Polish relations , such as the continued Soviet military presence in Poland , the Ribbentrop – Molotov Pact , the Katyn massacre , and the Soviet failure to support the Warsaw Uprising . A new Party Congress was demanded , as was a greater role for the Sejm and a guarantee of personal liberties . Alarmed by the process , the Party Secretariat decided to withhold the speech from the general public . 
 In June 1956 , there was an insurrection in Poznań . The workers rioted to protest shortages of food and consumer goods , bad housing , decline in real income , trade relations with the Soviet Union and poor management of the economy . The Polish government initially responded by branding the rioters " provocateurs , counterrevolutionaries and imperialist agents " . Between 57 and 78 people — mostly protesters — were killed , and hundreds were wounded and arrested . Soon , however , the party hierarchy recognized that the riots had awakened a nationalist movement and reversed their opinion . Wages were raised by 50 percent , and economic and political change was promised . 
 The Poznań protests , although the largest , were not unique in Poland , where social protest resumed its fury that autumn . On November 18 , rioters destroyed the militia headquarters and radio @-@ jamming equipment in Bydgoszcz , and on December 10 , a crowd in Szczecin attacked public buildings , including a prison , the state prosecutor 's office , militia headquarters , and the Soviet consulate . People across the country criticized the security police and asked for the dissolution of the public security committee and the punishment of its <unk> functionaries . Demands were made for the exposure of secret police collaborators , and suspected collaborators were frequently assaulted . In many localities , crowds gathered outside the secret police headquarters , shouted hostile slogans , and broke its windows . Public meetings , demonstrations , and street marches took place in hundreds of towns across Poland . The meetings were usually organized by local Party cells , local authorities , and trade unions . However , official organizers tended to lose control as political content exceeded their original agenda . Crowds often took radical action , in many cases resulting in unrest on the streets and clashes with police and other law @-@ enforcement agencies . Street activity peaked during and immediately after the 19 – 21 October " VIII Plenum " meeting of the Central Committee of the PZPR , but continued until late in the year . A concurrent upsurge in religious and clerical sentiment took place . Hymns were sung , and the release of Stefan Wyszyński and the reinstatement of suppressed bishops were demanded . Nationalism was the cement of mass mobilization and dominated public meetings , during which people sang the national anthem and other patriotic songs , demanded the return of the white eagle to the flag and traditional army uniforms , and attacked Poland 's dependence on the Soviet Union and its military . They demanded the return of the eastern territories , an explanation for the Katyn massacre , and elimination of the Russian language from the educational curriculum . In the last ten days of October , monuments to the Red Army , despised by Poles , were attacked : red stars were pulled down from roofs of houses , factories and schools ; red flags were destroyed ; and portraits of Konstantin Rokossovsky , the military commander in charge of operations that drove the Nazi German forces from Poland , were defaced . Attempts were made to force entries into the homes of Soviet citizens , mostly in Lower Silesia , home to many Soviet troops . However , unlike the protesters in Hungary and Poznań , activists limited their political demands and behavior , which were not purely opposed to communist and the system . The communist authorities were not openly and unequivocally challenged , as they had been in June , and anticommunist slogans that had been prevalent in the June uprising , such as " We want free elections " , " Down with Communist dictatorship " , or " Down with the Party " , were much less prevalent . Party committees were not attacked . 
 = = Political change = = 
 In October Edward Ochab , the First Secretary of the Party and the Polish Prime Minister , proposed Władysław Gomułka election for the First Secretary of the Party during 8th Plenum meeting . Gomułka was a moderate who had been the First Secretary of the Party 1943 @-@ 48 and had been ousted and imprisoned in 1951 after " right @-@ wing nationalist deviation " accusation by Stalinist hardliners ' with Bierut . Gomułka proved to be acceptable to both factions of Polish communists : the reformers , who were arguing for liberalization of the system , and the hardliners , who realized that they needed to compromise . Gomułka insisted that he be given real power to implement reforms . One specific condition he set was that Soviet Marshal Konstantin Rokossovsky , who had mobilized troops against the Poznań workers , be removed from the Polish Politburo and Defense Ministry , to which Ochab agreed . The majority of the Polish leadership , backed by both the army and the Internal Security Corps , brought Gomułka and several associates into the Politburo and designated Gomułka as First Secretary . Untouched by the scandals of Stalinism , Gomułka was acceptable to the Polish masses , but at first was viewed with much suspicion by Moscow . 
 The Soviet leadership viewed events in Poland with alarm . <unk> was underway in the Soviet Union as well , but the Soviet leadership did not view the democratic reform that the Polish public desired as an acceptable solution . In Moscow , the belief was that any trends towards democracy in one bloc country could lead to the destruction of communism and the ruin of Soviet influence in the region as a whole . Eastern Europe created a fence between Soviet Communism and Western Democracy , and any break in the wall could end Soviet power . The Soviet Union was not worried solely about the political implications of reform but about the economic implications as well . Economically , the Soviet Union was heavily invested in Poland . The Soviet Union had financed Polish industry and was Poland 's main trading partner . The Soviet Union directed what products Poland manufactured ; the Soviets bought the products and exported goods to Poland no longer produced within the country itself . The Polish and Soviet economies were thus heavily integrated ; any reform , whether political or economic , in one of the countries would inevitably have a great impact on the other . Because Poland was inextricably connected to the Soviet Union economically , the thought of an independent Polish economy was unrealistic . The country had been forced to rely on the Soviets for such a long time that breaking away completely would prove disastrous . Thus , both countries held crucial power in different facets . Poland could threaten Soviet strength and power in Eastern Europe politically , and the Soviet Union could essentially destroy the Polish economy . Therefore , any reform in the Polish government would have to concede to some Soviet demands , while the Soviets concurrently would have to concede to a vital partner . 
 A high @-@ level delegation of the Soviet Central Committee flew to Poland in an attempt to block removing pro @-@ Soviet members of Politburo mainly Soviet and Polish Marshal Konstantin Rokossovsky . Soviet delegation was led by Nikita Khrushchev and included Anastas Mikoyan , Nikolai Bulganin , Vyacheslav Molotov , Lazar Kaganovich , Ivan Konev , and others . The negotiations were tense ; both Polish and Soviet troops were put on alert , engaged in ' manoeuvres ' , and were used as thinly veiled threats . The Polish leadership made it clear that the face of communism had to become more nationalized ; no longer could the Soviet Union directly control the Polish people . Here , Khrushchev 's speech worked against him . During Stalinism , the Soviet Union had placed Moscow @-@ friendly Poles , or Russians themselves , in important political positions in Poland . After denouncing Stalinism so vehemently in his speech , Khrushchev could not regress to the Stalinist position by forcing more Russians into the Polish leadership . The Poles , in recognizing the cries of the public , needed to keep the Soviets from direct control but could not raise their demands to a point that endangered their relationships in the bloc . Gomułka demanded increased autonomy and permission to carry out some reforms but also reassured the Soviets that the reforms were internal matters and that Poland had no intention of abandoning communism or its treaties with the Soviet Union . The Soviets were also pressured by the Chinese to accommodate the Polish demands and were increasingly distracted by the events in Hungary . Eventually , when Khrushchev was reassured that Gomułka would not alter the basic foundations of Polish communism , he withdrew the invasion threat and agreed to compromise , and Gomułka was confirmed in his new position . 
 The leadership 's stance contributed to the relatively moderate political dimension of social protest in October . Also crucial were the impacts of nationalism and nationalist emotions . They spurred social protest in June but dampened it in October , when the threat of Soviet invasion against Gomułka and his supporters transformed the social image of Polish communists . In June , they were still treated as the puppets and servants of alien , anti @-@ Polish interests and excluded from the national community . In October , they became a part of the nation opposing Soviet domination . Gomułka was enthusiastically supported by the great majority of society , not primarily as a communist leader , but as a leader of a nation who , by resisting Soviet demands , embodied a national longing for independence and sovereignty . His name was chanted , along with anti @-@ Soviet slogans , at thousands of meetings : " Go home Rokossovsky " , " Down with the Russians , " " Long live Gomułka , " " We want a free Poland " . 
 While his anti @-@ Soviet image was obviously mythical and exaggerated , it was justified in the popular imagination by his anti @-@ Stalinist line in 1948 and years of subsequent internment . Thus , Polish communists found themselves unexpectedly at the head of a national liberation movement . The enthusiastic public support offered to Gomułka contributed to the legitimization of communist rule in Poland , which incorporated mass nationalist , anti @-@ Soviet feelings into the prevailing power structures . In Hungary , social protest destroyed the political system ; in Poland , it was absorbed within it . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Information about events in Poland reached the people of Hungary via Radio Free Europe 's news and commentary services between 19 October and 22 October 1956 . A student demonstration in Budapest in support of Gomułka , asking for similar reforms in Hungary , was one of the events that sparked the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 . The events of the Hungarian November also helped distract the Soviets and ensure the success of the Polish October . 
 Gomułka , in his public speeches , criticized the hardships of Stalinism and promised reforms to democratize the country ; this was received with much enthusiasm by Polish society . By mid @-@ November , Gomułka had secured substantive gains in his negotiations with the Soviets : the cancellation of Poland 's existing debts , new preferential trade terms , abandonment of the unpopular Soviet @-@ imposed collectivization of Polish agriculture , and permission to liberalize policy towards the Roman Catholic Church . In December , the status of Soviet forces in Poland , the Northern Group of Forces , was finally regulated . 
 In the aftermath of the October events , Rokossovsky and many other Soviet " advisers " left Poland , signaling that Moscow was willing to grant Polish communists slightly more independence . The Polish government rehabilitated many victims of the Stalinist era , and many political prisoners were set free . Among them was cardinal Stefan Wyszyński . The Polish legislative election of 1957 was much more liberal than that of 1952 although still not considered free by Western standards . 
 Gomułka , however , could not and did not want to reject communism or Soviet domination ; he could only steer Poland towards increased independence and " Polish national communism " . Because of these restricted ambitions , which were recognized by the Soviets , the limited Polish revolution succeeded where the radical Hungarian one did not . Norman Davies sums up the effect as a transformation of Poland from puppet state to client state ; Raymond Pearson similarly states that Poland changed from a Soviet colony to a dominion . 
 <unk> 's pledge to follow a " Polish road to socialism " more in harmony with national traditions and preferences caused many Poles to interpret the dramatic confrontation of 1956 as a sign that the end of the dictatorship was in sight . Initially very popular for his reforms , which were optimistically referred to at the time as " Gomułka 's thaw " , Gomułka gradually softened his opposition to Soviet pressures , and the late @-@ 1950s hopes for major political change in Poland were replaced with growing disillusionment in the 1960s . In the end , Gomułka failed in his goal to salvage communism — or socialism — in Poland . 
 Society became more liberal ( as seen , for instance , in the achievements of the Polish Film School and the creation of such controversial movies as Ashes and Diamonds ) , and a civil society started to develop , but half @-@ hearted democratization was not enough to satisfy the Polish public . By the time of the March 1968 events , Gomułka 's thaw would be long over , and increasing economic problems and popular discontent would end up removing Gomułka from power in 1970 — ironically , in a situation similar to the protests that once had propelled him to power . 
 Nonetheless , some social scientists , such as Zbigniew Brzezinski and Frank Gibney , refer to these changes as a revolution , one less dramatic than its Hungarian counterpart but one which may have had an even more profound impact on the Eastern Bloc . Timothy Garton Ash calls the Polish October the most significant event in the post @-@ war history of Poland until the rise of Solidarity . History professor Ivan Berend claims that while the effects of the Polish October on the Eastern Bloc may be disputed , it set the course for the eventual fall of communism in the People 's Republic of Poland . 
 = Battle of Pulo Aura = 
 The Battle of Pulo Aura was a minor naval engagement of the Napoleonic Wars , fought on 14 February 1804 , in which a large convoy of Honourable East India Company ( HEIC ) East Indiamen , well @-@ armed merchant ships , intimidated , drove off and chased a powerful French naval squadron . Although the French force was much stronger than the British convoy , Commodore Nathaniel Dance 's aggressive tactics persuaded Contre @-@ Admiral Charles @-@ Alexandre Durand Linois to retire after only a brief exchange of shot . Dance then chased the French warships until his convoy was out of danger , whereupon he resumed his passage towards British India . Linois later claimed that the unescorted British merchant fleet was defended by eight ships of the line , a claim criticised by contemporary officers and later historians . 
 The battle occurred during an extended commerce raiding operation by a French squadron led by Linois in the ship of the line Marengo . Linois had sailed to the Indian Ocean in 1803 before the declaration of war , under orders to install garrisons in the French and Dutch colonies in the region and to prey on lightly defended British merchant shipping . One of the richest and most significant targets was the " China Fleet " , an annual convoy of East Indiamen from China and other Far Eastern ports that carried millions of pounds worth of trade goods . Although these large vessels were accompanied by numerous smaller merchant ships , news of the outbreak of war had only just arrived in the Pacific and the only warship available to defend the fleet was the small HEIC armed brig Ganges . Dutch informants notified Linois of the fleet 's destination and date of departure from Canton while he was anchored at Batavia on Java , and he sailed in search of the convoy on 28 December 1803 , eventually discovering it in early February . 
 Although no warships protected the convoy , Commodore Dance knew that lookouts could , from a distance , mistake a large East Indiaman for a ship of the line . He raised flags that indicated that his fleet included part of the Royal Navy squadron operating in the Indian Ocean at the time and formed into a line of battle . Although Linois 's ships were clearly superior , the British reaction unnerved him and he quickly broke off combat . Dance continued his ruse , pursuing Linois for two hours until the body of the convoy was safe . King George III knighted Dance for his courage and various mercantile and patriotic organisations awarded him large sums of money , while both Linois 's own officers and the Emperor Napoleon personally castigated the French admiral for his failure to press the attack against a weaker and extremely valuable enemy . Although he remained in command of the squadron for another two years and had some minor success against undefended merchant ships , he suffered a string of defeats and inconclusive engagements against weaker British naval forces . Ironically , Linois was captured at the Action of 13 March 1806 by a numerically superior British battle squadron that he mistook for a merchant convoy . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the Napoleonic Wars , the British economy depended on its ability to trade with the British Empire , particularly the valuable colonies in British India . The intercontinental trade was conducted by the governors of India , the Honourable East India Company ( HEIC ) , using their fleet of large , well @-@ armed merchant vessels known as East Indiamen . These ships were of between 500 and 1200 nominal tons burthen ( bm ) and could carry up to 36 guns for defence against pirates , privateers and small warships . They were not , however , capable under normal circumstances of fighting off an enemy frigate or ship of the line . Their guns were usually of inferior design , and their crew smaller and less well trained than those on a naval ship . The East Indiamen sought to ensure the safety of their cargo and passengers , not defeat enemy warships in battle . Despite these disadvantages , the size of East Indiamen meant that from a distance they appeared quite similar to a small ship of the line , a deception usually augmented by paintwork and dummy cannon . At the Bali Strait Incident of 28 January 1797 an unescorted convoy of East Indiamen had used this similarity to intimidate a powerful French frigate squadron into withdrawing without a fight . In February 1799 an attack by a combined French @-@ Spanish squadron on the assembled convoy at Macau was driven off in the Macau Incident without combat by the small Royal Navy escort squadron . 
 The East Indiamen would gather at ports in India and the Far East and from there set out for Britain in large convoys , often carrying millions of pounds worth of trade goods . The journey would usually take six months and the ships would subsequently return carrying troops and passengers to augment the British forces stationed in India . " Country ships " , smaller merchant vessels chartered for local trade , sometimes independently from the HEIC , would often join the convoys . To protect their ships from the depredations of pirates , the HEIC also operated its own private navy of small armed vessels . In combination , these ships were an effective deterrent against smaller raiders , but were no match for a professional warship . 
 Understanding the importance of the Indian Ocean trade and seeking to threaten it from the start of the inevitable war , First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte ordered a squadron to sail for India in March 1803 . This force was under the command of Contre @-@ Admiral Charles @-@ Alexandre Durand Linois and consisted of the ship of the line Marengo and three frigates . Linois operated from the island base of Île de France with orders to attack British shipping once war had begun . Sailing initially to Pondicherry in India , Linois had a close encounter with a British squadron under Rear @-@ Admiral Peter Rainier during July , but was at Île de France in August when news arrived that the Napoleonic Wars had started on 16 May . Determined to fortify the French raiding bases in the region , Linois landed troops and supplies at Réunion and Batavia . During the operation he despatched the frigate Atalante to Muscat , captured numerous individual country ships , and burned the British trading post of Bencoolen . On 10 December he anchored at Batavia for the winter . Shortly thereafter , informants passed to Batavia the composition and date of departure of the British " China Fleet " , leading Linois to set out to intercept it . On 28 December , Linois 's squadron — consisting of Marengo , frigates Belle Poule and Sémillante , the corvette Berceau and the Dutch brig Aventurier — departed Batavia . The ships carried six months worth of provisions as Linois had anticipated an extended patrol in the approaches to the Strait of Malacca in the South China Sea . 
 The China Fleet was a large annual British merchant convoy that gathered at Canton in the Pearl River during the winter before sailing for Britain , via India . As the convoy passed through the East Indies , it was joined by vessels sailing from other European ports in the region on the route to India , until it often numbered dozens of ships . The 1804 fleet departed in late January , and by the time it reached the approaches to the Strait of Malacca it had swelled to include 16 East Indiamen , 11 country ships , a Portuguese merchant ship from Macau and a vessel from Botany Bay in New South Wales . Although the HEIC had provided the small , armed brig Ganges as an escort , this vessel could only dissuade pirates ; it could not hope to compete with a French warship . There was no military escort : news of the outbreak of war had reached Canton before reinforcements had arrived from the squadron in India . Spies based in Canton had passed the composition and date of departure of the China Fleet to Linois in Batavia , but the Dutch informants at Canton had also passed on false reports that Royal Navy warships were accompanying the convoy , reports that may have been deliberately placed by British authorities . The convoy was an immensely valuable prize , its cargo of tea , silk and porcelain valued at over £ 8 million in contemporary values ( the equivalent of £ 600 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) . Also on board were 80 Chinese plants ordered by Sir Joseph Banks for the royal gardens and carried in a specially designed plant room . The HEIC Select Committee in Canton had been very concerned for the safety of the unescorted convoy , and had debated delaying its departure . The various captains had been consulted , including Henry Meriton , who in his ship Exeter had captured a frigate during the Action of 4 August 1800 , a disastrous French attack on a convoy of East Indiamen off Brazil . Meriton advised that the convoy was powerful enough in both appearance and reality to dissuade any attack . He was opposed by John Farquharson of Alfred , who considered that the crews of East Indiamen were so badly trained that they would be unable to mutually defend one another if faced with a determined enemy . Eventually the Committee decided that it could delay the convoy no longer and awarded command to the most experienced captain , Commodore Nathaniel Dance – an officer with over 45 years service at sea – in the East Indiaman Earl Camden . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At 08 : 00 on 14 February 1804 , with the island of Pulo Aura within sight to the south @-@ west near the eastern entrance to the Straits of Malacca , the Indiaman Royal George raised a signal describing three sail approaching the convoy from the direction of the island . This was Linois 's squadron , which had been cruising in the area for the previous month in anticipation of the convoy 's arrival . Dance ordered the brig Ganges and the Indiamen Alfred , Royal George , Bombay Castle and Hope to approach the strange vessels and investigate , rapidly discovering that they were enemy warships . By 13 : 00 , Dance had readied his guns and reformed his convoy , with the large Indiamen formed up in line of battle to receive the French attack as if they were warships . During the late afternoon , Linois 's squadron fell in behind the slow line of merchant ships and Dance expected an immediate attack , but Linois was cautious and merely observed the convoy , preferring to wait until the following morning before engaging the enemy . Dance made use of the delay to gather the smaller country ships on the opposite side of his line from the French , the brig Ganges shepherding them into position and collecting volunteers from their crews to augment the sailors on board the Indiamen . Linois later excused his delay in attacking the merchant convoy by citing the need for caution : 
 If the bold front put on by the enemy in the daytime had been intended as a ruse to conceal his weakness , he would have profited by the darkness of the night to endeavour to conceal his escape ; and in that case should have taken advantage of his manoeuvres . But I soon became convinced that this security was not feigned ; three of his ships constantly kept their lights up , and the fleet continued to lie to , in order of battle , throughout the night . This position facilitated my gaining the wind , and enabled me to observe the enemy closely . 
 At dawn on 15 February , both the British and French forces raised their colours . Dance hoped to persuade Linois that his ships included some fully armed warships and he therefore ordered the brig Ganges and the four lead ships to hoist blue ensigns , while the rest of the convoy raised red ensigns . By the system of national flags then in use in British ships , this implied that the ships with blue ensigns were warships attached to the squadron of Admiral Rainier , while the others were merchant ships under their protection . Dance was unknowingly assisted by the information that had reached Linois at Batavia , which claimed that there were 23 merchant ships and the brig in the convoy . Dance had collected six additional ships during his journey , and the identity of these were unknown to the French , who assumed that at least some of the unidentified vessels must be warships , particularly as several vessels had been recently painted at Canton to resemble ships of the line . 
 At 09 : 00 Linois was still only observing the convoy , reluctant to attack until he could be sure of the nature of his opponents . Dance responded to the reprieve by reforming the line of battle into sailing formation to increase his convoy 's speed with the intention of reaching the Straits ahead of Linois . With the convoy a less intimidating target , Linois began to slowly approach the British ships . By 13 : 00 it was clear that Linois 's faster ships were in danger of isolating the rear of the convoy , and Dance ordered his lead ships to tack and come about , so that they would cross in front of the French squadron . The British successfully executed the manoeuvre , and at 13 : 15 Linois opened fire on the lead ship — Royal George — under the command of John Fam Timmins . The Royal George and the next four ships in line , the Indiaman Ganges , Dance 's Earl Camden , the Warley and the Alfred , all returned fire , Ganges initially attacking Royal George in error . Captain James <unk> in Hope , the next in line , was so eager to join the battle that he misjudged his speed and collided with Warley , the ships falling back as their crews worked to separate their rigging . Shots were then exchanged at long range for 43 minutes , neither side inflicting severe damage . 
 Royal George had a sailor named Hugh Watt killed , another man wounded , and suffered some damage to her hull . None of the other British ships or any of the French reported anything worse than superficial damage in the engagement . At 14 : 00 , Linois abandoned the action and ordered his squadron to haul away with the wind and sail eastwards , away from the convoy , under all sail . Determined to maintain the pretence of the presence of warships , Dance ordered the ships flying naval ensigns , including his flagship Earl Camden , to chase the French . None of the merchant ships could match the French speed , but an attempt at a chase would hopefully dissuade the French from returning . For two hours , Dance 's squadron followed Linois , Hope coming close to catching Aventurier but ultimately unable to overtake the brig . At 16 : 00 , Dance decided to gather his scattered ships and return to his former heading rather than risk attack from other raiders or lose sight of his convoy in the darkness . By 20 : 00 , the entire British convoy had anchored at the entrance to the Straits of Malacca . On 28 February , the British ships of the line HMS Sceptre and Albion joined them in the Strait and conducted them safely to Saint Helena in the South Atlantic . 
 There HMS Plantagenet escorted the convoy to England . Five whalers and the Carmarthen , Captain <unk> , also joined the convoy , with the <unk> , from coast of Guinea , joining at sea . The convoy returned to England without further incident . 
 Linois 's squadron reached Batavia several days after the action without encountering any British ships . He was there joined by Atalante and , after taking on supplies , made sail for Île de France , arriving on 2 April . The Dutch brig Aventurier was left at Batavia and remained there until a raid on the port by a British force in November 1806 , when it was destroyed . The French admiral later attempted to explain his conduct during the engagement : 
 The ships which had tacked rejoined those which were engaging us , and three of the engaging ships manoeuvred to double our rear , while the remainder of the fleet , crowding sail and bearing up , evinced an intention to surround us . By this manoeuvre the enemy would have rendered my situation very dangerous . The superiority of his force was ascertained , and I had no longer to deliberate on the part I should take to avoid the consequence of an unequal engagement : profiting by the smoke , I hauled up to port , and steering east @-@ north @-@ east , I increased by distance from the enemy , who continued the pursuit of the squadron for three hours , discharging at it several broadsides . 
 = = = Orders of battle = = = 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Nathaniel Dance and his fellow captains were highly praised in the aftermath of the battle : in saving the convoy they had prevented both the HEIC and Lloyd 's of London from likely financial ruin , the repercussions of which would have had profound effects across the British Empire . The various commanders and their crews were presented with a £ 50 @,@ 000 prize fund to be divided among them , and the Lloyd 's Patriotic Fund and other national and mercantile institutions made a series of awards of ceremonial swords , silver plate and monetary gifts to individual officers . Lloyd 's Patriotic Fund gave each captain a sword worth 50 pounds , and one to Royal Navy Lieutenant Robert Merrick Fowler , travelling as a passenger on Earl Camden , and one worth 100 pounds to Nathaniel Dance . 
 Dance was specifically rewarded , receiving royal recognition when he was made a Knight Bachelor by King George III . He was also personally presented with the sum of £ 5 @,@ 000 by the Bombay Insurance Company and an additional £ 500 a year for life by the HEIC . Dance immediately retired from the sea to Enfield Town , where he died in 1827 . He refused to take full credit for the survival of the convoy , writing in reply to the award from the Bombay Insurance Company : 
 Placed , by the adventitious circumstances of seniority of service and absence of convoy , in the chief command of the fleet intrusted to my care , it has been my good fortune to have been enabled , by the firmness of those by whom I was supported , to perform my trust not only with fidelity , but without loss to my employers . Public opinion and public rewards have already far outrun my deserts ; and I cannot but be sensible that the liberal spirit of my generous countrymen has measured what they are pleased to term their grateful sense of my conduct , rather by the particular utility of the exploit , than by any individual merit I can claim . 
 Among the passengers on the Indiamen were a number of Royal Navy personnel , survivors of the shipwreck of the exploratory vessel HMS Porpoise off the coast of New South Wales the previous year . This party — carried aboard Ganges , Royal George and Earl Camden — volunteered to assist the gun teams aboard their ships and Dance specifically thanked them in his account of the action . One was Lieutenant Robert Merrick Fowler , the former commander of Porpoise , who distinguished himself in a variety of capacities during the engagement . 
 Some of the party had influential careers in the Navy , including the naval architect James Inman , who sailed on Warley , and John Franklin , who later became a polar explorer . Also aboard was Indian businessman <unk> <unk> returning from the second of his five voyages to China . 
 Linois continued his raiding , achieving some success against individual sailing ships , but failing to press successfully his numerical superiority against British naval forces ; most notably at the Battle of Vizagapatam on 15 September 1804 and the Action of 6 August 1805 . Ironically , Linois was eventually captured at the Action of 13 March 1806 after mistaking a squadron of British ships of the line for a merchant convoy in the mid @-@ Atlantic . Linois was concerned throughout the engagement for the safety of his ships : with the nearest dockyard over 3 @,@ 000 nmi ( 3 @,@ 500 mi ; 5 @,@ 600 km ) away at Île de France , he could not afford to suffer severe damage to his rigging or masts that would leave his squadron crippled . He also sought to defend his behaviour off Pulo Aura with the claim that the British convoy was protected by as many as eight ships of the line , and that he had performed heroically in saving his squadron from this overwhelming force . Subsequent historians have ridiculed this latter statement : William James wryly commented in his account of the action , written in 1827 , that " it would be uncharitable to call into question the courage of Rear @-@ admiral Linois " and William Laird Clowes stated in 1900 that " his timidity and want of enterprise threw away a great opportunity " . Nicholas Rodger , writing in 2004 , was even more critical , insisting that " his [ Linois 's ] officers do not seem to have been fooled , and it is extremely difficult to believe that he was . " He goes on to suggest that no experienced seaman could possibly have mistaken a poorly manned and poorly trained merchant crew for the crew of a real Royal Navy ship of the line , concluding that " Linois had thrown away a prize worth at least £ 8 million through mere timidity " . The most scathing criticism of Linois 's conduct came from Napoleon himself , who wrote to Minister of Marine Denis Decrès on the subject , stating : 
 All the enterprises at sea which have been undertaken since I became the head of the Government have missed fire because my admirals see double and have discovered , I know not how or where , that war can be made without running risks ... Tell Linois that he has shown want of courage of mind , that kind of courage which I consider the highest quality in a leader . 
 = = In literature = = 
 The battle has been fictionalised twice , in Captain Frederick Marryat 's 1832 novel Newton Forster ; or , the Merchant Service , and in Patrick O 'Brian 's novel HMS Surprise , published in 1973 . In O 'Brian 's novel , Royal Navy Captain Jack Aubrey aids the China Fleet , organizing the Indiamen who then succeeded as in history . The rewards were shed on Aubrey , rather than the lead merchant captain . 
 = The Boat Race 1898 = 
 The 55th Boat Race took place on 24 March 1898 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Oxford , the reigning champions and leading overall , went into the race with a marginally heavier crew than Cambridge . They won " easily " as Cambridge 's boat became waterlogged in strong winds and inclement conditions . It was their ninth consecutive victory and took them to an overall lead of 32 – 22 in the event . The winning time of 22 minutes 15 seconds was the slowest since the 1878 race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1897 race by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , with Cambridge leading overall with 31 victories to Cambridge 's 22 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford were coached by G. C. Bourne who had rowed for Oxford in the 1882 and 1883 races and Douglas McLean ( an Oxford Blue five times between 1883 and 1887 ) . Cambridge 's president , William Dudley Ward , despite opposition , invited William Fletcher , Oxford Blue and former coach , to assist in teaching his crew the style required to challenge the Dark Blues . Several members of the Light Blue crew refused to row , and Dudley Ward himself was refused leave to row on grounds of sickness . According to George Drinkwater , former rower and author , " Fletcher turned out a crew well above the average of previous years . " Conversely , Oxford " did not develop as it should have done " and was " by no means up to the average of those that went before it . " 
 The umpire for the race for the tenth year in a row was Frank Willan who won the event four consecutive times , rowing for Oxford in the 1866 , 1867 , 1868 and 1869 races . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 7 lb ( 79 @.@ 2 kg ) , 0 @.@ 5 pounds ( 0 @.@ 2 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Cambridge 's crew contained two participants with Boat Race experience : Adam Searle Bell who was rowing in his fourth contest and cox Edward Caesar Hawkins steering in his second appearance . Claude Goldie , son of John rowed at number seven for the Light Blues . Oxford saw six members of the previous crew return , including Charles Burnell and R. Carr , both of whom were making their fourth consecutive appearance in the race . Eight of the nine crew Oxford crew had studied at Eton College . R. O. Pitman , rowing at bow for Oxford , was the third of his siblings to participate in the Boat Race , with his bothers Frederick I. Pitman rowing for Cambridge between 1884 and 1886 and C. M. Pitman who rowed for Oxford between 1892 and 1895 . 
 = = Race = = 
 According to author and former Oxford rower George Drinkwater , " there was a gale blowing ... which met a spring tide , so that the water was very rough from the start . " Oxford , the slight pre @-@ race favourites , won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the rougher Surrey side of the river to Cambridge . Willan started the race at 3 : 47 p.m. but within four strokes , the Cambridge boat was " half @-@ full of water " . 
 Oxford steered towards the shore for shelter , with Cambridge following , but they had taken on so much water that " only the bladders which had been placed under their seats kept them afloat " . Although the Dark Blues had shipped a fair amount of water , they were able to continue , and with Cambridge waterlogged , the race was effectively ended as a contest . Oxford won " easily " , to secure their ninth consecutive victory in the slowest winning time since the 1878 race . 
 = SR Lord Nelson class = 
 The SR class LN or Lord Nelson class is a type of 4 @-@ cylinder 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 steam locomotive designed for the Southern Railway by Richard Maunsell in 1926 . They were intended for Continental boat trains between London ( Victoria ) and Dover harbour , but were also later used for express passenger work to the South @-@ West of England . Sixteen of them were constructed , representing the most powerful ( although not the most successful ) Southern 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 design . They were all named after famous admirals . 
 The class continued to operate with British Railways until withdrawn during 1961 and 1962 . Only one example of the class – the first engine , Lord Nelson itself – has been saved from scrapping . This has been seen running on mainline tours and preserved railways throughout Britain . 
 = = Background = = 
 Although the improved ” King Arthur ” class 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 locomotives were capable of the heaviest express passenger work between London and South @-@ West England , there was a growth in demand for Continental traffic travelling via Dover and Folkestone . By the mid @-@ 1920s the Southern Railway Traffic Department wished to begin operating 500 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 510 t ; 560 @-@ short @-@ ton ) express trains on these routes during peak periods . These would require a more powerful locomotive , able to pull heavier loads at sustained speeds of 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) , so as not to impede the congested electrified lines around London . However , any enlargement of the existing 2 @-@ cylinder design was not possible due to weight restrictions imposed by the railway ’ s Civil Engineer . 
 After examining the practice of other British railways , Richard Maunsell , the Chief Mechanical Engineer , secured agreement for a 4 @-@ cylinder design , with an improved boiler and Belpaire firebox . The drive would be divided between the front coupled axle for the inside cylinders and the middle coupled axle for the outside cylinders giving better weight distribution and reduced hammer blow . The new design was an inevitable compromise between the need for additional power and to keep the weight down to an acceptable limit . 
 There were two unusual features of the design : the first of which was the setting of the crank axles at 135 ° , rather than the standard 90 ° of other locomotive types . This design necessitated four sets of valve gear , and gave rise to eight beats per revolution , rather than the usual four , designed to give a more even draw on the fire . The second difference was that fire grate was in two sections , the rear portion was horizontal and the front sloped away sharply . 
 = = Construction history = = 
 The prototype <unk> named Lord Nelson was ordered from Eastleigh railway works in June 1925 but production proceeded slowly , at Maunsell ’ s insistence , to ensure that the weight was kept to a minimum at every stage , so the locomotive did not appear until August 1926 . It was tested on a variety of duties over the next year , with sufficiently encouraging results for an initial order for ten more locomotives for delivery between May 1928 and April 1929 to be placed . These were originally scheduled to be allocated to Battersea depot and fitted with 4 @,@ 000 gallon 6 @-@ wheeled tenders suitable for the Continental ports . However , during construction , it was decided to equip half of the class with 5 @,@ 000 gallon 8 @-@ wheeled tenders necessary for the longer West of England routes and to allocate them to Nine Elms depot . A further batch of ten locomotives was ordered in 1928 , before the previous batch had been delivered , but when it became apparent that the Stock Market Crash of 1929 would be likely to reduce the demand for Continental travel , this second order was reduced to five . 
 = = = Naming the locomotives = = = 
 The locomotives were all named after famous Royal Navy admirals , with the doyen of the class being named Lord Nelson . As a result , the rest of the locomotives belonged to the Lord Nelson ( LN ) class . 
 = = = Modifications = = = 
 The performance of the new locomotives was mixed , depending upon the experience of the crew and the circumstances under which they were operating . At times it was no better than their smaller predecessors . Maunsell therefore undertook a number of experiments to try to improve the performance of the new locomotives . No . <unk> was fitted with smaller 6 ft 3 in ( 1 @.@ 905 m ) driving wheels to see if this would improve performance over the heavily graded London @-@ Dover line , but the difference was marginal . No . <unk> was fitted with a longer , heavier boiler but once again with little improvement . The whole class however benefitted from the fitting of smoke deflectors during the late 1920s . 
 Maunsell was aware of the reputation for poor steaming enjoyed by the class and attempted to address it by the fitting of twin Kylchap blastpipes to No. 860 in 1934 . However , the problem was ultimately solved by Oliver Bulleid , Maunsell 's replacement as Chief Mechanical Engineer of the Southern in 1938 . He fitted larger diameter chimneys and Lemaître multiple jet blastpipes , which effectively transformed their performance . Thereafter the class was highly respected . 
 = = Operational details = = 
 For location details and current status of the preserved locomotive , see : List of Lord Nelson class locomotives 
 For a period after its introduction to the Southern Railway network , the Lord Nelson class held the title of " most powerful locomotive in Britain " – a claim based on its tractive effort . The advanced design of the locomotive led to the GWR introducing the GWR 6000 Class in order to regain the title lost by their GWR Castle class locomotives when the Lord Nelsons were constructed . The planned 500 @-@ ton trains never materialised , but the class was regularly used on 460 ton trains such as the Golden Arrow . After the Second World War they were also frequently used on heavily laden Boat Trains between London Waterloo station and Southampton docks . 
 The Lord Nelsons were notoriously difficult for inexperienced crews to fire properly , due to their long firebox , and specific crews who had proven experience in firing the locomotives were therefore allocated to them . This was due to the relatively few locomotives in the class for crews to train on . The LMS Royal Scot Class was loosely based on this design . 
 = = = Accidents and incidents = = = 
 One member of the Lord Nelson class was involved in what could have been a major accident on 23 January 1930 . This entailed the leading driving wheels jumping off the track , though the locomotive ran for many yards before they re @-@ railed themselves over a point . No. 860 Lord Hawke was derailed at St. Denys , Hampshire on 14 August 1940 due to enemy action. a bomb fell on the track ahead of the train , which was unable to stop in time . No. 852 received a direct hit from an enemy bomb on 18 April 1941 , and was so severely damaged that it was not returned to service until June 1942 . No. 854 suffered a firebox failure due to lack of water 23 April 1945 , killing the fireman and injuring the driver . No. 851 Sir Walter <unk> involved in a serious derailment at Byfleet in December 1946 , due to the poor condition of the permanent way . On 26 November 1947 , No. 860 Lord Hawke was hauling a passenger train that was run into by another at Farnborough , Hampshire due to a signalman 's error . Two people were killed . No. <unk> Howard of Effingham was hauling a passenger train that overran signals and was derailed by trap points at Shawford , Hampshire on 20 July 1952 . 
 = = Withdrawal and preservation = = 
 The class was gradually superseded on top link expresses during the 1940s by growing numbers of Bulleid Pacifics , although throughout the 1950s they were frequently called upon during peak periods or to deputise for failures . The rebuilding of the Pacifics in the late 1950s and their subsequent increased reliability rendered the Lord Nelson surplus to operational requirements , and they were gradually phased out of service . The entire class was withdrawn during 1961 and 1962 . 
 The only survivor , first @-@ of @-@ class ( 30 ) 850 Lord Nelson , has been preserved as part of the National Collection , and has run on the national rail network . As of 2009 it is based on the Mid @-@ Hants Railway . 
 = = Livery and numbering = = 
 = = = Southern Railway = = = 
 The Lord Nelson class was initially painted in Maunsell lined olive green , which later changed to a lighter shade in the mid @-@ 1930s . From 1938 , some of the locomotives were painted in a semi @-@ matt Malachite Green finish when Bulleid replaced Maunsell as CME of the Southern . During the war years , the locomotives were painted in wartime black livery , though retained the word " Southern " in yellow on the tender . After the war , the livery was reverted to the Southern Railway Malachite Green standard with " Sunshine Yellow " lining on the boiler rings . 
 Numbers allocated to the locomotives were a variation of LSWR practice and , being constructed at Eastleigh , were given the prefix " E " before the number to distinguish from the locomotives of other pre @-@ grouping railway companies that also carried the same number . In the case of the Lord Nelson class the numbering ranged from <unk> to <unk> . This was eventually superseded by numbers without the " E " prefix , becoming 850 to 865 from 1931 . 
 = = = Post @-@ 1948 ( nationalisation ) = = = 
 The initial livery applied following the nationalisation of the railways in 1948 was modified Southern malachite green and sunshine yellow with " British Railways " on the tender , and the Southern numbering system was temporarily retained with an " S " prefix ( such as <unk> ) until superseded by the British Railways numbering system . The locomotives then carried British Railways Brunswick green livery with orange and black lining . By this stage the locomotives were renumbered under standard British Railways procedure , from <unk> to <unk> . 
 = Beth Hamedrash Hagodol = 
 Beth Hamedrash Hagodol ( Hebrew : בֵּית <unk> <unk> , " Great Study House " ) is an Orthodox Jewish congregation that for over 120 years was located in a historic building at 60 – 64 Norfolk Street between Grand and Broome Streets in the Lower East Side neighborhood of Manhattan , New York City . It was the first Eastern European congregation founded in New York City and the oldest Russian Jewish Orthodox congregation in the United States . 
 Founded in 1852 by Rabbi Abraham Ash as Beth Hamedrash , the congregation split in 1859 , with the rabbi and most of the members renaming their congregation Beth Hamedrash Hagodol . The congregation 's president and a small number of the members eventually formed the nucleus of Kahal Adath Jeshurun , also known as the Eldridge Street Synagogue . Rabbi Jacob Joseph , the first and only Chief Rabbi of New York City , led the congregation from 1888 to 1902 . Rabbi Ephraim Oshry , one of the few European Jewish legal <unk> to survive the Holocaust , led the congregation from 1952 to 2003 . 
 The congregation 's building , a Gothic Revival structure built in 1850 as the Norfolk Street Baptist Church and purchased in 1885 , was one of the largest synagogues on the Lower East Side . It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1999 . In the late 20th century the congregation dwindled and was unable to maintain the building , which had been damaged by storms . Despite their obtaining funding and grants , the structure was critically endangered . 
 The synagogue was closed in 2007 . The congregation , reduced to around 20 regularly attending members , was sharing facilities with a congregation on Henry Street . The Lower East Side Conservancy was trying to raise an estimated $ 4 @.@ 5 million for repairs of the building , with the intent of converting it to an educational center . In December the leadership of the synagogue under Rabbi Mendel Greenbaum filed a “ hardship application ” with the Landmarks Preservation Commission seeking permission to demolish the building to make way for a new residential development . This application was withdrawn in March 2013 , but the group Friends of the Lower East Side described Beth Hamedrash Hagodol 's status as " demolition by neglect " . 
 = = Early history = = 
 Beth Hamedrash Hagodol was founded by Eastern European Jews in 1852 as Beth Hamedrash ( literally " House of Study " , but used colloquially in Yiddish as the term for a synagogue ) . The founding rabbi , Abraham Joseph Ash , was born in <unk> ( then in Congress Poland ) in 1813 or 1821 . He immigrated to New York City in 1851 or 1852 . The first Eastern European Orthodox rabbi to serve in the United States , Ash " rejected the reformist tendencies of the German Jewish congregations " there . He soon organized a minyan ( prayer quorum ) of like @-@ minded Polish Jews , and by 1852 began conducting services . Though the membership consisted mostly of Polish Jews , it also included " Lithuanians , two Germans , and an Englishman . " For the first six years of the congregation 's existence , Ash was not paid for his work as rabbi and instead earned a living as a peddler . 
 The congregation moved frequently in its early years : in 1852 it was located at 83 Bayard Street , then at Elm and Canal , and from 1853 to 1856 in a hall at Pearl between Chatham and Centre Streets . In 1856 , with the assistance of the philanthropist Sampson Simson and wealthy Sephardi Jews who sympathized with the traditionalism of the congregation 's members , the congregation purchased a Welsh chapel on Allen Street . The synagogue , which had " a good Hebrew library " , was a place both of prayer and study , included a rabbinic family court , and , according to historian and long @-@ time member Judah David Eisenstein , " rapidly became the most important center for Orthodox Jewish guidance in the country . " 
 Synagogue dues were collected by the <unk> ( the equivalent of a sexton or beadle ) , who augmented his salary by working as a glazier and running a small food concession stand in the vestibule . There mourners who came to recite kaddish could purchase a piece of sponge cake and small glass of brandy for ten cents ( today $ 2 @.@ 60 ) . 
 Beth Hamedrash was the prototypical American synagogue for early immigrant Eastern European Jews , who began entering the United States in large numbers only in the 1870s . They found the synagogues of the German Jewish immigrants who preceded them to be unfamiliar , both religiously and culturally . Russian Jews in particular had been more excluded from Russian society than were German Jews from German society , for both linguistic and social reasons . Unlike German Jews , the Jews who founded Beth Hamedrash viewed both religion and the synagogue as central to their lives . They attempted to re @-@ create in Beth Hamedrash the kind of synagogue they had belonged to in Europe . 
 = = Schism = = 
 In 1859 , disagreement broke out between Ash and the synagogue 's <unk> ( president ) Joshua Rothstein over who had been responsible for procuring the Allen Street location , and escalated into a conflict " over the question of official authority and ' honor ' " . Members took sides in the dispute , which led to synagogue disturbances , a contested election , and eventually to Ash 's taking Rothstein to a United States court to try to oust him as president of the congregation . After the court rejected Ash 's arguments , a large majority of members left with Ash to form Beth Hamedrash Hagodol ( " Great House of Study " ) , adding the word " Hagodol " ( " Great " ) to the original name . 
 The followers of Rothstein stayed at the Allen Street location and retained the name " Beth Hamedrash " until the mid @-@ 1880s . With membership and financial resources both severely reduced , they were forced to merge with Congregation <unk> <unk> <unk> ; the combined congregation adopted the name " Kahal Adath Jeshurun " , and built the Eldridge Street Synagogue . 
 According to Eisenstein , Beth Hamedrash Hagodol provided an atmosphere that was " socially religious " , in which Jews " combine [ d ] piety with pleasure ; they call [ ed ] their <unk> a <unk> or prayer @-@ club room ; they desire [ d ] to be on familiar terms with the Almighty and abhor [ red ] decorum ; they want [ ed ] everyone present to join and chant the prayers ; above all they scorn [ ed ] a regularly ordained cantor . " In contrast to the informality of the services , members scrupulously observed the Jewish dietary laws , and every member personally oversaw the baking of his matzos for use on Passover . 
 The congregation initially moved to the top floor of a building at the corner of Grand and Forsyth Streets , and in 1865 moved again , to a former courthouse on Clinton Street . In 1872 , the congregation built a synagogue at Ludlow and Hester Streets . There the congregation 's younger members gained greater control and introduced some minor innovations ; for example , changing the title of <unk> to president , and in 1877 hiring a professional cantor — Judah Oberman — for $ 500 ( today $ 11 @,@ 100 ) per year , to bring greater formality and decorum to the services as well as to attract new members . While somewhat " Americanized " , in general the congregation remained quite traditional . Men and women sat separately , the full service in the traditional prayer book was followed , and the congregation still trained men for rabbinic ordination . Additionally , Talmud and <unk> study groups , founded in the 1870s , were held both mornings and evenings . 
 Ash had only served as Beth Hamedrash Hagodol 's rabbi intermittently during this time ; during the American Civil War he had briefly been a successful manufacturer of <unk> , before losing his money , and returning to the rabbinate . Congregants had a number of issues with him , including his outside business ventures and an alleged inclination towards Hasidism . The more learned members of the congregation contested his scholarship . Ash resigned as rabbi in 1877 , and in 1879 , directors of Beth Hamedrash Hagodol proposed that a Chief Rabbi be hired for New York . A number of New York City synagogues formed the " United Hebrew Orthodox Congregations " , and agreed to select the <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ben Jehiel Michel Weiser ) for the role . The appointment was announced in Philadelphia 's Jewish Record , but the <unk> never filled the position . Beth Hamedrash Hagodol re @-@ hired Ash to fill the vacant role of congregational rabbi at a salary of $ 25 per month ( or $ 300 — today $ 8 @,@ 000 — per year ) . The following year the congregation hired a new cantor , <unk> Samuelson , for $ 1 @,@ 000 ( today $ 25 @,@ 000 ) a year , over three times Ash 's salary . 
 = = Norfolk Street building = = 
 The congregation 's building at 60 – 64 Norfolk Street , between Grand Street and Broome Street on the Lower East Side , had originally been the Norfolk Street Baptist Church . Founded in 1841 when the Stanton Street Baptist Church congregation split , the members had first worshiped in an existing church building at Norfolk and Broome . In 1848 they officially incorporated and began construction of a new building , which was dedicated in January 1850 . 
 Largely unchanged , the structure was designed in the Gothic Revival style by an unknown architect , with masonry @-@ bearing walls with timber framing at the roof and floors , and brownstone foundation walls and exterior door and window trim . The front ( west / Norfolk Street ) facade is " stuccoed and scored to simulate smooth @-@ faced ashlar " , though the other elevations are faced in brick . Window tracery was all in wood . Much of the original work remains on the side elevations . Characteristically Gothic exterior features include " vertical proportions , pointed arched window openings with drip moldings , three bay facade with towers " . Gothic interior features include " ribbed vaulting " and a " tall and lofty rectangular nave and apse . " Originally the window over the main door was a circular rose window , and the two front towers had crenellations in tracery , instead of the present plain tops . The square windows below are original , but the former quatrefoil wooden tracery is gone in many cases . The <unk> of quatrefoil originally extended across the center section of the facade . 
 Even as the building was under construction , the ethnic makeup of the church 's neighborhood was rapidly changing ; native @-@ born Baptists were displaced by Irish and German immigrants . As members moved uptown , the congregation decided to follow and sold their building in 1860 to Alanson T. Biggs , a successful local merchant . The departing Baptist congregation founded the Fifth Avenue Baptist church , then founded the Park Avenue Church , and finally built the Riverside Church . 
 Biggs converted the church to one for Methodists , and in 1862 , transferred ownership to the Alanson Methodist Episcopal Church . The Methodist congregation was successful for a time , with membership peaking at 572 members in 1873 . It declined after that , and the church ran into financial difficulties . In 1878 the congregation transferred ownership to the New York City Church Extension and Missionary Society of the Methodist Episcopal Church . 
 Founded in 1866 , the Church Extension and Missionary Society 's mission was " ... to promote Churches , Missions , and Sunday @-@ schools in the City of New York . " It built or supported Methodist churches primarily in poor areas , or areas that were being developed , including one in the building that would later house the First Roumanian @-@ American congregation . Soon after its purchase of the Norfolk Street building , the Church Extension and Missionary Society discovered that the neighborhood had become mostly Jewish and German . By 1884 , it realized " the church was too big and costly to maintain " , and put it up for sale . 
 In 1885 Beth Hamedrash Hagodol purchased the building for $ 45 @,@ 000 ( today $ 1 @.@ 2 million ) , and made alterations and repairs at a cost of $ 10 @,@ 000 ( today $ 260 @,@ 000 ) , but made no external modifications by the re @-@ opening . Alterations to the interior were generally made to adapt it to synagogue use . These included the additions of an Ark to hold the Torah scrolls ( replacing the original pulpit ) , an " eternal light " in front of the ark , and a bimah ( a central elevated platform where the Torah scrolls are read ) . At some time a women 's gallery was added round three sides of the nave . Interior redecorations included sanctuary ceilings that were " painted a bright blue , studded with stars " . 
 In addition to attracting new and wealthy members , the congregation intended the substantial building to garner prestige and respectability for the relatively new immigrant Jews from Eastern Europe , and to show that Jews on the Lower East Side could be just as " civilized " as the reform @-@ minded Jews of uptown Manhattan . For this reason , a number of other Lower East Side congregations also purchased or built new buildings around this time . They also hired increasingly expensive cantors until , in 1886 , Kahal Adath Jeshurun hired P. <unk> for the " then @-@ staggering sum of five thousand dollars per annum " ( today $ 132 @,@ 000 ) . Beth Hamedrash Hagodol responded by recruiting from Europe the famous and highly paid cantor Israel <unk> ( or <unk> ) . By 1888 Beth Hamedrash Hagodol 's members included " several bankers , lawyers , importers and wholesale merchants , besides a fair sprinkling of the American element . " 
 Though the building had undergone previous alterations — for example , the Church Extension and Missionary Society had " removed deteriorated parapets from the towers " in 1880 — it did not undergo significant renovations until the early 1890s . That year the rose window on the front of the building was removed , " possibly because it had Christian motifs " , and replaced with a large arched window , still in keeping with the Gothic style . The work was undertaken by the architectural firm of ( Ernest ) Schneider & ( Henry ) Herter , German immigrants who had worked on a number of other synagogues , including the Park East Synagogue . In 1893 they fixed " serious structural problems " , the consequence of neglected maintenance . The work included " <unk> [ ing ] the front steps , add [ ing ] brick buttresses to the sides of the church for lateral support , again in a Gothic style , and <unk> [ ing ] the original basement columns with six @-@ inch cast iron columns . " A later renovation replaced the wooden stairs from the main floor to the basement with iron ones . 
 Two Stars of David were added to the center of the facade . One is seen in the old photograph ( above left ) , over a palmette ornament at the top of the window arch . The other , mounted above the top of the gable , remains visible in the modern photograph ( top ) . The unusual cupola @-@ like structure on legs seen above the gable in the old photograph , now gone , was also added by the synagogue , as was the square structure on which it sat . The panel with a large Hebrew inscription over the main doors was added in this period , before the older photograph . The decorations to the upper parts of the central section of the facade survived until at least 1974 , as did the tracery to the square windows on the towers ; this Gothic ornamentation was removed after it deteriorated . 
 = = Jacob Joseph era = = 
 Ash died in 1887 , and the United Hebrew Orthodox Congregations ( now called The Association of American Orthodox Hebrew Congregations ) began a search for a successor , to serve as rabbi of Beth Hamedrash Hagodol and as Chief Rabbi of New York City . This search was opposed by Rabbi Henry Pereira Mendes , of Congregation <unk> Israel . Mendes felt that the money and energy would be better spent on supporting the Jewish Theological Seminary of America ( JTSA ) , which he had co @-@ founded with Sabato Morais in 1886 . In his view , training American @-@ born rabbis at the Seminary would be a much more effective means of fighting the growing strength of American Reform Judaism : these native English @-@ speaking rabbis would appeal to the younger generation far more than imported , Yiddish @-@ speaking ones . 
 The Association of American Orthodox Hebrew Congregations rejected Morais 's position , and offered the role to a number of " leading East European Orthodox rabbis " , all of whom turned it down . They eventually narrowed the field to two candidates , Zvi Rabinovitch and Jacob Joseph . Although Rabinovitch received " massive support " from " leading east European rabbis " , the congregation hired Jacob Joseph as the first — and what would turn out to be only — Chief Rabbi of New York City . 
 Born in <unk> , Lithuania , Joseph had studied in the <unk> yeshiva under <unk> Zvi Yehuda Berlin ; he was known there as Rav Yaakov <unk> ( " Rabbi Jacob Sharp " ) because of his sharp mind . He was one of the main disciples of Yisroel <unk> , and in 1883 had been appointed the <unk> ( preacher ) of Vilna . Beth Hamedrash Hagodol , the Eldridge Street Synagogue , and 13 other Lower East Side synagogues had raised $ 2 @,@ 500 ( today $ 66 @,@ 000 ) towards the creation of a European style <unk> to oversee New York 's Orthodox community , and had imported Joseph in an attempt to achieve that ( ultimately unfulfilled ) goal . Joseph 's salary was to be the then @-@ substantial $ 2 @,@ 500 per year , " with an additional $ 1000 for rent , furnishings , and utilities " . Though Joseph 's appointment was , in part , intended to bring prestige to the downtown Orthodox congregations , his primary task as Chief Rabbi was to bring order and regulation to New York 's chaotic kosher slaughtering industry . 
 Joseph arrived in New York on July 7 , 1888 , and later that month preached his inaugural Sabbath sermon at Beth Hamedrash Hagodol . The speech attracted a huge crowd , with over 1 @,@ 500 men crowded into the sanctuary , and thousands more outside . The police had to call extra reinforcements to control the throng , and to escort Joseph into the synagogue . Though he had been chosen , in part , for his " fabulous skills as an orator " , his speaking style and sermons , which had been so beloved in Europe , did not impress New York audiences . According to Abraham Cahan , " [ S ] ome of the very people who drank in his words <unk> in Vilna left the synagogue in the middle of his sermon here . " 
 In October 1888 , Joseph made his first significant statement as Chief Rabbi . He issued new regulations for New York 's Jewish poultry business , in an attempt to bring it into accordance with Jewish law . The funds for supporting the agency supervising adherence to these regulations were to be raised through an increase in the price of meat and chicken . The affected vendors and consumers , however , refused to pay this levy . They likened it to the <unk> , a tax on meat in Russia they despised , and " organized a mass meeting in January 1889 against ' the imported rabbi ' " . Joseph never succeeded in organizing the kosher meat business . 
 Joseph was also unable to stop those who came to hear him speak from desecrating the Sabbath , and his Yiddish sermons had no impact on the younger generation . In addition , he had to contend with a number of obstacles : he had no administrative experience or training , local Orthodox rabbis ( particularly Joshua Seigel ) and Jews outside his congregation did not accept his authority , and non @-@ Orthodox Jews and groups criticized him . These problems were exacerbated by a stroke suffered in 1895 , which partially incapacitated him , followed by a relapse in 1900 which left him bedridden . 
 In the late 19th century , other synagogues in New York City often served a particular constituency , typically Jews from a single town in Russia , Poland , or Romania . Beth Hamedrash Hagodol prided itself in welcoming and assisting all Jews , regardless of origins . The synagogue 's Passover Relief Committee — dedicated to providing funds and food to poor Jews so that they could properly celebrate the holiday of Passover — stated " In dispensing money and matzos to the poor , all are recognized as the children of one Father , and no lines are drawn between natives of different countries . " By the turn of the 20th century , Beth Hamedrash Hagodol was distributing approximately $ 800 ( today $ 23 @,@ 000 ) a year to the poor for Passover supplies , compared to a total synagogue income of around $ 5 @,@ 000 ( today $ 142 @,@ 000 ) . This was on top of its average $ 15 ( today $ 400 ) weekly contributions to the poor , and those of individual congregational members of around $ 2 @,@ 000 ( today $ 57 @,@ 000 ) per annum . By 1901 , annual revenues were around $ 6 @,@ 000 ( today $ 171 @,@ 000 ) , and the congregation had 150 members . 
 During Joseph 's tenure , Beth Hamedrash Hagodol helped found the Union of Orthodox Jewish Congregations of America ( the " Orthodox Union " ) . In the spring of 1898 , 50 lay officials from a number of Orthodox New York synagogues — including Congregation <unk> Zedek , the Eldridge Street Synagogue , Congregation <unk> Israel and Beth Hamedrash Hagodol — convened to create the organization . By the 1980s the Orthodox Union had over 1 @,@ 000 member congregations . 
 Joseph served as the synagogue 's rabbi from his arrival in the United States in 1888 until his death in 1902 at age 62 . During this time , his family slipped into poverty , as he did not receive his salary , which had been based on the anticipated taxes on kosher meats and vendors , and on matzos . After his death , Beth Hamedrash Hagodol secured the right to bury him in its cemetery by promising his widow $ 1 @,@ 500 ( today $ 41 @,@ 000 ) and a monthly $ 15 stipend ; in turn , individuals offered the congregation large sums — $ 5 @,@ 000 ( today $ 137 @,@ 000 ) in one case — for the right to be buried near him . His funeral was attended by up to 100 @,@ 000 mourners , " clouded by the guilt @-@ driven attempt of New York 's Orthodox Jews to honor him for the last time , as partial compensation for the way they treated him during his life . " 
 = = Post @-@ Joseph era = = 
 Joseph was succeeded by Rabbi Shalom Elchanan Jaffe , a founder of the Union of Orthodox Rabbis and a strong supporter of the Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary . Jaffe , who was born near Vilna , had , like Joseph , studied at the <unk> yeshiva , and had received his rabbinic ordination from <unk> Zvi Yehuda Berlin and Yitzchak Elchanan Spektor . The author of several books of religious commentary , Jaffe was an influential rabbi on the Lower East Side , in part because of his authority over kosher supervision of New York 's butcher stores and slaughterhouses . He was also a strong anti @-@ Zionist and " rejoiced when Herzl died " . 
 Harry Fischel was the congregation 's Vice President until 1902 ; there he first met and eventually attended the Bar Mitzvah of his future son @-@ in @-@ law , Herbert S. Goldstein . Goldstein , who was ordained by Jaffe at the JTSA , founded the Institutional Synagogue in Harlem . He is the only person to have been president of the Union of Orthodox Jewish Congregations of America , the Rabbinical Council of America ( first presidium ) , and the Synagogue Council of America . It was in response to an April 1929 telegram from Goldstein , asking if Albert Einstein believed in God , that Einstein stated , " I believe in Spinoza 's God , who reveals himself in the lawful harmony of the world , not in a God who concerns himself with the fate and actions of human beings . " 
 Beth Hamedrash Hagodol had 175 member families by 1908 , and the synagogue 's annual revenues were $ 10 @,@ 000 ( today $ 250 @,@ 000 ) . In 1909 , the synagogue was the site of a mass meeting to protest the 20th Central Conference of American Rabbis , described as " the malicious misrepresentation of Judaism by the so @-@ called reformed rabbis in conference in this city " , and in 1913 the synagogue was the site of a " historic mass meeting " to raise funds for the first Young Israel synagogue , at which Jacob Schiff was the guest speaker . Membership had fallen to 110 families by 1919 . 
 Dr. Benjamin Fleischer , a noted orator , was elected rabbi of Beth Hamedrash Hagodol in September 1924 . While serving as Beth Hamedrash Hagodol 's rabbi he published his 1938 philosophical work <unk> . Miscellaneous essays , lectures and discourses on Jewish religious philosophy , ethics and history and his 1941 military history From Dan To Megiddo . In May 1939 , he and two other rabbis ( and a fourth rabbi as secretary ) formed the first permanent <unk> din ( court of Jewish law ) in the U.S. 
 In the early @-@ to @-@ mid @-@ 20th century the congregation 's financial footing was still not sound ; though the Norfolk Street building had been purchased in 1885 for $ 45 @,@ 000 ( and $ 10 @,@ 000 in alterations and repairs ) , in 1921 it still owed $ 40 @,@ 000 ( today $ 530 @,@ 000 ) on the mortgage . Additional costs were incurred by work done on the building ; two years earlier , architect George Dress had rearranged the toilet facilities , in 1934 architect Philip <unk> designed a small brick extension at the building 's south @-@ east corner , and in the 1930s or 1940s the walls and four of the five spandrels in the sanctuary interior were painted with colorful " Eastern European @-@ inspired " pictures and murals of Jerusalem and " Holy Land landscapes and Biblical scenes " . At the end of December 1946 , then @-@ president Abraham Greenwald stated that unless $ 35 @,@ 000 ( today $ 420 @,@ 000 ) were immediately raised for the repair of the building , it would have to be demolished . 
 Ephraim Oshry , noted Torah scholar and religious leader in the Kovno Ghetto , and one of the few European Jewish legal <unk> to survive The Holocaust , became the synagogue 's rabbi in 1952 , a post he retained for over 50 years . During the Holocaust the Nazis had made him the custodian of a warehouse that stored Jewish books intended for an exhibit of " artifacts of the extinct Jewish race " . He used the books to help him write responsa , answering questions asked of him regarding how Jews could live their lives in accordance with Jewish law under the extreme conditions imposed by the Nazis . He also ran " secret nightly worship services " , and helped Jews bake matzos for Passover , under threat of death if discovered . After the war he founded a yeshiva for Jewish orphans in Italy , and then another religious school in Montreal , before moving to New York to take up the position of rabbi at Beth Hamedrash Hagodol . There , his Sunday afternoon lectures were so popular that the entire 1 @,@ 200 @-@ seat sanctuary was filled , and the overflow had to sit on the stairs . While rabbi of Beth Hamedrash Hagodol , he founded another yeshiva in Monsey , New York for gifted high school aged boys . 
 The congregation 's building was again threatened with demolition in 1967 , but Oshry , possibly the first Lower East Side rabbi to recognize the value of landmark designation , was successful in having it designated a New York city landmark , thus saving it . At that time the congregation claimed 1 @,@ 400 members . 
 In 1974 , the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission applied to have the building added to the National Register of Historic Places , and considered significant at the state level ; on the application the building 's condition was described as " excellent " . The case was reviewed on June 19 , 1974 , and the site was deemed ineligible . The building was repainted and repaired in 1977 , but in subsequent years deteriorated and suffered damage . 
 = = Late 1990s to present = = 
 In the summer of 1997 , a storm blew out the main two @-@ story window at the front of the building , and the window 's wooden frame was rotten , cracked and could not be saved . The window remained unrepaired which left the sanctuary open to the elements for a month before the congregation , down to approximately 100 members , asked for assistance . The congregants had , by then , long held services in a smaller room , using the sanctuary only on the High Holidays . The New York Landmarks Conservancy 's Endangered Buildings fund gave $ 2 @,@ 500 for a temporary metal window , and assisted in getting approval from the Landmarks Preservation Commission for the work required to repair the damage , but the congregation did not have the $ 10 @,@ 000 required to pay for it . Beth Hamedrash Hagodol received an additional $ 2 @,@ 000 from the New York Landmarks Conservancy 's Sacred Sites program in 1998 for a conditions survey . In 1999 a second application for National Historical designation was made , this time successful ; the building was deemed significant at the local level , and was added to the National Register of Historic Places on November 30 . 
 The congregation raised $ 40 @,@ 000 in 2000 for emergency repairs , and was awarded a $ 230 @,@ 000 grant by the New York State Office of Parks , Recreation and Historic Preservation for restoration work , including roof repair , but had not been able to raise the matching funds required to receive the grant . On December 6 , 2001 , a fire and subsequent fire @-@ fighting efforts severely damaged the roof , ceiling , mural paintings and decorative plasterwork . 
 The National Trust for Historic Preservation designated the building an endangered historic site in 2003 , the only synagogue on the list . It still retained a number of significant architectural features , including " the ornate ark and pulpit , central bimah ( reader 's platform ) with etched glass lamps , cantilevered balconies , Gothic vaulted ceiling , and colorful wall paintings " ; the lighting included " converted gas fixtures " . Features retained from the original construction included Gothic Revival style woodwork and cast @-@ iron railing that follows the lot line , and the original wooden pews . That same year Oshry died . His successor — designated by Oshry himself — was his son @-@ in @-@ law , Rabbi <unk> Greenbaum . 
 By 2006 , $ 1 million of an estimated required $ 3 @.@ 5 million had been raised for repairs to the structure . In 2007 , Greenbaum made the decision to shut the synagogue down , as its membership had dwindled to around 15 . The building was mostly closed to the public as its damaged interior was considered a hazard for visitors . The synagogue , " the home of the oldest Orthodox congregation continuously housed in a single location in New York " sat " padlocked and empty " with holes in the roof and plaster falling from the ceiling . In 2011 , the Buildings Department issued a vacate order . 
 Reportedly , the Lower East Side Conservancy was trying to raise an estimate $ 4 @.@ 5 million for repairs , with the intent of turning the building into an educational center . It was granted $ 215 @,@ 000 by the United States Department of Education and was promised an equal amount by the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation . Several years earlier the Conservancy had also been promised a total of $ 980 @,@ 000 from New York State , the City Council , Mayor Bloomberg , and the Manhattan Borough President 's office , but had yet to receive most of the city funds . The group was also trying to raise $ 400 @,@ 000 from private donors for the first phase of the renovation , which would secure the structure and roof . Led by Greenbaum , Beth Hamedrash Hagodol was down to around 20 regularly attending members , and was sharing facilities with a congregation on Henry Street . 
 By the end of 2012 at least a million dollars in grants for repairs to the building had gone unused and were rescinded . In December 2012 the leadership of the synagogue under Greenbaum filed a “ hardship application ” with the Landmarks Preservation Commission seeking permission to demolish the building to make way for a new residential development . In place of the synagogue , Greenbaum envisioned a 45 @,@ 000 square foot condo building with room for a small synagogue on the ground floor , and possibly a <unk> . This application was withdrawn — at least temporarily — in March 2013 , but the group Friends of the Lower East Side described Beth Hamedrash Hagodol 's status as " demolition by neglect " . 
 = = = Cited sources = = = 
 = French battleship France = 
 France was the last ship of the Courbet @-@ class battleships , the first dreadnoughts built for the French Navy . She was completed just before World War I as part of the 1911 naval building programme . She spent the war in the Mediterranean , covering the Otranto Barrage in the Adriatic . France , accompanied by her sister ship Jean Bart , was sent to the Black Sea in 1919 to oppose the Bolsheviks during the Russian Civil War . Her crew briefly mutinied in April 1919 from a combination of war @-@ weariness , Communist sympathizers in the crew and difficult conditions . The mutiny and general lack of morale among her crew caused her to return to France later that month . Striking an uncharted rock off the French coast in 1922 , she foundered four hours later . 
 = = Description = = 
 France was 166 metres ( 544 ft 7 in ) long overall . She had a beam of 27 metres ( 88 ft 7 in ) and at full load a draft of 9 @.@ 04 metres ( 29 ft 8 in ) at the bow . She displaced 23 @,@ 475 tonnes ( 23 @,@ 104 long tons ) at standard load and 25 @,@ 579 tonnes ( 25 @,@ 175 long tons ) at full load . She proved to be rather wet in service as she was bow @-@ heavy because of the superimposed turrets forward . 
 France had four propellers powered by four Parsons direct @-@ drive steam turbines which were rated at 28 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 20 @,@ 880 kW ) . Twenty @-@ four Belleville water @-@ tube boilers provided steam for her turbines . These boilers were coal @-@ burning with auxiliary oil sprayers . She had a designed speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . She carried up to 2 @,@ 700 long tons ( 2 @,@ 700 t ) of coal and 906 long tons ( 921 t ) of oil and could steam for 4 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 800 km ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 12 mph ; 19 km / h ) . 
 France 's main armament consisted of twelve 305 @-@ millimetre ( 12 in ) Mle 1910 45 @-@ calibre guns were mounted in six twin gun turrets , with two turrets superimposed fore and aft , and one on each flank of the ship . For anti @-@ torpedo boat defence she carried 22 138 @-@ millimetre ( 5 @.@ 4 in ) Mle 1910 guns , which were mounted in casemates . Four 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Modèle 1902 Hotchkiss guns were fitted , two on each beam . She was also armed with four 450 @-@ millimetre ( 18 in ) submerged Modèle 1909 torpedo tubes with twelve torpedoes . 
 France 's waterline armoured belt extended well below the waterline as the French were concerned about protection from underwater hits . Her main armour was also thinner than that of her British or German counterparts , but covered more area . It was 270 millimetres ( 10 @.@ 6 in ) thick between the fore and aft turrets and tapered to 180 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) towards the bow and stern . It extended 2 @.@ 4 metres ( 7 ft 10 in ) below the normal waterline . Above the main belt was another belt , 180 mm thick , that covered the sides , and the secondary armament , up to the forecastle deck , 4 @.@ 5 metres ( 14 ft 9 in ) deep , between the fore and aft turrets . The conning tower had armour 300 mm ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) thick . The main gun turrets had 290 millimetres ( 11 @.@ 4 in ) of armour on their faces , 250 millimetres ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) on their sides and roofs 100 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick . Their barbettes had 280 millimetres ( 11 @.@ 0 in ) of armour . There was no anti @-@ torpedo bulkhead although there was a longitudinal bulkhead abreast the machinery spaces that was used either as a coal bunker or left as a void . 
 = = Career = = 
 France , together with her sister ship Paris , was ordered on 1 August 1911 as part of the 1911 Naval Programme . She was built by the Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire in Saint @-@ Nazaire . Her keel was laid down on 30 November 1911 and she was launched on 7 November 1912 . She was commissioned as part of the Bastille Day celebrations in 1914 . Almost immediately after being commissioned , she , escorted by Jean Bart , carried the President of the French Republic , Raymond Poincaré , on a state visit to Saint Petersburg , Russia in July 1914 . They returned from Russia shortly before World War I began . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 France , upon her return , was ordered , along with her three sister ships , to serve in the Mediterranean Sea against the Austro @-@ Hungarian and Ottoman Navies . They spent most of 1914 providing gunfire support for the Montenegrin Army until the submarine U @-@ 12 torpedoed Jean Bart on 21 December off Sazan Island . This forced the battleships to fall back to either Malta or Bizerte . After the French occupied the neutral Greek island of Corfu in 1916 they moved forward to Corfu and Argostoli , but their activities were very limited as many of their crews were used to man anti @-@ submarine ships . 
 After the war , France and Paris supported Allied forces in the Black Sea in 1919 during the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War . Mutinies briefly broke out on both ships in April 1919 , but collapsed when Vice @-@ Admiral Jean @-@ Françoise @-@ Charles Amet agreed to meet their main demand to take the ships home . 26 crewmen were sentenced to prison terms upon her return , although they were commuted in 1922 as part of a bargain between Prime Minister Raymond Poincaré and the parties of the Left . On 26 August 1922 , she struck an uncharted rock in Quiberon Bay and foundered four hours later . Of her crew of 900 , only three were lost . She was not modernized before her loss . 
 = Cold Fear = 
 Cold Fear is a 2005 survival horror third @-@ person shooter video game developed by Darkworks and published by Ubisoft for PlayStation 2 , Xbox and Microsoft Windows . It was Ubisoft 's first horror game , and Darkworks ' second game , after Alone in the Dark : The New Nightmare in 2001 . The game is centered on Tom Hansen , a member of the United States Coast Guard , who comes to the aid of a Russian whaler in the Bering Strait and finds a mysterious virus has turned the crew into zombie @-@ like creatures . Discovering the involvement of both the Russian mafia and the CIA , Hansen sets out to ensure the virus doesn 't reach land . 
 The game was first announced at E3 in 2004 . To make the ship roll realistically , the developers had to write a completely new program ( dubbed the " <unk> editor " ) to allow them to control movement on both the vertical and the horizontal axes . They also used real physics to simulate the movement patterns of inanimate objects on the ship . Due to the random nature created by this , the player character required nine times the amount of animations usually seen in third @-@ person games . Ultimately , the game contained more than nine hundred separate animations for all characters , allowing for over five thousand possible character movements . The game 's soundtrack was composed by Tom Salta , with Marilyn Manson contributing a song from his 2003 album The Golden Age of Grotesque . 
 Cold Fear was met with mixed reviews , with many critics comparing it unfavorably to Resident Evil 4 . Although critics were generally impressed with the environments and the opening scenes , they found the game too short and felt it failed to live up to its promising beginning . The game was a commercial failure ; in the United States , it sold only 70 @,@ 000 units across all platforms . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Cold Fear is a survival horror third @-@ person shooter played from either a third @-@ person fixed camera perspective or an over @-@ the @-@ shoulder camera , depending on the player 's preferences . 
 The main enemies in the game are Russian mercenaries and various types of zombie @-@ like creatures known as " <unk> " ( creatures infected by a parasitic organism known as an " <unk> " ) . <unk> include " <unk> " ( mercenaries infected with <unk> ) , " <unk> " ( creatures which can see perfectly in the dark ) , " <unk> " ( which can turn transparent for brief periods of time ) and " <unk> " ( a hugely strong but deformed creature created as a result of a failed experiment ) . Most infected enemies can be knocked down with two or three shots , but unless the brain is destroyed , they will not die , and will eventually attack Hansen again . Players can destroy the brain either by shooting enemy in the head , or knocking them down and stomping on their head . If an enemy gets close to Hansen , the player can perform a critical hit by pressing a combination of buttons . All <unk> carry at least one exocel within them . When the exo is killed , the exocel may emerge and attack Hansen , or , if there are any other dead bodies in the area , infect and re @-@ animate that body . <unk> are fast , but very weak and can be killed with one gunshot . 
 The first half of the game is set on a whaler in the middle of a storm , and the conditions on the deck affect the degree of control the player has over Hansen . As the ship sways continuously from side to side , aiming is made more difficult , although Hansen can grab onto a ledge to steady himself , if one is available . In some instances , the ship can sway to such a degree that Hansen will slide towards the edge and potentially fall overboard . There are also numerous environmental hazards on the deck which react to the motion of the ship , such as swinging electrical wires and crates hooked up to ropes . If any of these items hit Hansen , he will lose health . Waves crashing on to the ship 's deck can also cause Hansen damage . 
 The game also features a Resistance gauge , which decreases as the player performs certain actions , such as running , although running is not possible when in over @-@ the @-@ shoulder mode . If Hansen falls off the edge of the ship , he can hang onto the side as long as he has resistance left , but if he doesn 't climb back aboard quickly enough , he will fall into the ocean . 
 The game does not feature an inventory , and neither health packs nor ammo can be stockpiled . Health packs are used immediately upon collection , and no more ammo can be collected than the capacity of the specific weapon . Players can find ammo and health packs distributed throughout the game at certain predetermined locations and also by looting the bodies of fallen enemies . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game begins with a Navy SEAL team deploying on a Russian whaler , the Eastern Spirit , in the Bering Strait . As the team explore the deck , they are attacked and killed by something that literally rips them apart . Seeing his team is gone , CIA Special Agent Jason Bennett , who is supervising the mission from another location , orders any other government vessel in the vicinity to investigate . His call is picked up by the US Coast Guard ship , the USCGC Ravenswood , which heads to the Eastern Spirit . The crew of the Ravenswood split into teams , but within moments of boarding , only one remains ; Tom Hansen , who hears his shipmates being killed over the radio . He sets out to explore the ship and determine what is happening . 
 As soon as he enters the interior of the Spirit , however , he is attacked by two frightened Russians , who he is forced to kill . As he continues to explore , he encounters a multitude of panicking Russians , all of whom attack him . He also finds several horrifically mutilated bodies , including that of the Ravenswood 's captain , Lt. Lansing . Hansen soon learns of a creature known as an " exocel " , which was accidentally discovered by the crew of a Russian oil rig , the Star of Sakhalin , owned by Colonel Dmitriy Yusupov , a member of the Russian mafia , and staffed by Major Yuri Anischenko and his team of mercenaries . Yusupov came to realize the exocels were parasitic organisms , which used other living organisms as hosts , and as such , he brought Dr. Viktor Kamsky to the Sakhalin to begin experimenting with infecting various species with exocel serum . These experiments led to the discovery that exocels could re @-@ animate recently deceased humans , and the creation of an antidote to counter infection . Hansen heads to the radio room to request help , but instead he is answered by Bennett , who tells him that Yusupov is on board and must be captured for questioning . Bennett tells Hansen that if he finds Yusupov , the CIA will get him off the ship . 
 Hansen locates Yusupov , who tells him that Anna Kamsky , Viktor 's daughter , is onboard and must be saved . Yusupov had brought her to Sakhalin to blackmail Viktor into turning the exocels into biological weapons . Eventually , Viktor and his colleague , Dr. Pavel Bakharev , began to experiment on live human infection , and the Eastern Spirit was on its way from the Sakhalin to collect the next batch of human specimens supplied by the Mafia when the exocel outbreak occurred . An exocel then bursts out of Yusupov 's chest , killing him . Hansen finds Anna , who tells them they must go to the radio room and contact her father . They contact the rig , but Bakharev tells Anna that Kamsky is missing and pleads with her not to return . She refuses , telling Bakharev she will see him soon . They turn the ship back towards the Sakhalin but because the seas are so rough , they are unable to dock with the platform . As such , they head to the crow 's nest and jump from the ship when it collides with the rig . Hansen makes the jump , but Anna falls into the sea . 
 Hansen soon finds Bakharev , who tells him that to disable the radio jammer around the rig so he can contact Bennett , he will need Anischenko to get him past a retinal scanner . Bakharev is then dragged into an air duct and killed . Hansen learns that Kamsky and Bakharev were under orders to make the exocels as dangerous as possible , which they had succeeded in doing , but without any way to control the resulting creatures . Hansen finds and kills Anischenko , removing his eye and using it to deactivate the radio jammer . Once back in touch with Bennett , Hansen is told he must find Kamsky 's laptop and transmit the exocel research . Meanwhile , Anna is rescued from the sea by a large creature and left in a lab , where she is infected by an exocel . Seeing this take place on a security monitor , Hansen races to the lab to give Anna the antidote . 
 He makes it to her in time and administers the antidote before the infection can take hold . Bennett then contacts him and Hansen makes him promise that if he gives Bennett the research , Bennett will save Anna . He soon discovers that Kamsky infected himself with a strain of exocel DNA , and now wishes to do the same to Anna . Hansen finds Kamsky 's laptop and transmits the antidote data to Bennett , but nothing else . As a furious Bennett berates Hansen , he and Anna agree to blow up the rig using C4 . As Hansen plants the charges , he learns Kamsky had gone completely insane ; after infecting himself with exocel serum , he released the imprisoned <unk> on the rig and planted a group of exocels on the Eastern Spirit . He then went into hiding to await his metamorphosis . When Hansen has planted all of the charges , he heads to the heliport to meet Anna . Before they can take off however , they are attacked by a mutated Kamsky ; the same creature who rescued Anna from the sea . Kamsky is desperate for Anna to remain with him on the rig , but Hansen is able to fight him off and kill him . He and Anna then escape in a helicopter as the rig explodes below them . 
 = = Development = = 
 Cold Fear was first announced at E3 in 2004 when the title was included on a list of upcoming games . According to Sony , the game was set to be published by Namco . On October 6 , however , Ubisoft announced they would be publishing the Darkworks developed game in March 2005 for PlayStation 2 , Xbox and PC . The game would be Ubisoft 's first horror game , and Darkworks ' second game , after Alone in the Dark : The New Nightmare in 2001 . A playable demo version was released in December . 
 To make the Eastern Spirit roll realistically in the storm , the developers had to write a completely new program . They found that making the ship move was easy , but getting it to respond to storm conditions was much more complex . As such , they created a complete roll editor , called the <unk> editor , which allowed them to control the pitch ( when the ship moves on the horizontal axis ) and the roll ( when it moves on the vertical axis ) separately . The combination of moving the ship on both axes allowed the developers to create realistic ship movements . This in turn allowed them to time the exact movement of the ship to coincide with what was happening in the game without having to use a cutscene . However , creating such a realistic movement system led to camera problems . According to programmer , Claude Levastre , early in development , " the camera was constantly going through the walls because of the roll movement . So we had to develop an inertia @-@ control system for the camera , just as if a cameraman is using a steadicam behind the hero . " Another change brought about by the ship 's motion was that initially , the movement patterns of inanimate objects on the ship were scripted , but this was later replaced with real physics . 
 The ship 's constant movement also impacted character animation . Once the ship 's movement reached a certain angle , Hansen and any other characters on deck start to slide , and have to compensate in whatever direction was necessary relative to their position . According to Levastre , this meant Hansen required nine times the animations usually seen in third @-@ person games ( center , front , back , left , right and four intermediary positions ) . Ultimately , Hansen had two hundred and fifty separate animations , and most of the non @-@ player characters had one hundred and fifty . According to Antonin <unk> , lead animator on the game , " all the technical decisions were taken in favor of animation , both in terms of quality and quantity , which is very rare on this kind of project . " Basic animation was produced with 3D Studio Max software . Inverse kinematics were then used to create the nine directional animations , with the engine calculating the level of character compensation depending on the angle of the ship . Each character movement is composed of basic animation and compensation animation , and <unk> says that in total , the game contains more than nine hundred animations , allowing for over five thousand possible movements . Levastre stated " The interaction between the storm and the characters that are on the deck sometimes creates some really breathtaking moments . And on top of that , we managed to offer some really intense action sequences featuring far more enemies than in most horror games . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 On February 3 , 2005 , Ubisoft announced Marilyn Manson was contributing a song to the game ; " Use Your Fist and Not Your Mouth " , from his 2003 album The Golden Age of Grotesque . 
 On February 22 , Ubisoft revealed the soundtrack was being composed by Tom Salta . Salta had been hired in November 2004 , with his first finished track submitted on November 16 . The completed score was handed in on December 23 . According to Salta , he had to compose over twenty different individual pieces as well as music for nine cutscenes ; " It ended up being over an hour 's worth of music which I composed in under six weeks . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Cold Fear received " mixed or average reviews " on all three platforms ; the PlayStation 2 version holds an aggregate score of 68 out of 100 on Metacritic , based on thirty @-@ nine reviews , the Xbox version 71 out of 100 , based on forty @-@ one reviews , and the PC version 66 out of 100 , based on thirteen reviews . 
 Eurogamer 's Kristan Reed was unimpressed with the game , calling it " a bit half @-@ baked " . He praised the opening of the game , arguing that , like Hansen himself , the player feels a strong sense of disorientation as they get used to being on the ship in the middle of a storm . However , he felt the strong opening soon gives way to clichés . He was highly critical of the absence of a map , arguing that because the environments all look similar , getting lost is a regular occurrence . GameSpot 's Carrie Gouskos scored the PlayStation 2 version 6 @.@ 9 out of 10 and the Xbox version 7 @.@ 2 out of 10 . She argued " <unk> , Cold Fear is derivative and predictable , which is a shame considering that it is , at times , an enjoyable action game . " Although she praised the outdoor scenes on the boat , she felt there were not enough of them , with too many " generic indoor locations . " She was also highly critical of the lack of a map and the autosave feature , feeling the save points were unevenly distributed . 
 GameSpy 's Will Tuttle scored the PlayStation 2 version 3 out of 5 and the Xbox version 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 . He praised the setting , atmosphere and over @-@ the @-@ shoulder camera , but was critical of the lack of a map . He remarked , " While it 's not going to overthrow Resident Evil 4 as King of All Horror Games , Cold Fear is a solid little thriller . " Game Revolution 's JP <unk> gave the game a B- . He too criticized the length of the game , the lack of a map and the autosave feature , which he found too random . He praised the graphics and sound , but concluded " With so much attention paid to the environments , Darkworks almost made a great game . Unfortunately , it 's only half a great game [ ... ] The ending as well as many portions along the way feel rushed . " IGN 's Ed Lewis scored the PlayStation 2 version 7 @.@ 2 out of 10 and the Xbox version 7 @.@ 6 out of 10 . He praised the over @-@ the @-@ shoulder camera and the setting , but also criticized the lack of a map . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 The game was met with extremely poor sales figures . By February 2006 , it had sold only 70 @,@ 000 units across all three platforms in the US . 
 = = Film adaptation = = 
 In April 2006 , Variety reported that Avatar Films and <unk> Productions had co @-@ purchased the rights for a feature film adaptation of the game . However , there have since been no further developments , with the project presumably cancelled . 
 = Death Is Birth = 
 Death Is Birth is an EP released by the British hardcore punk band Gallows , released 5 December 2011 through Thirty Days of Night Records . It is the band 's first release with singer Wade MacNeil , formerly of Alexisonfire , who replaced original Gallows singer Frank Carter when the latter left the band in July 2011 . The EP was recorded in Los Angeles and produced by Joby J. Ford of The Bronx . It includes a re @-@ recording of the track " True Colours " , previously released as a free download in August 2011 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Frank Carter the original vocalist of Gallows announced in early July 2011 that he would be leaving Gallows because of differing opinions in writing the band 's follow @-@ up album to their second release Grey Britain . His departure was effective on 1 August after the band 's final tour dates . Just eight days after Frank 's departure , on the 9 August 2011 , MacNeil was confirmed as the new Gallows vocalist . MacNeil has stated that the members of Gallows asked him initially out of coincidence that Alexisonfire had disbanded and Gallows needed a new singer . With Frank 's departure fans of the band started to believe that he left because he wanted to continue playing heavy music , while the band wanted to go in a more melodic direction ; the band decided to release something to show this as false . 
 From the moment Wade 's arrived in Britain in July Gallows started writing new material to follow up to their 2009 album Grey Britain . The ep itself was both written and recorded in a short period of time . A majority of the music featured on the extended play was written by the band before Wade had joined and that they put the finishing touches on the record with him . Lee Barratt summarises the ep as a " good release of anger " and that all the band felt " particularly venomous when Wade joined " . Just a few months later in November the band made the announcement that the new extended play would be released in early December . After the band 's infamous split from Warner Bros the band decided to work on an independent record label for the release , Thirty Days of Night whom they considered as " Gallows family " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The EP has being seen by critics simply as " unapologetic hardcore punk " and being the most aggressive work Gallows had done so far . A more Americanised influence can be heard throughout the EP as it 's been likened to bands like Cancer Bats and Every Time I Die . MacNeil had always stated the EP helped build on what he has always liked about Gallows ; he considers it being " Four songs like a kick in the teeth " . In the writing of the new extended play the band focused on less typical song structures and focused on the chaotic sound from live shows . MacNeil believed that " sometimes you don ’ t need to <unk> things . Obviously , we 're trying to write music that ’ s chaotic and is going to be something that comes across vicious @-@ sounding live ... you don ’ t repeat it four times , you do it once , and you don ’ t have a bridge . " Gallows guitarist Laurent Barnard said how the EP would not sound similar to the band 's third studio album by saying " If you 're going to make a punk rock EP , you might as well make it the most punk rock thing you can really . " 
 Music critics have described True Colours upon its release as a single as " the most brutal thing Gallows has done . " Andrew Ford of Hit The Floor Magazine considered it a " 36 second middle finger to all those who have suggested this is the end of the road for the Watford lads . " Something which both critics and Wade MacNeil himself have acknowledged is his distinct tone of voice from Frank Carter even to the point in which their fan base could be divided over the decision to have Wade in the band . Wade wanted the EP and the future lyrics of Gallows records to have a much more global view . Believing that the band 's second studio album Grey Britain had too much of a British perspective . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The band released the first song from the EP , True Colours for free download on 29 August 2011 from their band website . They then released Mondo Chaos as a digital single on 25 November . Just a few days before that on 17 November the song was leaked . Gallows completed their first tour after the release of True Colours with MacNeil as front man in the United States and Canada in November alongside Four Year Strong , Title Fight and The <unk> and Sharks . The band incorporated songs from the first two albums live set @-@ lists . MacNeil said that he aimed to alter the songs in a way that " breathes some life into them " but also wanted to keep what " people love about those songs and what I love about those songs . " <unk> Records released the ep in North America on vinyl record . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Death Is Birth received positive reception from music critics . British publication Kerrang ! gave the album a " Excellent " four out of five " K " s describing the EP as " The snarling rebirth of the <unk> best punk band . " Vincent Danger when writing for Thrash Hits gave the album a 5 out of 6 stars giving the album a positive review praising their choice of front man to replace Carter . " there ’ s only so much one can say about 459 seconds of music . There ’ s enough here to prove that Lags Barnard ’ s songwriting skills aren ’ t on the wane and that Wade MacNeil is a more than able replacement for Carter . " Alternative Press writer Jason Pettigrew appreciated the album 's short but violent writing in his 4 out of 5 star review ; saying " the EP is steeped in impenetrable , relentless nihilism and thrashing madness that ’ s one part noise weapon ( “ True Colours ” ) , one part circle @-@ pit centrifuge ( “ Hate Hate Hate ” ) and two parts hateful hardcore ( “ Mondo Chaos ” and the title track ) . " Dan <unk> , a writer for Alter The Press ! gave the album a score of 4 / 5 in an otherwise positive review did see fault in the change of front man . " Some fans will undoubtedly find it hard to get past the fact that he isn ’ t Frank Carter , but a little scratch at the surface will reveal the same aggression and similar bile @-@ filled lyrics you ’ d expect from one of Britain ’ s most hateful bands . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Wade MacNeil – lead vocals 
 Laurent " Lags " Barnard – guitar , backing vocals 
 Steph Carter – guitar , backing vocals 
 Stuart Gili @-@ Ross – bass guitar , backing vocals 
 Lee Barratt – drums , percussion 
 = 1933 Chesapeake – Potomac hurricane = 
 The 1933 Chesapeake – Potomac hurricane was among the most damaging hurricanes in the Mid @-@ Atlantic states in the eastern United States . The sixth storm and third hurricane of the very active 1933 Atlantic hurricane season , it formed in the eastern Atlantic , where it moved west @-@ northwestward and eventually became a Category 4 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale . A strong ridge over New England allowed a continued northwest course , bringing the storm south of Bermuda and later toward the middle coast of the eastern United States . Advance warning allowed hundreds of people to evacuate ahead of the hurricane making landfall . It did so in northeastern North Carolina on August 23 with winds of about 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . Soon after , the eye crossed over Norfolk , Virginia , the first time that happened since 1821 . The hurricane weakened into a tropical storm over northern Virginia shortly before passing near Washington , D.C. , becoming the worst tropical cyclone there since 1896 . Curving northward , the storm moved through Pennsylvania and New York before losing tropical characteristics on August 25 . Now extratropical , the former hurricane moved across Atlantic Canada , dissipating on August 28 . 
 Across the eastern United States , the hurricane left widespread damage amounting to over $ 40 million and causing 47 deaths . Although the storm struck North Carolina , damage in the state totaled only about $ 250 @,@ 000 , largely to crops and transport . Along the Chesapeake Bay , the storm produced 100 @-@ year flooding from its storm surge , setting records that remained for over 80 years . In Virginia , flooding covered downtown portions of Norfolk in the southeast and Alexandria in the north . Damage in the state was estimated at $ 17 @.@ 5 million . Similarly heavy damage occurred in Maryland , including over $ 7 million to crops . High waves along the coast eroded beaches and created a new inlet at Ocean City . The highest rainfall associated with the hurricane was 13 @.@ 28 in ( 337 mm ) at York , Pennsylvania . In the state , the rains flooded several rivers which forced thousands to evacuate . In neighboring New Jersey , high waves wrecked boats and destroyed a fishing pier , while in New York , flooding caused traffic jams . In Atlantic Canada , heavy rainfall assisted firefighters in combating wildfires , and the associated winds caused isolated power outages . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 13 , a tropical depression developed near the west coast of Africa , southeast of Cape Verde , with an associated closed circulation . Based on observations from a nearby ship , it is estimated the depression quickly intensified into a tropical storm while moving generally to the west @-@ northwest . For several days the storm continued this general trajectory , eventually shifting more to the northwest . Based on interpolation of reports , it is estimated the storm intensified into a hurricane on August 16 while halfway between Africa and the Lesser Antilles . The Weather Bureau began tracking the system on August 18 . Later that day , a ship reported a pressure of 948 mbar ( 28 @.@ 0 inHg ) , suggesting winds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) . This made the hurricane a Category 4 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale . Another ship report on August 20 indicated a pressure of 940 mbar ( 28 inHg ) while reporting hurricane winds , suggesting peak winds of 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) . 
 After remaining near peak intensity for three days , the hurricane began steadily weakening while curving more to the west @-@ northwest , a rare track for the region due to steering from a ridge over New England . On August 21 , the storm passed about 150 mi ( 240 km ) southwest of Bermuda . At 1000 UTC on August 23 , the hurricane made landfall along the northern Outer Banks of North Carolina , near Nags Head , with a pressure of 963 mbar ( 28 @.@ 4 inHg ) . Based on the steady weakening , coastal observations , and a larger than normal size , landfall winds were estimated at 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . A few hours later , the hurricane made another landfall on the North Carolina mainland after crossing the Albemarle Sound . While the hurricane continued to the northwest , the eye briefly moved over Norfolk , Virginia , for the first time since the 1821 Norfolk and Long Island hurricane . Early on August 24 , the hurricane weakened into a tropical storm while passing near Washington , D.C. Curving to the north , the storm crossed Pennsylvania and into New York , where it weakened further into a tropical depression . On August 25 , the former hurricane turned to the east near the Canadian border , and after interacting with a cold front , became extratropical . It emerged from Maine and briefly re @-@ intensified , moving across southern Nova Scotia with gale force winds . On August 28 , the circulation dissipated to the south of Newfoundland . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 The hurricane first affected Bermuda when it passed to the south . Winds at St. George 's reached 64 mph ( 103 km / h ) . High waves along the coast prevented boats from docking . 
 Early on August 21 , the Weather Bureau issued storm warnings from Cape Hatteras to Boston , Massachusetts . As the hurricane approached land , the warnings were extended southward to Southport , North Carolina . In Norfolk , Virginia , most ships either remained at port or sought shelter due to advance warning . Residents were advised to evacuate in Ocean View , Virginia Beach , and Willoughby Spit , and about 350 people left their houses in Virginia Beach . Along the coast , the United States Coast Guard rescued more than 200 people , many of whom due to capsized boats . A 1993 article published in the Monthly Weather Review considered the storm to have been " one of the most severe storms that has ever visited the Middle Atlantic coast . " Flooding affected a larger portion of the northeastern United States than any other hurricane in the 1900s after Hurricane Agnes in 1972 . The Federal Emergency Management Agency later used high water levels from the storm as a 100 @-@ year event for the Chesapeake Bay region . The next storm to approach the storm surge levels was Isabel in 2003 , which was lower in most locations in Virginia , although higher in Washington , D.C. and Baltimore due to sea level rise . This hurricane caused damage from North Carolina through New Jersey , due to the combination of high winds and storm tides , and left 47 people dead overall . 
 = = = North Carolina and Virginia = = = 
 When the hurricane made landfall in the Outer Banks , it produced winds of 76 mph ( 122 km / h ) at Cape Hatteras . The winds caused crop damage as far inland as Granville County . Across the region , the storm downed power lines , highways , boats , and houses , and overall damage in the state was around $ 250 @,@ 000 . 
 As the hurricane moved into Virginia , winds were as strong as 82 mph ( 131 km / h ) at Cape Henry , while Norfolk reported winds of 70 mph ( 113 km / h ) . The latter city reported a record high tide of 9 @.@ 8 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) above normal at Sewell 's Point , which flooded the downtown section with 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) of water . Water levels were 5 to 8 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 4 m ) higher than any previous high water mark in Newport News and most of Fort Eustis was flooded . In Hampton the storm surge flooded Langley Air Force Base , swamped homes and businesses , wrecked boats , and destroyed fishing piers . Rainfall in Chesapeake reached about 10 in ( 250 mm ) , and reached about 7 in ( 180 mm ) in Norfolk . Flooding near Norfolk damaged crops , and after its downtown section was flooded , residents were forced to travel by boat . When the flood levels dropped , many fish were left behind in the streets . High water levels of around 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) along the York River destroyed buildings at Gloucester Point . In Virginia Beach , the storm knocked down about 600 trees , many of them about 100 years old , and over 79 @,@ 000 people lost telephone service . 
 Due to advance warning , there was minimal damage to shipping in the region . However , high waves damaged the steamer Madison with 90 people on board and caused it to drift off Cape Charles , which necessitated rescue from the Coast Guard . Inland flooding occurred along the James River as far west as Richmond , where damage was limited to downed trees and broken windows . The pier of the Jamestown Ferry was washed out in Surry and a marina at Jordan Point near Hopewell was wrecked after the river reached the highest level on record . A powerful storm surge moved up the Chesapeake Bay and flooded waterfront locations . At Colonial Beach along the Potomac River , the surge flooded the town with 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) of water and wrecked a local amusement park . The Potomac in Alexandria was at its highest level since 1899 , causing floods 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) deep along U.S. Route 1 , and flooding the Old Town section . High winds in the city caused power outages , and flooding along the Cameron Run washed out a bridge . The combination of rain and winds damaged crops in Fairfax and Loudoun counties , mainly to corn and peaches . Statewide , the storm caused $ 5 @.@ 25 million in crop damage , largely to corn and tobacco . Damage in the state was estimated at $ 17 @.@ 5 million , and there were 15 deaths . After the storm , about 350 people helped clear debris from the streets of Norfolk . 
 = = = Maryland north = = = 
 Farther north , it is estimated the storm produced hurricane @-@ force winds in portions of Maryland . Along the coast , high waves eroded about 2 sq mi ( 5 @.@ 2 km2 ) of beaches in Maryland and another 1 sq mi ( 2 @.@ 6 km2 ) in Delaware . High waves created an inlet that turned Assateague into an island . The storm damaged or destroyed several hotels in the region . Power , telephone , and telegraph outages occurred from Cape Charles through Delaware . In Baltimore , 7 @.@ 62 in ( 194 mm ) of precipitation fell in 24 hours , setting a record and causing flooding . The storm surge wrecked a steamboat pier and promenade at Chesapeake Beach , and damaged or destroyed 70 houses in neighboring North Beach . In Cheverly , flooding caused nine cars of a train to derail , killing four people . Statewide , the storm caused about $ 7 million in crop damage , mostly to tobacco , tomato , and corn . The high tides caused $ 3 million in damage to the fishing industry , having damage or destroyed many boats and docks . There was about $ 90 @,@ 000 worth of damage to the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis , after docks were damaged . Throughout the state , the hurricane caused about $ 10 million in property damage , with another $ 1 @.@ 1 million to federal properties , about $ 960 @,@ 000 in transportation damage , and $ 364 @,@ 000 in utility damage . 
 In neighboring Delaware , road damage was about $ 150 @,@ 000 , after three bridges were wrecked along DuPont Highway . Rainfall in the state reached 13 @.@ 24 in ( 336 mm ) in Bridgeville . In Washington , D.C. , the storm dropped 6 @.@ 39 in ( 162 mm ) of rainfall , at the time the highest on record for a single day total . High winds knocked down trees and destroyed the roofs of several houses . Along the Anacostia River , flooding surpassed a seawall , and traffic was disrupted when the Benning Bridge was flooded with 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) of water . The Washington @-@ Hoover Airport was also flooded . Damage in the nation 's capital was the worst since a tropical storm in 1896 . The highest rainfall associated with the hurricane was 13 @.@ 28 in ( 337 mm ) near York , Pennsylvania . On August 24 , the minimum pressure in Philadelphia dropped to 996 mbar ( 29 @.@ 40 inHg ) , which was the lowest on record in the month of August at the time . Wind gusts in the city reached 42 mph ( 68 km / h ) . In the surrounding area , winds and rainfall caused $ 1 million in damage , mostly to crops and houses , and there were four deaths . Rainfall caused the worst flooding in the Lehigh Valley since 1902 . In York County , floods destroyed 47 bridges , while in York proper , about 3 @,@ 000 people evacuated along the swollen <unk> Creek . 
 Hurricane @-@ force winds potentially affected portions of Delaware and southern New Jersey . In Atlantic City , New Jersey , winds reached 76 mph ( 122 km / h ) at a height of 171 ft ( 52 m ) , which is 67 mph ( 107 km / h ) at sea @-@ level . At the time , this was the highest wind report for the station in the month of August . Rainfall in Atlantic City totaled 8 @.@ 12 in ( 206 mm ) , including 2 @.@ 25 in ( 57 mm ) that fell in an hour on August 20 , which was the monthly average . Two people drowned along the Jersey Shore due to high waves , and the storm capsized nine boats . The waves destroyed a 300 ft ( 91 m ) long fishing pier in Cape May . High winds damaged the boardwalk while streets were flooded in Atlantic City , and there was about $ 3 million in damage . The storm spawned a tornado in Wildwood . At Picatinny Arsenal , residents and members of the military helped prevent a dam from breaking . Sustained winds of around 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) were observed across northern New York , while the top of the Empire State Building reported a gust of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Heavy rainfall in the state increased water levels along streams , causing one person to drown at Mount Tremper . After a dam broke , 190 people at <unk> were stranded until they were rescued by a fire crew . A power outage during the storm caused the Statue of Liberty torch to extinguish for the first time since 1929 . Streets and basements of New York City were flooded after the heavy rainfall . The combination of flooding and fallen trees caused heavy traffic jams . 
 The former hurricane passed near southern Quebec as a tropical depression , and later crossed southern Nova Scotia as an extratropical cyclone . Along Lake Ontario , winds reached 51 mph ( 81 km / h ) , and in Montreal , winds reached 21 mph ( 33 km / h ) . After a dry summer , the storm 's accompanying rainfall was beneficial , reaching 4 @.@ 4 in ( 112 mm ) in Fredericton , New Brunswick and 2 in ( 50 mm ) in Halifax , Nova Scotia . The rains helped farmers in Ontario and assisted firefighters in New Brunswick and Nova Scotia . In Montreal , 2 @.@ 4 in ( 60 mm ) of rainfall flooded a tunnel . Gusty winds knocked down power lines in portions of Quebec , Nova Scotia , and Nova Scotia . Overall effects were minor , limited to some utility damage and delays for shipping . 
 = John Shurna = 
 John William Shurna ( born April 30 , 1990 ) is an American – Lithuanian professional basketball player who plays for Valencia Basket of the Liga ACB . He is the 2012 Big Ten scoring champion . He played in the 2012 NBA Summer League with the Atlanta Hawks . He then signed with the New York Knicks , but was waived at the end of the preseason . 
 He played college basketball for the Northwestern Wildcats . He has been a three @-@ time All @-@ Big Ten Conference selection ( 2010 – 2nd team ; 2011 – 3rd team coaches / honorable mention media ; 2012 – 1st team ) and the Northwestern statistical leader in several categories . He was the 2010 Sporting News Most Improved Player . He holds several Northwestern all @-@ time records , including single @-@ season and career scoring . He was selected as an honorable mention Associated Press 2012 NCAA Men 's Basketball All @-@ American . He won the State Farm College 3 @-@ Point Championship three @-@ point shooting contest at the 2012 Final Four . 
 In high school , he was the 2008 Illinois High School Association ( IHSA ) Class 4A Slam Dunk Champion . He was a member of the gold @-@ medal @-@ winning USA Basketball team at the 2009 FIBA Under @-@ 19 World Championship . 
 = = High school = = 
 Shurna was a 2007 and 2008 Chicago Tribune All @-@ State boys basketball team special mention selection . As a junior , in March 2007 , he led <unk> West High School to the Class AA supersectional for the first time since 1938 , but they lost to Lockport Township High School 53 – 50 despite 27 points by Shurna , according to the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , but only 21 according to the Daily Southtown and Chicago Tribune . He committed to Northwestern University on May 13 , 2007 , but he did not sign his National Letter of Intent until November 14 . 
 As a senior , he was selected to the IHSA 4A all @-@ state second @-@ team by Associated Press and the 3A / 4A all @-@ state first @-@ team by Illinois Basketball Coaches Association . In addition , he won the 2008 IHSA 4A slam dunk championship at the state tournament , but finished second to Marland Johnson by a point in a contest of the winners of the four classes . As a senior , he finished 8th in the Illinois Mr. Basketball voting . Following his senior season , he participated in local and regional All @-@ Star contests such as the 34th annual Foundation For Student Athletes city @-@ suburban all @-@ star event . Although ESPN.com ranked Shurna as the 53rd best high school basketball power forward in the national class of 2008 , he was not among the ranked players by state or position according to either Rivals.com or Scout.com. 
 = = College = = 
 = = = Freshman = = = 
 As a true freshman , he started all 31 games for the 2008 – 09 Northwestern Wildcats . Shurna was a member of Team USA basketball during the 2009 FIBA Under @-@ 19 World Championship competition held in Auckland , New Zealand from July 2 , 2009 until July 12 . He played in all 9 games , starting 2 . Despite averaging the fewest minutes ( 12 @.@ 2 ) , he was fifth on the team in rebounding with ( 3 @.@ 9 ) . The USA team earned the gold medal . 
 = = = Sophomore = = = 
 He played forward for the 2009 – 10 Northwestern Wildcats and led the team in scoring and rebounding . Following the 2009 – 10 All @-@ Big Ten Conference regular season , he was named a second @-@ team All @-@ conference selection by both the coaches and the media . He was twice named Big Ten men 's basketball player of the week during the season . He was recognized as an All @-@ District second @-@ team selection by the National Association of Basketball Coaches making him eligible for the State Farm Division I All ‐ America teams . He finished his sophomore season among the Big Ten leaders in many statistical categories : 3rd in scoring , 7th in rebounding , 10th in free throw percentage , 8th in blocked shots , and 6th in minutes played . He was recognized by Sporting News as the Most Improved Player after raising his scoring average from 7 @.@ 3 points as a freshman to 18 @.@ 5 as a sophomore , while improving his rebounding average from 2 @.@ 6 to 6 @.@ 4 . During the season , he established new Northwestern Wildcats basketball single @-@ season records in both total points ( 619 ) , surpassing Evan <unk> , and field goals made ( 217 ) , surpassing Dale Kelly . In so doing , he helped Northwestern establish a new school record for single @-@ season wins with 20 . 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 As a junior , he was a preseason top 50 candidate for both the John R. Wooden Award and the Naismith College Player of the Year . In the first game of his junior season , Shurna tied his career @-@ high with 31 points on his way to Big Ten Player of the Week honors . On December 20 , in week 6 of the season , Shurna repeated as conference player of the week . Following the 2010 – 11 Big Ten Conference men 's basketball season , he was a third team All @-@ Big Ten selection by the coaches and an honorable mention by the media . Sports Illustrated named him as one of the ten best players in the Big Ten Conference . 
 Shurna submitted the paperwork to declare for the 2011 NBA Draft following the season , though he did not hire an agent . He withdrew his name prior to the May 8 deadline and chose to return for his senior year . He was one of 20 players who tried out to represent USA Basketball at the 2011 Summer Universiade , but did not make the team . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 As a senior he repeated as a preseason top 50 watchlist selection for the Wooden Award and the Naismith Award . He was also a Sporting News Preseason All @-@ American ( 2nd team ) . When Shurna scored 37 points on November 17 against LSU it heralded a career @-@ high and tied for the most points scored by a Northwestern player during the 12 @-@ year Bill Carmody era . On December 18 , he scored 32 points as Northwestern defeated Eastern Illinois . Shurna earned Co @-@ Big Ten Player of the week on February 6 after averaging 26 points , 4 rebounds and 2 steals in wins over Nebraska and Illinois on February 2 and February 5 , respectively . On February 12 , he posted his third 30 @-@ point game of the season against Purdue . With three 30 @-@ point games as a senior , he brought his career total to six . On February 18 he became Northwestern 's all @-@ time leading scorer in a game against Minnesota , passing Billy McKinney 's record of 1 @,@ 900 points . He was selected as a first team All @-@ Big Ten selection by both the coaches and the media . He was selected by the U.S. Basketball Writers Association to its 10 @-@ man 2011 – 12 Men 's All @-@ District V ( OH , IN , IL , MI , MN , WI ) Team . Shurna was a first team selection to the National Association of Basketball Coaches Division I All ‐ District 7 team on March 14 . Shurna finished the season with a 20 @.@ 0 point per game average , which led the Big Ten Conference . He was named an honorable mention Associated Press All @-@ American . He competed in the 2012 State Farm 3 @-@ Point Contest , beating Juan Fernandez 21 – 20 in the final round by making his final seven shots . Shurna was also selected to participate in the NABC 2012 Reese 's Division I All @-@ Star Game at the 2012 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament final four . Shurna had 12 points in the game . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 After going undrafted in the 2012 NBA Draft , Shurna signed a 2012 Las Vegas NBA Summer League contract with the Atlanta Hawks . On September 10 , 2012 , Shurna signed a 1 @-@ year partially guaranteed contract with the New York Knicks . He was waived at the end of the preseason . 
 By the beginning of December 2012 , he had made his professional debut with Strasbourg IG of <unk> Pro A. Shurna was originally signed as an injury replacement for Nicolas de Jong until the end of 2012 , but was signed longer term as it became apparent that de Jong would be out for an extended period . 
 After the played on the Milwaukee Bucks ' 2013 NBA Summer League team , Shurna signed a 2 @-@ year contract with <unk> <unk> . He signed with the Toronto Raptors for the 2014 NBA Summer League and posted 21 points on 6 @-@ for @-@ 9 field goal shooting including 5 three point shots in his July 11 debut . In August 2014 , he signed a one @-@ year contract with Turkish Basketball League team Darüşşafaka . 
 He played in the 2015 NBA Summer League with the Cleveland Cavaliers . On July 27 , 2015 , he signed a one @-@ year contract with Valencia Basket of Spain . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Shurna was born in Glen Ellyn , Illinois , to Tony and Suzy Shurna . At Northwestern , he was a double major in sociology and learning and organizational change . 
 = Jacob Pavlovich Adler = 
 Jacob Pavlovich Adler ( born <unk> P. Adler ; February 12 , 1855 – April 1 , 1926 ) was a Jewish actor and star of Yiddish theater , first in Odessa , and later in London and in New York City 's Yiddish Theater District . 
 Nicknamed " <unk> <unk> " , ( " the Great Eagle " ) , Adler being the Yiddish for " eagle " , he achieved his first theatrical success in Odessa , but his career there was rapidly cut short when Yiddish theater was banned in Russia in 1883 . He became a star in Yiddish theater in London , and in 1889 , on his second voyage to the United States , he settled in New York City . Adler soon started a company of his own , ushering in a new , more serious Yiddish theater , most notably by recruiting the Yiddish theater 's first realistic playwright , Jacob Gordin . Adler scored a great triumph in the title role of Gordin 's Der Yiddisher King Lear ( The Jewish King Lear ) , set in 19th @-@ century Russia , which along with his portrayal of Shakespeare 's Shylock would form the core of the persona he defined as the " Grand Jew " . 
 Nearly all his family went into theater ; probably the most famous was his daughter Stella , who taught method acting to , among others , Marlon Brando . 
 = = Childhood and youth = = 
 Adler was born in Odessa , Russian Empire ( now Ukraine ) . Adler 's father <unk> ( Pavel ) <unk> Adler was a ( rather unsuccessful ) grain merchant . His mother , née <unk> Halperin , was a tall , beautiful woman , originally from a wealthy family in Berdichev . She became estranged from her family after divorcing her first husband ( and leaving behind a son ) to marry Adler 's father . The marriage to a divorcée cost <unk> Adler ( and therefore Jacob Adler ) his status as a Kohen ( priest ) . His paternal grandfather lived with them for some eight years ; he was a pious man , and the family was much more observant of Jewish religious practices during the time he lived with them . However , according to Adler , the real patriarch of the family was his wealthy uncle Aaron " Arke " Trachtenberg , who would later be the model for his portrayal of roles such as Gordin 's Jewish King Lear . 
 Adler grew up with one foot in a traditional Jewish world and one in a more modern , European one . His granddaughter Lulla Rosenfeld writes , " Of the <unk> [ Jewish Enlightenment ] as an organized system of ideas , he probably knew little or nothing . " His education was irregular : as the family fortunes rose and fell , he would be sent to <unk> ( Jewish religious school ) or to a Russian language county school , pulled out of school entirely , or have a private tutor for a few months . He wrote that " the sum of my learning was a little arithmetic , some Russian grammar , and a few French phrases . " 
 He grew up with both Jewish and Christian playmates , but also survived a full @-@ fledged pogrom around 1862 . He played hooky ; as a 12 @-@ year @-@ old he started going to witness public floggings , brandings , and executions of criminals ; later he would develop more of an interest in attending courtroom trials . At 14 he began working in a textile factory , and soon rose to a white collar job there at a salary of 10 rubles a month , which would have been decent even for an adult . Still living at home , he began to frequent the disreputable district of <unk> . His first brush with stardom was that he briefly became a boxer , known as <unk> <unk> , " Jake the Fist " . He soon got bored with boxing , but not with his new connections to the " sons of rich fathers , attorneys without diplomas " , etc . A good dancer , he became part of a crowd of young toughs who regularly crashed wedding parties . His local celebrity continued , with a reputation as Odessa 's best can @-@ can dancer . 
 He left the factory , becoming a <unk> , a peddler ; his memoir hints at back @-@ door assignations with " servant girls and <unk> " ; by his own description , his life at this point was just a step from a life of crime . Through his uncle Arke , " a hot theater lover " , he became interested in the theater , at first in the beauty of Olga <unk> and the cut of Ivan <unk> 's clothes , but he had the good fortune to be in one of the great theater cities of his time . 
 At 17 he became the leader of <unk> 's claque , was working as a copyist for lawyers , and going out to a theater , a tavern , or a party every night . He would later draw on his own life at this time for his portrayal of <unk> in Tolstoy 's The Living Corpse . Over the next few years he had numerous love affairs , and was prevented from a love marriage with one Esther <unk> because his own dubious reputation compounded the taint of his mother 's divorce . He survived another pogrom , but his family was financially ruined by the destruction of their possessions and the theft of their money . 
 In writing about this period in his memoir , Adler mentions attending and admiring performances by Israel Grodner , a Brody singer and improvisational actor who would soon become one of the founders of professional Yiddish theater . A song of Grodner 's about an old father turned away by his children would later be the germ of the idea for The Yiddish King Lear . He writes that he would have become a Brody singer , like Grodner , except " I had no voice " . This lack of a singing voice would be a major factor in the direction of his acting career : according to Rosenfeld , although Yiddish theater was long dominated by <unk> and operettas , " He was the only Yiddish actor to rely entirely on classics and translations of modern European plays . " 
 = = Sanitar and Inspector = = 
 The outbreak of the Russo @-@ Turkish War brought on universal conscription of young men . At his family 's urging , Adler bribed his way into becoming a <unk> , an assistant in the Red Cross Medical Corps . He was selected ( apparently on little more than his appearance ) by Prince Vladimir Petrovich <unk> to work at a German hospital in Bender , Moldova , dealing mainly with typhus patients . In his four months there , he became a favorite with the established Jewish families there , and earned a Gold Medal for Outstanding Achievement for his brief service to the Tsar . 
 Returning to Odessa , he got a job distributing newspapers . This respectable work required getting up at 6 a.m. , not good for a carouser . Still , newspaper connection meant that he soon heard of one of the war 's other effects : the many Jewish merchants and middlemen war brought to Bucharest were a boon to Abraham Goldfaden 's nascent Yiddish theater there . Two of his Odessa acquaintances — Israel Rosenberg , a personable con @-@ man , and Jacob <unk> , scion of a wealthy Jewish family — had become actors there , then had left Goldfaden to found their own company , touring in Moldavia . Adler wrote them to urge them to bring their troupe to Odessa . 
 Adler managed to leverage a recommendation from Prince <unk> and another from Avrom Markovich Brodsky — a businessman so successful as to have earned the nickname " the Jewish Tsar " — to get a job as a marketplace inspector for the Department of Weights and Measures , rather unusual for a Jew at that time . His mildly corrupt tenure there gave him good contacts with the police . These would soon come in handy for smoothing over certain problems of a young and unlicensed theater troupe when Rosenberg and <unk> returned from Romania , penniless because the end of the war had meant the collapse of Yiddish theater in the provinces , and ready to start a troupe in Odessa . 
 Adler aspired to be an actor , but found himself at first serving the troupe more as critic and theoretician , making use of his now @-@ vast knowledge of Russian theater . The first productions ( Goldfaden 's Grandmother and Granddaughter and Shmendrick ) were popular successes , but Adler 's own account suggests that they were basically mediocre , and his Uncle Arke was appalled : " Is this theater ? No my child , this is a circus . " 
 = = Acting career = = 
 Lulla Rosenfeld 's remark that Adler " ... rel [ ied ] entirely on classics and translations of modern European plays " does not quite tell the whole story . On one hand , he was also responsible for recruiting the Yiddish theater 's first naturalistic playwright , Jacob Gordin , and he scored a great triumph in the title role of Gordin 's Der Yiddisher King Lear ( The Jewish King Lear ) , set in 19th @-@ century Russia . On the other , until his 50s , he was not hesitant to take advantage of his prowess as a dancer , and even occasionally took on roles that called for some singing , although by all accounts ( including his own ) this was not his forte . 
 = = = Russia = = = 
 Adler wrote in his memoir that the passion of his future wife Sonya Oberlander ( and of her family ) for theater , and their vision of what Yiddish theater could become , kept him in the profession despite his uncle 's view . When she was cast by Rosenberg opposite Jacob Spivakovsky in the title role of Abraham Goldfaden 's darkly comic operetta <unk> Cossack , she pulled strings so that the role of <unk> would be reassigned to Adler . 
 His success in the role was cut short by the news that Goldfaden , whose plays they were using without permission , was coming with his troupe to Odessa . Goldfaden 's own account says he came there at the urging of his father ; Adler attributes it to Rosenberg and Spivakovsky 's " enemies " . Rosenberg , never the most ethical of men , withdrew his troupe from Odessa to tour the hinterland . ( Soon , though , he would come to an accommodation by which his troupe would be an officially recognized touring company attached to Goldfaden 's own troupe . ) ( For greater detail on Adler 's time with Rosenberg 's company , see Israel Rosenberg . ) 
 By his own account , Adler took a leave of absence from his job to travel with Rosenberg 's troupe to Kherson , where he made a successful acting debut as the lover Marcus in The Witch of Botoşani . He overstayed his leave , lost his government post , and the decision to become a full @-@ time actor was effectively made for him . Adler was unhappy that under <unk> Goldfaden there were " No more communistic shares , no more idealistic comradeship " . Still , under this same Goldfaden regime he had his first taste of real stardom when people in <unk> camped in the courtyards awaiting performances . Even the police seemed to have " fallen in love " with the troupe , dressing up the actors in their uniforms at riotous parties after shows , while trying on the troupe 's costumes themselves . 
 Unsatisfied with the low pay , in Kremenchuk Adler led an unsuccessful actors ' strike . A series of intrigues almost led to a breakup with Sonya , but ultimately led both back into Rosenberg 's troupe and led to their marriage in Poltava . When this particular troupe broke up , the Adlers were among the few players to remain with Rosenberg to form a new one that included the actress who later became famous under the name of Keni Liptzin . In Chernigov , Adler turned down the opportunity to act in a Russian @-@ language production of Boris <unk> . Around this time Goldfaden appeared again and , after using an elaborate intrigue to demonstrate to the Adlers that Rosenberg had no loyalty to them , recruited them to his own troupe , which at the time appeared to be headed for a triumphant entry into Saint Petersburg . 
 All that changed with the assassination of Tsar Alexander II . The mourning for the tsar meant there would be no performances in the capital ; in addition the political climate of Russia turned sharply against the Jews . Goldfaden 's troupe soldiered on for a time — to Minsk , to Bobruisk where they played mainly to Russian soldiers , and to Vitebsk , where he and Sonya ended up having to sue Goldfaden for their pay , and left to rejoin Rosenberg , who was playing in a tent theater in <unk> . However , matters there proved even worse : <unk> soon fell prey to a pogrom . The troupe managed to avoid bodily harm , partly by convincing the rioters that they were a French theater troupe and partly by making judicious use of the money the Adlers had won in court from Goldfaden . 
 In Łódź , Adler triumphantly played the title role in Karl <unk> 's Uriel Acosta , the first of a series of roles through which he developed a persona he would later call " the Grand Jew " . After Łódź , they landed in Zhytomyr , under an incompetent investor / director named Hartenstein . They thought they had found " a quiet corner " of the Russian Empire in which " to make a bit of a livelihood " , but in fact Hartenstein was simply running through his money . 
 The financial consequences of the collapse of their company were mitigated be a series of three benefit performances , in coordination with the local Russian @-@ language theater company . Sonya returned to Odessa to give birth to their daughter Rivka ; Adler stayed on six weeks in Zhytomyr and had sort of a belated apprenticeship with two Russian character actors of national fame , Borisov and <unk> . However , he returned to Odessa thinking that he would most likely leave theater behind . 
 Late in life , when he looked back at his years acting in Adler and Goldfaden 's companies , Adler saw it as merely the " childhood " of his career . He describes his thoughts toward the end of this period , " For three years I had wandered in the cave of the Witch in the clown 's rags of Shmendrick and what did I really know of my trade ? ... If someday I return to the Yiddish theater , let me at least not be so ignorant . " 
 Returning to Odessa , where he discovered that no one would employ him in any job other than as an actor . In 1882 , he put together a troupe of his own with Keni Liptzin , and brought Rosenberg in as a partner . This troupe toured to Rostov , Taganrog , around Lithuania , to Dünaburg ( now Daugavpils , Latvia ) . Aiming to bring the troupe to Saint Petersburg , they brought back their sometime manager <unk> Bain . They were in Riga in August 1883 when the news arrived that a total ban was about to be placed on Yiddish theater in Russia . 
 The troupe were left stranded in Riga . <unk> Bain took ill and died . With some difficulty , passage to London for the troupe was arranged on a cattle ship , in exchange for entertaining the crew . However , about this time Israel Grodner and his wife <unk> reappeared . Adler wanted to include them in the group headed for London . According to Adler , Rosenberg , who played many of the same roles as Israel Grodner , essentially told Adler " it 's him or me " . Adler attempted to convince him to change his mind , but insisted on including Grodner in the travel party : Adler considered him one of the best actors in Yiddish theater , a great asset to any performances they would give in London , while he felt Rosenberg lacked depth as an actor . He tried to get Rosenberg to come with them to London , but Rosenberg would not budge . 
 = = = London = = = 
 Of his time in London , Adler wrote , " ... if Yiddish theater was destined to go through its infancy in Russia , and in America grew to manhood and success , then London was its school . " 
 Adler arrived in London with few contacts . In Whitechapel , the center of Jewish London at that time , he encountered extremes of poverty that he describes as exceeding any he had ever seen in Russia or would ever see in New York . The quite distinguished Chief Rabbi of the British Empire at that time , Dr. Nathan Marcus Adler , was a relative . Adler 's father had him written a letter of introduction in Hebrew , but nothing could have been farther from the rabbi 's desires than to assist Yiddish @-@ language theater . Nathan Marcus Adler viewed Yiddish as a " jargon " that existed at the expense of both liturgical Hebrew and the English necessary for upward mobility , and his Orthodox Judaism " could not endure so much as a blessing given on stage , for such a blessing would be given in vain ... " ; further , he was afraid that the portrayals of Jews on stage would give aid and comfort to their enemies . 
 At this time , Yiddish theater in London meant amateur clubs . The arrival of professional Yiddish actors from Russia worked great changes , bringing Yiddish theater in London to a new level and allowing a modest professionalism , though never at much more than a poverty wage . Adler 's memoir acknowledges many people who helped him out in various ways . Eventually , with the aid in particular of Sonya 's relative Herman Fiedler — a playwright , orchestra leader , and stage manager — the Adlers and the <unk> were able to take over the Prescott Street Club . There they presented generally serious theater to audiences of about 150 . Fiedler adapted The Odessa Beggar from Felix <unk> 's The <unk> of Paris , a tragicomic play written on the eve of the Revolutions of 1848 . Adler starred in it , in a role he would continue to play throughout his career . 
 Two months later , he played Uriel Acosta at the Holborn Theatre to an audience of 500 , including the " Jewish aristocrats of the West End " . The piety of the London Jews was such that they had to use an ( unplayable ) cardboard ram 's horn so as to avoid blasphemy . Chief Rabbi Adler and his son and eventual successor Hermann Adler were present , and both , especially the younger rabbi , were favorably impressed . There were even mentions in the English @-@ language press . 
 Playing to small audiences , on tiny stages , in communal troupes where all but the stars had day jobs , and playing only Saturday and Sunday ( the pious London Jews would never have tolerated Friday performances ) , Adler focused on serious theater like never before . However , he and Grodner soon fell out : they wrangled over ideology and over parts , and their verbal duels boiled over into improvised stage dialogue . The <unk> ultimately left to do theater in a series of other locations , notably Paris , but eventually came back to London , where Israel Grodner died in 1887 . 
 By November 1885 , Adler had a theatrical club of his own , the Princes Street Club , No. 3 Princes Street ( now Princelet Street , E1 ) , purpose @-@ built , financed by a butcher named David Smith . It seated 300 ; playing every night except Friday , he was earning about £ 3 <unk> a week , but with a fame well out of proportion to the meagre money . Many of the most prominent figures in Yiddish theater , including Sigmund Mogulesko , David Kessler , Abba and Clara <unk> , and Sara Heine ( the future Sara Adler ) , gave guest performances when they passed through London . 
 One of Adler 's most famous roles from this period was as the villain Franz Moore in Herman Fiedler 's adaptation of Schiller 's The Robbers , which introduced Schiller into Yiddish theater . On at least one occasion in 1886 , he played both Franz Moore and the play 's hero , Franz 's brother Karl Moore : in the play they never meet . 
 1886 was to prove a terrible year for Adler . His daughter Rivka died of croup ; Sonya died of an infection contracted while giving birth to their son Abram ; meanwhile , he had been carrying on an affair with a young woman , Jenny ( " Jennya " ) Kaiser , who was also pregnant , with his son Charles . Depressed after Sonya 's death , he passed up an offer to relocate to the United States , which was taken up instead by Mogulesko and Finkel . In winter 1887 , an audience at the Princes Street Club panicked when they thought a simulated stage fire was real ; 17 people died in the stampede . While the authorities determined that this was not Adler 's fault , and the club was allowed to reopen , the crowds did not return ; " the theater , " he writes , " was so cold , dark , and empty you could hunt wolves in the gallery . " 
 Adler 's affair with Jennya continued ; he also took up with a young chorus girl from an Orthodox Jewish family , Dinah Shtettin . His memoir is extremely unclear on the sequence of this , and hints at other affairs at this time . The memoir does make clear that the " hot @-@ blooded " Jennya had little interest in a marriage , while Dinah 's father insisted on a marriage , even though he despised Alder and made it clear that he doubted the marriage would last . 
 = = = Coming to America = = = 
 With the aid of a small sum of money from his distant relative the Chief Rabbi , Adler got together the money to travel by steerage to New York , with his infant son <unk> , Alexander Oberlander and his family , Keni and <unk> Liptzin , and Herman Fiedler , among others . Adler did not doubt that the rabbi was glad to see Yiddish actors leaving London . In New York , they promptly discovered that neither Mogulesko and Finkel at the Romanian Opera House nor Maurice Heine at the Oriental Theater had any use for them . They headed on to Chicago , where , after a brief initial success , the troupe fell apart due to a combination of labor disputes and cutthroat competition . The <unk> managed to start a restaurant ; he and Keni Liptzin headed to New York that autumn , where she managed to sign on at the Romanian Opera House ; failing to find a similar situation for himself , he returned to London , drawn back to the charms of both Dinah and Jennya . 
 He did not remain long in London . After some major successes in Warsaw , which was under Austrian rule , he returned to London in the spring of 1889 , and then again to New York , this time to play for Heine at Poole 's Theater . After an initial failure in The Odessa Beggar ( he writes that the New York audience of the time was not ready for " tragicomedy " ) , he was a success in the melodrama <unk> Soldat , and " a more worthy success " in Uriel Acosta . This gave him the basis to bring Dinah to America . Their marriage didn 't last , though the divorce was amicable : she remarried , to Siegmund <unk> . Adler fell out with Heine , initially over business ; at this time Heine 's marriage was also falling apart , and Sara Heine would eventually become Sara Adler . 
 Adler went on the road with Boris Thomashefsky , who at the time was pioneering the touring circuit for Yiddish theater in America . They played in Philadelphia and Chicago , where word arrived of an opportunity to take over Poole 's , Heine having moved on to the Thalia . Adler returned to New York , where he managed also to win Mogulesko and Kessler away from Heine . 
 = = = New York = = = 
 Renaming Poole 's as the Union Theater , Adler attempted to produce the most serious Yiddish @-@ language theater New York had yet seen in the Yiddish Theater District , with plays such as Scribe 's La Juive , <unk> 's Samson the Great , and <unk> 's Quo Vadis . However , after Thomashefsky became an enormous popular success in Moses Halevy Horowitz 's operetta David ben Jesse at Moishe Finkel 's National Theater , the Union Theater temporarily to abandon its highbrow programming and competed head on , with operettas Judith and Holofernes , Titus Andronicus , or the Second Destruction of the Temple , and Hymie in America . 
 Adler was not content to continue long in this mode , and sought a playwright who could create pieces that would appeal to the Jewish public , while still providing a type of theater he could be proud to perform . He recruited Jacob Gordin , already a well @-@ respected novelist and intellectual , recently arrived in New York and eking out a living as a journalist at the Arbeiter Zeitung , precursor to The Forward . Gordin 's first two plays , Siberia and Two Worlds were commercial failures — so much so that Mogulesko and Kessler quit the company — but The Yiddish King Lear , starring Adler and his new wife Sara was such a success that the play eventually transferred to Finkel 's larger National Theater . This play ( based only very loosely on Shakespeare ) played well with the popular audience , but also with Jewish intellectuals who until this time had largely ignored Yiddish Theater , ending for a time the commercial dominance of operettas such as those of Horowitz and Joseph <unk> . The next year , Gordin 's The Wild Man solidified this change in the direction of Yiddish theater , which was entering what is retrospectively seen as its first period of greatness . 
 Over the next decades , Adler would play in ( or , in some cases , merely produce ) numerous plays by Gordin , but also classics by Shakespeare , Schiller , Lessing ; Eugène Scribe 's La Juive ; dramatizations of George du Maurier 's Trilby and Alexandre Dumas , fils ' Camille ; and the works of modern playwrights such as Gorky , Ibsen , Shaw , Strindberg , Gerhart Hauptmann , Victor Hugo , Victorien Sardou , and Leonid Andreyev . Frequently the works of the great contemporary playwrights — even Shaw , who was writing in English — would be staged in New York in Yiddish years , even decades , before they were ever staged there in English . 
 Having already famously played Shylock in Shakespeare 's The Merchant of Venice on the Yiddish stage at the People 's Theater , he played the role again in a 1903 Broadway production , directed by Arthur Hopkins . In this production , Adler spoke his lines in Yiddish while the rest of the cast spoke in English . The New York Times review of Adler 's performance was not favorable : in particular his naturalistic acting style was not what audiences of the period expected in a production of Shakespeare . Some other reviews ( such as that in Theater magazine ) were friendlier ; in any event the same production was revived two years later . 
 Lulla Rosenfeld writes that Henry Irving , the great Shylock before that time , played Shylock as " morally superior to the Christians around him ... driven to cruelty only by their more cruel persecutions . " In contrast , " Adler scorned justification . Total vindication was his aim . " In Adler 's own words , " Shylock from the first was governed by pride rather than revenge . He wishes to humble and terrify Antonio for the insult and humiliation he has suffered at his hands . This is why he goes so far as to bring his knife and scales into the court . For Shylock , however , the desired climax was to refuse the pound of flesh with a gesture of divine compassion . When the verdict goes against him , he is crushed because he has been robbed of this opportunity , not because he lusts for Antonio 's death . This was my interpretation . This is the Shylock I have tried to show . " The road from this to method acting is clear . 
 After his two Broadway triumphs , Adler returned to Yiddish theater . 
 In the wake of the Kishinev pogrom , Adler went back briefly to Eastern Europe in summer 1903 , where he tried to convince various family members to come to America . Although he was greeted as a hero , he was only partially successful in convincing people to leave ; his mother , in particular , was determined to finish out her life where she was . ( His father had died some years earlier . ) He persuaded his sister Sarah Adler to follow him to America as her husband had died of heart disease in Verdun in 1897 and she was raising seven children on her own . She emigrated in 1905 . 
 Returning to New York , he and Thomashefsky jointly leased The People 's Theater , intending to use it on different nights of the week . Adler , exhausted from his Russian trip , was often leaving his nights unused , and Thomashefsky offered to buy him out for $ 10 @,@ 000 on the condition that he would not return to performing in New York . Adler was so insulted that the two did not speak for months , even though at the time they were living across a courtyard from one another , and could see into each other 's St. Mark 's Place apartments . Adler decided to perform Tolstoy 's The Power of Darkness , and decided that he would do his own translation from Russian to Yiddish . The play was a great success , the first successful production of a Tolstoy play in the U.S. , and Thomashefsky was so obviously happy for Adler that their friendship was renewed . Adler followed with equally successful productions of Gordin 's dramatization of Tolstoy 's Resurrection and the Gordin original The Homeless . 
 In 1904 Adler had the Grand Theater built in what was to be the Yiddish Theater District at the corner of Bowery and Canal Street , the first purpose @-@ built Yiddish theater in New York . His wife Sara had branched out to do her own plays at the Novelty Theater in Brooklyn , and the family had taken up residence in a four @-@ story brownstone , with an elevator , in the East Seventies . ( They would later move one more time , to Riverside Drive . ) Around this time Lincoln Steffens wrote a piece saying that Yiddish theater in New York had eclipsed English @-@ language theater in quality . 
 This golden age was not to last . The years 1905 – 1908 saw half a million new Jewish immigrants to New York , and once again the largest audience for Yiddish theater was for lighter fare . Adler hung on , but the <unk> were making a fortune at the Thalia ; plays with titles like <unk> the Servant Girl were far outdrawing fare like Gordin 's Dementia Americana ( 1909 ) . It would be 1911 before Adler scored another major success , this time with Tolstoy 's The Living Corpse ( also known as Redemption ) , translated into Yiddish by Leon Kobrin . 
 In 1919 – 1920 , Adler , despite his own socialist politics , found himself in a labor dispute with the Hebrew Actors ' Union ; he played that season in London rather than New York . A stroke in 1920 while vacationing in upstate New York nearly ended his acting career , although he continued to appear occasionally , usually as part of a benefit performance for himself , often playing Act I of The Yiddish King Lear : the title character remains seated throughout the entire act . In 1924 , he was well enough to perform in the title role of a revival of Gordin 's The Stranger , inspired by Tennyson 's " Enoch Arden " : the character is " a sick and broken man " , so the Adler was able to integrate his own physical weakness into the portrayal . However , March 31 , 1926 , he collapsed suddenly , dying almost instantly . 
 = = Family = = 
 Adler was married three times , first to Sophia ( Sonya ) Oberlander ( died 1886 ) , then to Dinah Shtettin ( m . <unk> divorced . 1891 ) and finally to actress Sara Adler ( previously Sara Heine ) ( m . 1891 ) , who survived him by over 25 years . 
 His and Sonya 's daughter <unk> ( Rebecca ) died at the age of 3 . Sonya died from an infection contracted while giving birth to their son Abram in 1886 . Abram 's son Allen Adler ( 1916 – 1964 ) was , among other things , the screenwriter of Forbidden Planet . While still married to Sonya , Adler had an affair with Jenny " Jennya " Kaiser , with whom he had a son , stage actor Charles Adler ( 1886 – 1966 ) . 
 He and Dinah had a daughter , Celia Adler ( 1889 – 1979 ) . 
 He and Sara had six children : the well @-@ known actors Luther ( 1903 – 1984 ) and Stella Adler ( 1901 – 1992 ) and the lesser @-@ known actors Jay ( 1896 – 1978 ) , Frances , Julia , and Florence . Jacob and Stella Adler are both members of the American Theater Hall of Fame . 
 His sister Sarah / <unk> Adler and her seven children emigrated to New York in 1905 . His niece , Francine <unk> , Sarah 's daughter , became a Broadway actress , who also appeared in films . 
 = = Memoir = = 
 Adler 's memoirs were published in the New York socialist Yiddish @-@ language newspaper Die <unk> in 1916 – 1919 , and briefly resumed in 1925 in an unsuccessful revival of that paper ; his granddaughter Lulla Rosenfeld 's English translation was published only in 1999 . The 1916 – 1919 portion of the memoir gives a detailed picture of his Russian years . The 1925 portion gives a comparably detailed picture of his time in London , although with some evasions around the relative timing of his relationships with his wife Sonya and with Jennya Kaiser and Dinah Shtettin . It contains only a relatively fragmentary description of his New York career . In the English @-@ language book of these memoirs , Rosenfeld attempts to fill the gaps with her own commentary . 
 Adler writes vividly and with humor . He describes the director Hartenstein as " a young man from Galicia with long hair and short brains , half educated in Vienna , and half an actor " , and refers to the poor of Whitechapel as looking as if they " had come out of their mothers already gray and old . " Of his early London years , he writes , " We played for a tiny audience , on a stage the size of a cadaver , but we played well , with a drunkenness of happiness . " 
 In a small essay , " Shmendrick , My Mephistopheles " , one of the last passages he wrote , Adler describes the last time he saw Shmendrick played , at a memorial for Goldfaden in 1912 . Lamenting the choice of play for the memorial — " Goldfaden has written better things " — he nonetheless acknowledges , " that same bitter Shmendrick was our livelihood ... I gritted my teeth . I called on the ghosts of Aristophanes , of Shakespeare , of Lope de Vega . I wept and swallowed my own tears ... And I cursed the fate that bound me to him ... Yet even as I cursed and condemned , the tears rose . For my whole life , my whole past , was before me on that stage ... Poor weak first step of our Yiddish theater ... I thank you for the happiness you gave us ... I thank you Shmendrick — my beloved — my own . " 
 = Virat Kohli = 
 Virat Kohli ( pronunciation ; born 5 November 1988 ) is an Indian international cricketer . He is a right @-@ handed batsman and occasional right @-@ arm medium pace bowler , who currently captains the Indian team in Test cricket and is its vice @-@ captain in limited overs formats . In the Indian Premier League ( IPL ) , he captains the Royal Challengers Bangalore . Often rated as one of the best batsmen in the world , Kohli was ranked eighth in ESPN 's list of world 's most famous athletes in 2016 . 
 After representing Delhi at various age @-@ group levels and domestic cricket , Kohli captained India Under @-@ 19s to victory at the 2008 Under @-@ 19 World Cup in Malaysia . A few months later , he made his ODI debut for India against Sri Lanka at the age of 19 years . Initially having played as a reserve batsman in the Indian team , he soon established himself as a regular in the ODI middle @-@ order and was part of the squad that won the 2011 World Cup . He made his Test debut in 2011 and , shrugged off the tag of " ODI specialist " by 2013 , with Test hundreds in Australia and South Africa . He reached the number one spot in the ICC rankings for ODI batsmen for the first time in 2013 . He has also found success in the Twenty20 format , winning the Man of the Tournament twice at the ICC World Twenty20 ( in 2014 and 2016 ) . In 2014 , he became the top @-@ ranked T20I batsman in the ICC rankings and , as of April 2016 , holds the position . 
 Kohli was appointed vice @-@ captain of the ODI team in 2012 and has since captained the team on several occasions in the absence of regular skipper Mahendra Singh Dhoni . After Dhoni 's Test retirement in 2014 , Kohli was handed over the Test captaincy . Kohli holds numerous Indian batting records including the fastest ODI century , the fastest batsman to 5 @,@ 000 ODI runs and the fastest to 10 ODI centuries . He is only the second batsman in the world to have scored 1 @,@ 000 or more ODI runs for four consecutive calendar years . Kohli is the fastest batsman in the world to 1 @,@ 000 runs in T20Is and also holds the record for most fifties ( 16 ) in T20Is . He holds the records of most runs in a single tournament of both the World Twenty20 and the IPL . 
 Kohli has been the recipient of many awards such as the ICC ODI Player of the Year in 2012 and the BCCI 's international cricketer of the year for the 2011 – 12 and 2014 – 15 seasons . In 2013 , he was given the Arjuna Award in recognition of his achievements in international cricket . He is also a co @-@ owner of the ISL team FC Goa and the IPTL franchise UAE Royals . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Virat Kohli was born on 5 November 1988 in Delhi . His father , Prem Kohli , worked as a criminal lawyer and his mother , Saroj Kohli , is a housewife . He has an elder brother , Vikash , and an elder sister , Bhavna . According to his family , when he was three @-@ years old , Kohli would pick up a cricket bat , start swinging it and ask his father to bowl at him . 
 Kohli was raised in Uttam Nagar and started his schooling at Vishal Bharti Public School . In 1998 , the West Delhi Cricket Academy was created , and Kohli , a nine @-@ year @-@ old , was part of its first intake . Kohli 's father took him to the academy after their neighbours suggested that " Virat shouldn 't waste his time in gully cricket and instead join a professional club " . Kohli trained at the academy under Rajkumar Sharma and also played matches at the Sumit Dogra Academy near Noida at the same time . In ninth grade , he shifted to <unk> Convent in <unk> Vihar to help his cricket practice . Apart from sports , Kohli was good at academics as well , and his teachers remember him as " a bright and alert child " . 
 Kohli 's father died on 18 December 2006 due to brain stroke after being bed @-@ ridden for a month . Regarding his early life , Kohli has said in an interview , " I 've seen a lot in life . Losing my father at a young age , the family business not doing too well , staying in a rented place . There were tough times for the family ... It 's all embedded in my memory . " According to Kohli , his father supported his cricket training during his childhood , " My father was my biggest support . He was the one who drove me to practice everyday . I miss his presence sometimes . " 
 = = Youth and domestic career = = 
 Kohli first played for Delhi Under @-@ 15 team in October 2002 in the 2002 – 03 Polly Umrigar Trophy . He was the leading run @-@ getter for his team in that tournament with 172 runs at an average of 34 @.@ 40 . He became the captain of the team for the 2003 – 04 Polly Umrigar Trophy and scored 390 runs in 5 innings at an average of 78 including two centuries and two fifties . In late @-@ 2004 , he was selected in the Delhi Under @-@ 17 team for the 2003 – 04 Vijay Merchant Trophy . He scored 470 runs in four matches at an average of 117 @.@ 50 with two hundreds and top @-@ score of 251 * . Delhi Under @-@ 17s won the 2004 – 05 Vijay Merchant Trophy in which Kohli finished as the highest run @-@ scorer with 757 runs from 7 matches at an average of 84 @.@ 11 with two centuries . In February 2006 , he made his List A debut for Delhi against Services but did not get to bat . 
 In July 2006 , Kohli was selected in the India Under @-@ 19 squad on its tour of England . He averaged 105 in the three @-@ match ODI series against England Under @-@ 19s and 49 in the three @-@ match Test series . India Under @-@ 19 went on to win both the series . At the conclusion of the tour , the India Under @-@ 19 coach <unk> Rajput was impressed with Kohli and said , " Kohli showed strong technical skills against both pace and spin " . In September , the India Under @-@ 19 team toured Pakistan . Kohli averaged 58 in the Test series and 41 @.@ 66 in the ODI series against Pakistan Under @-@ 19s . 
 Kohli made his first @-@ class debut for Delhi against Tamil Nadu in November 2006 , at the age of 18 , and scored 10 in his debut innings . He came into the spotlight in December when he decided to play for his team against Karnataka on the day after his father 's death and went on to score 90 . He went directly to the funeral after he was dismissed . Delhi captain Mithun <unk> said , " That is an act of great commitment to the team and his innings turned out to be crucial , " while coach Chetan Chauhan lauded Kohli 's " attitude and determination . " His mother noted that " Virat changed a bit after that day . Overnight he became a much more matured person . He took every match seriously . He hated being on the bench . It 's as if his life hinged totally on cricket after that day . Now , he looked like he was chasing his father 's dream which was his own too . " He scored a total of 257 runs from 6 matches at an average of 36 @.@ 71 in that season . 
 In April 2007 , he made his Twenty20 debut and finished as the highest run @-@ getter for his team in the Inter @-@ State T20 Championship with 179 runs at an average of 35 @.@ 80 . In July – August 2007 , the India Under @-@ 19 team toured Sri Lanka . In the triangular series against Sri Lanka Under @-@ 19s and Bangladesh Under @-@ 19s , Kohli was the second highest run @-@ getter with 146 runs from 5 matches . In the two @-@ match Test series that followed , he scored 244 runs at an average of 122 including a hundred and a fifty . 
 In February – March 2008 , Kohli captained the victorious Indian team at the 2008 ICC Under @-@ 19 Cricket World Cup held in Malaysia . Batting at number 4 , he scored 235 runs in 6 matches at an average of 47 , and finished as the tournament 's third highest run @-@ getter and one of the three batsmen to score a hundred in the tournament . His century ( 100 runs from 74 balls ) against the West Indies Under @-@ 19s in the group stage , which was called " the innings of the tournament " by ESPNcricinfo , gave India a 50 @-@ run victory and earned Kohli the man of the match . Kohli picked up a leg injury during the match , but recovered in time to play the quarterfinal match against England Under @-@ 19s . He was instrumental in India 's three @-@ wicket semifinal win over New Zealand Under @-@ 19s in which he took 2 / 27 and scored 43 in the tense run @-@ chase and was awarded the man of the match . He scored 19 against South Africa Under @-@ 19s in the final which India won by 12 runs ( D / L method ) . ESPNcricinfo commended him for making several tactical bowling changes during the tournament . 
 Following the Under @-@ 19 World Cup , Kohli was bought by the Indian Premier League franchise Royal Challengers Bangalore for $ 30 @,@ 000 on a youth contract . In June 2008 , Kohli and his Under @-@ 19 teammates Pradeep Sangwan and <unk> Srivastava were awarded the Border @-@ Gavaskar scholarship . The scholarship allowed the three players to train for six weeks at Cricket Australia 's Centre of Excellence in Brisbane . In July 2008 , he was included in India 's 30 @-@ man probable squad for the ICC Champions Trophy which was to be held in Pakistan in September 2008 . He was also picked in the India Emerging Players squad for the four @-@ team Emerging Players Tournament in Australia . He was in fine form in that tournament and scored 206 runs in six matches at an average of 41 @.@ 20 . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 In August 2008 , Kohli was included in the Indian ODI squad for tour of Sri Lanka and the Champions Trophy in Pakistan . Prior to the Sri Lankan tour , Kohli had played only eight List A matches , and his selection was called a " surprise call @-@ up " . During the Sri Lankan tour , as both first @-@ choice openers Sachin Tendulkar and Virender Sehwag were injured , Kohli batted as a makeshift opener throughout the series . He made his international debut , at the age of 19 , in the first ODI of the tour and was dismissed for 12 . He made his first ODI half century , a score of 54 , in the fourth match which helped India win the series . He had scores of 37 , 25 and 31 in the other three matches . India won the series 3 – 2 which was India 's first ODI series win against Sri Lanka in Sri Lanka . 
 After the Champions Trophy was postponed to 2009 , Kohli was picked as a replacement for the injured Shikhar Dhawan in the India A squad for the unofficial Tests against Australia A in September 2008 . He batted only once in the two @-@ match series , and scored 49 in that innings . Later that month in September 2008 , he played for Delhi in the <unk> Trophy against <unk> ( winners of Quaid @-@ i @-@ Azam Trophy from Pakistan ) and top @-@ scored for Delhi in both innings , with 52 and 197 . The match was drawn but <unk> won the trophy on first @-@ innings lead . In October 2008 , Kohli played for Indian Board President 's XI in a four @-@ day tour match against Australia . He made 105 and 16 * in that match against a bowling line @-@ up consisting of Brett Lee , Stuart Clark , Mitchell Johnson , Peter Siddle and Jason Krejza . 
 Kohli was included in the squad for the home ODI series against England in November 2008 but was not given a chance to play , due to the inclusion of Tendulkar and Sehwag in team . In December 2008 , Kohli was given a Grade D contract in the annual BCCI contracts list which entitled him to receive Rs 15 lakh . He was then dropped from the squad for the five @-@ match ODI series in Sri Lanka against Sri Lanka in January 2009 . 
 Kohli was selected in the four @-@ team Emerging Players Tournament in July – August 2009 held in Australia . He opened the innings for India Emerging Players in that tournament and finished as the leading run @-@ getter with 398 runs from seven matches at an average of 66 @.@ 33 . He scored 104 off 102 balls in the final against South Africa Emerging Players at Brisbane to help his team win the match by 17 runs and clinch the title . At the conclusion of the tournament , Kris Srikkanth , the chairman of the national selection committee , was impressed with Kohli and remarked " I must say , opener Virat Kohli was outstanding . Some of the shots he played spoke about his ability . " Kohli has called this tournament as the " turning point " of his career . 
 Kohli then replaced the injured Gambhir in Indian squad for the tri @-@ series in Sri Lanka . Kohli batted at number 4 for India in the 2009 ICC Champions Trophy because of the injury to Yuvraj Singh . In the inconsequential group match against the West Indies , Kohli scored an unbeaten 79 in India 's successful chase of 130 and won his first man of the match award . Kohli played as a reserve batsman in the seven @-@ match home ODI series against Australia , appearing in two matches as a replacement for the injured players Yuvraj and Gambhir . Kohli found a place in the home ODI series against Sri Lanka in December 2009 . He scored 27 and 54 in the first two ODIs before making way for Yuvraj who regained fitness for the third ODI . However , Yuvraj 's finger injury recurred leading to him being ruled out indefinitely . Kohli returned to the team in the fourth ODI at Kolkata and scored his first ODI century – 107 off 111 balls – sharing a 224 @-@ run partnership for the third wicket with Gambhir who made his personal best score of 150 . India won by seven wickets to seal the series 3 – 1 . The man of the match was awarded to Gambhir who gave the award to Kohli . 
 Tendulkar was rested for the tri @-@ nation ODI tournament in Bangladesh in January 2010 which enabled Kohli to play in each of India 's five matches . Against Bangladesh , he scored 91 to help secure a win after India collapsed to 51 / 3 early in their run @-@ chase of 297 . In the next match against Sri Lanka , Kohli ended unbeaten on 71 to help India win the match with a bonus point having chased down their target of 214 within 33 overs . The next day , he scored his second ODI century , against Bangladesh , bringing up the mark with the winning runs . He became only the third Indian batsman to score two ODI centuries before their 22nd birthday , after Tendulkar and Suresh Raina . Kohli was much praised for his performances during the series in particular by the Indian captain Dhoni . Although Kohli made only two runs in the final against Sri Lanka in a four @-@ wicket Indian defeat , he finished as the leading run @-@ getter of the series with 275 runs from five innings at an average of 91 @.@ 66 . In the three @-@ match ODI series at home against South Africa in February , Kohli batted in two games and had scores of 31 and 57 . 
 = = = Rise through the ranks = = = 
 Raina was named captain and Kohli vice @-@ captain for the tri @-@ series against Sri Lanka and Zimbabwe in Zimbabwe in May – June 2010 , as many first @-@ choice players skipped the tour . Kohli made 168 runs at 42 @.@ 00 including two fifties , but India suffered three defeats in four matches and crashed out of the series . During the series , Kohli became the fastest Indian batsman to reach 1 @,@ 000 runs in ODI cricket . He made his T20I debut against Zimbabwe at Harare and scored an unbeaten 26 . Later that same month , India chose a full @-@ strength squad for the 2010 Asia Cup with Dhoni as captain and Sehwag vice @-@ captain . Kohli batted at 3 throughout the tournament and scored a total of 67 runs at an average of 16 @.@ 75 . His struggles with form continued in the tri @-@ series against Sri Lanka and New Zealand in Sri Lanka where he averaged 15 . 
 Despite the poor run of form , Kohli was retained in the ODI squad for a three @-@ match series against Australia in October . The first and third matches of the series were washed out and in the second match at Visakhapatnam , Kohli scored his third ODI century – 118 off 121 balls – which helped India chase down the target of 290 after losing the openers early . He won the man of the match and admitted that he was under pressure to keep his place in the team after failures in the two previous series . In late @-@ 2010 , Gambhir was named captain of a largely inexperienced ODI squad to play against New Zealand , and Kohli maintained his place . In the first ODI at Guwahati , Kohli scored a 104 @-@ ball 105 , his fourth ODI hundred and second in succession , in a 40 @-@ run victory and was awarded man of the match . In the second and third ODIs , he made 64 and 63 * respectively , sharing 100 @-@ plus partnerships with Gambhir in both matches chasing . India completed a 5 – 0 whitewash of New Zealand , while Kohli 's performance in the series helped him become a regular in the ODI team and made him a strong contender for a spot in India 's World Cup squad . He was India 's leading run @-@ scorer in ODIs in 2010 , with 995 runs from 25 matches at an average of 47 @.@ 38 including three centuries . 
 Kohli played in the one @-@ match T20I series and all five ODIs of the South African tour in January 2011 . India won the T20I in which he scored 28 , but lost the ODI series 2 – 3 , in which he finished as India 's leading run @-@ getter with 193 runs at an average of 48 @.@ 25 including two fifties , both in Indian defeats . During the ODI series , India announced their 15 @-@ man squad for the World Cup in which Kohli was also named . Kohli also reached the number two spot on the ICC Rankings for ODI batsmen during the series . 
 The inclusion of both Kohli and Raina in the World Cup squad resulted in speculations about which of the two batsmen will make it to the playing eleven . Days before India 's first match of the tournament , Indian captain Dhoni indicated that the in @-@ form Kohli is likely to be preferred over Raina . Kohli played in every match of India 's successful World Cup campaign . He scored an unbeaten 100 , his fifth ODI century , in the first match against Bangladesh and became the first Indian batsman to score a century on World Cup debut . In the next four group matches he had low scores of 8 , 34 , 12 and 1 against England , Ireland , Netherlands and South Africa respectively . He returned to form against West Indies scoring 59 and sharing a 122 @-@ run third @-@ wicket partnership with Yuvraj Singh . Against Australia in the quarterfinals , he scored 24 , and was dismissed for 9 in the semifinal against Pakistan . India won both matches and progressed to the finals against Sri Lanka at Mumbai . In the final , he scored 35 and shared an 83 @-@ run partnership with Gambhir for the third wicket after India had lost both openers within the seventh over chasing 275 . The partnership is regarded as " one of the turning points in the match " . India went on to win the match by six wickets and lift the World Cup for the first time since 1983 . 
 When India toured the West Indies in June – July 2011 , they chose a largely inexperienced squad , resting Tendulkar and others such as Gambhir and Sehwag missing out due to injuries . Kohli was one of three uncapped players in the Test squad . Kohli found success in the ODI series which India won 3 – 2 , with a total of 199 runs at an average of 39 @.@ 80 . His best efforts came in the second ODI at Port of Spain where he won the man of the match for his score of 81 which gave India a seven @-@ wicket victory , and the fifth ODI at Kingston where his innings of 94 came in a seven @-@ wicket defeat . Kohli made his Test debut at Kingston in the first match of the Test series that followed . He batted at five and was dismissed for 4 and 15 caught behind by Fidel Edwards in both innings . India went on to win the Test series 1 – 0 but Kohli struggled throughout the series amassing just 76 runs from five innings . He struggled against the short ball and was particularly troubled by the fast bowling of Edwards , who dismissed him three times in the series . 
 Initially dropped from the Test squad for India 's four @-@ match series in England in July and August , Kohli was recalled as replacement for the injured Yuvraj , though did not play in any match in the series . He found moderate success in the subsequent ODI series in which he averaged 38 @.@ 80 . His score of 55 in the first ODI at Chester @-@ le @-@ Street was followed by a string of low scores in the next three matches . In the last game of the series , Kohli scored his sixth ODI hundred – 107 runs off 93 balls – and shared a 170 @-@ run third @-@ wicket partnership with Rahul Dravid , who was playing his last ODI , to help India post their first 300 @-@ plus total of the tour . Kohli was dismissed hit wicket in that innings which was the only century in the series by any player on either team and earned him praise for his " hard work " and " maturity " . However , England won the match by D / L method and the series 3 – 0 . 
 In October 2011 , Kohli was the leading run @-@ scorer of the five @-@ match home ODI series against England which India won 5 – 0 . He scored a total of 270 runs across five matches including unbeaten knocks of 112 from 98 balls at Delhi , where he put on an unbroken 209 @-@ run partnership with Gambhir , and 86 at Mumbai , both in successful run @-@ chases . Following this ODI success , Kohli was included , ahead of Raina , in the Test squad to face the West Indies in November . In competition with Yuvraj Singh for the number six position , it was not until the final match of the series that Kohli was selected in the team . He scored a pair of fifties in the match , passing his previous highest Test score of 30 , and his knock of 52 in the first innings ensured India avoided follow @-@ on . The match ended in a draw , and having won the first two Tests , India took the series 2 – 0 . India won the subsequent ODI series 4 – 1 in which Kohli managed to accumulate 243 runs at 60 @.@ 75 . During the series , Kohli scored his eighth ODI century and his second at Visakhapatnam , where he made 117 off 123 balls in India 's run @-@ chase of 271 , a knock which raised his reputation as " an expert of the chase " . Kohli ended up as the leading run @-@ getter in ODIs for the year 2011 , with 1381 runs from 34 matches at 47 @.@ 62 and four centuries . 
 = = = Ascension to ODI vice @-@ captaincy = = = 
 Kohli was selected in India 's Test squad for the tour of Australia in December 2011 . The exclusion of Yuvraj from the Test squad meant that the number six position was a competition between Kohli and Rohit Sharma , who was yet to make his Test debut . Kohli top @-@ scored with 132 in a tour match against Cricket Australia Chairman 's XI and strengthened his case for a spot in the Boxing Day Test . Kohli was picked for the first Test at Melbourne , but his defensive technique was exposed in the match as he was dismissed for 11 in the first innings and a first @-@ ball duck in the second , by Ben <unk> on both occasions . He struggled in the second Test at Sydney as well with scores of 24 and 9 . While fielding on the boundary during the second day of the match , he gestured to the crowd with his middle finger for which he was fined 50 % of his match fee by the match referee . He top @-@ scored in each of India 's innings in the third Test at Perth , with 44 and 75 , even as India surrendered to their second consecutive innings defeat . In the fourth and final match at Adelaide , Kohli scored his maiden Test century of 116 runs in the first innings ; it was the only century scored by an Indian in the series . India lost the series 4 – 0 and Kohli , India 's top run @-@ scorer in the series , was described as " the lone bright spot in an otherwise nightmare visit for the tourists " . 
 Following the Test series , India remained in Australia for a two @-@ match T20I series and the Commonwealth Bank triangular series featuring Australia and Sri Lanka apart from India . Kohli scored 22 and 31 in the T20I series that ended in a 1 – 1 draw . In the first seven matches of the tri @-@ series , Kohli made two fifties – 77 at Perth and 66 at Brisbane – both against Sri Lanka , while India secured two wins and a tie , which meant that India needed a bonus point win their last group match against Sri Lanka at Hobart to stay in contention for qualifying for the finals series . Chasing 321 to win , Kohli came to the crease with India 's score at 86 / 2 and went on to score 133 not out from 86 balls to take India to a comfortable win with 13 overs to spare . India earned a bonus point with the win and Kohli was named Man of the Match for his effort , which included scoring 24 runs in an over by <unk> Malinga . Former Australian cricketer and commentator Dean Jones rated Kohli 's innings as " one of the greatest ODI knocks of all time " . However , Sri Lanka beat Australia three days later in their last group fixture and knocked India out of the series . With 373 runs at 53 @.@ 28 , Kohli once again scored the only hundred by an Indian batsman and finished as India 's highest run @-@ scorer of the series . 
 Kohli was appointed the vice @-@ captain for the 2012 Asia Cup in Bangladesh on the back of his fine performance in Australia . Kris Srikkanth , the chairman of selectors , told reporters , " Hats off to Virat Kohli for the way he played . We have to start looking towards the future . The selection committee and the Board felt Kohli is future captaincy material . " Kohli was in fine form during the tournament , finishing as the leading run @-@ scorer with 357 runs at an average of 119 . He scored 108 in the opening match against Sri Lanka in a 50 @-@ run Indian victory , while India lost their next match to Bangladesh in which he made 66 . In the final group stage match against Pakistan , he scored a personal best 183 off 148 balls , his 11th ODI century . Coming in at 0 / 1 , he struck 22 fours and a six in his innings to help India to chase down 330 , their highest successful ODI run @-@ chase at the time . His knock was the highest individual score in Asia Cup history , the joint @-@ second highest score in an ODI run @-@ chase and the highest individual score against Pakistan in ODIs surpassing previous record of 156 by Brian Lara . Kohli was awarded the man of the match in both matches that India won , but India could not progress to the final of the tournament . 
 In July – August 2012 , Kohli struck two centuries in the five @-@ match ODI tour of Sri Lanka – 106 off 113 balls at Hambantota and 128 * off 119 balls at Colombo – winning man of the match in both games . India won the series 4 – 1 and on account of scoring the most number of runs in the series , Kohli was named player of the series . In the one @-@ off T20I that followed , he scored a 48 @-@ ball 68 , his first T20I fifty , and won the player of the series award . Kohli scored his second Test century at Bangalore during New Zealand 's tour of India and won his first man of the match award in Test cricket . India won the two @-@ match series 2 – 0 , and Kohli averaged 106 with one hundred and two fifties from three innings . In the subsequent T20I series , he scored 70 runs off 41 balls , but India lost the match by one run and the series 1 – 0 . He continued to be in good form during the 2012 ICC World Twenty20 in Sri Lanka , with 185 runs from 5 matches at an average of 46 @.@ 25 . He hit two fifties during the tournament , 50 against Afghanistan in the group stage and 78 * against Pakistan in the Super Eights , winning man of the match for both innings . 
 Kohli 's Test form dipped during the first three matches of England 's tour of India with a top score of 20 and England leading the series 2 – 1 . He scored a patient 103 from 295 balls in the last match on a slow and low pitch at Nagpur , keeping India in contention of drawing the series . ESPNcricinfo praised Kohli for having " demonstrated his growing maturity to play just the sort of innings his side required " , while Kohli described his knock as " a learning innings " . However , the match ended in a draw and England won their first Test series in India in 28 years . India drew the following T20I series 1 – 1 in which Kohli had scores of 21 and 38 . Before the five @-@ match ODI series against England in January 2013 , India hosted Pakistan for two T20Is and three ODIs . The T20I series was drawn 1 – 1 and Pakistan won the ODI series 2 – 1 . Kohli struggled in both series , averaging 18 in the T20Is and 4 @.@ 33 in the ODIs . Kohli was troubled by the fast bowlers , particularly Junaid Khan , who dismissed him on all three occasions in the ODI series . Kohli had a quiet ODI series against England , apart from a match @-@ winning 77 * in the third ODI at Ranchi , with a total of 155 runs at an average of 38 @.@ 75 . 
 Kohli scored his fourth Test century ( 107 ) at Chennai in the first match of the home Test series against Australia in February 2013 . He said he was " feeling hungry for this series " after a poor run of form in the two previous series and also disappointed on getting out soon after reaching the hundred @-@ run mark . India completed a 4 – 0 series sweep , becoming the first team to whitewash Australia in more than four decades . Kohli averaged 56 @.@ 80 in the series and cemented his spot in the Test team . 
 = = = Setting records = = = 
 In June 2013 , Kohli featured in the ICC Champions Trophy in England which India won . He scored a match @-@ winning 144 against Sri Lanka in a warm @-@ up match . He scored 34 , 22 and 22 not out in India 's group matches against South Africa , West Indies and Pakistan respectively , while India qualified for the semifinals with an undefeated record . In the semifinal against Sri Lanka at Cardiff , he struck 58 not out in an eight @-@ wicket win for India . The final between India and England at Birmingham was reduced to 20 overs after a rain delay . India batted first and Kohli top @-@ scored with 43 from 34 balls , sharing a sixth @-@ wicket partnership of 47 runs off 33 balls with Ravindra Jadeja and helping India reach 129 / 7 in 20 overs . India went on to secure a five @-@ run win and their second consecutive ICC ODI tournament victory . 
 Kohli stood @-@ in as the captain for the first ODI of the triangular series in West Indies after Dhoni injured himself during the match . India lost the match by one wicket , and Dhoni was subsequently ruled out of the series with Kohli being named captain for the remaining matches . In his second match as captain , Kohli scored his first hundred as captain , making 102 off 83 balls against the West Indies at Port of Spain in a bonus point win for India . India earned another bonus point win in their next match against Sri Lanka and , having topped the points table , qualified for the final against the same opposition . Dhoni recovered from his injury before the final and returned to the team as captain . Kohli was dismissed for 2 in that match , but India went on to register a one @-@ wicket victory . Many senior players including Dhoni were rested for the five @-@ match ODI tour of Zimbabwe in July 2013 , with Kohli being appointed captain for an entire series for the first time . In the first game of the series at Harare , he struck 115 runs from 108 balls , helping India chase down the target of 229 and winning the man of the match award . He batted on two more occasions in the series in which he had scores of 14 and 58 not out . India completed a 5 – 0 sweep of the series ; their first in an away ODI series . 
 Kohli had a successful time with the bat in the seven @-@ match ODI series against Australia . After top @-@ scoring with 61 in the opening loss at Pune , he struck the fastest century by an Indian in ODIs in the second match at Jaipur . Reaching the milestone in just 52 balls and putting up an unbroken 186 @-@ run second @-@ wicket partnership with Rohit Sharma that came in 17 @.@ 2 overs , Kohli 's innings of 100 not out helped India chase down the target of 360 for the loss of one wicket with more than six overs to spare . This chase was the second @-@ highest successful run @-@ chase in ODI cricket , while Kohli 's knock became the fastest hundred against Australia and the third @-@ fastest in a run @-@ chase . He followed that innings with 68 in the next match at Mohali in another Indian defeat , before the next two matches were washed out by rain . In the sixth ODI at Nagpur , he struck 115 off only 66 balls to help India successfully chase the target of 351 and level the series 2 – 2 and won the man of the match . He reached the 100 @-@ run mark in 61 balls , making it the third @-@ fastest ODI century by an Indian batsman , and also became the fastest batsman in the world to score 17 hundreds in ODI cricket . India clinched the series after winning the last match in which he was run out for a duck . At the conclusion of the series , Kohli moved to the top position in the ICC ODI batsmen rankings for the first time in his career . 
 Kohli batted twice in the two @-@ match Test series against West Indies , and had scores of 3 and 57 being dismissed by Shane <unk> in both innings . This was also the last Test series for Tendulkar and Kohli was expected to take Tendulkar 's number four batting position after the series . In the first game of the three @-@ match ODI series that followed at Kochi , Kohli made 86 to seal a six @-@ wicket win and won the man of the match . During the match , he also equalled Viv Richards ' record of becoming the fastest batsman to make 5 @,@ 000 runs in ODI cricket , reaching the landmark in his 114th innings . He missed out on his third century at Visakhapatnam in the next match , after being dismissed for 99 playing a hook shot off Ravi <unk> . India lost the match by two wickets , but took the series 2 – 1 after winning the last match at Kanpur . With 204 runs at 68 @.@ 00 , Kohli finished the series as the leading run @-@ getter and was awarded the man of the series . 
 = = = Overseas season = = = 
 India toured South Africa in December 2013 for three ODIs and two Tests . Kohli averaged 15 @.@ 50 in the ODIs , including a duck . In the first Test at Johannesburg , playing his first Test in South Africa and batting at 4 for the first time , Kohli scored 119 and 96 . His hundred was the first by a subcontinent batsman at the venue since 1998 . Regarding Kohli 's hundred , South Africa bowling coach Allan Donald said , " The one word that comes to my mind is responsibility . I think he [ Kohli ] showed great discipline and responsibility . It reminds me of Sachin Tendulkar when they came here in 1996 . " The match ended in a draw , and Kohli was awarded man of the match . India failed to win a single match on the tour , losing the second Test by 10 wickets in which he made 46 and 11 . 
 Kohli continued to amass runs on the subsequent New Zealand tour . He averaged 58 @.@ 21 in the five @-@ match ODI series in which his efforts of 111 @-@ ball 123 at Napier , 65 @-@ ball 78 at Hamilton and 78 @-@ ball 82 at Wellington all went in vain as India were defeated 4 – 0 . He made 214 runs at 71 @.@ 33 in the two @-@ match Test series that followed including an unbeaten 105 on the last day of the second Test at Wellington that helped India save the match . 
 India then travelled to Bangladesh for the Asia Cup and World Twenty20 . Dhoni was ruled out of the Asia Cup after suffering a side strain during the New Zealand tour , which led to Kohli being named captain for the tournament . Kohli scored 136 off 122 balls in India 's opening match against Bangladesh , sharing a 213 @-@ run third @-@ wicket stand with <unk> <unk> , which helped India successfully chase 280 . It was his 19th ODI century and his fifth in Bangladesh , making him the batsman with most ODI centuries in Bangladesh . India were knocked out of the tournament after narrow losses against Sri Lanka and Pakistan , in which Kohli scored 48 and 5 respectively . 
 Dhoni returned from injury to captain the team for 2014 ICC World Twenty20 and Kohli was named vice @-@ captain . In India 's opening match of the tournament against Pakistan , Kohli top @-@ scored with 36 not out to guide India to a seven @-@ wicket win . He scored 54 off 41 balls in the next game against West Indies and an unbeaten 57 from 50 balls against Bangladesh , both in successful run @-@ chases . In the semifinal , he made an unbeaten 72 in 44 deliveries to help India achieve the target of 173 with six wickets and five balls to spare . He won the man of the match for this knock which he called " my best T20 innings " . India posted 130 / 4 in the final against Sri Lanka , in which Kohli scored 77 from 58 balls , and eventually lost the match by six wickets . Kohli had made a total of 319 runs in the tournament at an average of 106 @.@ 33 , a record for most runs by an individual batsman in a single World Twenty20 tournament , for which he won the Man of the Tournament award . 
 Kohli and other senior players were rested for India 's tour of Bangladesh ahead of the England tour . India conceded a 3 – 1 defeat in the five @-@ match Test series against England despite leading it 1 – 0 after the first two Tests . Kohli fared poorly in the series averaging just 13 @.@ 40 in 10 innings with a top score of 39 . He was dismissed for single @-@ digit scores on six occasions in the series and was particularly susceptible to the swinging ball on off stump line , being dismissed several times edging the ball to the wicket @-@ keeper or slip fielders . Man of the series James Anderson got Kohli 's wicket four times , while Kohli 's batting technique was questioned by analysts and former cricketers . Geoffrey Boycott said , " Jimmy Anderson ate him for breakfast . Every time Kohli came in , all he did was bowl at off stump , around the corridor of uncertainty and Kohli nicked it . He is playing with his bat too far away from his pad . He has to look at video replays of his technique and get back to basics " . India won the ODI series that followed 3 – 1 , but Kohli 's struggles with the bat continued with an average of 18 in four innings . In the one @-@ off T20I , he scored 41 @-@ ball 66 , his first fifty @-@ plus score of the tour on the last match of the tour . India lost the match by three runs , but Kohli reached the number one spot for T20I batsmen in the ICC rankings . 
 Kohli had a successful time during India 's home ODI series win over the West Indies in October 2014 . His 62 in the second ODI at Delhi was his first fifty across Tests and ODIs in 16 innings since February , and he stated that he got his " confidence back " with the innings . He struck his 20th ODI hundred – 127 runs in 114 balls – in the fourth match at Dharamsala . India registered a 59 @-@ run victory and Kohli was awarded man of the match . Dhoni was rested for the five @-@ match ODI series against Sri Lanka in November , enabling Kohli to lead the team for another full series . Kohli batted at 4 throughout the series and made scores of 22 , 49 , 53 and 66 in the first four ODIs , with India leading the series 4 – 0 . In the fifth ODI at Ranchi , Kohli came in to bat with India at 14 / 2 in pursuit of 287 . He made an unbeaten 139 off 126 balls to give his team a three @-@ wicket win and a whitewash of Sri Lanka . Kohli was awarded player of the series , and it was the second whitewash under his captaincy . During the series he became the fastest batsman in the world to go past the 6000 @-@ run mark in ODIs . With 1054 ODI runs at 58 @.@ 55 in 2014 , he became the second player in the world after Sourav Ganguly to make more than 1 @,@ 000 runs in ODIs for four consecutive calendar years . 
 = = = Test captaincy = = = 
 For the first Test of the Australian tour in December 2014 , Dhoni was not part of the Indian team at Adelaide due to an injury , and Kohli took the reins as Test captain for the first time . Kohli scored 115 in India 's first innings , becoming the fourth Indian to score a hundred on Test captaincy debut . In their second innings , India were set a target of 364 to be scored on the fifth day . Kohli came in to bat when the Indian innings was reduced to 57 / 2 and started batting aggressively . He put on 185 runs for the third wicket with M Vijay before Vijay 's dismissal , which triggered a batting collapse . From 242 / 2 , India were bowled out for 315 with Kohli 's 141 off 175 balls being the top score . Kohli noted that his team was looking for a win and not a draw , while also saying that it was " the best Test I have been part of " . Kohli 's second innings ton was hailed by several Australian commentators as the finest fourth @-@ innings performance they had ever seen in Australia . 
 Dhoni returned to the team as captain for the second match at Brisbane where Kohli scored 19 and 1 in a four @-@ wicket defeat for India . In the Melbourne Boxing Day Test , Kohli was India 's top @-@ scorer in both innings . He made his personal best Test score of 169 in the first innings while sharing a 262 @-@ run partnership with <unk> , India 's biggest partnership outside Asia in ten years . Kohli followed it with a score of 54 in India 's second innings on the fifth day , helping his team draw the Test match . Dhoni announced his retirement from Test cricket at the conclusion of this match , and Kohli was appointed as the full @-@ time Test captain ahead of the fourth Test at Sydney . Captaining the Test team for the second time , Kohli hit 147 in the first innings of the match and became the first batsman in Test cricket history to score three hundreds in his first three innings as Test captain . He was dismissed for 46 in the second innings and India hung in for another draw . Kohli 's total of 692 runs in four Tests was the most by any Indian batsman in a Test series in Australia . 
 In January 2015 , India failed to win a single match in the tri @-@ nation ODI series against the hosts Australia and England . Kohli was unable to replicate his Test success in ODIs , failing to make a two @-@ digit score in any of the four games . Kohli 's ODI form did not improve in the lead @-@ up to the World Cup , with scores of 18 and 5 in the warmup matches against Australia and Afghanistan respectively . 
 In the first match of the World Cup against Pakistan at Adelaide , Kohli hit 107 in 126 balls , sharing 100 @-@ plus partnerships with both Dhawan and Raina , to help India set a total of 300 and win the match by 76 runs . For his knock he was awarded the man of the match award , his 20th in ODIs and first in a World Cup match . He was dismissed for 46 in India 's second match against South Africa after another century stand with opening batsman Dhawan . India went on to post 307 in 50 overs and register a 130 @-@ run victory in that match . India batted second in their remaining four group matches in which Kohli scored 33 * , 33 , 44 * and 38 against UAE , West Indies , Ireland and Zimbabwe respectively . India went on to secure wins in these four fixtures and top the Pool B points with an undefeated record . In India 's 109 @-@ run victory in the quarterfinal over Bangladesh , Kohli was dismissed by Rubel Hossain for 3 edging the ball to the wicket @-@ keeper . India were eliminated in the semifinal by Australia at Melbourne , where Kohli was dismissed for 1 off 13 balls , top @-@ edging a short @-@ pitched delivery from Mitchell Johnson . 
 Kohli had a slump in form when India toured Bangladesh in June 2015 . He contributed only 14 in the one @-@ off Test which ended in a draw and averaged 16 @.@ 33 in the ODI series which Bangladesh won 2 – 1 . Kohli ended his streak of low scores by scoring his 11th Test hundred in the first Test of the Sri Lankan tour which India lost . India came back and won the next two matches to seal the series 2 – 1 , Kohli 's first series win as Test captain and India 's first away Test series win in four years . 
 During South Africa 's tour of India , Kohli became the fastest batsman in the world to make 1 @,@ 000 runs in T20I cricket , reaching the milestone in his 27th innings . In the ODI series , he made 77 at Rajkot and a match @-@ winning 138 in the fourth ODI at Chennai that helped India draw level in the series . India lost the series after a defeat in the final ODI and Kohli finished the series with an average of 49 . India came back to beat the top @-@ ranked South African team 3 – 0 in the four @-@ match Test series under Kohli 's captaincy , and climbed to number two position on the ICC Test rankings . He scored a total of 200 runs in the series at 33 @.@ 33 , including 44 and 88 in the fourth match at Delhi . 
 On 22 July 2016 , Virat became the first Indian captain to hit a double century outside India , beating previous highest of 192 by Azharuddin against New Zealand in Auckland in 1989 @-@ 90 . This was also Kohli 's first double hundred at first class level . 
 = = IPL career = = 
 In March 2008 , Kohli was bought on a youth contract by the Indian Premier League franchise Royal Challengers Bangalore for $ 30 @,@ 000 . He had an indifferent 2008 season , with a total of 165 runs in 12 innings at an average of 15 @.@ 00 and a strike rate of 105 @.@ 09 . He fared slightly better in the second season in which he made a total of 246 runs at 22 @.@ 36 , striking at over 112 , while his team made it as far as the final . In the 2010 season , Kohli was the third highest run @-@ getter for his team with 307 runs , averaging 27 @.@ 90 and improving his strike rate to 144 @.@ 81 . 
 Ahead of the 2011 season , Kohli was the only player retained by the Royal Challengers franchise . Kohli was made vice @-@ captain of the team that year and also captained the team in a few matches when the regular skipper Daniel Vettori was injured . The Royal Challengers coach Ray Jennings opined that the 22 @-@ year @-@ old would become the future captain of not only the franchise but also the Indian team . Kohli was the second @-@ highest run @-@ getter of the season , only behind teammate Chris Gayle , and his team finished as runners @-@ up of the IPL . Kohli accumulated a total of 557 runs at an average of 46 @.@ 41 and a strike rate of over 121 including four fifties . In the 2012 IPL , he was moderately successful , averaging 28 for his 364 runs . 
 After Vettori 's retirement , Kohli was appointed as the team 's captain for the 2013 season . The Royal Challengers finished fifth on the league table that year , but Kohli found success with the bat . Averaging 45 @.@ 28 , he hit a total of 634 runs at a strike rate of over 138 including six fifties and a top @-@ score of 99 and finished as the season 's third @-@ highest run @-@ scorer . Bangalore finished seventh in the next season in which Kohli made 359 runs at 27 @.@ 61 . He found success with the bat in the 2015 IPL in which he led his team to the playoffs . He finished fifth on the season 's leading run @-@ getters list with 505 runs at an average of 45 @.@ 90 and a strike rate of more than 130 . 
 At the 2016 IPL , Kohli broke the record for most runs in an IPL season ( of 733 runs ) by scoring 973 runs in 16 matches at an average of 81 @.@ 08 , and won the Orange Cap . He scored four centuries in the tournament , having never scored one in the Twenty20 format before the start of the season , and also became the first player to reach the 4000 @-@ run milestone in the IPL . Bangalore finished runners @-@ up in the tournament . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Kohli is a naturally aggressive batsman with strong technical skills . He usually bats in the middle @-@ order , but , on many occasions , has opened the innings as well . He bats with a slightly open @-@ chested stance and a strong bottom @-@ hand grip , and is said to have quick footwork . He is known for his wide range of shots , ability to pace an innings and batting under pressure . He is strong through the mid @-@ wicket and cover region . He has said that the cover drive is his favourite shot , while also saying that the flick shot comes naturally to him . He does not play the sweep shot often , being called " not a natural sweeper of the cricket ball " . His teammates have praised his confidence , commitment , focus and work ethics . Kohli is also known to be a " sharp " fielder . 
 Kohli is regarded as one of the best limited @-@ overs batsmen in the world , especially while chasing . In ODIs , he averages more than 61 in matches batting second as opposed to over 39 batting first . 15 of his 25 hundreds have come in run @-@ chases , only two fewer than Sachin Tendulkar who holds the record for most hundreds batting second . Regarding his impressive record batting second , Kohli has said " I love the whole situation that comes with chasing . I like the challenge of testing myself , figuring out how to rotate strike , when to hit a boundary . " 
 Kohli is often compared to Tendulkar , due to their similar styles of batting , and is sometimes referred to as Tendulkar 's " successor " . Many former cricketers expect Kohli to break Tendulkar 's batting records . Former West Indies great Vivian Richards , who is regarded as the most destructive batsman in cricket , stated that Kohli reminds him of himself . In early @-@ 2015 , Richards said Kohli was " already legendary " in the ODI format , while former Australian cricketer Dean Jones called Kohli the " new king of world cricket " . 
 Kohli is noted for his on @-@ field aggression and was described in the media as " brash " and " arrogant " during his early career . He has got into confrontations with players and umpires on several occasions . His aggressive attitude has been backed by many former cricketers , while some have criticised it . In 2012 , Kohli had stated that he tries to limit his aggressive behaviour but " the build @-@ up and the pressure or the special occasions make it tough to control the aggression . " 
 = = Outside cricket = = 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 As of December 2015 , Kohli is in a relationship with Bollywood actress Anushka Sharma . The relationship has attracted substantial media attention . 
 Kohli has admitted that he is superstitious . He wears black wristbands as a cricket superstition ; earlier , he used to wear the same pair of gloves with which he had " been scoring " . Apart from a religious black thread , he has also been wearing a kara on his right arm since 2012 . 
 = = = Commercial investments = = = 
 According to Kohli , football is his second favourite sport . In 2014 , Kohli became a co @-@ owner of Indian Super League club FC Goa . He stated that he invested in the club with the " keenness of football " and because he " wanted football to grow in India " . He added , " It 's a business venture for me for the future . Cricket 's not going to last forever and I 'm keeping all my options open after retirement . " 
 In September 2015 , Kohli became a co @-@ owner of the International Premier Tennis League franchise UAE Royals , and , in December that year , became a co @-@ owner of the <unk> @-@ owned Bengaluru <unk> franchise in Pro Wrestling League . 
 In November 2014 , Kohli and <unk> Reddy 's Universal <unk> ( <unk> ) launched a youth fashion brand ' <unk> ' . The brand started to produce men 's casual wear clothing in 2015 and has tied up with Myntra and Shopper 's Stop . In late @-@ 2014 , Kohli was announced as a shareholder and brand ambassador of the social networking venture ' Sport <unk> ' based in London . 
 In 2015 , Kohli invested ₹ 90 crore ( US $ 13 million ) to start a chain of gyms and fitness centres across the country . Launched under the name " Chisel " , the chain of gyms is jointly owned by Kohli , Chisel India and CSE ( Cornerstone Sport and Entertainment ) , the agency which manages Kohli 's commercial interests . In 2016 , Kohli started <unk> Kids , a children fitness venture , in partnership with <unk> Lifestyle . 
 = = = Endorsements = = = 
 Kohli was signed up by sports agent Bunty Sajdeh of Cornerstone Sport and Entertainment after the 2008 Under @-@ 19 World Cup . Sajdeh recalls , " I didn ’ t go after them after they became stars . In fact , I watched Virat at the 2008 ICC Under @-@ 19 World Cup in Kuala Lumpur . I was mighty impressed with his attitude and the way he was marshalling his team . He had that spark . And I told <unk> to set up the meeting . " Sajdeh manages Kohli 's endorsement deals , along with those of other Indian cricketers Shikhar Dhawan , Rohit Sharma and Murali Vijay . It was reported in 2013 that Kohli 's brand endorsements were worth over ₹ 100 crore . In 2014 , American Appraisal estimated Kohli 's brand value at US $ 56 @.@ 4 million placing him fourth on the list of India 's most valued celebrity brands . His bat deal with MRF is said to be the costliest deal in Indian cricket history . In 2014 , the UK @-@ based magazine <unk> rated Kohli as the second most marketable athlete in the world behind only Lewis Hamilton , placing him above the likes of Cristiano Ronaldo , Lionel Messi and Usain Bolt . 
 As of March 2016 , Kohli has endorsement deals with 13 brands : Adidas , Audi , Boost , Colgate @-@ Palmolive , <unk> , MRF , <unk> Estates , PepsiCo , <unk> , Tissot , TVS Motors , United Spirits and Vicks . The brands Kohli previously endorsed include 3C Company , <unk> Mobiles , <unk> ( from <unk> ) , Clear ( from Unilever ) , Fair & Lovely , Fastrack ( from Titan ) , Flying Machine , Mattel , Munch ( from Nestle ) , Oakley , Red Chief Shoes , Royal Challenge ( from United Breweries ) , Sangam <unk> and Toyota Motors . 
 = = = Charity = = = 
 In March 2013 , Kohli started a charity foundation called ' Virat Kohli Foundation ' ( VKF ) . The organisation aims at helping underprivileged kids and conducts events to raise funds for the charity . According to Kohli , the foundation works with select NGOs to " create awareness , seek support and raise funds for the various causes they endorse and the philanthropic work they engage in . " In May 2014 , eBay and Save the Children India conducted a charity auction with VKF , and directed the funds generated towards the education and healthcare of underprivileged children . 
 Kohli has captained the All Heart Football Club , owned by VKF , in charity football matches against All Stars Football Club , owned by Abhishek Bachchan 's Playing for Humanity . The matches , known as " Celebrity <unk> " , feature cricketers playing for All Heart and Bollywood actors in the All Stars team , and are organized to generate funds for the two charity foundations . 
 = = = Media image = = = 
 Kohli is often described in the media as a sex symbol and a youth icon . He was the only sportsperson to be ranked in the top 50 of a " Sexiest Asian Men " poll in 2015 . In the Times " 50 Most Desirable Men " list , Kohli was placed fourth in 2013 , first in 2014 and second in 2015 , after being ranked 13th and seventh in the preceding two years . In February 2016 , he was named in the " Entertainment & Sports " section of the Forbes 30 Under 30 Asia , a list of 30 " promising young leaders and game changers " from Asia under the age of 30 . 
 Kohli was named as the brand ambassador of the Premier Futsal in April 2016 . He appeared on the cover of the Indian edition of the GQ magazine in June 2016 . 
 = = Records and achievements = = 
 Fastest century 
