 Fastest century by an Indian cricketer in ODIs ( in 52 balls ) 
 Milestones 
 Fastest Indian to reach 1 @,@ 000 runs in ODIs 
 Fastest Indian and third fastest in the world to reach 4 @,@ 000 runs in ODIs 
 Fastest Indian and second fastest in the world to reach 5 @,@ 000 runs in ODIs 
 Fastest Indian and second fastest in the world to reach 6 @,@ 000 runs in ODIs 
 Fastest in the world to reach 7 @,@ 000 runs in ODIs 
 Fastest Indian and second fastest in the world to reach 10 centuries in ODIs 
 Fastest Indian and second fastest in the world to reach 15 centuries in ODIs 
 Fastest Indian and second fastest in the world to reach 20 centuries in ODIs 
 Fastest in the world to reach 25 centuries in ODIs 
 Fastest in the world to reach 1 @,@ 000 runs in T20Is 
 Most runs in a calendar year / series 
 Most ODI runs in 2010 by an Indian cricketer 
 Most ODI runs in 2011 by any cricketer 
 Most ODI runs in 2012 by an Indian cricketer 
 Most ODI runs in 2013 by an Indian cricketer 
 Most ODI runs in 2014 by an Indian cricketer 
 Most Test runs in 2012 by an Indian cricketer 
 Most runs in an IPL Season ( 2016 ) 
 Captaincy records 
 First cricketer to score three centuries in his first three innings as Test captain 
 First Indian Test captain to score a double hundred overseas . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = Batting = = = 
 = = = Captaincy = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 ICC ODI Player of the Year : 2012 
 ICC World ODI XI : 2012 , 2014 
 BCCI 's Polly Umrigar Award for international cricketer of the year : 2011 – 12 , 2014 – 15 
 Arjuna Award : 2013 
 <unk> International Cricketer of the Year : 2011 – 12 , 2013 – 14 
 = = = Test cricket = = = 
 = = = = Man of the match awards = = = = 
 = = = ODI cricket = = = 
 = = = = Man of the match awards = = = = 
 = = = = Man of the series awards = = = = 
 = = = T20I cricket = = = 
 = = = = Man of the match awards = = = = 
 = = = = Man of the series awards = = = = 
 = Great Salt Lake = 
 The Great Salt Lake , located in the northern part of the U.S. state of Utah , is the largest salt water lake in the Western Hemisphere , and the eighth @-@ largest terminal lake in the world . In an average year the lake covers an area of around 1 @,@ 700 square miles ( 4 @,@ 400 km2 ) , but the lake 's size fluctuates substantially due to its shallowness . For instance , in 1963 it reached its lowest recorded level at 950 square miles ( 2 @,@ 460 km ² ) , but in 1988 the surface area was at the historic high of 3 @,@ 300 square miles ( 8 @,@ 500 km2 ) . In terms of surface area , it is the largest lake in the United States that is not part of the Great Lakes region . 
 The lake is the largest remnant of Lake Bonneville , a prehistoric pluvial lake that once covered much of western Utah . The three major tributaries to the lake , the Jordan , Weber , and Bear rivers together deposit around 1 @.@ 1 million tons of minerals in the lake each year . As it is endorheic ( has no outlet besides evaporation ) , it has very high salinity , far saltier than seawater , which makes swimming similar to floating , and its mineral content is steadily increasing . Its shallow , warm waters cause frequent , sometimes heavy lake @-@ effect snows from late fall through spring . 
 Although it has been called " America 's Dead Sea " , the lake provides habitat for millions of native birds , brine shrimp , shorebirds , and waterfowl , including the largest staging population of Wilson 's phalarope in the world . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The Great Salt Lake is a remnant of a much larger prehistoric lake called Lake Bonneville . At its greatest extent , Lake Bonneville spanned 22 @,@ 400 square miles ( 58 @,@ 000 km2 ) , nearly as large as present @-@ day Lake Michigan , and roughly ten times the area of the Great Salt Lake today . Bonneville reached 923 ft ( 281 m ) at its deepest point , and covered much of present @-@ day Utah and small portions of Idaho and Nevada during the ice ages of the Pleistocene Epoch . 
 Lake Bonneville existed until about 16 @,@ 800 years ago , when a large portion of the lake was released through the Red Rock Pass in Idaho . With the warming climate , the remaining lake began to dry , leaving the Great Salt Lake , Utah Lake , Sevier Lake , and Rush Lake behind . 
 = = History = = 
 While the lake was well known by local Native Americans , it entered written history through the records of Silvestre Vélez de Escalante , who learned of its existence from the Timpanogos Utes in 1776 . No name was given to it at the time , and it was not shown on the map by Bernardo Miera y Pacheco , the cartographer for the expedition . In 1824 , it was observed , apparently independently , by Jim Bridger and Etienne Provost . Shortly thereafter other trappers saw it and walked around it . 
 Most of the trappers , however , were illiterate and did not record their discoveries . As oral reports of their findings made their way to those who did make records , some errors were made . Escalante had been on the shores of Utah Lake , which he named Laguna Timpanogos . It was the larger of the two lakes that appeared on Miera 's map . Other cartographers followed his lead and charted Lake Timpanogos as the largest ( or larger ) lake in the region . As people came to know of the Great Salt Lake , they interpreted the maps to think that " Timpanogos " referred to the Great Salt Lake . On some maps the two names were used synonymously . In time " Timpanogos " was dropped from the maps and its original association with Utah Lake was forgotten . 
 In 1843 , John C. Fremont led the first scientific expedition to the lake , but with winter coming on , he did not take the time to survey the entire lake . That happened in 1850 under the leadership of Howard Stansbury ( Stansbury discovered and named the Stansbury mountain range and Stansbury island ) . John Fremont 's overly glowing reports of the area were published shortly after his expedition . Stansbury also published a formal report of his survey work which became very popular . His report of the area included a discussion of Mormon religious practices based on Stansbury 's interaction with the Mormon community in Great Salt Lake City , which had been established three years earlier in 1847 . 
 Beginning in November 1895 , artist and author Alfred Lambourne spent a year living on the remote Gunnison Island , where he wrote a book of musing and poetry , Our Inland Sea . From November 1895 to March 1896 , he was alone . In March , a few guano sifters arrived to harvest and sell the guano of the nesting birds as fertilizer . Lambourne included musings about these guano sifters in his work . Lambourne left the island early in the winter of 1896 along with the first group of guano sifters . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The Great Salt Lake lends its name to Salt Lake City , originally named " Great Salt Lake City " by the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) Brigham Young , who led a group of Mormon pioneers to the Salt Lake Valley southeast of the lake on July 24 , 1847 . 
 The lake lies in parts of five counties : Box Elder , Davis , Tooele , Weber , and Salt Lake . Salt Lake City and its suburbs are located to the southeast and east of the lake , between the lake and the Wasatch Mountains , but land around the north and west shores are almost uninhabited . The Bonneville Salt Flats are to the west , and the Oquirrh and Stansbury Mountains rise to the south . 
 The Great Salt Lake is fed by three major rivers and several minor streams . The three major rivers are each fed directly or indirectly from the Uinta Mountain range in northeastern Utah . The Bear River starts on the north slope of the Uintas and flows north past Bear Lake , into which some of Bear River 's waters have been diverted via a man @-@ made canal into the lake , but later empty back into the river by means of the Bear Lake Outlet . The river then turns south in southern Idaho and eventually flows into the northeast arm of the Great Salt Lake . The Weber River also starts on the north slope of the Uinta Mountains and flows into the east edge of the lake . The Jordan River does not receive its water directly from the Uintas , rather it flows from freshwater Utah Lake , which itself is fed primarily by the Provo River ; the Provo River does originate in the Uintas , a few miles from the Weber and Bear . The Jordan flows from the north part of Utah Lake into the southeast corner of the Great Salt Lake . 
 A railroad line – the <unk> Cutoff – runs across the lake , crossing the southern end of Promontory Peninsula . The mostly solid causeway supporting the railway divides the lake into three portions : the northeast arm , northwest arm , and southern . This causeway prevents the normal mixing of the waters of the lake because there are only three 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) breaches . Because no rivers , except a few minor streams , flow directly into the northwest arm , Gunnison Bay , it is now substantially saltier than the rest of the lake . This provides an environment suitable for different types of algae than those growing in the southern part of the lake , leading to a marked color difference on the two sides of the causeway . 
 = = = Islands = = = 
 <unk> stating the number of islands is difficult , as the method used to determine what is an island is not necessarily the same in each source . Since the water level of the lake can vary greatly between years , what may be considered an island in a high water year may be considered a peninsula in another , or an island in a low water year may be covered during another year . According to the U.S. Department of the Interior and the U.S. Geological Survey , " there are eight named islands in the lake that have never been totally submerged during historic time . All have been connected to the mainland by exposed shoals during periods of low water . " In addition to these eight islands , the lake also contains a number of rocks , reefs , or shoals that become fully or partially submerged at high water levels . 
 The Utah Geological Survey , on the other hand , states " the lake contains 11 recognized islands , although this number varies depending on the level of the lake . Seven islands are in the southern portion of the lake and four in the northwestern portion . " 
 The size and whether they are counted as islands during any particular year depends mostly on the level of the lake . From largest to smallest , they are Antelope Island , Stansbury Island , Fremont Island , Carrington Island , Dolphin Island , Cub Island , and Badger Island , and various rocks , reefs , or shoals with names like Strongs Knob , Gunnison Island , Goose , Browns , Hat ( Bird ) , Egg Island , Black Rock , and White Rock . Dolphin Island , Gunnison Island , Cub Island , and Strongs Knob are in the northwestern arm . The rest are in the southern portion of the Great Salt Lake . 
 Black Rock , Antelope Island , White Rock , Egg Island , Fremont Island , and the Promontory mountain range are each extensions of the Oquirrh Mountain Range , which dips beneath the lake at its southeastern shore . Stansbury , Carrington , and Hat Islands are extensions of the Stansbury mountain range , and Strongs Knob is an extension of the Lakeside Mountains which run along the lake 's western shore . The lake is deepest in the area between these island chains , measured by Howard Stansbury in 1850 at about 35 feet ( 10 @.@ 7 meters ) deep , and an average depth of 13 feet ( four meters ) . When the water levels are low , Antelope Island becomes connected to the shore as a peninsula , as do Goose Islands , Browns Island , and some of the other islands . Stansbury Island and Strongs Knob remain peninsulas unless the water level rises well @-@ above the average . 
 = = = Lake effect precipitation = = = 
 Due to the warm waters of the Great Salt Lake , lake effect snowfalls are frequent phenomena of the surrounding area . Cold north , northwest , or west winds generally blow across the lake following the passage of a cold front , and the temperature difference between the warm lake and the cool air can form clouds that lead to precipitation downwind of the lake . It is typically heaviest from eastern Tooele County east and north into central Davis County . It can deposit excessive snowfall amounts , generally with a narrow band of snow highly dependent on the direction the wind is blowing . 
 The lake effect snowfalls are more likely to occur in late fall , early winter , and during spring due to the higher temperature differences between the lake and the air above it . During summer , the temperature differences can cause thunderstorms to form over the lake and drift eastward along the northern Wasatch Front . Some rainstorms may also be partially attributed to the lake effect in fall and spring . It is estimated that approximately six to eight lake effect snowstorms occur in a year , and that 10 % of the average precipitation of Salt Lake City can be attributed to the lake effect . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 Because of its high salt concentration , the lake water is unusually dense , and most people can float more easily than in other bodies of water , particularly in Gunnison Bay , the saltier north arm of the lake . 
 Water levels have been recorded since 1875 , averaging about 4 @,@ 200 feet ( 1 @,@ 280 m ) above sea level . Since the Great Salt Lake is a shallow lake with gently sloping shores around all edges except on the south side , small variations in the water level greatly affect the extent of the shoreline . The water level can rise dramatically in wet years and fall during dry years . The water level is also affected by the amount of water flow diverted for agricultural and urban uses . The Jordan and Weber rivers , in particular , are diverted for other uses . In the 1880s Grove Karl Gilbert predicted that the lake – then in the middle of many years of recession – would virtually disappear except for a small remnant between the islands . 
 A 2014 study used tree rings collected in the watershed of the Great Salt Lake to create a 576 @-@ year record of lake level reconstruction . The lake level change is strongly modulated by Pacific Ocean coupled ocean / atmospheric oscillations at low frequency , and therefore reflects the decadal @-@ scale wet / dry cycles that characterize the region . By capturing these climate oscillations as well as utilizing the tree @-@ ring reconstruction of lake level change , researchers were able to predict the lake level fluctuation onward for as long as 5 – 8 years . 
 The Great Salt Lake differs in elevation between the south and north parts . The causeway for the <unk> Cutoff divides the lake into two parts . The water @-@ surface elevation of the south part of the lake is usually 0 @.@ 5 to 2 feet ( 15 – 61 cm ) higher than that of the north part because most of the inflow to the lake occurs from the south . 
 = = = Salinity = = = 
 Most of the salts dissolved in the lake and deposited in the desert flats around it reflect the concentration of solutes by evaporation ; Lake Bonneville itself was fresh enough to support populations of fish . More salt is added yearly via rivers and streams , though the amount is much less than the relict salt from Bonneville . 
 The salinity of the lake 's main basin , Gilbert Bay , is highly variable and depends on the lake 's level ; it ranges from 5 to 27 % ( 50 to 270 parts per thousand ) . For comparison , the average salinity of the world ocean is 3 @.@ 5 % ( 35 parts per thousand ) and 33 @.@ 7 % in the Dead Sea . The ionic composition is similar to seawater , much more so than the Dead Sea 's water ; compared to the ocean , Great Salt Lake 's waters are slightly enriched in potassium and depleted in calcium . 
 = = = 1930s Fresh Water Project = = = 
 In the early 1930s there was a project to dam off a third of the lake with dikes on the east side north of Salt Lake City to make a fresh water reservoir for drinking and irrigation . The project was abandoned before it got beyond the planning stage . 
 = = = Willard Bay Reservoir = = = 
 Willard Bay , also known as Willard Bay Reservoir or Arthur V. Watkins Reservoir is a fresh water reservoir , completed in 1964 , which separated , drained , and subsequently filled with fresh water from the Weber River , a portion of the Great Salt Lake 's northeastern arm . 
 = = = West Desert Pumping Project = = = 
 Record high water levels in the 1980s caused a large amount of property damage for owners on the eastern side of the Great Salt Lake , and the water started to erode the base of Interstate Highway 80 . In response , the State of Utah built the West Desert Pumping Project on the western side of the lake . This project consists of a pumping station ( 41 ° 15 ′ 9 @.@ 28 ″ N 113 ° 4 ′ 53 @.@ 31 ″ W ) at <unk> Ridge , containing three pumps with a combined capacity of moving 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 US gallons per minute ( 95 m3 / s ) ; an inlet canal ; and an outlet canal . Also , there are 25 miles ( 40 km ) of dikes and a 10 @-@ mile ( 16 km ) access road between the town of Lakeside and the pumping station . 
 This pumping project was designed to increase the surface area of the Great Salt Lake , and thus increase the rate of water evaporation . The pumps drove some of the water of the Great Salt Lake into the 320 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 1300 @-@ square kilometer ) Newfoundland Evaporation Basin in the desert west of the lake . A weir in the dike at the southern end of the Newfoundland Mountains regulated the level of water in the basin , and it sometimes returned salty water from the evaporation basin into the main body of the Great Salt Lake . 
 At the end of their first year of operation , the pumps had removed about 500 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 620 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) of water from the Great Salt Lake . The project was shut down in June 1989 since the level of the lake had dropped by nearly six feet ( 1 @.@ 8 meters ) since reaching its peak levels during June 1986 and March 1987 . The Utah Division of Water Resources credits the project with " over one @-@ third of that decline . " In total , the pumps removed 2 @,@ 730 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 3 @.@ 37 km3 ) of water while they operated . 
 Although the pumps are no longer in use , they have been kept in place in case the level of the Great Salt Lake ever rises that high again . 
 = = Ecosystem = = 
 The high salinity in parts of the lake makes them uninhabitable for all but a few species , including brine shrimp , brine flies , and several forms of algae . The brine flies have an estimated population of over one hundred billion and serve as the main source of food for many of the birds which migrate to the lake . However , the <unk> and salt @-@ water wetlands along the eastern and northern edges of the Great Salt Lake provide critical habitat for millions of migratory shorebirds and waterfowl in western North America . These marshes account for approximately 75 % of the wetlands in Utah . Some of the birds that depend on these marshes include : Wilson 's phalarope , red @-@ necked phalarope , American avocet , black @-@ necked stilt , marbled godwit , snowy plover , western sandpiper , long @-@ billed <unk> , tundra swan , American white pelican , white @-@ faced ibis , California gull , eared grebe , peregrine falcon , bald eagle , plus large populations of various ducks and geese . 
 There are twenty @-@ seven private duck clubs , seven state waterfowl management areas , and a large federal bird refuge on the Great Salt Lake 's shores . Wetland / wildlife management areas include the Bear River Migratory Bird Refuge ; Gillmor Sanctuary ; Great Salt Lake <unk> Preserve ; Salt Creek , Public Shooting Grounds , Harold Crane , Locomotive Springs , Ogden Bay , <unk> Springs , and Farmington Bay Waterfowl Management Areas . 
 Several islands in the lake provide critical nesting areas for various birds . Access to Hat , Gunnison , and Cub islands is strictly limited by the State of Utah in an effort to protect nesting colonies of American white pelican ( Pelecanus <unk> ) . The islands within the Great Salt Lake also provide habitat for lizard and mammalian wildlife and a variety of plant species . Some species may have been extirpated from the islands . For example , a number of explorers who visited the area in the mid @-@ 1800s ( e.g. Emmanuel Domenech , Howard Stansbury , Jules Rémy ) noted an abundance of yellow @-@ flowered " onions " on several of the islands , which they identified as Calochortus luteus . This species today occurs only in California , however , at that time the name C. luteus was applied to plants that later were named C. nuttallii A yellow @-@ flowered Calochortus was first named as a variety of C. nuttallii but was later separated into a new species C. aureus . This species occurs in Utah today , though apparently no longer on the islands of the Great Salt Lake . 
 Because of the Great Salt Lake 's high salinity , it has few fish , but they do occur in Bear River Bay and Farmington Bay when spring runoff brings fresh water into the lake . A few aquatic animals live in the lake 's main basin , including centimeter @-@ long brine shrimp ( Artemia <unk> ) . Their tiny , hard @-@ walled eggs or cysts ( diameter about 200 micrometers ) are harvested in quantity during the fall and early winter . They are fed to prawns in Asia , sold as novelty " Sea @-@ Monkeys , " sold either live or dehydrated in pet stores as a fish food , and used in testing of toxins , drugs , and other chemicals . There are also two species of brine fly as well as protozoa , rotifers , bacteria and algae . 
 Salinity differences between the sections of the lake separated by the railroad causeway result in significantly different biota . A phytoplankton community dominated by green algae or cyanobacteria ( blue @-@ green algae ) tint the water south of the causeway a greenish color . North of the causeway , the lake is dominated by <unk> salina , a species of algae which releases beta @-@ carotene , and the bacteria @-@ like <unk> , which together give the water an unusual reddish or purplish color , and the bacteria converts non @-@ toxic mercury into toxic methyl mercury , which then flows into the Southern portion of the lake in a heavy brine layer through the causeway . 
 Although brine shrimp can be found in the arm of the lake north of the causeway , studies conducted by the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources indicate that these are likely transient . Populations of brine shrimp are mostly restricted to the lake 's south arm . 
 In the two bays that receive most of the lake 's fresh water inflows , Bear River Bay and Farmington Bay , the diversity of organisms is much higher . <unk> in these bays can approach that of fresh water when the spring snow melt occurs , and this allows a variety of bacteria , algae and invertebrates to proliferate in the nutrient @-@ rich water . The abundance of invertebrates such as gnat larvae ( <unk> ) and back swimmers ( <unk> ) are fed upon extensively by the huge shorebird and waterfowl populations that utilize the lake . Fish in these bays are fed upon by diving terns and pelicans . 
 = = = Pink Floyd the flamingo = = = 
 A solitary Chilean flamingo , named Pink Floyd after the English rock band , wintered at the Great Salt Lake . He escaped from Salt Lake City 's Tracy Aviary in 1987 and lived in the wild , eating brine shrimp and socializing with gulls and swans . ( Pink Floyd is often referred to as a " he " , although the bird 's gender is not actually known . ) A group of Utah residents suggested petitioning the state to release more flamingos in an effort to keep Floyd company and as a possible tourist attraction . Wildlife biologists resisted these efforts , saying that deliberate introduction of a non @-@ native species would be ecologically unsound and might have detrimental consequences . Pink Floyd was last seen in Idaho ( where he was known to migrate ) in 2005 . He has not been seen since then and is presumed not to have survived the winter of 2005 – 2006 . 
 = = = Elevated mercury levels = = = 
 US Geological Survey and US Fish & Wildlife researchers , originally studying selenium levels in the lake , discovered some of the highest levels of methyl @-@ mercury they had ever seen , at 25 nanograms per liter of water . For comparison , a fish consumption advisory was issued at the Florida Everglades after water there was found to contain 1 nanogram per liter . The extremely high methyl mercury concentrations have been only in the lake 's anoxic deep brine layer ( <unk> ) below a depth of 20 ' ( 6 m ) , but concentrations are also moderately high up in the water column where there is oxygen to support brine shrimp and brine flies . 
 The finding of high mercury levels prompted further studies and a health advisory warning hunters not to eat common goldeneye or northern shoveler , two species of duck found in the lake . It has been stated that this does not pose a risk to other recreational users of the lake . 
 After later studies were conducted with a larger number of birds , the advisories were revised and another was added for cinnamon teal . Seven other species of duck were studied and found to have levels of mercury below EPA guidelines , thus being determined safe to eat . 
 A study in 2010 concluded that the main source of the mercury is likely worldwide industry , rather than local sources . As water levels rise and fall , mercury accumulation does as well . About 16 percent of the mercury comes in from rivers , and 84 percent comes from the atmosphere in a non @-@ toxic , inorganic form . The non @-@ toxic mercury is converted into toxic methyl mercury by bacteria which thrive in the more saline water of the North arm affected by the causeway . 
 = = Commerce = = 
 Great Salt Lake contributes an estimated $ 1 @.@ 3 billion annually to Utah 's economy , including $ 1 @.@ 1 billion from industry ( primarily mineral extraction ) , $ 136 million from recreation , and $ 57 million from the harvest of brine shrimp . 
 Solar evaporation ponds at the edges of the lake produce salts and brine ( water with high salt quantity ) . Minerals extracted from the lake include : sodium chloride ( common salt ) , used in water <unk> , salt lick blocks for livestock , and to melt ice on local roadways ( food @-@ grade salt is not produced from the lake , as it would require further costly processing to ensure its purity ) ; potassium sulfate , used as a commercial fertilizer ; and magnesium @-@ chloride brine , used in the production of magnesium metal , chlorine gas , and as a dust suppressant . US Magnesium operates a plant on the Southwest shore of the lake , which produces 14 percent of the worldwide supply of magnesium , more than any other North American magnesium operation . Mineral @-@ extraction companies operating on the lake pay royalties on their products to the State of Utah , which owns the lake . 
 The harvest of brine shrimp cysts during fall and early winter has developed into a significant local industry , with the lake providing 35 to 45 percent of the worldwide supply of brine shrimp , and cysts selling for as high as $ 35 a pound . Brine shrimp were first harvested during the 1950s and sold as commercial fish food . In the 1970s the focus changed to their eggs , known as cysts , which were sold primarily outside of the United States to be used as food for shrimp , prawns , and some fish . Today , these are mostly sold in East Asia and South America . The amount of cysts and the quality are affected by several factors , but salinity is most important . The cysts will hatch at 2 to 3 % salinity , but the greatest productivity is at salinities above about 10 % . If the salinity drops near 5 to 6 % , the cysts will lose buoyancy and sink , making them more difficult to harvest . 
 The lake 's north arm contains deposits of oil , but it is of poor quality and it is not economically feasible to extract and purify it . As of 1993 , around 3 @,@ 000 barrels ( 480 m3 ) of crude oil had been produced from shallow wells along the shore . The oil field at Rozel Point produced an estimated 10 @,@ 000 barrels ( 1 @,@ 600 m3 ) of oil from 30 to 50 wells , but has been inactive since the mid @-@ 1980s . Oil seeps in the area had been known since the late nineteenth century , and attempts at production began in 1904 . Industrial debris from this field remained in place near Spiral Jetty until a cleanup effort by the Division of Oil , Gas and Mining and the Division of Forestry , Fire , and State Lands was completed in December , 2005 . 
 = = = Causeway = = = 
 The causeway running across the lake was built in the 1950s by the Morrison @-@ Knudsen construction company for the Southern Pacific Railroad as a replacement to a previously built wooden trestle , and is now owned and operated by Union Pacific . About 15 trains cross the 20 @-@ mile causeway each day . Because water flow is so constrained by the causeway , it has a significant impact on various industries . 
 For instance , the northern arm of the lake has a much higher salinity , to the point that the native brine shrimp cannot survive in its waters . In the southern portion , where the vast majority of the fresh water inlets are found , the salt level can dip below what is necessary for the brine shrimp to survive , while water in the northern bay is too salty . Thus , the brine shrimp harvesting industry would benefit from the causeway allowing a freer flow of water . 
 However , the increased salt and mineral content is better for Great Salt Lake Minerals Company ( a subsidiary of Compass Minerals , which extracts minerals from the northern bay ) . Morton Salt , Cargill Salt , Broken Arrow Salt and the <unk> Group 's U.S. Magnesium each extract minerals from the southern bay , and could benefit from a more natural mixture of water between the two sides of the lake . 
 = = = Recreation = = = 
 Dramatically fluctuating lake levels have inhibited the creation and success of tourist @-@ related developments . Additionally , there is a problem with pollution from industrial and urban effluent , as well as a natural " lake stink " caused by the decay of insects and other wildlife , particularly during times of low water . 
 Despite these issues , the lake remains one of Utah 's largest tourist attractions . Antelope Island State Park is a popular tourist destination that offers panoramic views of the lake , hiking and biking trails , wildlife viewing and access to beaches . 
 The State of Utah operates a marina on the south shore of the lake at Great Salt Lake State Park , and another in Antelope Island State Park . With its sudden storms and expansive spread , the lake is a great test of sailing skills . Single mast , simple sloops are the most popular boats . Sudden storms and lack of experience on the part of boatmen are the two most dangerous elements in boating and sailing on the Great Salt Lake . 
 = = = = Saltair = = = = 
 Three resorts , each called Saltair , have been operated on the southern shore of the lake since 1893 , each one built as a successor to the previous one . Rising and lowering water levels have affected each iteration , and the first two were destroyed by fire . 
 The first Saltair pavilion was destroyed by fire on April 22 , 1925 . A new pavilion was built and the resort was expanded at the same location by new investors , but after years of various challenges , it was eventually destroyed by an arsonist in 1970 . 
 The current Saltair serves as a concert venue . The new resort was completed in 1981 , approximately a mile west of the original . 
 The second Saltair included a fun house and a dancing venue . 
 = = Legends and unusual features = = 
 Spiral Jetty 
 The northwest arm of the lake , near Rozel Point , is the location for Robert Smithson 's work of land art , Spiral Jetty ( 1970 ) , which is only visible when the level of Great Salt Lake drops below 4 @,@ 197 @.@ 8 feet ( 1 @,@ 280 @.@ 2 m ) above sea level . 
 Oolitic sand 
 The lake and its shores contain oolitic sand , which are small , rounded , or spherical grains of sand made up of a nucleus ( generally a small mineral grain ) and concentric layers of calcium carbonate ( lime ) and look similar to very small pearls . 
 Whales in the Great Salt Lake 
 Local legend maintains that in 1875 , entrepreneur James Wickham had two whales released into the Great Salt Lake , with the intent of using them as a tourist attraction . The whales are said to have disappeared into the lake and subsequently sighted multiple times over a number of months , but there have never been any confirmed sightings of the whales since the time of their supposed release . 
 Lake monster 
 In mid @-@ 1877 , J.H. McNeil was with many other Barnes and Co . Salt Works employees on the lake ’ s north shore in the evening . They claimed to have seen a large monster with a body like a crocodile and a horse ’ s head in the lake . They claimed this monster attacked the men , who quickly ran away and hid until morning . This creature is regarded by some to have simply been a buffalo in the lake . Thirty years prior , " Brother Bainbridge " claimed to have sighted a creature that looked like a dolphin in the lake near Antelope Island . This monster is called by some the North Shore Monster . 
 = The Judd School = 
 The Judd School ( usually known simply as Judd ) is a grammar school in Tonbridge , Kent , southeast England . It was established in 1888 at Stafford House on East Street in Tonbridge , where it remained for eight years before moving to its present location on Brook Street , in the south of the town . Founded by the Skinners Company , it was named after 16th century merchant Sir Andrew <unk> , whose endowment helped fund the school . The Skinners ' Company maintains close links with the school and makes up the majority of the governing body . 
 There are 1019 students in the school aged 11 to 18 ; the lower school is all boys , but of 350 students aged 16 – 18 in the sixth form , up to 60 are girls . The first headmaster was William Bryant , who oversaw the transition to the present site before his retirement in 1908 . The headmaster as of 2015 is Robert Masters , who has occupied the post since September 2004 and is the seventh headmaster of the school . 
 Judd pupils generally take ten General Certificate of Secondary Education ( GCSE ) tests in Year Eleven ( aged 15 – 16 ) , and they have a choice of four or five A @-@ levels in the sixth form . An Office for Standards in Education , Children 's Services and Skills ( Ofsted ) inspection in 2007 graded The Judd School as " outstanding " , and league tables published by the Daily Telegraph based on 2013 A @-@ level results rank Judd as the second best ( or best , if independent schools are excluded ) school in Kent . In 2013 , The Sunday Times newspaper ranked The Judd School as the 12th best state secondary school ( for pupils aged 11 – 16 , with an optional two further years of education in sixth form ) in the country . The majority of students go on to higher education following the completion of their A @-@ levels at the end of Year Thirteen ( aged 17 – 18 ) , and in 2011 , one in five Year 13 students gained an Oxbridge offer . 
 In September 2004 , the school was designated a music and mathematics specialist school , which means it receives additional funding for those subjects . In 2007 , the school was invited to become a High Performing Specialist School , and in April 2008 was successful in attaining science specialism status . As mathematics is automatically included under a science specialism , the school selected English to be included under the first specialism . The Judd School is now a music with English and science with mathematics specialist school . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years : 1888 – 1918 = = = 
 The Judd School was established in 1888 , but the need for a secondary school to supplement Sir Andrew Judd 's Grammar School ( now known as the famous Public School : Tonbridge School ) was acknowledged as early as 1870 , after it was revealed that only one in 200 of its students was the son of a Tonbridge tradesman . Tonbridge School was founded in 1553 by Sir Andrew Judd , who made a fortune in the Muscovy fur trade during the 16th century . His endowment was left in the hands of the Skinners Company , who agreed to fund the establishment of a commercial school in Tonbridge in 1875 . However , the Charity Commissioners – empowered by the 1869 Endowed Schools Act to govern the establishment of charitably funded schools – directed that the £ 20 @,@ 000 provided by The Skinners ' Company for this cause be taken to neighbouring Tunbridge Wells , where it was used to establish The Skinners ' School in September 1887 . 
 Demand persisted for a similar school in Tonbridge ; in July 1888 , William J. D. Bryant , previously an assistant master at Tonbridge School , was named headmaster of Sir Andrew Judd 's Commercial School , which opened on 17 September at Stafford House in East Street , Tonbridge . The funds were provided by a loan of £ 13 @,@ 000 repaid over the next 20 years with income from the Judd Foundation ( of which The Skinners ' Company were trustees ) , which rapidly increased when the leases on the Sandhills Estate in London were renewed in 1906 . The school also benefited from at least £ 500 per year from the Judd Foundation , after funding for Tonbridge School was reduced . Although established on a tentative basis , the school 's early success led to its move to a larger , purpose @-@ built site in south Tonbridge in 1896 . 
 William Bryant retired as headmaster in 1908 and was replaced by John Evans , appointed in preference to the 217 other applicants for the post . Previously headmaster of Ashford Grammar School , Evans took up his new position at the conclusion of the autumn term . He oversaw a period of change and modernisation , including the transition from gas to electric lighting , and the introduction of a house system in 1909 . Soon after the outbreak of the First World War the school was requisitioned by the War Office to house two brigades , from Folkestone and Aldershot . In 1917 , the school Cadet Corps was established , which within one month consisted of 120 students . The following year , and according to Taylor ( 1988 ) " much to the Headmaster 's distaste " , the first female teachers were appointed after the deaths of several male members of staff . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war years : 1919 – 1939 = = = 
 In June 1919 , soon after the passage of Education Act 1918 , the school successfully applied for grant @-@ earning status and became partly state @-@ funded . As a consequence , it became necessary to introduce a composite governing board ( including public representatives ) and to offer free places , equal to 25 percent of the normal number of admissions . In 1925 , the school saw its first students enter the Oxbridge universities and changed its name to simply The Judd School . Evans retired in 1928 and was replaced by Welshman Cecil Lloyd Morgan who beat 164 other applicants to a job which carried an annual salary of £ 650 . He oversaw a change in the curriculum such that each form was divided into two streams , of which one took Latin , the other more vocational subjects . Morgan continued as many of the Judd customs as long as he could , including the tradition of donating £ 20 per year to send a Barnardo boy to Australia or Canada . 
 = = = Second World War : 1939 – 1945 = = = 
 The outbreak of the Second World War on 3 September 1939 delayed the commencement of the Autumn Term until trenches could be dug at the school . To avoid the bombing raids , 369 students of the Westminster City School in London were evacuated to The Judd School in the relative safety of Tonbridge . Initially , each school used the facilities three days per week , but Taylor ( 1988 ) notes that " imaginative timetables " enabled all Judd pupils to attend five days a week by the end of 1941 . The Westminster boys were instructed to further evacuate to Exmouth , Devon in July 1944 , but ended up fleeing back to London . In a bombing raid that same year a rocket shell exploded in a neighbouring field , destroying more than 200 panes of glass and numerous doors and windows . By the end of the war , 60 former pupils had lost their lives , and 48 were decorated . On 31 December 1944 , The Judd School became the first in the country to be awarded the status of a voluntarily aided grammar school in new legislation brought in by the Butler Education Act , which meant it received state funding , but could continue to select pupils by ability . 
 = = = Post @-@ war years : 1945 – 1986 = = = 
 Francis Hillier Taylor , previously senior history master at The Skinners ' School , was appointed as Morgan 's successor at the end of the spring term in 1946 , a position that attracted 321 applications . During his tenure , Taylor significantly expanded the school facilities : in 1948 , the headmaster 's living quarters were converted to include a secretaries office , waiting room and medical inspection room ( the headmaster moved to neighbouring Brook House , which was purchased by The Skinners ' Company ) . In 1955 , new geography rooms were constructed , followed three years later by a new gymnasium . Although not first used until two years later , a swimming pool was constructed in 1964 at the cost of £ 9 @,@ 000 . Taylor also introduced some major curriculum changes , including the introduction of new subjects such as rural biology and zoology . 
 Denis Rendall took over in 1970 , at a time when the future of the school was under threat from the Circular 10 / 65 , which proposed the abolition of grammar schools , which select pupils according to their academic ability , in favour of the comprehensive schools , which are non @-@ selective state funded schools . He oversaw the building of the new art and crafts department building , currently the R.E. block , which opened in May 1974 , and the purchase of a neighbouring detached house , 10 Brook Street , by the Kent Education Committee . Known as " Lawton 's " , this building is now used by the economics and business departments and for music technology . Rendall experienced a high turnover of staff : 31 teachers were at the school in the year of his arrival , and 43 joined and left the school between 1970 and 1986 . He increased the number of female staff from zero to seven during his tenure , and the student body grew from 463 to 746 during these years . 
 = = = Recent years : 1986 – present = = = 
 Rendall was succeeded in 1986 by Keith Starling , who further developed and expanded the school to celebrate its centenary ; the £ 2 million Cohen Building was constructed in 1991 , followed by a £ 1 @.@ 4 million music centre in 1995 . More recent developments include the Library Building , built in 2002 , and a new sports hall in 2003 ; much of the construction funds was raised by parents . 
 After Starling 's retirement in 2004 , Robert Masters was appointed as his replacement and oversaw the school 's transition to music and maths specialist status in 2004 . Following an " outstanding " result in a 2007 Ofsted inspection , the school was invited to become a High Performing Specialist School and in April 2008 was successful in attaining science specialism status . As mathematics is automatically included under a science specialism , the school selected English to join music under the first specialism . Mr Masters also organised the building of the school 's all @-@ weather pitch , which was completed in 2006 . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The Judd School foundation document , which was approved by Queen Victoria on 15 October 1889 , stipulated that the Board of Governors had right of appointment and dismissal of the headmaster , who has the same powers over the rest of the staff . Major decisions were made by The Skinners ' Company , but its powers were restricted by the Charity Commissioners , who were granted considerable powers under the Endowed Schools Act . Soon after the First World War , in the wake of the Education Act 1918 , the Burnham Scale of teachers salaries came into force and the school was forced to enter into negotiations with the Kent Education Committee to meet the increased expenditure ; the Court of The Skinners ' Company approved the school becoming grant earning in June 1919 . It became necessary to appoint a composite governing body , a third of them public representatives nominated by the Kent Education Committee , who also had some control over school affairs . Subsequently a fee of one guinea was paid to those who attended meetings of the governing body , the first of which was held on 4 February 1920 , at Skinners ' Hall in London . 
 After applying for voluntary aided status , the school was required to adopt new Articles of Government on 31 December , 1944 . It became the first school in the country to be awarded the dual control of state funding and limited independence . The Kent Education Committee funded free dinners for some pupils , travel and maintenance grants and created a common entrance exam . The current governing body consists of a chair and vice chair , ten foundation governors ( elected by the Worshipful Company of Skinners ) , three parent governors , two Local Education Authority ( LEA ) governors , three staff governors , an education officer and clerk , education assistant , assistant clerk and the headmaster . 
 = = School structure = = 
 The majority of the school 's first pupils joined from Gordon House , which was a successful private school on Hadlow Road run by T. E. Grice ; after it was decided that the two schools should not compete , Grice was appointed deputy headmaster of The Judd School . On the opening day , 40 boys were in attendance , rising to 50 by the end of the first term and to 115 in 1902 . In 1917 , the school had 244 pupils , which increased to 308 over the next 11 years , and reached 376 in 1935 . In 1952 , 380 boys were on the roll , which included 42 sixth form students . Under Denis Rendall , the school experienced a strong growth in numbers ; in 1970 , there were 463 pupils , increasing to 689 in 1978 , and to 742 in 1986 . At the last Ofsted inspection in 2007 , The Judd School had 933 students . According to the school , as of 2010 the student body is made up of 935 students : 625 in the lower school and 310 in the sixth form , including about 60 girls . Many students come from affluent backgrounds and very few require free school meals ; the number of students with disabilities , learning difficulties and special educational needs is well below the national average . The majority of students go on to higher education at the end of Year Thirteen . 
 The house system was first established in 1909 , when there were three houses : Alpha , Beta and Gamma , each of which had a house master and captain . Boys remained in the same house for their entire school career , and would be joined by any siblings . Every year , the houses competed for the House Shield ; points were awarded for all forms of competitions , from sword dancing to vaulting . In 1914 , house colours were introduced ; purple for Alpha , green for Beta , and scarlet for Gamma . As the student body increased , a fourth house – Delta – was formed in 1917 , for which the colour was yellow . The house system was abolished in the 1980s , but re @-@ introduced in September 2008 , with houses named after notable alumni . The four houses are : Duke ( after Neville Duke ) , Hodge ( after Donald Hodge ) , Lewin ( after Terence Lewin ) and Powell ( after Cecil Frank Powell ) . 
 = = = Lower school = = = 
 In its early years , boys entered the school mainly from local elementary ( now known as primary ) schools from ages eight onwards ; at that time , the maximum age of a pupil was 16 , although any boy who reached this age during the course of a term was permitted to remain until the end of that term . In 1908 , a government inspection noted that the average pupil remained at the school for three and a half years and left the school between the ages of 14 and 15 , and that 20 percent of the intake held scholarships . The lower school as it is today was first established by the " Five Year Plan " following a government inspection in 1933 . In 1944 , following the Butler Education Act , entrance to the school was gained through a common entrance exam , aged 11 or 12 ; five boys offered themselves for each place , and most came from local primary schools . Prior to the establishment of the sixth form , The Judd School passed several boys to Tonbridge School , or other grammar schools , to complete their education to the age of 18 or 19 ; £ 20 was paid as a leaving scholarship . 
 As of 2010 , the lower school has an annual intake of around 125 boys at the beginning of Year Seven ( aged 11 ) . The lower school ( Years 7 – 11 ) is 625 students ( all boys ) strong , for whom the school uniform consists of a navy blazer accompanied with the school badge on the breast pocket , with grey trousers and a grey or white shirt . Socks must be dark , and shoes must be black . Shirts must be worn with a tie , which varies according to the house in which the student is placed ; green for Powell , blue for Lewin , purple for Hodge and red for Duke . 
 = = = Sixth form = = = 
 The Judd School sixth form can be said to have been established as early as 1903 – in the wake of the Education Act of 1902 – when the Pupil Teachers Scheme was born and The Judd School was used a training centre for young teachers . However , normal pupils above the age of 16 were not permitted until 1919 ; previously special permission from the governors was required to stay on beyond this age . A 1952 government inspection stated that 42 students were in the sixth form . Judd 's sixth form has significantly grown over the last decade , consisting of 308 students at the last Ofsted inspection in 2007 . A minimum of 40 offers per year will be made to external applicants ; girls are admitted in Year Twelve ( aged 16 ) and make up about 16 percent of the sixth form . The sixth form has its own Common Room in the main school building , including a dedicated cafeteria and study area . 
 Boys may wear a dark grey or black suit , plain black , grey or navy V @-@ neck sweater and a scarf of a plain colour . Girls may wear plain tailored suits ( skirt or trousers ) in black , navy or dark grey . Shirts may be plain grey , blue or white . There is a sixth form house tie available , although girls may choose to wear a pin badge instead . 
 = = = Staff = = = 
 In July 1904 , The Judd School participated in the Pupil Teachers Scheme on an experimental basis . Established in the 1902 Education Act , students would receive a normal secondary education , before receiving two years training , splitting their time between a Pupil Teachers Centre and practical experience at elementary and secondary schools . The experiment was dropped soon after the First World War . When the school became grant earning in 1919 , the additional funds meant teachers received pensions under the School Teachers ' Superannuation Act of 1918 . In 1970 , 31 staff taught 463 boys ; 45 taught 745 in 1988 . According to the 2009 school prospectus , there are 71 teaching staff , 20 visiting music staff and 36 additional support , administration and maintenance staff . 
 = = Admission = = 
 The Judd School opened as a day school for local pupils living with their parents , between the ages of eight and 16 . According to the foundation document , the conditions of entry were possession of a " good character " and " sufficient health " ; sons of freemen of The Skinners ' Company were given preference when the number of applicants exceeded the places available . During his tenure , William Bryant attempted to extend admission to boarders and estimated the costs to be £ 50 per term ( including fees ) , but the Board of Governors rejected the idea . However , when a lack of public transport made day @-@ to @-@ day travel to the school impractical , boys were permitted to lodge from neighbouring villages and would stay at masters ' homes or at hostels approved by the governors . Entry to the school was conditional upon a pupil passing an entrance exam , which would vary according to the age of the boy . However , the foundation document stipulated that every boy had to be able read , write from dictation and perform sums in the " first four simple rules of Arithmetic , with the multiplication table " . 
 In 1944 , The Butler Education Act confirmed The Judd School as a grammar school , at which time it applied for voluntarily aided status , which required it to abolish fees under the principle of universal free education . The school was required to offer entrance via an entrance examination , now known as the Eleven Plus , which pupils take aged 10 or 11 , depending on their date of birth . Provision was made for pupils to enter aged 13 or 14 , for those that had failed the test two years earlier . While defining the school @-@ leaving age as 15 , the act granted the government the power to raise the age to 16 " as soon as the Minister is satisfied that it has become practicable " , which happened in 1973 . 
 Admission continues to be via the Eleven Plus examination ; The Judd School complies with the Co @-@ ordinated Admission Scheme which is administered by the Kent Local Authority . All pupils must have gained a selective place through the Eleven Plus and placed The Judd School as a preference on their application form . Because the school is usually over @-@ subscribed , priority is given to students in Local Authority Care in the first instance . Students are then ranked according to their aggregate scores in the Eleven Plus , and the distance from a students home to the school ( as the crow flies ) is used as a tiebreaker . 
 Pupils are also admitted to the sixth form aged 16 or 17 , for which similar criteria is applied . External students must have at least five predicted A * GCSEs and will be given conditional offers based on how high their predicted grades are . In the event of over @-@ subscription , priority will be given to internal applicants , followed by external applicants in Local Authority Care . Students are then ranked according to their predicted or actual GCSE results , and the distance to school is again used as a tiebreaker . Should entrance be refused for any reason , parents have a statutory right of appeal , which is heard by the governors of the school . In 2007 , the school was ordered to pay compensation to two pupils after it was deemed that they did not receive fair appeals because of what the Local Government Ombudsman deemed " inappropriate links " between the appeals panel and the governors . 
 = = = Fees = = = 
 The foundation document stipulated that fees were to be fixed by the governors and could range from £ 4 – 8 per year ; in 1888 , the fees charged were £ 7 / 10s per year . Provision was made for the allocation of scholarships to the value of the tuition fees for one in every ten boys in the school ; one @-@ half of the scholarships were arranged by the governors and awarded only to boys who had spent three years education in a public elementary school . Around the turn of the 20th century , an attempt was made to attract younger boys into the school by reducing fees for those under the age of 12 from £ 2 / 20s to £ 2 per term . 
 In July 1919 , the school applied for grant @-@ earning status , and as a result 25 percent of the places became free . As part of this change , the fee structure was changed to £ 3 / 10s per term , or ten guineas per annum . In 1944 , in accordance with the Butler Education Act , fees were abolished under the principle of universal free education . Parents are encouraged to contribute to The Judd School Development Fund , which raises money for future construction projects . Parents who cannot contribute are required to write a letter of explanation to the headmaster . 
 = = Curriculum = = 
 The first prospectus promised " religious instruction in accordance with the principles of the Christian Faith " and the following subjects : reading , writing , arithmetic , geography , history , English ( grammar , composition , and literature ) , Latin , at least one other foreign European language , mathematics , book @-@ keeping , natural science , drawing , drill , and vocal music . It also said that instruction may also be given " in the use of tools for working in wood " , for which a carpentry shed was placed in the yard of Stafford House . At the turn of the 20th century , 15 subjects were taught and lessons lasted one hour ; school began at nine , and the day included 15 minutes of hymns , prayers and roll calls . 
 German was first introduced into the curriculum in 1931 , the same time at which the school began to offer voluntary after @-@ school art classes . F. H. Taylor attempted to achieve equilibrium in the curriculum between arts and science subjects ; he made woodwork and art continuous for an entire term and introduced a geography course for the Higher School Certificate . In 1948 rural biology was added to the curriculum for the first time , for which the headmaster provided a plot of land to be used as a vegetable plot . At the end of that year , an after @-@ school study period was introduced ; following the seven normal periods ( five in the morning , two in the afternoon ) , students were to either begin their homework , or attend a school society . However , the 1950s saw a definite swing towards maths and science , and a subsequent increase in staffing in those departments . In 1957 , zoology and botany was taught at A @-@ level for the first time , and physics and chemistry replaced rural biology at O @-@ level ( now replaced by the GCSE ) . 
 As of 2010 , the school follows the National Curriculum in Years 7 – 11 and offers a broad range of GCSEs ( national exams taken by students aged 14 – 16 ) and A @-@ levels ( national exams taken by pupils aged 16 – 18 ) . The school has no affiliation with a particular religious denomination , but religious education is given throughout the school , and boys may opt to take the subject as part of their GCSE course . Although morning assemblies take place and are Christian in nature , they are non @-@ denominational . Students participate in a number of educational visits and excursions throughout their school career and Year Eleven students participate in a nine @-@ day work experience programme . The curriculum comprises English and Drama , Mathematics , French , Latin , History , Geography , Physics , Chemistry , Biology , Art , Music , Design Technology , Religious Education , Physical Education ( P.E. ) and Games and Personal , Social and Health Education ( <unk> ) . In the second year German is added and in Mathematics , students are divided based on their ability . The use of Information Technology is central to all teaching and is taught as a discrete subject in Years 7 and 8 . Boys usually take ten subjects for GCSE , English ( Language and Literature ) , Mathematics , a foreign language , all three separate sciences or Dual Certificate Science , supplemented by three other subjects from those listed above . 
 In the sixth form , pupils study five AS @-@ level ( the equivalent of half an A @-@ level qualification ) subjects for one year , which may include General Studies and usually continue with three or four subjects to A @-@ level . A wide choice of subjects is offered at A @-@ level : English , French , German , Latin , Classical Civilisation , Art , Design and Technology , Music , Geography , History , Economics , Government and Politics , Business Studies , Mathematics , Further Mathematics , Physics , Chemistry , Biology , Religious Studies and P.E. Most combinations of subjects can be accommodated . All students participate in a games activity on a Wednesday afternoon . 
 The school year runs from September to July , split across three terms : the autumn term ( September to December ) , spring term ( January to April ) and the summer term ( April to July ) . Students receive two weeks off for Christmas and Easter , a six @-@ week summer break , and three " half term " breaks . 
 = = = Examination = = = 
 Until the establishment of the General Certificate of Education , exams were set once a year by an external examiner ( s ) appointed by the governors , who reported in writing on the general proficiency of pupils , as well as the condition of the school . A 1902 report by examiner Dr <unk> found that the curriculum was " sufficient to help those few capable of rising to something higher by providing a bridge between elementary school and grammar school " . He criticised the absence of German tuition and the fact that more than half the students came " feebly taught from country districts " . The headmaster would also submit a written report to the governors . 
 In 1951 , the school adopted the General Certificate of Education , but students were barred from taking any exams before the age of 16 , which meant that many students left school without any qualifications because of the sheer necessity of leaving school to contribute to household income . The system became more rational in time , but often pupils were taking O @-@ levels and A @-@ levels simultaneously . As of 2010 , the school offers GCSEs to students in the lower school , and AS / A @-@ levels to students in the sixth form . Under Rendall , exam pass rates at A @-@ level increased from 67 @.@ 5 percent in 1970 , peaking at 95 percent in 1984 before decreasing slightly to 92 percent in 1987 . O @-@ level / GCSE results have similarly improved , reaching a peak of 88 percent pass rate in 1978 . League tables published by the BBC based on 2008 A @-@ level results rank Judd as the fourth best school in Kent . According to the BBC , in 2009 A @-@ level students achieved an average of 999 @.@ 2 <unk> points , against a national average of 739 @.@ 1 and 100 percent of students achieved five or more grade C results ( or equivalent ) at GCSE , including Maths and English . In its league table of the 500 best state secondary schools in the United Kingdom , The Sunday Times ranked The Judd School 27th . 
 = = Extra @-@ curricular activities = = 
 School clubs and societies include various language clubs , sport clubs , musical activities , politics and debating societies , a Voluntary Service Unit , Young Enterprise and many others . Students may also participate in the Duke of Edinburgh 's Award Scheme . Now defunct school societies have included a Young Farmers Club , Jazz Society , Science Society , Stamp Club , Literary and Debating Society , and the League of Nations Union . 
 Extra @-@ curricular musical opportunities include : Choir , Junior Singers , Chamber Choir , Judd Brass , Big Bands , String Orchestra , Concert Band , Symphony Orchestra and Junior Orchestra ; students give up to 40 concerts per year . Instrumental lessons are available through the school , for which a charge is made . Organised drama at the school began at the latest in 1929 , with performances including Richard II and Julius Caesar . Despite the minimum of theatrical equipment , Taylor ( 1988 ) notes that " much has been achieved " and at times the headmaster himself took a leading role . 
 The school cadet corps , a national program now known as the Combined Cadet Force , was formed towards the end of 1917 and 120 cadets were recruited within a month . The governors provided £ 25 towards their initial expenses , and volunteers contributed haversacks , water bottles , dummy rifles and trips to summer camp . Training initially took place on the Tonbridge School rifle range . By 1952 , the number of volunteer cadets had fallen to 90 . During the 1970s , numbers averaged about 150 cadets . The school 's Combined Cadet Force currently comprises both an Army and a Royal Air Force Section with a total establishment strength of 120 cadets , who meet on Friday afternoons following a full school day . Membership remains voluntary , and boys can join from Year Nine ( aged 13 – 14 ) . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 At lower school level , there are regular games for " A " and " B " teams in most sports , so that many of the students have the chance to represent the school ; in Year Seven there are even " C " , " D " , " E " and " F " rugby matches from time to time . There is also a programme of inter @-@ house competitions , including one designed specifically for those who are not school team players . The main games are rugby football , cross @-@ country and basketball during the winter months , and cricket , tennis and athletics during the summer term . 
 The school adopted the rugby code of football in 1923 , at which time it was played on soccer pitches ; the first games against other schools were played during the 1925 – 26 season , and rugby was played by all students by 1927 . As of 2010 , " A " and " B " rugby teams play against the likes of Tonbridge School , RGS High Wycombe , Whitgift School and local grammar schools . The biggest sporting rivalry in the Judd sporting calendar is the annual match against The Skinners ' School , played on the second Saturday of October , alternating between Southfields and the Yeomans pitches . In recent years crowd numbers have swelled to 1 @,@ 000 supporters on occasions . The fixture is notorious for generating noisy , passionate , support with fans from both sides interacting in a humorous and <unk> manner . Boys are often rewarded for their efforts with international tours and rugby sevens is also played at the school . In the 2008 – 09 season the under @-@ 15 rugby team advanced to the final of the national schools Daily Mail Cup at Twickenham on 1 April 2009 but lost 11 – 34 to Millfield . Football had been played at the school since its foundation and in 1908 , despite the inadequacy of the school 's pitches , was the primary winter game . However , by 1925 rugby was the predominant winter sport , and three years later soccer balls were banned from the school . 
 Burgess ( 2000 ) notes that The Judd School has a " fine reputation for its cricket teams " , and as the primary summer game , the sport remains popular today . During the 1890s , the cricket balls used by the team were made in Tonbridge . The Judd School offers cricket academies from Year Eight ( aged 12 – 13 ) onwards , with training available all year round in the four indoor nets within the Sports Hall . In 2004 , the school 's cross country team became the first school in a decade to end the dominance of public schools Winchester College and St Albans School at the Knole run in Sevenoaks . The school cross country squad have an annual training camp in Lanzarote in December , which acts as both a reward for effort and a valuable warm @-@ weather training camp in preparation for January 's Knole Run . The school holds weekly matches against local schools as well as competing in the National Schools Cup at both junior and Intermediate level . During lunchtime and after school practice sessions for other athletics events , including the high jump , discuss and javelin , are offered for pupils of all ages . School teams compete in other sports such as basketball , tennis and hockey . 
 = = Property = = 
 = = = Stafford House = = = 
 Upon its foundation , when – according to Green ( 1990 ) – it was said to be a " temporary expedient " , the school was based at Stafford House , in East Street in the centre of Tonbridge . Previously used by private tutor Isaac Fleming in 1878 , it was a building whose central urban position was , Taylor ( 1988 ) said , a " major asset , and possibly the only one " ; Headmaster Bryant " bore its numerous shortcomings , its bricked ambience and <unk> " . Positioned in a narrow street and originally designed for 20 boarders , traffic noise , awkward arrangement and low pitch of the classrooms and the distance of the school from its playing fields made the building far from ideal . It underwent repairs and alterations to the value of £ 300 , carried out by a local builder ; several partition walls were knocked down to form larger rooms , although this still restricted the bench length in even the widest of the rooms to 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) , and 18 pupils . The floor of the main schoolroom was restored and lavatory closets and urinals were installed . Later , a carpentry shed was placed in the yard , and a " Mr Russell " was appointed as its first occupant in October 1889 . " Mr Beeching 's field " was used – at what Taylor ( 1988 ) considered " an extortionate sum " – for games , but it was unavailable for four months of the year when it was used to grow hay . Beeching ended this arrangement in April 1889 , at which time the school used the 5 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 0 ha ) YMCA field , for £ 20 per year . In June of that year , a shed to house cricket equipment was constructed at the cost of £ 13 / 10s . It was soon decided that there was a need for more " wholesome " surroundings , and it was generally accepted that south Tonbridge would be more suitable for the development of a new school . 
 = = = Brook Street site = = = 
 After <unk> field ( the current location of Tonbridge Grammar School ) was rejected as an inferior site , " Mr Deacon 's Field " in <unk> Lane ( now Brook Street ) was acquired from Sir Edmund Hardinge 's trustees for £ 240 per acre , a total of £ 2 @,@ 059 . At one point owned by Sir Andrew Judd , the site consisted of 8 acres ( 3 @.@ 2 ha ) of land , which according to Taylor ( 1988 ) sloped " gently from the road to the rear of the site " . Plans , by Campbell Jones , were submitted to the headmaster in July 1883 ; they included a covered playground , red @-@ bricked buildings incorporating local sandstone , <unk> roof tiles and a small basement housing a boiler . The construction was carried out by Messrs Turners of Watford , and total construction costs were £ 8 @,@ 637 . Nearly two years later , on 27 April 1895 , the Foundation Stone was laid , at which time Lewis Boyd Sebastian , Master of The Skinners ' Company performed a small ceremony . Opened in March 1896 , the building featured an oak Neo @-@ Georgian fleche surmounting an Oregon pine hammer @-@ beamed roof . The principal entrance was carved by Messrs <unk> of London and featured shields bearing the coat of arms of Sir Andrew Judd and the company , the only architectural flourish allowed by the low budget . 
 In addition to the " schoolroom " , which was larger than the Town Public Hall , the building consisted of a dining hall ( cum gymnasium ) , the masters common room to the east and a block of six classrooms to the west . The headmaster 's house was completed at the same time as the main school building , and had five bedrooms wired with electric bells , and a bathroom plumbed with hot and cold water . In November 1920 , an organ was built at a cost of over £ 1 @,@ 000 , and placed in the schoolroom as a memorial to the old boys and masters who died in the First World War . A new gymnasium was constructed after a 1956 survey deemed its predecessor economically irreparable . Accompanied by the construction of three hard tennis courts , it was opened by Sir Benjamin Brodie in 1958 , but lacked adjoining changing rooms , washing facilities and office facilities for members of the physical education staff . 
 Now known as " Lawton 's " , 10 Brook Street was purchased during the early 1970s using funds provided by the Kent Education Committee , after whose chairman the building is now named . A £ 2 million classroom and technology building ( the " Cohen Building " ) , together with two new science laboratories , was opened in 1991 . A new music centre , financed by voluntary donations , was opened in 1995 and a schoolroom annexe followed in 1997 . The most recent developments are a library / classroom building in 2002 , a new sports hall in 2003 and an all @-@ weather pitch in 2006 . The Atwell Building , formerly known as the " Maths @-@ Geography Block " , opened in 2009 after suffering delays after the original building contractor went out of business . The school grounds have sufficient space for two rugby pitches and training grids in the winter months , or a 200 @-@ metre ( 660 ft ) running track , and a cricket ground ( with nets ) for summer . There are also three asphalt tennis courts , an air rifle range used by the school 's Combined Cadet Force , and an open @-@ air swimming pool . 
 = = = Yeoman 's fields = = = 
 The " Yeoman 's fields " site was purchased after a government inspection in 1933 recommended the school seek more land . The site consists of 6 @.@ 8 acres ( 2 @.@ 8 ha ) of level , dry land that requires little conditioning , making it ideal for the full @-@ sized rugby pitches , which came into regular use in 1935 . Previously part of <unk> land termed the " <unk> " , it was purchased by the Kent Education Committee from the Town Wardens and soon equipped with hedges , lavatories and a pavilion . In 1939 , trenches were dug in the field in preparation for the Second World War . 
 On the 26 April 2016 , it was revealed that the " Yeoman 's fields " site had been sold to help fund a new set of playing fields , which will be situated near Lower <unk> Lane . The new playing fields will tackle the issue of increasing student numbers and provide four rugby pitches , a cricket square and artificial strip and car parking in the 26 acres of land . This has caused some controversy in the Tonbridge community as the proposed development will be situated in an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty . 
 = = Notable former pupils = = 
 Former pupils notable for their military careers are Neville Duke , a World War Two fighter pilot ; Donald Hodge , one of the last surviving veterans of the First World War , and Terence Lewin , former Chief of the Defence Staff and Admiral of the Fleet . Sportsmen alumni include professional rugby player Martin Purdy and David Fulton , former captain of the Kent County Cricket Club . Other notable former students are Cecil Frank Powell , winner of a Nobel Prize in physics ; Humphrey Burton , former head of BBC Music ; Bernard Hailstone , a Royal portrait painter ; Ronald Ralph Williams , former Bishop of Leicester and Guy Hands , chief executive officer of Terra Firma Capital Partners . Tom Greatrex MP and Shadow Scotland Office Minister , who represented the constituency of Rutherglen & Hamilton West , attended Judd between 1986 and 1993 . 
 = Thomas Pownall = 
 Thomas Pownall ( bapt . 4 September 1722 ( New Style ) – 25 February 1805 ) was a British politician and colonial official . He was governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay from 1757 to 1760 , and afterward served in the British Parliament . He travelled widely in the North American colonies prior to the American Revolutionary War , opposed Parliamentary attempts to tax the colonies , and was a minority advocate of colonial positions until the Revolution . 
 Classically educated and well @-@ connected to the colonial administration in London , Pownall first travelled to North America in 1753 , and spent two years exploring the colonies before being appointed Lieutenant Governor of New Jersey in 1755 . He became governor of Massachusetts in 1757 after helping engineer the recall of longtime Governor William Shirley . His administration was dominated by the French and Indian War ( called the " Seven Years War " in England ) in which Pownall was instrumental in raising Massachusetts provincial militia for the war effort . He opposed military interference in colonial administration , including attempts to quarter British troops in private homes , and had a generally positive relationship with the colonial assembly . 
 Returning to England in 1760 , he continued to be interested in colonial affairs , publishing widely read materials on conditions in the colonies , including several editions of The Administration of the Colonies . As a Member of Parliament he regularly advocated for colonial positions without much success , but supported the war effort once the Revolutionary War began . In the early 19th century he became an early advocate of the reduction or removal of trade barriers , and the establishment of a solid relationship between Britain and the United States . Several writers have proposed that Pownall was Junius , a pseudonymous writer of letters critical of British governmental practices . 
 John Adams wrote , " Pownall was the most constitutional and national Governor , in my opinion , who ever represented the crown in this province . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thomas Pownall was the eldest son of William and Sarah ( <unk> ) Pownall . His father was a country gentleman and soldier whose poor health and early death in 1735 caused the family to fall upon hard times . Baptised 4 September 1722 ( New Style ) in Lincoln , England , Thomas was educated at Lincoln Grammar School and at Trinity College , Cambridge , where he graduated in 1743 . His education exposed him to classic and current philosophers , and the sciences . His first publication , a treatise on the origins of government published in 1752 , began as notes developed at Cambridge . 
 During his years at Cambridge , his younger brother John acquired a job at the Board of Trade , which oversaw British colonial affairs , and rapidly rose in the bureaucracy . The brothers were influential supporters of each other in their efforts to advance . John secured a job for Thomas in the colonial office , where he was exposed to the possibilities for advancement and influence in colonial postings . In 1753 he went to America as private secretary to Sir Danvers Osborne , just appointed governor of New York . Osborne committed suicide several days after reaching New York , leaving Pownall without a job and a sponsor . Pownall chose to remain in America , devoting himself to studying the condition of the American colonies . In the following months he travelled widely , from Maryland to Massachusetts . He was introduced into the highest circles of leadership and society in the colonies , and established relationships with a number of influential people , including Benjamin Franklin and Massachusetts Governor William Shirley . 
 One item of importance that Governor Osborne had been instructed to deal with was rising discontent among the Iroquois whose territory abutted New York ( and is now central and western Upstate New York ) . Pownall had studied the matter , and he was consequently invited by his Pennsylvania connections to attend the 1754 Albany Congress as an observer . His observations on the nature of colonial dealings with the Indians ( including political infighting for control of the Indian trade , and the corrupt and fraudulent acquisition of Indian lands ) led him to draft a number of proposals related to colonial administration . He proposed the establishment of a crown @-@ appointed superintendent of Indian affairs , specifically William Johnson , New York 's commissioner for Indian affairs . He also articulated visions for managing the expansion of the colonies to the west . After the conference he returned to Philadelphia . In this time he apparently cemented a close friendship with Franklin , with whom he began to invest in business ventures . Franklin , who had unsuccessfully proposed colonial union at the Albany conference , may have contributed to Pownall 's writings , although the exact nature of his influence is unclear . While in Philadelphia he also established a close collaboration with cartographer Lewis Evans , both of whom recognized the need for accurate maps of the inland regions of North America then being disputed with New France in the French and Indian War . The map Evans published in 1755 was dedicated to Pownall , and brought the latter wide publicity . Pownall 's recommendation of Johnson as superintendent of Indian affairs was also implemented by the crown in 1755 . 
 = = Lieutenant Governor of New Jersey = = 
 Pownall had been living at his own expense , in the hopes that a posting would eventually come his way . In May 1755 he was appointed Lieutenant Governor of New Jersey , with little responsibility beyond anticipating the death of the aging governor , Jonathan Belcher , and attending military conferences concerning the ongoing war . Belcher , however , proved to be longer lived than expected ( he died in 1757 ) , and Pownall was restless . The military conferences drew him into an ongoing power struggle between Johnson and Shirley ( who rose to become military commander @-@ in @-@ chief upon the death of General Edward Braddock in July 1755 ) over the management of Indian affairs . Johnson capitalized on Pownall 's concern over frontier security to draw him into his camp . Pownall already harboured some dislike of Shirley over an earlier snub , and his reports to New York Governor Sir Charles Hardy , combined with damaging allegations provided by other Johnson supporters , led to Shirley 's dismissal as commander @-@ in @-@ chief . Pownall returned to England in early 1756 , where he confirmed the Johnson allegations , and was rewarded with a post as " Secretary Extraordinary " ( a title of Pownall 's creation ) to the new commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Lord Loudoun . 
 While Pownall was in England , Shirley 's reputation was further damaged by allegations ( not apparently furthered by Pownall 's action ) that he had let military information fall into enemy hands , and the Board of Trade decided to recall him . Pownall was also offered the governorship of Pennsylvania by its proprietors ; however , his demands for wide @-@ ranging powers in the post led them to retract the offer . Pownall turned this to his own advantage , widely publicizing the fact that he had turned down the offer because of the " unreasonable , unenlightened attitude of the proprietors . " 
 He accompanied Loudoun back to America in July 1756 , but again returned to England to represent Loudoun in hearings on Shirley 's military leadership . Loudoun also instructed him on his military plans and objectives . In London he became closely involved in informing members of the new Pitt @-@ Newcastle Ministry of the state of affairs in North America . His performance in these matters resulted in his appointment as governor of Massachusetts in March 1757 . Although he was admired for his competence in colonial affairs , he was also criticised for his vanity and temper , as well as his role in bringing about Shirley 's fall . 
 = = Governor of Massachusetts Bay = = 
 Pownall arrived in Boston in early August . He was well received , and assumed his duties on August 3 . He was immediately thrust into a war @-@ related crisis : a French force was reported to be moving toward Fort William Henry in northern New York , and the military commander there had made an urgent call for militia . Pownall was energetic in organizing the militia , but the call to arms came too late : Fort William Henry fell after a brief siege that was followed by some of the worst Indian atrocities of the war . 
 In September 1757 Pownall travelled to New Jersey to attend the funeral of Governor Jonathan Belcher , and stopped in New York to meet with Loudoun . The commander @-@ in @-@ chief was upset that the Massachusetts General Court had not fully implemented a variety of demands he had made , and he held Pownall responsible . Pownall objected to the interference of the military in civilian affairs , the threat of which Loudoun used to implement his agenda , maintaining that it was necessary for the governor to lead , not drive , the provincial assembly . The meeting was acrimonious , and Loudoun afterward wrote a letter to London harshly criticising Pownall 's position , calling his ideas on governance " high @-@ handed " . Loudoun encountered opposition in the General Court ( the provincial assembly ) to a demand that British troops be billeted with civilians in Boston , and threatened to march additional troops into the province and take housing by force . Pownall requested that the General Court accede in some way to Loudoun 's demands , eventually signing a bill authorizing the quartering of troops in inns and other public spaces . This bill was unpopular , and Pownall was negatively cast in the local press as supportive of Loudoun and his policies . Pownall 's exchanges with Loudoun , however , show that he was keenly aware of the colonists ' position : " the inhabitants of this province are <unk> to the natural rights of English born subjects ... the enjoyment of these rights ... will animate and encourage them to resist ... a cruel , invading enemy " . He was equally clear on the relationship between the royal governor and his assembly : " a governor must endeavour to lead those people for he cannot drive them and must lead them step by step as he can <unk> [ sic ] footing . " He was so committed to these ideas that he offered to resign ; however Loudoun encouraged him to remain in the post . Pownall would later author portions of the 1765 Quartering Act , a Parliamentary bill whose implementation was widely resisted in the colonies . 
 In January 1758 Pownall wrote several letters to William Pitt , outlining the difficult issues surrounding relations between the colonial government and both the military and civil administrations of the British establishment . He specifically recommended that London offer to pay more of the colonial expenses of the war ; the implementation of this idea led to significantly increased militia recruitment in the remaining years of the war , including 7 @,@ 000 men from Massachusetts for the 1758 campaign . Pownall was able to move a bill through the General Court implementing reforms of the militia system . The bill did not include all of the changes Pownall sought in order to achieve a more flexible and less costly organization , and its terms also centered more power over the militia in the hands of local officials ( reducing the governor 's control ) . 
 Despite these reforms , recruiting for the militia proved difficult , and recruiting parties were often harassed and stoned , leading to rioting on several occasions . Pownall was , however , successful in recruiting the province 's full quota of militia , and his energetic assistance in the war effort earned him approbation from William Pitt , the Board of Trade , and the new commander @-@ in @-@ chief , James Abercrombie . Flush with success , Pownall proposed to General Jeffery Amherst the idea of establishing a fort on Penobscot Bay to contest potential French movements in the area . The area had been the site of periodic frontier raids since 1755 , including a major attack on St. George in spring 1758 . This idea developed into a major expedition to the area , which received not only Amherst 's approval but that of the assembly . Pownall led the expedition , oversaw the construction of Fort Pownall , and counted it as a major success of the year . Its success kicked off a minor land rush in the area . 
 Although Pownall 's start in power was a little rocky , his popularity in the province grew as his term progressed . He assiduously saw to the needs of its many fishermen , successfully convincing military authorities to eliminate burdensome red tape , and courted local merchants . He invested in ventures managed by Thomas and John Hancock , and was lauded by a group of Massachusetts merchants upon his departure . A bachelor , he was reported to be a ladies ' man and highly engaged in the social scene . Although he was not strongly religious , he regularly attended Anglican services , but was also a frequent visitor to local Congregational services . He successfully finessed contentious issues surrounding the recruitment , deployment , and provisioning of militia , negotiating compromises between military and provincial demands . He did , however , have a strained relationship with his lieutenant governor , Thomas Hutchinson . The two men never trusted each other , and Pownall regularly excluded Hutchinson from his inner council meetings , instead sending him on missions , for example to deal with militia recruitment issues . One of Pownall 's last acts before leaving the colony was to approve the appointment of James Otis , Sr. , a longtime Hutchinson adversary , as speaker of the assembly . 
 In the later months of 1759 Pownall wrote a letter to William Pitt requesting leave to return to England because " I might be of some service " there . Biographer John Schutz speculates that the underlying reason for Pownall 's request were related to frustration with his exclusion from the major military actions of the later war years , and possibly his desire to acquire a more significant post , such as a governor @-@ generalship of conquered New France . Historian Bernard Bailyn is of the opinion that Pownall 's divisive dislike and distrust of Shirley supporters like Thomas Hutchinson and ensuing local political infighting contributed to the request , as did his difficult relationships with the military commanders . Whatever the reason , the Board of Trade engaged in a reshuffling of colonial positions after King George II died , and Pownall was given the governorship of South Carolina , and permission to first take leave in England . His departure from Boston was delayed by militia recruiting issues and the need to deal with the aftermath of a major fire in the city , and he did not leave until June 1760 . 
 = = The Administration of the Colonies = = 
 Although he held the governorship of South Carolina , he never actually went there . He characterised his term in Massachusetts as " arduous " , and informed the colonial office in November 1760 that he would only accept another governorship if the recently acceded King George III directly ordered it . Pitt appointed him to the military commissary 's office in the Electorate of Hanover , where he served until the Seven Years ' War ended in 1763 . The position did not further his career ambitions in colonial administration , however , and led to allegations of financial irregularities ( of which he was cleared ) . 
 Upon his return to England he prepared for publication a treatise entitled The Administration of the Colonies . First published anonymously in 1764 , Pownall revised the work and republished the work several times between 1765 and 1777 . The work , a dry and complex treatise on the situation in North America that included commentary on the burgeoning tensions in the Thirteen Colonies , was intended by Pownall to explore how the colonies could properly be incorporated into a larger empire . 
 Pownall 's work identified him as supportive of American liberty . Although he feared that Britain was losing control of its colonies , he wrote that the Americans were entitled to the same rights of representative government as their fellow subjects in England , Scotland , and Wales . At the same time , he insisted that the military protection that the colonists received from Britain created equally extensive obligations to help pay for some of the cost . He was also convinced of the need for a strong , central legislature capable of making common policies that would be binding for every member of the British empire , including the fractious provinces in North America . Pownall eventually decided that the only solution lay in creating an imperial parliament with representatives from both Britain and the colonies . Although he was not the only British commentator to embrace the idea of an imperial parliament , most Americans found it anathema , so much so that John Dickinson singled out his centralized plan of legislative reform for particular criticism in his influential Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania ( 1768 ) . 
 = = Colonial supporter = = 
 Pownall continued to communicate with political allies in Massachusetts , and was on several occasions called to appear before Parliamentary committees to comment on colonial affairs . He considered returning to Massachusetts if a post could be found , and began investing in property in Nova Scotia , extending his colonial property interests beyond those he had been granted in Maine during his governorship . In 1765 he married Harriet Fawkener , widow of Everard Fawkener and daughter to Lieutenant General Charles Churchill , giving him a connection to the aristocratic Dukes of Marlborough . Pownall raised her four children as his own . A gracious and intelligent woman , she became a partner in advancing his political career , hosting social events and encouraging his intellectual pursuits . She may have encouraged him to stand for Parliament in 1767 , when he won a seat representing Tregony . 
 He renewed correspondence with officials in Massachusetts in the hopes of winning appointment as an agent representing the province 's interests , but was unsuccessful . He regularly received visitors from the colonies , and Benjamin Franklin , his old friend from Pennsylvania , was a frequent guest . He observed with alarm the rise in tension in the colonies and the missteps of Parliamentary leadership and colonial administration that exacerbated rather than reduced them . He used his position in Parliament to highlight the colonial objections to the Quartering Act of 1765 and other unpopular legislation . When troops were sent to Boston in 1768 after protests against the Townshend Acts turned violent , he took to the floor of Parliament , warning that the connections between Britain and the colonies were unraveling , and that the end result could be a permanent breach . 
 Pownall was opposed to Lord North 's partial repeal in 1770 of the hated Townshend Acts , in which the tax on tea was retained as a symbol of Parliamentary power . In debate on the act , Pownall pointed out that retention of the tax would be a " millstone " around English necks rather than a yoke on American ones , and that it would lead to civil war . His speech was delivered March 5 , 1770 , the day of the Boston Massacre . <unk> by his view that Parliament failed to understand the American colonial issues , he urged his colonial correspondents to continue to press constitutional issues and avoid violence . 
 Colonial American issues then briefly subsided from the stage . In 1772 Pownall introduced legislation reforming food production and distribution in Great Britain . It passed the House of Commons , but was amended by the Lords , leading the Commons to reject the amended bill as a violation of its prerogatives . The bill passed the next year , and was called " Governor Pownall 's Bill " . It received much praise , including some from influential figures such as Adam Smith . Pownall was also honoured with membership in the Society of Antiquaries and the Royal Society . 
 = = Revolution = = 
 Following the Boston Tea Party in December 1773 , Parliament passed a series of bills designed to punish Massachusetts . Pownall was unable to sway opinion toward more conciliatory measures . He was also implicated in the Hutchinson Letters Affair as someone who may have delivered private letters of Thomas Hutchinson to Benjamin Franklin , although Franklin never identified his source for the letters . Pownall was unable to retain his seat : in 1774 he was voted out of office . Seeking to remain active , Pownall ended up appealing to Lord North , who secured a seat for him in a by @-@ election , representing Minehead . This apparent turn towards Toryism alarmed a number of Pownall 's colonial supporters ; there is also some evidence that North may have engineered Pownall 's defeat in order to gain his support . 
 Pownall supported North 's attempts at reconciliation in debates leading to the start the War of Independence . However , once hostilities began in April 1775 , his conciliatory views were dismissed by war @-@ supporting Tories ( who opposed them ) as well as by Whigs ( who saw his proposals as attempts to undercut their positions ) . Pownall remained nominally in support of North until 1777 , when he openly made declarations in support of the peace party . The entry of France into the war on the American side returned him firmly to the pro @-@ war Tory position . His support was , however , nuanced : he continued to argue for some sort of conciliation with the Americans , while remaining resolutely patriotic with respect to the French . He was not alone among British politicians in being unable reconcile these positions , and refused to stand for reelection in 1780 . 
 During the war years he published several revisions to The Administration of the Colonies , updating and expanding the work to reflect changing conditions . He also worked to update and revise the Evans map , soliciting data and updated maps from colonial correspondents . He withdrew to some extent in the later years following the death of his wife in 1777 , but continued to appear in Parliament . 
 = = Post @-@ war years = = 
 In July 1780 Pownall anonymously published an essay titled A Memorial Most <unk> Addressed to the Sovereigns of Europe . This widely published document gained Pownall attention throughout Europe ; the anonymity of its author was compromised by the use of extended passages from Administration of the Colonies . The essay propounded instructions to Europe 's leaders on how to deal with a newly independent United States , pointing out that America 's independence and rapid population growth would have a transformative effect on world trade . He proposed that European leaders meet to establish worldwide regulations for what was essentially free trade . 
 Pownall continued to maintain an interest in the United States after the war ended , although he never returned . He sought without success a commission in the Massachusetts militia , mostly as a formality so that he could present it during his European travels . He continued to write essays ( new ones and revisions to older ones ) , and published an updated version of his 1755 map . In his later years Pownall was introduced to Francisco de Miranda , a Venezuelan colonial general who favored Latin American independence from Spain . According to historian William Spence Robertson , significant arguments advanced by Miranda in his later efforts are traceable to Pownall 's influence . Pownall also assisted Miranda explicitly , cultivating connections in the British government as he attempted to advance the independence agenda . Pownall 's last major work was a treatise again arguing for free trade , and explicitly calling for British support of Latin American independence as a way to open those markets to British and American trade . Pownall died at Bath on 25 February 1805 , and was interred in the church at Walcot . 
 = = Thomas Pownall as an Antiquary = = 
 While Thomas Pownall is well known as an American colonial Governor and English politician , he was also an important figure in later 18th century antiquarian and archaeological studies . In her study of Governor Pownall , Bryony Orme remarks that he is perhaps one of the most neglected of our early antiquaries , and undeservedly so . He inherited these interests from his father Captain William Pownall , who lived at No. 5 <unk> in the Minster Yard , which surrounds Lincoln Cathedral . His father had corresponded with William Stukeley about ancient finds in and around Lincoln , and Thomas Pownall ’ s brother John was also a writer on archaeological subjects . Pownall was already demonstrating his interest in archaeology before he left for America , when , in 1752 , he recorded evidence for a Roman villa at <unk> in Lincolnshire After his return from America he became a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1770 and he contributed extensively to early issues of the journal Archaeologia . Some of his writings describe discoveries around Lincoln , but more importantly he wrote more widely on New Grange in Ireland in 1773 and Cairn Brach y Dinas at <unk> , on the north Welsh coast . He was to follow this with descriptions of Roman remains in France when he was living there , and , on moving to Bath he again provided descriptions of Roman discoveries . 
 = = Family and legacy = = 
 Pownall married twice . His first wife was Harriet Churchill , widow of Sir Everard Fawkener and illegitimate daughter of Lieutenant General Charles Churchill . In 1784 Pownall married Hannah ( Kennet ) Astell , acquiring in the process significant estates and the trappings of landed gentry . 
 The towns of Pownal , Maine and Pownal , Vermont are named after Thomas Pownall . Dresden , Maine was once named <unk> in his honour ; this recognition survives in the <unk> Courthouse , an historic property built there in 1761 . The remains of Fort Pownall , named for him , survive in Maine 's Fort Point State Park . 
 = = Junius = = 
 Between 1769 and 1772 a series of letters was published in London 's Public Advertiser , written by someone using the pseudonym Junius . Many of the letters contained accusations of corruption and abuse of power on the part of British government officials , subjects Pownall also spoke and wrote about . The identity of Junius has since been the subject of contemporary and historical debate . In 1854 Frederick Griffin wrote Junius Uncovered , in which he advanced the argument that Pownall was Junius ; this argument was again raised by Pownall descendant Charles A. W. Pownall in his 1908 biography of Pownall . Modern scholars dispute the notion , currently favouring Philip Francis as the writer of the letters based on several lines of evidence . 
 = = = Publications by Thomas Pownall = = = 
 A Description of the <unk> Monument of New Grange , near Drogheda , in the County of Meath , in Ireland . By Thomas Pownall , Esq. in a letter to the Rev. Gregory Sharpe , D.D. Master of the Middle Temple . Read at the Society of Antiquaries , June 21 / 28 1770 . Archaeologia Vol 2 , ( 1773 ) , pp. 236 – 276 [ 1 ] 
 = Alchi Monastery = 
 Alchi Monastery or Alchi Gompa is a Buddhist monastery , known more as a monastic complex ( <unk> ' khor ) of temples in Alchi village in the Leh District , of the Indian state under the Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council of Jammu and Kashmir . The complex comprises four separate settlements in the Alchi village in the lower Ladakh region with monuments dated to different periods . Of these four hamlets , Alchi monastery is said to be the oldest and most famous . It is administered by the <unk> Monastery . 
 Alchi is also part of the three villages ( all in lower Ladakh region ) which constitute the ‘ Alchi group of monuments ’ ; the other two villages adjoining Alchi are the <unk> and Sumda Chun . The monuments in these three villages are stated to be of “ unique style and workmanship ’ , but the Alchi monastic complex is the best known . 
 The monastery complex was built , according to local tradition , by the great translator Guru Rinchen Zangpo between 958 and 1055 . However , inscriptions in the preserved monuments ascribe it to a Tibetan noble called Kal @-@ dan <unk> @-@ <unk> later in the 11th century . Dukhang or Assembly Hall and the Main Temple ( <unk> @-@ lag @-@ khang ) , which is a three @-@ storied temple called the Sumtseg ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) , are built in Kashmiri style as seen in many monasteries ; the third temple is called the Manjushri Temple ( ' Jam @-@ dpal <unk> @-@ khang ) . Chortens are also an important part of the complex . 
 The artistic and spiritual details of both Buddhism and the Hindu kings of that time in Kashmir are reflected in the wall paintings in the monastery . These are some of the oldest surviving paintings in Ladakh . The complex also has huge statues of the Buddha and elaborate wood carvings and art @-@ work comparable to the baroque style . Shakti <unk> has vividly explained the beauty of this small monastery . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of the monuments in the Alchi complex and in the other two villages in the Alchi group is not precise , in spite of many inscriptions and texts displayed on the walls . 
 Traditionally , the creation of the Alchi complex is attributed to the famous scholar @-@ translator Rinchen Zangpo ( 958 – 1055 ) in the 10th century , along with the <unk> Monastery , the <unk> , the Mang @-@ gyu and the Sumda . During the tenth century , the Tibetan King Yeshe Od of <unk> , in order to spread Buddhism in the Trans Himalayan region , took the initiative by allocating 21 scholars to the region . However , due to harsh climatic and topographic conditions , only two survived , one of them the esteemed scholar and translator Rinchen Zangpo who established Buddhist activity in the Ladakh region and other areas of India including Himachal Pradesh and Sikkim . During his sojourn there , he also went to the neighbouring countries of Nepal , Bhutan and Tibet . Zangpo became known by the epithet “ <unk> ” or the “ Great Translator ” ; he is credited with building 108 monasteries in the trans @-@ Himalayan region in his quest to disseminate Buddhism . He institutionalized Buddhism in the region ; these monasteries are considered the mainstay of Vajrayana of Tibetan Buddhism ( also known as Lamaism ) . Zangpo engaged Kashmiri artists to create wall paintings and sculptures in the legendary 108 monasteries ; only a few of these have survived , with the Alchi Monastery complex in Ladakh having pride of place among all monasteries that he built . 
 Since the monasteries of this period did not belong to any of the established Tibetan schools , they were initially brought under the control of the <unk> order . When the condition of the monasteries deteriorated , they were mostly taken over by the Gelukpa order , with the exception of <unk> which was placed under the <unk> sect . After worship at Alchi monastery ceased for some reason in the fifteenth century , it also became under the Gelugpa sect controlled from <unk> . 
 = = Geography and visitor information = = 
 Alchi is located on the south bank of the Indus River at an altitude of 3 @,@ 100 metres ( 10 @,@ 200 ft ) and 65 kilometres ( 40 mi ) outside of Leh ( to its west ) . Leh is connected by air from Delhi . The road approach to Leh starts at Manali , a route that is accessible from May or June to October , depending on the snow fall conditions in the valley . The village is in the high altitude rain shadow area of Ladakh . It is laid out in four settlements on the banks of a tributary of the Indus River . The monastic complex is separate from the other village settlements . 
 = = Structures = = 
 The monastery complex has three major shrines : the Dukhang ( Assembly hall ) , the Sumtseg and the Temple of Manjushri , all dating from between the early 12th and early 13th centuries . Chortens are also an important part of the complex . In addition , the Alchi complex has two other important temples , the Translator 's temple called the ' <unk> Lakhang ' and a new temple called the ' Lakhang Soma ' . This collection of four small shrines in the Alchi village has been described by The Hindu : 
 ... as a jewel of colours and forms that is so utterly beautiful that the normal state of breathlessness in this high altitude becomes a deep gasp . 
 The artistic and spiritual details of both Buddhism and the Hindu kings of that time in Kashmir are reflected in the wall paintings in the monastery complex . These are some of the oldest surviving paintings in Ladakh . The complex also has huge statues of the Buddha and " lavish wood carvings and art @-@ work — almost baroque in style . " Shakti <unk> vividly explains the beauty of this small monastery as " stylistically rendered in an eclectic mix of Tibetan and Kashmiri faces and clothes . " 
 = = = Dukhang = = = 
 Dukhang or the Assembly Hall is at the heart of the monastery complex , where monks perform worship and ceremonies . It is large and ancient , and the original wooden door frame is retained . Many additions were made to the ancient structure during the 12th and 13th centuries . The colonnaded veranda leads to the hall from a front courtyard and frescoes of one thousand Buddhas are depicted in the passageway . The Wheel of Life and <unk> can be seen at the outer gate . The walls of the Dukhang , dedicated to Panch <unk> , are painted with six different mandalas that surround the <unk> , the main deity worshipped in the hall . The mandalas are set among by many paintings of Buddhas , Bodhisattvas , goddesses , fierce divinities and guardians of dharma , and also lesser divinities . 
 = = = Sumtseg = = = 
 The Alchi Sumtseg in the Alchi complex is one of the most outstanding , but its purpose is not clearly established . The Sumtseg ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) means a three storied building , though small , was built with loam and natural stone ( reflected in the bland exterior ) in the Tibetan building tradition . However , the luxuriant woodwork columns , facades , walls , clay images and paintings in the interior of the monastery were made by Kashmiri artists . The sanctum in the ground floor and the first floor measures 5 @.@ 4 metres ( 18 ft ) <unk> metres ( 19 ft ) with the niches of 2 @.@ 1 – 2 @.@ 7 metres ( 6 @.@ 9 – 8 @.@ 9 ft ) width and 4 metres ( 13 ft ) height ( niches in the main wall are larger in size vis @-@ a @-@ vis the side walls ) . The niches depict the main images of three Bodhisattvas ( all in standing posture and about 4 metres ( 13 ft ) in height ) and its associate secondary deities ( four in each niche ) with two flying goddesses in each niche . Except for the main wooden door on the top floor , which is dilapidated , the rest of the Sumtseg is well preserved in its original form , as built in the early 13th century . The second floor of the building is more in the form of a balcony with a lantern mounting . Image of Maitreya , the largest in size ( 4 @.@ 63 metres ( 15 @.@ 2 ft ) ) , is deified on the back wall and flanked by the images of Avalokiteshwara to its right and Manjushri to its left . An interesting aspect of the elegant drapery ( dhotis ) worn by the deities is the display of different themes printed in different textile patterns ; Maitreya 's dhoti depicts the life of Buddha , the <unk> 's dhoti shows holy places and royal palaces and Manjushri 's dhoti has adepts ( of 84 Mahasiddhas ) printed on it . <unk> , the deities have a single head with four arms but differently portrayed . Each deity is identified to a different Buddha . Maitreya has a five Buddha crown representing <unk> . Avalokiteshwara 's crown represents Amitabha and Manjushri 's crown represents Akshobhya . An inscription in the main niche states that the three images are reliquaries representing body , speech and mind @-@ compared to the three bodies of the Buddha @-@ namely , Maitreya denoting the Buddha body of reality , <unk> representing pure rapture and Manjushri representing <unk> body . In simple terms , they represent the Buddhist concepts of Compassion , Hope and Wisdom . 
 Further , depiction of Buddha ’ s life in textile prints on the dhoti is a unique representation of the cycle of the life of Buddha that is arranged in a reverse sequence . It is in medallion form painted red , with each medallion measuring 15 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) over a blue background . 48 scenes representing 41 episodes with five preaching scenes and two scenes of <unk> – all are arranged in pre @-@ determined sequence representing the events in Buddha 's life between the last journey in Tushita heaven and the first sermon in Sarnath . 
 Dating of the Sumtseg has been made on the basis of the names of the priests inscribed on the top floor of the structure . The last name inscribed is that of the <unk> school of <unk> or <unk> <unk> ( 1143 – 1217 ) from which it is inferred that <unk> was established in the early 13th century . 
 = = = Manjushri Temple = = = 
 From various analysis of the iconography of the temple compared with that of the Sumtseg and Sumda Assembly hall , it has been inferred that the temple dates to around 1225 AD . Manjushri Temple , also called ' <unk> Lhakhang ' , is built around the four central images of Manjushri ( seated back to back ) seen on a common platform that is 5 @.@ 7 metres ( 19 ft ) square . Four pillars form the enclosure for the images ; the pillars are supported with cross bracing connected to the painted wood ceiling . The paintings on the wooden ceiling are similar to those in the Sumtseg and the two chortens , but are unrefined . Located close to the Indus river , the temple is not well preserved except for wood carvings on the doors and pillars . The <unk> or <unk> temple to its left side is a later addition . The Manjushri images are on a common pedestal ( 85 centimetres ( 33 in ) high ) , painted recently to give an overall picture of fright since the decorative scrolls are derived from the tails of Makara surrounded by images of animals , gods and symbols . The normal colour attributed to Manjushri images is orange , but in this temple they are depicted with different colours . 
 Each of the four images is single @-@ headed with four arms that are adorned with a sword , a book on top of a lotus , a bow and an arrow . Each wall in the shrine is dedicated to a Buddha image . Manjushri is depicted on the main wall , seated on a lion throne ; the side walls have images of Amitabha on the right and <unk> on the left . The images are set around the central image of Manjushri in a niche in the wall . Manjushri is adorned with jewellery ( pearls and other moulded forms ) and a crown made of a flower band . In the base of the throne on which the Manjushri image is deified , is a depiction of ' Seven Jewels ' and ' Eight Suspicious Symbols ' ( flanked by lions ) enclosed in a square frame that is distinctive . The top of the throne frame has makara mountings . 
 = = = Chortens = = = 
 The earliest recorded Chortens are the Great Chorten and the Small Chorten ( stupa ) to the early 13th century , following the building of the Sumtseg . These chortens are decorated gateways known locally as ' <unk> <unk> ' and ' Ka @-@ ka @-@ ni <unk> @-@ <unk> ' that are considered unique to Alchi with historical link to other monuments . More chortens were added between the 13th and 14th centuries . In the Alchi complex , there are also three other chortens , which have ancient paintings . 
 = Hemlock Hoax , the Detective = 
 Hemlock Hoax , the Detective is an American short comedy film produced and distributed in 1910 by the Lubin Manufacturing Company . The silent film features a detective named Hemlock Hoax who tries to solve a murder , which unbeknownst to him is a practical joke being played on him by two young boys . It was one of many shorts designed to derive its humor from a sleuth whose name was similar to Sherlock Holmes . 
 The character of Hemlock Hoax was based on a minor character from a film story that had been rejected . The finished film was released in April as a split reel , being presented with two other Lubin comedies . The black @-@ and @-@ white short received positive reviews with several journalists praising the film 's humor . It is unclear whether there is a surviving print of the film , and the identities of the film 's cast and crew are not recorded . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Hemlock Hoax is a detective who has little respect in the small tropical town where he lives , despite the fact that he thinks he is a better sleuth than Sherlock Holmes . A pair of boys decide to play a trick on Hoax and tell him about a murder . Hoax rushes to scene of the crime where he discovers a shred of cloth , later finding that a tramp is wearing the same type of clothes that he found . The tramp runs away and Hoax gives chase , with other people helping the pursuit . Eventually , Hoax captures the tramp with the aid of a police officer , and returns to the victim 's body with the man . Hoax then comes to a realization that the body was just a dummy that had been stuffed with the leaves . The crowd has a laugh at Hoax 's expense while the two boys are punished . 
 = = Production = = 
 Hemlock Hoax , the Detective was produced by the Lubin Manufacturing Company , a company founded by German @-@ American film pioneer Siegmund Lubin . It was known for producing films that were similar to others successful at the time . Author Ron Haydock wrote in his book Holmes and Watson On Screen that Hemlock Hoax " was another in the long and ever @-@ growing line of comedies that were having fun with sleuths whose names were similar to [ Sherlock ] Holmes " . 
 The featured character of Hemlock Hoax had originally been a minor character in a film story that had been rejected before he appeared in Hemlock Hoax , the Detective . It is a silent film and was filmed in black @-@ and @-@ white , and the finished product comprised 232 feet ( 71 m ) of film . The identities of the cast and crew are not recorded . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Hemlock Hoax , the Detective was released on April 11 , 1910 , being distributed by the Lubin Manufacturing Company . Advertising touted the film as " a roaring comedy that cannot but be funny . " The film was a split @-@ reeler , and was presented alongside the Lubin comedies Jones ' Watch , about a man who believes his watch has been robbed , and The Fisherman 's Luck , centering on a fisherman who causes mischief while at the lake one day . 
 Hemlock Hoax , the Detective received positive reviews upon release . An article in film journal The Moving Picture World written by an unnamed journalist opined that the fact that the films only totaled up to 990 feet ( 300 m ) and yet had " three strong comedy subjects on the same reel " was notable . The reviewer wrote that " the three topics are so entirely different that there is no <unk> and the reel is one of the best comedy offerings in a long time . " 
 Another Moving Picture World reviewer wrote positively of the film , opining " the acting is clever , developing many amusing features as it proceeds . To see a detective hunting <unk> with a magnifying glass is funny indeed . " A May review in Indiana newspaper The Huntington Herald described the film positively as " a comical detective picture full of exciting situations " . 
 A review in Connecticut newspaper The New London Day lauded the three films , writing that the pictures were " a trio of laugh <unk> . " Hemlock Hoax , the Detective was still being screened as late as October 1911 . As of October 2009 , it is unclear whether there is a surviving print of Hemlock Hoax , the Detective ; it has likely become a lost film . If rediscovered , the film would be in the public domain . 
 = Mark O. Hatfield Library = 
 The Mark O. Hatfield Library is the main library at Willamette University in Salem , Oregon , United States . Opened in 1986 , it is a member of the Hatfield Library Consortium along with several library lending networks and is a designated Federal depository library . Willamette 's original library was established in 1844 , two years after the school was founded . The library was housed in Waller Hall before moving to its own building ( now Smullin Hall ) in 1938 . 
 Two @-@ stories tall , the library contains over 350 @,@ 000 volumes overall in its collections , and includes the school 's archives . Designed by <unk> Architects , the red @-@ brick building has glass edifices on two sides and a clocktower outside the main entrance . The building also includes a 24 @-@ hour study area , private study rooms , and a classroom . The academic library is named in honor of former Senator Mark O. Hatfield , a 1943 graduate of Willamette and former member of the faculty . 
 = = History = = 
 Founded in 1844 , Willamette University 's library was started two years after the establishment of the school . The library grew to a size of 2 @,@ 500 volumes in 1874 . University Hall ( now Waller Hall ) , which was built in 1867 , was one of the homes of the library in the early years . The library was located on the third floor of the building . The early name for the institution was the Willamette University Library , which by 1901 was a free , general library with both circulating and reference collections . That year the library collection had grown to 4 @,@ 686 volumes , along with a total of 2 @,@ 753 pamphlets . 
 By 1909 the school library had 6 @,@ 000 books valued at $ 3 @,@ 500 and Ray D. Fisher as librarian . During November of that year the library received new furniture as Eaton Hall opened , and many departments were moved to it from Waller Hall . The library was re @-@ cataloged in 1912 by Lucia Haley , a specialist from New York City hired by the school for this task . At that time the librarian was Dr. Lyle . Plans at this time called for constructing a building where the Art Building now stands to serve as a memorial to the pioneers of the university . This was to be the future home of the library , but the building was never built . In 1913 , the librarian was Mary Field , and the collection was still about 6 @,@ 000 volumes . Field was replaced the following year by Fannie J. Elliot . 
 On December 17 , 1919 , a fire gutted Waller Hall , the home of the library . The school rebuilt the interior of the hall , with construction beginning in February 1920 . The library was moved to the second floor of the rebuilt structure and reopened in December 1920 . At that time William E. Kirk was the librarian and the facility had a capacity of 100 people . By 1922 the collection had grown to 16 @,@ 000 volumes , and F. G. Franklin served as the school 's librarian . 
 In 1937 , construction began on a new concrete and brick @-@ faced building to house the library . Completed in 1938 , the building housed a collection that grew to 35 @,@ 000 volumes in 1940 . Now known as Smullin Hall , the library building was designed by architect Pietro Belluschi in the Georgian style of architecture . In 1965 , the school received a $ 450 @,@ 000 loan from the federal government for the library . Congressman Al Ullman worked to secure status as a Federal Depository Library in the late 1960s , with status conferred in 1969 . In 1980 , Willamette began a multi @-@ year fund raising campaign intended to raise funds to renovate academic halls and build a new library , with $ 18 million total raised during the funding drive . At the time the library held a collection of 143 @,@ 000 volumes . 
 Plans for a new library to be named in honor of alumnus and former faculty member Mark Hatfield were announced in the spring of 1985 . Originally estimated to cost $ 6 @.@ 8 million , groundbreaking was on April 13 , 1985 , with Hatfield in attendance . On September 4 , 1986 , the new library building was dedicated in a ceremony featuring Hatfield , then Senator Bob Packwood , and then Librarian of Congress Daniel J. <unk> . Then school president Jerry E. Hudson presided over the ceremony that had over 700 people in attendance . 
 All funds for the $ 7 @.@ 4 million library came from private donors that numbered over 1 @,@ 300 companies , individuals , or non @-@ profit organizations . Large donations came from the Fred Meyer Charitable Trust , the M. J. Murdock Charitable Trust , and The Collins Foundation . Construction was a part of a broader plan to open up the southern portion of the campus after railroad tracks were removed in 1981 and the Mill Race re @-@ routed and landscaped . 
 The library lost a rare book in 1999 when a vandal used a <unk> to cut out the 30 pages of The Old Days in and Near Salem , Oregon . A limited edition art book , a replacement was donated to the school by the Oregon State Library . In 2002 , the library received a $ 500 @,@ 000 grant from the Meyer Memorial Trust for the library ’ s archives department . The library dedicated the Hatfield Library Consortium in September 2002 that includes the two state run libraries and the university ’ s law library . These four libraries share a common online card catalog . 
 = = Building = = 
 Located in the middle of Willamette 's campus along the Mill Race , the Hatfield library was built in 1986 with the design by Theodore Wofford of <unk> Architects in St. Louis , Missouri . The building is two @-@ stories tall and has a total of 58 @,@ 000 square feet ( 5 @,@ 400 m2 ) . Architectural plans allow for the addition of a third floor to the structure . 
 The library is a modern looking rectangular structure with orange brick and clear glass which is adjacent to Glenn Jackson Plaza and Hudson 's Bay , with the Mill Race flowing by on the north side . The north and south faces are clear glass , while the other two sides are brick . The exterior walls taper slightly outward on the brick sides of the building . Bricks on these sides were laid horizontally , while the overhanging roof line contains bricks that were laid vertically . A glass @-@ enclosed stairwell and the main entrance near the northwest corner are the only parts that jut out from the primarily rectangular building . 
 Inside , the Hatfield Library contains a 24 @-@ hour study area , private study rooms , a classroom , the university 's archives , and listening rooms . On the main floor is the circulation desk , reference section , and work stations , among others . The building also holds a formal reception area , the Mark O. Hatfield Room , and the Hatfield archives that contain the former Senator 's papers , both located on the second floor . Interior space was left mainly open to allow for flexibility with the evolving needs and technology of the library . Artist Dean Larson painted the portrait of Hatfield that hangs in the library . 
 Outside the library is a 61 @.@ 75 @-@ foot ( 18 @.@ 82 m ) tall steel and brick clock tower . The tower has one clock face on each of the four sides , a copper roof , and glass running down each side towards the 18 ton base . The glass consists of vertical panels created by taking strips of bent glass and weaving them together . There are inscriptions of various quotes in the exposed portions of the concrete on the tower . Lawrence Halperin was responsible for the landscaping designs of the library . 
 = = Operations = = 
 Hatfield Library is the main library on Willamette 's campus , with the law school 's library as the only other library at the school . The director of the library is Deborah B. <unk> , who heads a staff of 23 employees , of which 10 are librarians , and a total budget of $ 1 @,@ 771 @,@ 376 in expenditures in 2006 . The library averages 6 @,@ 720 visitors weekly at the school with 2 @,@ 700 students . Regular circulation transactions totaled 39 @,@ 764 in 2004 , with an additional 46 @,@ 004 in reference requests . 
 = = = Collections = = = 
 The library contains over 390 @,@ 000 volumes , more than 317 @,@ 000 titles , and over 1 @,@ 400 journal subscriptions . These collections include periodicals , books , newspapers , microforms , sound recordings , videos , government documents , CD @-@ <unk> , and musical scores . As of 2006 , this includes 365 @,@ 609 volumes of books , past issues of periodicals , and other printed sources ; 11 @,@ 508 items in the audio visual collection ; 5 @,@ 147 subscriptions to periodicals ; and 337 @,@ 918 microforms . The library also offers access to electronic sources through <unk> , <unk> , OCLC , EPIC , and <unk> among others . Additionally , university publications such as the yearbook ( The <unk> ) , the student newspaper ( Willamette Collegian ) , school catalogs , the Willamette Journal of the Liberal Arts , and the Willamette Scene among others , are collected by the library . 
 Hatfield Library is a member of <unk> , Northwest Association of Private Colleges and Universities ( <unk> ) , Summit , Valley Link , and the Hatfield Library Consortium lending networks . These networks allow students to borrow additional materials from other member libraries and institutions from around the Pacific Northwest . As of 2006 , this led to Willamette providing 17 @,@ 869 interlibrary loans while requesting 14 @,@ 650 of these loans . 
 Hatfield Library also contains the Mark O. Hatfield Archives containing the papers , memorabilia , and books of the former United States Senator and Willamette alumni . The papers include those from his time in the Oregon legislature through his time in the Senate and after leaving the Senate . Hatfield ’ s personal library is part of the regular library catalog , however the books are non @-@ circulating . The rest of the collection is not open to the public , as Hatfield 's archives will not become accessible until 20 years after his death . The library also contains the university 's archives on the second floor . The climate @-@ controlled archives are housed in a 1 @,@ 500 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 140 m2 ) area that includes offices for staff , including the school 's official archivist . 
 Willamette ’ s library was designated as a Federal Depository Library in 1969 . It serves as the library for the 5th Congressional District population . The library selects around 20 % of the documents available with areas of concentration in earth sciences , education , history , politics , economics , health , accounting , business , government , public policy , human resources , and others . Additionally , the university selects major items from the Census Bureau , Bureau of Labor Statistics , the office of the President , and Congress . Other materials come from the Smithsonian Institution , the Small Business Administration , the Department of State , and the Department of Education to list a few . 
 = = = Consortium = = = 
 The Hatfield Library Consortium is a cooperative library catalog shared between several libraries in Salem . Participating libraries are the State of Oregon Law Library at the Oregon Supreme Court Building , the Oregon State Library , the Hatfield Library , and Willamette University College of Law 's J. W. Long Library . This public @-@ private cooperative network allows students and the state government to share resources to expand the breadth of research . Dedicated on September 4 , 2002 , the consortium started in 2000 when the libraries received a $ 215 @,@ 000 federal grant . The collection includes more than 500 @,@ 000 records . 
 = = Namesake = = 
 The Mark O. Hatfield Library is named for the former Senator and Governor of Oregon , Mark Odom Hatfield . Hatfield was born west of Salem in Dallas , Oregon , in 1922 and graduated from Salem High School in 1940 . He graduated from Willamette University in 1943 and joined the U.S. Navy to fight in World War II . After the war Hatfield obtained a graduate degree from Stanford University before returning to Willamette as a professor and then as a dean . During this time he also served in Oregon ’ s legislature before becoming Oregon Secretary of State , and then in 1958 he was elected as Oregon ’ s governor . In 1966 , he was elected to the United States Senate and served there until his retirement in 1997 . He died in 2011 . 
 = Deogarh , Uttar Pradesh = 
 Deogarh is a village in Lalitpur district of the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh . It is located on the right bank of Betwa River and to the west of Lalitpur hills . It is known for Gupta monuments and for many ancient monuments of Hindu and Jain origins are in and outside the walls of the fort . 
 The Gupta temple dedicated to the Hindu god Vishnu , popularly known as the Dashavatara Temple , is the earliest known <unk> temple in North India . The fort on the hill is dominated by a cluster of Jain temples on its eastern part , the oldest of these dating to the 8th or 9th century . Apart from Jain temples , the wall frescoes of Jain images of " iconographic and the stylistic variety " , are special features of the fort . The three ghats ( ghat means " flight of stone steps leading to the river " ) , which provide approach to the Betwa river edge from the fort — the Nahar Ghat , the Rajghat and the ghat with the <unk> ki Ghufa ( saints cave ) — are also of archeological significance . 
 The Deogarh monuments are protected by the Department of Archaeology of the Archaeological Survey of India ( ASI ) , and managed through its Northern Circle Office located in Agra . ASI maintain an archaeological museum at the Deogarh site , which is noted for its treasured archaeological sculptures . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 " Deogarh " derives from the Sanskrit Deo and <unk> , " God " and " fort " , compounded to mean " fort of the Gods " . This term , " House of God " , is also widely used as a place name for villages in the vicinity of temples within fort @-@ walls throughout India . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Deogarh village lies on the right bank of the Betwa River , at the point where it joins the reservoir formed by the Rajghat Dam . The village is at the western end of the Lalitpur hill range , situated 23 kilometres ( 14 mi ) south @-@ east from Lalitpur town in Lalitpur district and 123 kilometres ( 76 mi ) south of the divisional administrative centre at Jhansi . The village is spread over an area of 5 square kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 sq mi ) with an average elevation of 211 metres ( 692 ft ) . 
 The fort of Deogarh is in a valley which generally has a gentle slope . The valley is formed by the Betwa River at the western end of the hills of the Vindhya Range . Known earlier as <unk> ( Sanskrit , meaning " containing reeds " ) , the Betwa River is a tributary of the Yamuna River , and skirts the fort hill on its southern side . The river , flowing at a bend near the fort , has a rocky bed . It flows in a cascade of deep pools with steep rocky banks of sandstone formations . The fort is located on a precipice of the steep cliff , just above the river on its right bank . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the 1991 Census , the population of the Deogarh village was 553 . Hindi and <unk> are the languages spoken in the area . The Census figures of 2001 for the Deogarh village in <unk> block of Lalitpur district ( Rural ) , has recorded a population of 699 covering 125 households . The distribution of male and female population was 375 and 320 respectively . The village had presence of 314 Schedule Caste ( SC ) population ( Male @-@ 164 and Female @-@ 150 ) . The literacy rate recorded was 43 @.@ 77 % ( 306 persons out of total of 699 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Deogarh 's strategic location on the ancient route to the Deccan Plateau made it a historically important place . Its antiquarian , archaeological and epigraphical importance are linked to the Gupta period , the Gurjara – <unk> , the <unk> , the Muslim rulers of Delhi , the Marathas and the British eras . 
 The earliest religious influence in the Deogarh area can be traced to the Gupta period ( 320 @-@ 550 ) , known as the " golden period " of Indian history . This was followed by the Jain period between the 8th and 17th centuries , where innumerable temples have been traced . 
 The present village 's history has not been examined at depth , even though many inscriptions have been located in the fort and the valley , relating to various stylistic and palaeographical denominations . Although the dynasties who ruled over the territory are known , who built what is not clear , except for the Jain temples , which were built by the merchant Jain community . More archaeological explorations would therefore be essential , to establish the linkages of building activities with the dynasties who ruled over the territory , considering the enormous amount of Hindu and Jain temple remains and artifacts found here . 
 The earliest history of Deogarh is that of the architectural evolution traced to the ancient Gupta period , which flourished between the 4th and 6th centuries in Northern India . During this period , the arts , science and literature saw aesthetic evolution . It was the period when Brahminical , Buddhist and Jain activities flourished . 
 During this time , sculptural arts peaked and " India entered upon the classical phase of sculpture " . Even though Guptas were Hindu rulers , the cultures of Buddhism and Jainism also flourished during their reign . During this period , Buddhist sculptures were more puritanical with total elimination of nudity in its depictions . However , transparent tight fitting drapery were dictated by moral values and hence , were restrained . Indian temple architecture emerged with figurine sculptures in decorative settings , attaining excellence of form . This is inferred from the large panel of Sheshashayi Vishnu ( Hindu god Vishnu reclining on the serpent Shesha ) at the Deogarh temple . < <unk> to > 
 = = Monuments = = 
 The Deogarh monuments can be categorized based on their location at valley and fort temples , which are generally built with sand stones of brick @-@ red colour . The valley temples consist mainly of Hindu temples from the Gupta period near the Deogarh village . 
 = = = <unk> Temple = = = 
 The fort temples are dominated by the Jain temples in the eastern part of the hill fort ; the <unk> images here are mostly of the " iconographic and the stylistic variety " . The Jain temples have a large number of panels depicting scenes from Jain mythology , tirthankara images and votive tablets . The pillars are carved with a thousand Jain figures . 
 According to a survey conducted by the Archaeological Survey of India ( ASI ) , 31 Jain temples of different sizes , age and character have been deciphered . All these are dated later than the Hindu temples . They are categorized into two distinct periods : the early medieval period from 850 to 950 , and the medieval period between 950 and 1150 . During the Islamic iconoclastic depredations , the temples were devastated ; this was compounded by the growth of vegetation and neglect of maintenance . 
 The Jain temples have also been examined individually and reports prepared by ASI . The number of images and inscriptions for each temple have been recorded . These findings testify their political history and early medieval status . Out of the many sculptures in the Jaina compound , at least 400 carvings were worthy of recording for their " stylistic and iconographic variety " . 
 The extravagance of the intricacies of the Jain sculptures are similar to that of nearby Gwalior in Madhya Pradesh and adjoining areas of Bihar . Jain sculptures lie scattered on both sides of the path from the gate , on the walls of the fort . A notable pillar seen here is called the <unk> . The complete image of each of the 24 tirthankaras depicting the emblem of a bird , flower or animal are seen here . Images of Yaksha and <unk> are also part of such depictions . Thousands of sculptures are seen embedded in the walls surrounding the complex . The large number of idols lying scattered around the fort area is attributed to the fact that this was the sculptors ' workshop . 
 Worship at some of the Jain temples are still held regularly . The most famous of the Jain temples in the fort is the <unk> temple , which was built before 862 AD . It is testament that a prosperous Jain community lived in this region . In 1959 , robbers looted a number of Jain images or even cut off heads of many images . This resulted in the Jain community of the area taking precautionary action by setting up a temple committee . This temple committee oversees the protection of the monuments and work to improve the ambience of the entire place . It has been suggested however , that restoration works be carried out on more scientific terms , following guidelines set by " UNESCO 's World Heritage Sites " . 
 Within a 50 miles ( 80 km ) radius from Deogarh , the <unk> community of Jains have lived in 1 @,@ 438 towns and villages ( as per 1924 records ) ; the largest number of them living in Lalitpur . 
 = = = Dashavatara temple = = = 
 The " Gupta Temple " , dedicated to god Vishnu , was first discovered by Captain Charles Strahan . It was given its name by the archaeologist , <unk> . Archaeologists have inferred that it is the earliest known Panchayatana temple in North India . It was subsequently renamed by Cunningham as Dashavatara Mandir or Dashavatara Temple ( because the temple depicts ten incarnations of Vishnu ) , and also as Sagar <unk> ( meaning : the temple by the well ) . It was the first North Indian temple with a shikhara or tower , although the shikhara is curtailed and part of it has disappeared . The temple has a high plinth and is set with a basement porch . The Dashavatara temple has a " compelling presence " in spite of its dilapidated condition . Sculpted panels are seen on the terraced basement , with carved figurines of river goddesses Ganga and Yamuna flanking the doorway to the sanctum sanctorum . In addition , on the side walls , three large carved panels of Vaishnava mythology related to Gajendra Moksha , the Nara Narayana <unk> ( austerities ) , and the Sheshashayi Vishnu ( reclining on the serpent ) , are portrayed . A protective wall made of undressed stone was built around the temple after it was first discovered . However , the idol of the sanctum sanctorum of the temple is missing , believed to have been relocated <unk> ancient treatise Vishnudharmottara Purana describes several temples including a " <unk> temple " , which has been identified by archaeologists and Indologists with the Dashavatara Temple . 
 = = = Fort = = = 
 The fort on the hill is located a few hundred yards east of Deogarh village . The fort , when originally built , was known as ' <unk> ' . Subsequently , it was renamed " <unk> " after it was built in 1057 ( <unk> 1154 ) during the reign of Chandela King Kirtivarman . However , some believe that fort was built earlier by the Pratihara rulers of Kannauj in the 9th century , changed hands from the builders to the <unk> and the <unk> , before it came under the control of the <unk> of Gwalior . 
 The fort has an external wall for the most part , except in stretches where the steep hill slopes towards the Betwa river . It is also subdivided by many internal walls . A circular structure , the west gate and the east gate ( south @-@ east of the Jain temples ) are notable monuments . Additionally , there are two gates of entry into the fort , the " Hathi <unk> " meaning " Elephant gate " , and " Delhi <unk> " which means " Delhi gate " . 
 There are three ghats which provide approach to the Betwa river edge , which have archaeological significance . These are the Nahar Ghat , the Rajghat and the Ghat , with the Siddi ki Ghufa ( Saints cave ) . 
 The Nahar Ghat ( " <unk> " means boat ) at the east end of the fort , has steep steps that go down from the plateau of the fort to the Betwa river . The ghat is aligned parallel to the wall of the cliff and the river . The " Siddhi ki Ghufa " ( Cave of the Saint ) , is an archaeological find , located on the cliff wall to the left , along the descent from the <unk> Ghat . While descending via the Rajghat , the cliff wall is to the right . It is a plain cave . The cave depicts , on its right , an image of the goddess Mahishasuramardini . 
 The cliffs above the three ghats are embellished with Gupta sculptures and inscriptions dating from various periods . The Nahar Ghat has about a dozen niches , which house lingas and various deities . From an archaeological perspective , this ghat is considered the richest of the three flights of steps . The Rajghat ( Kings steps ) also accommodate more than a dozen niches with lingas and statues , but the sculptures are small and in an unfinished state . 
 Matrika statues ( seated ) are also important archaeological finds at the <unk> Ghat and Rajghat sections , as they establish early sculptural activity in the 6th century . Both these matrika panels are flanked by images of <unk> Shiva ( Shiva as " bearer of the <unk> " ) and his son Ganesha , though with differences in detailing . The sculpted figurines show large breasts , tiny waists and broad hips . 
 The Varaha temple is also situated in the southeast corner of the fort . But it is in ruins except for a few architectural fragments . 
 = Capture of Fort Ticonderoga = 
 The Capture of Fort Ticonderoga occurred during the American Revolutionary War on May 10 , 1775 , when a small force of Green Mountain Boys led by Ethan Allen and Colonel Benedict Arnold overcame a small British garrison at the fort and looted the personal belongings of the garrison . Cannons and other armaments from the fort were later transported to Boston and used to fortify Dorchester Heights and break the standoff at the Siege of Boston . 
 After seizing Ticonderoga , a small detachment captured the nearby Fort Crown Point on May 11 . Seven days later , Arnold and 50 men boldly raided Fort Saint @-@ Jean on the Richelieu River in southern Quebec , seizing military supplies , cannons , and the largest military vessel on Lake Champlain . 
 Although the scope of this military action was relatively minor , it had significant strategic importance . It impeded communication between northern and southern units of the British Army , and gave the nascent Continental Army a staging ground for the invasion of Quebec later in 1775 . It also involved two larger @-@ than @-@ life personalities in Allen and Arnold , each of whom sought to gain as much credit and honor as possible for these events . Most significantly , artillery from Ticonderoga would be dragged across Massachusetts to the heights commanding Boston Harbor , forcing the British to withdraw from that city . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1775 , Fort Ticonderoga 's location did not appear to be as strategically important as it had been in the French and Indian War , when the French famously defended it against a much larger British force in the 1758 Battle of Carillon , and when the British captured it in 1759 . After the 1763 Treaty of Paris , in which the French ceded their North American territories to the British , the fort was no longer on the frontier of two great empires , guarding the principal waterway between them . The French had blown up the fort 's powder magazine when they abandoned the fort , and it had fallen further into disrepair since then . In 1775 it was garrisoned by only a small detachment of the 26th Regiment of Foot , consisting of two officers and forty @-@ six men , with many of them " invalids " ( soldiers with limited duties because of disability or illness ) . Twenty @-@ five women and children lived there as well . Because of its former significance , Fort Ticonderoga still had a high reputation as the " gateway to the continent " or the " Gibraltar of America " , but in 1775 it was , according to historian Christopher Ward , " more like a backwoods village than a fort . " 
 Even before shooting started in the American Revolutionary War , American Patriots were concerned about Fort Ticonderoga . The fort was a valuable asset for several reasons . Within its walls was a collection of heavy artillery including cannons , howitzers , and mortars , armaments that the Americans had in short supply . The fort was situated on the shores of Lake Champlain , a strategically important route between the Thirteen Colonies and the British @-@ controlled northern provinces . British forces placed there would expose the colonial forces in Boston to attack from the rear . After the war began with the Battles of Lexington and Concord on April 19 , 1775 , the British General Thomas Gage realized the fort would require fortification , and several colonists had the idea of capturing the fort . 
 Gage , writing from the besieged city of Boston following Lexington and Concord , instructed Quebec 's governor , General Guy Carleton , to rehabilitate and refortify the forts at Ticonderoga and Crown Point . Carleton did not receive this letter until May 19 , well after the fort had been captured . 
 Benedict Arnold had frequently traveled through the area around the fort , and was familiar with its condition , manning , and armaments . En route to Boston following news of the events of April 19 , he mentioned the fort and its condition to members of Silas Deane 's militia . The Connecticut Committee of Correspondence acted on this information ; money was " borrowed " from the provincial coffers and recruiters were sent into northwestern Connecticut , western Massachusetts , and the New Hampshire Grants ( now Vermont ) to raise volunteers for an attack on the fort . 
 John Brown , an American spy from Pittsfield , Massachusetts who had carried correspondence between revolutionary committees in the Boston area and Patriot supporters in Montreal , was well aware of the fort and its strategic value . Ethan Allen and other Patriots in the disputed New Hampshire Grants territory also recognized the fort 's value , as it played a role in the dispute over that area between New York and New Hampshire . Whether either took or instigated action prior to the Connecticut Colony 's recruitment efforts is unclear . Brown had notified the Massachusetts Committee of Safety in March of his opinion that Ticonderoga " must be seized as soon as possible should hostilities be committed by the King 's Troops . " 
 When Arnold arrived outside Boston , he told the Massachusetts Committee of Safety about the cannons and other military equipment at the lightly defended fort . On May 3 , the Committee gave Arnold a colonel 's commission and authorized him to command a " secret mission " , which was to capture the fort . He was issued £ 100 , some gunpowder , ammunition , and horses , and instructed to recruit up to 400 men , march on the fort , and ship back to Massachusetts anything he thought useful . 
 = = Colonial forces assemble = = 
 Arnold departed immediately after receiving his instructions . He was accompanied by two captains , <unk> Oswald and Jonathan Brown , who were charged with recruiting the necessary men . Arnold reached the border between Massachusetts and the Grants on May 6 , where he learned of the recruitment efforts of the Connecticut Committee , and that Ethan Allen and the Green Mountain Boys were already on their way north . Riding furiously northward ( his horse was subsequently destroyed ) , he reached Allen 's headquarters in Bennington the next day . Upon arrival , Arnold was told that Allen was in Castleton , 50 miles ( 80 km ) to the north , awaiting supplies and more men . He was also warned that , although Allen 's effort had no official sanction , his men were unlikely to serve under anyone else . Leaving early the next day , Arnold arrived in Castleton in time to join a war council , where he made a case to lead the expedition based on his formal authorization to act from the Massachusetts Committee . 
 The force that Allen had assembled in Castleton included about 100 Green Mountain Boys , about 40 men raised by James Easton and John Brown at Pittsfield , and an additional 20 men from Connecticut . Allen was elected colonel , with Easton and Seth Warner as his lieutenants . When Arnold arrived on the scene , Samuel Herrick had already been sent to Skenesboro and Asa Douglas to Panton with detachments to secure boats . Captain Noah Phelps , a member of the " Committee of War for the Expedition against Ticonderoga and Crown Point " , had reconnoitered the fort disguised as a peddler seeking a shave . He saw that the fort walls were dilapidated , learned from the garrison commander that the soldiers ' gunpowder was wet , and that they expected reinforcements at any time . He reported this intelligence to Allen , following which they planned a dawn raid . 
 Many of the Green Mountain Boys objected to Arnold 's wish to command , insisting that they would go home rather than serve under anyone other than Ethan Allen . Arnold and Allen worked out an agreement , but no documented evidence exists concerning the deal . According to Arnold , he was given joint command of the operation . Some historians have supported Arnold 's contention , while others suggest he was merely given the right to march next to Allen . 
 = = Capture of the fort = = 
 By 11 : 30 pm on May 9 , the men had assembled at Hand 's Cove ( in what is now Shoreham , Vermont ) and were ready to cross the lake to Ticonderoga . However , boats did not arrive until 1 : 30 am , and they were inadequate to carry the whole force . Eighty @-@ three of the Green Mountain Boys made the first crossing with Arnold and Allen , and Douglas went back for the rest . As dawn approached , Allen and Arnold became fearful of losing the element of surprise , so they decided to attack with the men at hand . The only sentry on duty at the south gate fled his post after his musket misfired , and the Americans rushed into the fort . The Patriots then roused the small number of sleeping troops at gunpoint , and began confiscating their weapons . Allen , Arnold , and a few other men charged up the stairs toward the officers ' quarters . Lieutenant Jocelyn Feltham , assistant to Captain William Delaplace , was awakened by the noise , and called to wake the captain . Stalling for time , Feltham demanded to know by what authority the fort was being entered . Allen , who later claimed that he said it to Captain Delaplace , replied , " In the name of the Great Jehovah and the Continental Congress ! " Delaplace finally emerged from his chambers ( fully clothed , not with " his breeches in his hand " , as Allen would later say ) and surrendered his sword . 
 Nobody was killed in the assault . The only injury was to one American , Gideon Warren , who was slightly injured by a sentry with a bayonet . Eventually , as many as 400 men arrived at the fort , which they plundered for liquor and other provisions . Arnold , whose authority was not recognized by the Green Mountain Boys , was unable to stop the plunder . Frustrated , he retired to the captain 's quarters to await forces that he had recruited , reporting to the Massachusetts Provincial Congress that Allen and his men were " governing by whim and caprice " at the fort , and that the plan to strip the fort and send armaments to Boston was in peril . When Delaplace protested the seizure of his private liquor stores , Allen issued him a receipt for the stores , which he later submitted to Connecticut for payment . Arnold 's disputes with Allen and his unruly men were severe enough that there were times when some of Allen 's men drew weapons . 
 On May 12 , Allen sent the prisoners to Connecticut 's Governor Jonathan Trumbull with a note saying " I make you a present of a Major , a Captain , and two Lieutenants of the regular Establishment of George the Third . " Arnold busied himself over the next few days with cataloging the military equipment at Ticonderoga and Crown Point , a task made difficult by the fact that walls had collapsed on some of the armaments . 
 = = Crown Point and the raid on Fort Saint @-@ Jean = = 
 Seth Warner sailed a detachment up the lake and captured nearby Fort Crown Point , garrisoned by only nine men . It is widely recorded that this capture occurred on May 10 ; this is attributed to a letter Arnold wrote to the Massachusetts Committee of Safety on May 11 , claiming that an attempt to sail up to Crown Point was frustrated by headwinds . However Warner claimed , in a letter dated May 12 from " Head Quarters , Crown Point " , that he " took possession of this garrison " the day before . It appears likely that , having failed on May 10 , the attempt was repeated the next day with success , as reported in Warner 's memoir . A small force was also sent to capture Fort George on Lake George , which was held by only two soldiers . 
 Troops recruited by Arnold 's captains began to arrive , some after seizing Philip Skene 's schooner Katherine and several bateaux at Skenesboro . Arnold rechristened the schooner Liberty . The prisoners had reported that the lone British warship on Lake Champlain was at Fort Saint @-@ Jean , on the Richelieu River north of the lake . Arnold , uncertain whether word of Ticonderoga 's capture had reached Saint @-@ Jean , decided to attempt a raid to capture the ship . He had Liberty outfitted with guns , and sailed north with 50 of his men on May 14 . Allen , not wanting Arnold to get the full glory for that capture , followed with some of his men in bateaux , but Arnold 's small fleet had the advantage of sail , and pulled away from Allen 's boats . By May 17 , Arnold 's small fleet was at the northern end of the lake . Seeking intelligence , Arnold sent a man to reconnoiter the situation at Fort Saint @-@ Jean . The scout returned later that day , reporting that the British were aware of the fall of Ticonderoga and Crown Point , and that troops were apparently on the move toward Saint @-@ Jean . Arnold decided to act immediately . 
 Rowing all night , Arnold and 35 of his men brought their bateaux near the fort . After a brief scouting excursion , they surprised the small garrison at the fort , and seized supplies there , along with the HMS Royal George , a seventy @-@ ton sloop . Warned by their captives that several companies were on their way from Chambly , they loaded the more valuable supplies and cannons on the George , which Arnold renamed the Enterprise . Boats that they could not take were sunk , and the enlarged fleet returned to Lake Champlain . This activity was observed by Moses Hazen , a retired British officer who lived near the fort . Hazen rode to Montreal to report the action to the local military commander , and then continued on to Quebec City , where he reported the news to General Carleton on May 20 . Major Charles Preston and 140 men were immediately dispatched from Montreal to Saint @-@ Jean in response to Hazen 's warning . 
 Fifteen miles out on the lake , Arnold 's fleet met Allen 's , which was still heading north . After an exchange of celebratory gunfire , Arnold opened his stores to feed Allen 's men , who had rowed 100 miles ( 160 km ) in open boats without provisions . Allen , believing he could seize and hold Fort Saint @-@ Jean , continued north , while Arnold sailed south . Allen arrived at Saint @-@ Jean on May 19 , where he was warned that British troops were approaching by a sympathetic Montreal merchant who had raced ahead of those troops on horseback . Allen , after penning a message for the merchant to deliver to the citizens of Montreal , returned to Ticonderoga on May 21 , leaving Saint @-@ Jean just as the British forces arrived . In their haste to escape the British , three men were left behind ; one was captured , but the other two eventually returned south by land . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Ethan Allen and his men eventually drifted away from Ticonderoga , especially once the alcohol began to run out , and Arnold largely controlled affairs from a base at Crown Point . He oversaw the fitting of the two large ships , eventually taking command of Enterprise because of a lack of knowledgeable seamen . His men began rebuilding Ticonderoga 's barracks , and worked to extract armaments from the rubble of the two forts and build gun carriages for them . 
 Connecticut sent about 1 @,@ 000 men under Colonel Benjamin Hinman to hold Ticonderoga , and New York also began to raise militia to defend Crown Point and Ticonderoga against a possible British attack from the north . When Hinman 's troops arrived in June , there was once again a clash over leadership . None of the communications to Arnold from the Massachusetts committee indicated that he was to serve under Hinman ; when Hinman attempted to assert authority over Crown Point , Arnold refused to accept it , as Hinman 's instructions only included Ticonderoga . The Massachusetts committee eventually sent a delegation to Ticonderoga . When they arrived on June 22 they made it clear to Arnold that he was to serve under Hinman . Arnold , after considering for two days , disbanded his command , resigned his commission , and went home , having spent more than £ 1 @,@ 000 of his own money in the effort to capture the fort . 
 When Congress received news of the events , it drafted a second letter to the inhabitants of Quebec , which was sent north in June with James Price , another sympathetic Montreal merchant . This letter , and other communications from the New York Congress , combined with the activities of vocal American supporters , stirred up the Quebec population in the summer of 1775 . 
 When news of the fall of Ticonderoga reached England , Lord Dartmouth wrote that it was " very unfortunate ; very unfortunate indeed " . 
 = = = Repercussions in Quebec = = = 
 News of the capture of Ticonderoga and Crown Point , and especially the raids on Fort Saint @-@ Jean , electrified the Quebec population . Colonel Dudley Templer , in charge of the garrison at Montreal , issued a call on May 19 to raise a militia for defense of the city , and requested Indians living nearby to also take up arms . Only 50 men , mostly French @-@ speaking landowning seigneurs and petty nobility , were raised in and around Montreal , and they were sent to Saint @-@ Jean ; no Indians came to their aid . Templer also prevented merchants sympathetic to the American cause from sending supplies south in response to Allen 's letter . 
 General Carleton , notified by Hazen of the events on May 20 , immediately ordered the garrisons of Montreal and Trois @-@ Rivières to fortify Saint @-@ Jean . Some troops garrisoned at Quebec were also sent to Saint @-@ Jean . Most of the remaining Quebec troops were dispatched to a variety of other points along the Saint Lawrence , as far west as Oswegatchie , to guard against potential invasion threats . Carleton then traveled to Montreal to oversee the defense of the province from there , leaving the city of Quebec in the hands of Lieutenant Governor Hector Cramahé . Before leaving , Carleton prevailed on Monsignor Jean @-@ Olivier Briand , the Bishop of Quebec , to issue his own call to arms in support of the provincial defense , which was circulated primarily in the areas around Montreal and Trois @-@ Rivières . 
 = = = Later actions near Ticonderoga = = = 
 In July 1775 , General Philip Schuyler began using the fort as the staging ground for the invasion of Quebec that was launched in late August . In the winter of 1775 – 1776 , Henry Knox directed the transportation of the guns of Ticonderoga to Boston . The guns were placed upon Dorchester Heights overlooking the besieged city and the British ships in the harbor , prompting the British to evacuate their troops and Loyalist supporters from the city in March 1776 . 
 Benedict Arnold again led a fleet of ships at the Battle of Valcour Island , and played other key roles in thwarting Britain 's attempt to recapture the fort in 1776 . The British did recapture the fort in July 1777 during the Saratoga campaign , but had abandoned it by November after Burgoyne 's surrender at Saratoga . 
 = = = Broken communications = = = 
 Although Fort Ticonderoga was not at the time an important military post , its capture had several important results . Rebel control of the area meant that overland communications and supply lines between British forces in Quebec and those in Boston and later New York were severed , so the British military command made an adjustment to their command structure . This break in communication was highlighted by the fact that Arnold , on his way north to Saint @-@ Jean , intercepted a message from Carleton to Gage , detailing the military troop strengths in Quebec . Command of British forces in North America , previously under a single commander , was divided into two commands . General Carleton was given independent command of forces in Quebec and the northern frontier , while General William Howe was appointed Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of forces along the Atlantic coast , an arrangement that had worked well between Generals Wolfe and Amherst in the French and Indian War . In this war , however , cooperation between the two forces would prove to be problematic and would play a role in the failure of the Saratoga campaign in 1777 , as General Howe apparently abandoned an agreed @-@ upon northern strategy , leaving General John Burgoyne without southern support in that campaign . 
 = = = War of words between Allen and Arnold = = = 
 Beginning on the day of the fort 's capture , Allen and Arnold began a war of words , each attempting to garner for himself as much credit for the operation as possible . Arnold , unable to exert any authority over Allen and his men , began to keep a diary of events and actions , which was highly critical and dismissive of Allen . Allen , in the days immediately after the action , also began to work on a memoir . Published several years later ( see Further reading ) , the memoir fails to mention Arnold at all . Allen also wrote several versions of the events , which John Brown and James Easton brought to a variety of Congresses and committees in New York , Connecticut , and Massachusetts . Randall ( 1990 ) claims that Easton took accounts written by both Arnold and Allen to the Massachusetts committee , but conveniently lost Arnold 's account on the way , ensuring that Allen 's version , which greatly glorified his role in the affair , would be preferred . Smith ( 1907 ) indicates that it was highly likely that Easton was interested in claiming Arnold 's command for himself . There was clearly no love lost between Easton and Arnold . Allen and Easton returned to Crown Point on June 10 and called a council of war while Arnold was with the fleet on the lake , a clear breach of military protocol . When Arnold , whose men now dominated the garrison , asserted his authority , Easton insulted Arnold , who responded by challenging Easton to a duel . Arnold later reported , " On refusing to draw like a gentleman , he having a [ sword ] by his side and cases of loaded pistols in his pockets , I kicked him very heartily and ordered him from the Point . " 
 = 2009 ICF Canoe Sprint World Championships = 
 The 2009 International Canoe Federation ( ICF ) Canoe Sprint World Championships were held 12 – 16 August 2009 in Dartmouth , Nova Scotia , Canada , on Lake <unk> . The Canadian city was selected to host the championships in October 2003 after having done so previously in 1997 . Final preparations were made after the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , with competition format changed for the first time since the 2001 championships . Four exhibition events for both paddleability and women 's canoe were added . Sponsorship was local within the province of Nova Scotia and the Halifax Regional Municipality . Media coverage was provided from Canada , Europe and the United States on the Internet , television and mobile phone . 669 canoeists from 68 nations participated at the championships themselves . 
 Germany won the most medals with 18 medals and seven golds . Men 's canoe 's overall winner was Russia with seven medals ( one gold , five silver and one bronze ) . In men 's kayak , the big winner was Germany with five medals ( three golds , one silver and one bronze ) . Hungary won medals in all nine events of women 's kayak . Athlete comments ranged from disgust over the format adjustment made to the canoe sprint program for the 2012 Summer Olympics to not being upset at all . Paddleability 's success at these championships will hopefully push for inclusion into future Paralympic level events . 
 = = Explanation of events = = 
 Canoe sprint competitions are broken up into Canadian canoe ( C ) , an open canoe with a single @-@ blade paddle , or in kayaks ( K ) , a closed canoe with a double @-@ bladed paddle . Each canoe or kayak can hold one person ( 1 ) , two people ( 2 ) , or four people ( 4 ) . For each of the specific canoes or kayaks , such as a K @-@ 1 ( kayak single ) , the competition distances can be 200 metres ( 660 ft ) , 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) , or 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) long . When a competition is listed as a C @-@ 2 500 m event as an example , it means two people are in a canoe competing at a 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) distance . 
 = = Preliminaries to the event = = 
 Dartmouth was awarded the 2009 championships at an ICF Board of Directors meeting in Madrid , Spain , on 23 October 2003 . 
 = = = Event format changes = = = 
 At the 2008 ICF Congress in Rome , a new program for the championships was approved . This marked the first change in the program since the addition of the K @-@ 4 1000 m women 's event at the 2001 championships in Poznań . Men 's C @-@ 4 500 m , men 's K @-@ 4 500 m , women 's K @-@ 4 1000 m events were replaced by C @-@ 1 4 × 200 m relay ( men only ) and K @-@ 1 4 × 200 m relay ( both men and women ) . Women 's C @-@ 1 200 m , C @-@ 1 500 m , C @-@ 2 200 m and C @-@ 2 500 m events were shown as exhibition . Paddleability exhibition events of K @-@ 1 200 m LTA ( men & women ) , K @-@ 2 200 m TA & A ( mixed ) , and C @-@ 2 200 m LTA & A ( mixed ) also took place ( <unk> – Legs , Trunks , and Arms or Trunks and Arms ; LTA – Legs , Trunks , and Arms ; and TA & A – Trunks and Arms , or Arms ) . Support for women 's Canadian and the paddle ability events were confirmed at an ICF Board of Directors meeting in Lausanne , Switzerland , on 18 – 20 March 2009 . A training camp was held for women 's canoe in conjunction with the championships . 
 = = = Official meetings = = = 
 In January 2009 , ICF Secretary General Simon <unk> visited Halifax for three days and was impressed with the history of canoeing in the area and the development of future canoeists for Canada . Two public meetings were held in Dartmouth and Halifax on 24 and 26 March regarding the championships . 
 = = = Facility = = = 
 During the end of 2008 , Lake <unk> had its canoe course upgraded by Dexter Construction Limited . Water that had been pumped out of lake ceased on 15 December 2008 , allowing the lake to rise back to its regular level by February 2009 . Cleanup , restoration and landscaping was completed in the spring of 2009 . By May 2009 , this construction included new concrete abutments at the 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) , 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) , 200 metres ( 660 ft ) , and finish points , debris and abutment cleanup , ten new lane wires , four new cross wires , and 800 new buoys . Starting gates were tested during the second national team trials held at the lake on 27 – 28 June 2009 . Temporary grandstands for 20 @,@ 000 spectators per day were also constructed . 
 Additional changes were for environmental reasons . This included the Halifax Regional Water Commission , Conserve Nova Scotia , and Nova Scotia Environment providing water stations for athletes , spectators and volunteers to fill up reusable water bottles which were purchased on site . It eliminated 100 @,@ 000 disposable bottles and 1 @,@ 400 kilograms ( 3 @,@ 100 lb ) of plastic waste . Dalhousie University 's residence halls used energy efficient lighting and cleaning products . The university 's cafeteria eliminated the use of trays , lessening food waste , energy consumption and daily water usage by 4 @,@ 000 litres ( 880 imp gal ; 1 @,@ 100 US gal ) . A buy local policy and delivery truck that ran entirely on vegetable oil fuel was also used . 
 According to a 10 August 2009 press release , the staging area was at Birch Cove Park in Halifax . 669 from 68 countries competed at the championships with an estimated 100 @,@ 000 spectators . 
 = = = Sponsorships = = = 
 The Atlantic Lottery Corporation presented the " Women in Canoe " program that included 21 female canoeists from 12 different countries . Festival entertainment was sponsored by the Nova Scotia Gaming Corporation , including a " Concert on the Lake " by Matt Mays on 14 August that drew 10 @,@ 000 spectators . Other sponsors include Bell Aliant as presenters , silver sponsors were The Chronicle Herald of Halifax , <unk> <unk> FM radio , CBC Sports and the Halifax Water Authority ; the bronze sponsors were <unk> , Helly Hansen , Conserve Nova Scotia , Nova Scotia environment , Mills fashion and <unk> ; government sponsorship of Department of Canadian Heritage , Nova Scotia Health Promotion and Protection , and the Halifax Regional Municipality ; other supporters of Mic Mac Mall , CBS Outdoor , Metro Transit of Halifax , and Office Interiors ; and friends of Ambassadors , Priority Management , <unk> , the Office of Aboriginal Affairs , and The Cider House Company Limited . 
 = = Participating nations = = 
 68 nations were listed on the preliminary entry list . The numbers in parentheses shown are for men and women who competed for each respective nation . 
 Russia had the most overall attendees with 46 while Canada topped the number of women competing with 16 . 
 The media guide listed 71 nations as participating , but seven nations listed did not compete ( Cameroon , Dominican Republic , Montenegro , Nigeria , South Korea , Togo and Uganda ) while four nations who competed were not listed ( Ghana , Kyrgyzstan , Senegal and Tajikistan ) . 
 The ICF sponsored ten athletes in a development program in Romania in early 2009 that allowed them to compete at the world championships . These countries included Algeria , Armenia , Sri Lanka , and Thailand . 
 = = Coverage = = 
 Media coverage was provided by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ( CBC ) Sports in Canada , Eurosport , and Universal Sports in the United States . Live results were provided onsite from the official website that was sponsored by Bell Aliant which ran 9 am to 4 : 30 pm AST on 13 August , 9 AM to 3 : 55 pm AST on 14 August , 8 : 44 am to 5 : 45 pm AST on 15 August 2009 , and 8 : 30 am to 3 : 46 pm AST on 16 August . Championship information was also available on Twitter . CBC Sports had broadcast times of 2 – 3 PM AST on 15 August 2009 followed by late night coverage at 12 : 30 am AST on 16 August 2009 along with coverage on the web at http : / / <unk> Universal Sports <unk> the finals for both the 15th and the 16th live and are now seen on demand on their website . A total of 30 million people from 36 countries worldwide watched the event on television . 
 Results were transmitted for free with mobile web application named ZAP result . This mobile widget was developed by <unk> 
 = = Schedule = = 
 = = = Opening and closing ceremonies = = = 
 Opening ceremonies took place at 8 pm AST on 12 August . 10 @,@ 000 people watched 68 countries participate in the opening ceremonies that included Canoe ' 09 chair Chris Keevill , ICF President José <unk> , and Sport Canada minister Gary Lunn . The Concert on the Lake took place at 8 pm AST on 14 August with over 10 @,@ 000 attendees . Closing ceremonies occurred on 16 August at 4 pm AST . Medals were presented in Mi 'kmaq baskets for gold medalists , traditional European baskets for silver medalists , and in traditional African Nova Scotian baskets for bronze medalists . Mi 'kmaq is a territory in the Atlantic Provinces of Canada prior to the settlement by the French in the 17th century . The settlement was rotated between the French and British between 1627 and 1755 before the British took over the area after the French and Indian War . Africans settled in Nova Scotia during the Atlantic slave trade that ran from the 16th to 19th centuries . The closing ceremonies on 16 August included passing the ICF flag from Dartmouth to the 2010 world championship hosts in Poznań . 
 = = = Festival performances = = = 
 Festivals for all four days started 30 minutes before the first race and ended 30 minutes after the last race each day . Live entertainment took place each of the days along with vendors , displays and exhibits . Boating safety was discussed along with interactive exhibits on canoe construction and allowing to touch live animals from around the world , including tarantulas and a 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) -long python . 
 = = = Competition schedule = = = 
 = = = = Men 's canoe = = = = 
 = = = = Men 's kayak = = = = 
 = = = = Women 's kayak = = = = 
 = = = = Women 's canoe ( exhibition ) = = = = 
 = = = = Paddleability ( exhibition ) = = = = 
 = = Results = = 
 The preliminary draw was released on 9 August . This was updated again on 11 August . 
 = = = Men 's = = = 
 = = = = Canoe = = = = 
 Russia was the top winner with seven medals with Nikolay Lipkin winning five medals . Belarus won three gold medals . Azerbaijan won a complete set of medals in the canoe discipline while Uzbekistan won its first ever gold medal at the championships . 
 = = = = Kayak = = = = 
 Germany won five medals in the men 's kayak . Ronald <unk> 's three medals for Germany at these championships pushed his career total to 20 , tying him with Torsten <unk> ( East Germany @-@ Germany : 1989 – 99 ) . Belarus won four golds with <unk> <unk> and Raman <unk> each winning four of those golds . 
 = = = Women 's = = = 
 = = = = Kayak = = = = 
 Hungary medaled in all nine events with <unk> <unk> and Katalin Kovacs each winning five medals . Kovacs ' five medals pushed her total medal count to 35 , three behind Birgit Fischer 's 38 ( East Germany @-@ Germany : 1978 – 2005 ) . Bridgette Hartley 's bronze medal in the K @-@ 1 1000 m event was the first for both South Africa and Africa at the world championships . Josefa Idem 's bronze in the K @-@ 1 500 m event makes her the oldest medalist in the history of the championships . 
 = = = Exhibition = = = 
 = = = = Women 's canoe = = = = 
 Host nation Canada won all four of the exhibition events . Jenna Marks won three of these events ( C @-@ 1 200 m , C @-@ 2 200 m , C @-@ 2 500 m ) . Other nations with top three finishes included Brazil , Ecuador , Great Britain and the United States . 
 = = = = Paddleability = = = = 
 Italy had four top three finishes to lead all nations in this event while the United States was second with three . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Athlete comments = = = 
 Australia 's Wallace commented that he was upset at the ICF 's decision that was made during the championships to replace the men 's 500 m events ( C @-@ 1 , C @-@ 2 , K @-@ 1 and K @-@ 2 ) at the Summer Olympics with the 200 m events ( men 's C @-@ 1 , K @-@ 1 and K @-@ 2 ; and women 's K @-@ 1 ) for the upcoming Summer Olympics in London . Kovacs of Hungary stated that the addition of the women 's K @-@ 1 200 m event for the 2012 Olympics will not change her training routine . Italy 's Idem , who was competing in her 20th world championships , stated that she was just as " ... nervous when ... [ she ] ... was a 13 year old girl ( 1977 ) and ... [ she was ] ... the same today . " Germany 's <unk> expressed his love for Canada by " ... going on holiday now . " in the host nation . 
 = = = Paddleability 's ( <unk> 's ) future = = = 
 In a 25 August 2009 ICF article , ICF Canoeing for All Committee and Canoe Kayak Canada 's Domestic Development Director John Edwards thanked efforts of the paddlers involved in the paddleability events for the 2009 championships . Edwards stated that the efforts for paddleability 's success are twofold . The first is for inclusion into the 2011 Special Olympics World Summer Games in Athens , Greece . Once this is recognized , the next goal is to get Special Olympic programs at a national level for inclusion into the 2016 Summer Paralympics . The second , a shorter @-@ term one , is to have 24 nations from three continents participate at next year 's canoe sprint world championships in Poznań . Besides the medalists from this year 's world championships being from Italy , the United States , Canada , Brazil and France , other participants included Great Britain and Portugal . The process to include paddleability into the 2016 Summer Paralympics in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil began on 1 October 2009 and approval was reached on 16 July 2010 . 
 = = Medals Table = = 
 Shown for the non @-@ exhibition events only . 
 = Dominator ( roller coaster ) = 
 Dominator is a steel floorless roller coaster built by Bolliger & Mabillard at Kings Dominion in Doswell , Virginia . It originally opened at Six Flags Ohio on May 5 , 2000 under the name Batman : Knight Flight . Cedar Fair Entertainment Company purchased the park in 2004 and renamed it Dominator . In 2007 , the park closed and Dominator was relocated to Kings Dominion where it opened on May 24 , 2008 in the International Street section of the park . 
 Dominator is notable for having the 4th @-@ tallest vertical loop in the world at 135 ft ( 41 m ) . Only three are larger : Superman : Krypton Coaster at Six Flags Fiesta Texas has a 145 ft ( 44 m ) loop , Viper at Six Flags Magic Mountain has a 144 ft ( 44 m ) loop and Full Throttle , also at Magic Mountain , has a 160 ft ( 49 m ) loop . It is also the world 's longest floorless coaster at 4 @,@ 210 feet ( 1 @,@ 280 m ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Geauga Lake era ( 2000 – 2007 ) = = = 
 = = = = Six Flags era ( 2000 – 2003 ) = = = = 
 Dominator , then known as Batman : Knight Flight , was announced at an event on December 9 , 1999 as the only floorless roller coaster in the Midwest . It opened on May 5 , 2000 at what was then known as Six Flags Ohio . The ride was a part of the conversion and major expansion that occurred between the 1999 and 2000 season , transforming the park from Geauga Lake to Six Flags Ohio . Dominator was built in the Gotham City section of the park , a common themed area in many Six Flags parks . 
 = = = = Cedar Fair era ( 2004 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 In March 2004 , Six Flags sold Geauga Lake ( then known as Six Flags Worlds of Adventure ) to Cedar Fair for $ 145 million . All references to Looney Tunes and DC Comics characters had to be removed prior to opening day the same year , since Cedar Fair did not have licensing rights . As a result , Cedar Fair renamed Batman : Knight Flight to Dominator . The process included the melting of the Batman symbol off every seat , the removal of the Bruce Wayne Foundation text on the station , and the renaming of the Gotham City section to " Power City . " 
 In August 2007 , rumors of Dominator being relocated to Kings Dominion surfaced . On September 21 , 2007 , Cedar Fair announced that Geauga Lake would no longer operate as a traditional amusement park , and instead become solely a waterpark , Wildwater Kingdom . As a result , September 16 , 2007 was the last day the ride would operate at Geauga Lake . With that announcement , the rides from the amusement park side began to be relocated to other Cedar Fair properties . The new location of Dominator , however , was not released . 
 = = = Kings Dominion era ( 2008 – present ) = = = 
 On October 23 , 2007 , it was announced that the Dominator would be moved to Kings Dominion in Doswell , Virginia . Dominator sits on the former site of the bus parking lot , behind Berserker , an Intamin Looping Starship . When it was relocated to Kings Dominion , it received a new paint job . The supports remained dark blue , but the track was painted orange instead of yellow . The record @-@ breaking loop , however , is still painted yellow . It opened to the public on May 24 , 2008 . 
 = = Experience = = 
 While at Geauga Lake , the ride was notable for interacting with the lake numerous times throughout the course . When it was relocated to Kings Dominion , it was built behind the Berserker flat ride , in the International Street section of the park . 
 = = = Layout = = = 
 After leaving the station , the train makes a small dip before making a 180 degree right turn to climb the 161 @-@ foot ( 49 m ) lift hill . Once the train apexes the top of the lift , riders drop 148 feet ( 45 m ) to the right at a 57 degree angle , reaching a top speed of 67 miles per hour ( 108 km / h ) . The train then enters the record breaking , 135 @-@ foot ( 41 m ) tall vertical loop . Following the loop , riders go past the queue and rise up into a turnaround around the ride 's station . After the turn , riders enter a cobra roll , which contains two of the ride 's five inversions . Riders then pass by the station again and enter the mid @-@ course brake run . After the brakes , there is a small drop followed by the interlocking corkscrews , the last two inversions of the ride . Following the corkscrews , the train completes a 135 @-@ degree curve to the left that dives into a 270 @-@ degree curve along the ground , entering the final brake run . One cycle of the ride lasts about 2 minutes and 6 seconds . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Dominator operates with three open @-@ air steel and fiberglass trains . Each train has eight cars that have four seats in a single row for a total of 32 riders per train . Riders are secured by an over the shoulder restraint with a lap belt . 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The steel track is approximately 4 @,@ 210 feet ( 1 @,@ 280 m ) in length , making it the longest Floorless Coaster in the world . The height of the lift is approximately 161 feet ( 49 m ) . Dominator features the fourth @-@ tallest vertical loop at 135 feet ( 41 m ) . When the coaster first opened at Geauga Lake , it was painted with blue supports , yellow track and unpainted rails . When Dominator was relocated to Kings Dominion , the supports remained blue and the rails remained unpainted . The track was painted orange but the loop remained yellow . 
 = = = Theme = = = 
 During Six Flags ' ownership , Dominator was the star attraction of the Gotham City themed area and featured various Batman theming . The seats of the ride 's trains had the Batman symbol engraved into the headrests and the station originally had text reading , " Bruce Wayne Foundation . " When Cedar Fair bought the park in 2004 , they did not own the rights to DC Comics characters . All Batman theming had to be removed before opening day , which included melting the Batman symbol off every seat , removing the Bruce Wayne Foundation text on the station , and renaming the Gotham City section into " Power City . " There has been no theme for the ride while it has been owned by Cedar Fair . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 On July 20 , 2012 , a 48 @-@ year @-@ old woman from Pitt County , North Carolina , was found unresponsive on Dominator after its train returned to the ride 's unloading station . An incident report described that she had a " seizure @-@ like episode " after riding the roller coaster . The woman was taken to a hospital , where she died . Autopsy results revealed that she had a brain aneurysm . A Hanover County , Virginia , inspector found no operational problems with Dominator . The ride reopened on July 23 , 2012 , after it passed two safety inspections . 
 = Skin Deep ( Once Upon a Time ) = 
 " Skin Deep " is the twelfth episode of the American fairy tale / drama television series Once Upon a Time . The series takes place in the fictional seaside town of Storybrooke , Maine , in which the residents are actually characters from various fairy tales that were transported to the " real world " town by a powerful curse . In this episode , Emma Swan ( Jennifer Morrison ) suspects Mr. Gold ( Robert Carlyle ) is planning to seek vigilante justice when a cat burglar ( Eric Keenleyside ) robs his house . Meanwhile , Mary Margaret ( Ginnifer Goodwin ) plans a special girls ' night out on Valentine 's Day with Ruby ( Meghan Ory ) and Ashley ( Jessy Schram ) , and a fateful deal made between Rumpelstiltskin ( Carlyle ) and Belle ( Emilie de Ravin ) is revealed – in which she gives up her freedom to save her village from the horrors of the Ogre Wars . 
 The episode was written by consulting producer Jane Espenson and directed by Milan Cheylov . It featured the first appearance of de Ravin , who was cast as Belle in November 2011 after being approached by series co @-@ creators Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz . Espenson created a love @-@ themed episode ; initially its main theme was to focus on Rumpelstiltskin choosing power over love , but during the writing process Espenson decided to make him instead believe that he was not worthy of love at all . 
 " Skin Deep " first aired in the United States on ABC on February 12 , 2012 . The episode received mixed reviews from television critics . Several reviewers felt that the Belle @-@ Rumpelstiltskin relationship resembled Stockholm Syndrome and was not developed enough to make it believable . Others , however , praised the complex characterization of the episode 's female characters , as well as Carlyle 's performance . A novelization of " Skin Deep " was released in 2013 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Opening Sequence = = = 
 A straw spinning wheel is shown in the forest . 
 = = = In the Characters ' Past = = = 
 In The Enchanted Forest , the Ogre Wars continue but are not going well for the lands controlled by Sir Maurice ( Eric Keenleyside ) . Rumpelstiltskin ( Robert Carlyle ) arrives and agrees to aid the battle in exchange for Maurice 's daughter , Belle ( Emilie de Ravin ) . Belle 's fiancée , Gaston ( Sage Brocklebank ) , and her father are against the terms but Belle agrees . At his castle , Rumpelstiltskin gives Belle a list of tasks , including skinning the children that he hunts for their pelts . At this Belle drops and chips a teacup in shock , but he explains that it is a joke and doesn 't mind about the chipped cup . As time goes by , Rumpelstiltskin and Belle develop a strong bond with each other . After a few months of living with him , Belle asks the dark one why she found children 's clothing upstairs . Rumpelstiltskin tells her it belonged to his son whom he unfortunately lost along with his wife . Gaston arrives to take Belle back but Rumpelstiltskin turns him into a rose and presents it to her as a gift . When asked about Gaston , Belle says that it was an arranged marriage , not one of love . She left him because she wanted to be heroic and there are not many chances for women to be heroic . Rumpelstiltskin asks Belle to go into town to buy more straw , and she cannot believe he trusts her to come back . Rumpelstiltskin says he does not expect to see her again . 
 As Belle is walking down the road , she runs into The Evil Queen ( Lana Parrilla ) , who asks her if she is running from someone . Belle admits the man she is leaving is overcome by evil yet she loves him . The Evil Queen offers the solution : true love 's kiss will break the curse . Belle returns to Rumpelstiltskin 's castle and the Dark one asks why she came back to him . She replies that she wasn 't going to return but something changed her mind . After a moment of silence between the two , they both share true love 's kiss , the magic starts to turn him back into an ordinary man , but becomes furious and shakes off the magic , accusing Belle of conspiring with The Evil Queen . Rumpelstiltskin yells in a rage that no one will love him , and The Evil Queen will never take away his power . He throws Belle in his dungeon and smashes every cup against the wall but he cannot bring himself to destroy the chipped one . Once he has cooled off , he tells Belle to leave because his powers are more important to him than she is . Belle admonishes him for not believing she can love him . She warns him that he will regret his actions when all he has is an empty heart and a chipped cup . 
 A month later , The Evil Queen appears ; Rumpelstiltskin says that her deception with Belle failed , and that The Evil Queen will never be more powerful than him . She then tells him that she had nothing to do with Belle 's actions ( even though she prodded her , Belle 's feelings were real ) and informs him that upon Belle 's return to her home , she had been shunned by her village for her association with Rumpelstiltskin and Gaston 's disappearance and was subsequently imprisoned and tortured by her father . She eventually killed herself , leaping off the tower she was kept prisoner in . Rumpelstiltskin is devastated and replaces a treasured gold chalice with the chipped cup and weeps over his loss . 
 = = = In Storybrooke = = = 
 In the present day , Mr. Gold ( Carlyle ) repossesses florist Moe French 's ( Keenleyside ) van the day before Valentine 's Day . At Granny 's Cafe , David ( Josh Dallas ) and Mary Margaret ( Ginnifer Goodwin ) talk from separate tables , until Emma Swan ( Jennifer Morrison ) interrupts to ask about Henry ( Jared S. Gilmore ) . Ashley ( Jessy Schram ) arrives with her baby , noting how rarely she gets a babysitter or sees her boyfriend , Sean ( Tim Phillipps ) . Ruby ( Meghan Ory ) suggests a girl 's night out . Emma investigates a robbery of Mr. Gold 's home , who says he knows that Moe is responsible , seeking revenge for the repossession . Emma recovers the majority of Mr. Gold 's items but one thing is missing and he will stop at nothing until it is recovered . He kidnaps Moe , ties him up and beats him , demanding where it is . However , he soon starts saying " she 's gone , " referring to Belle , until Emma arrives to stop him . Mr. Gold believes Regina ( Parrilla ) put Moe up to the theft and she knows where the last stolen item is . Emma still has to arrest Mr. Gold for kidnapping and assault . 
 Elsewhere , during their girls night out , Ruby is trying to convince Ashley to find another guy since Sean is always working . Ashley tells Mary Margaret that all she wants is to be with Sean . Mary Margaret understands since her own romantic arrangement is not ideal . Sean shows up on a break from work and proposes to Ashley ; she accepts and they go out for a drive . David shows up next to give Mary Margret her Valentine , but mistakenly gives her Kathryn 's . Mary Margaret says she thought if two people were meant to be together they would find a way , but maybe she and David need another way . She tells him he should probably go home . 
 At the sheriff 's office , Mr. Gold reminds Emma about the favor she owes him but he does not use it to ask for his freedom . Regina shows up and tells Emma that she can see Henry for only 30 minutes if she will allow her to visit Mr. Gold . He asks Regina if she has what he wants and she in fact does . Regina put Moe up to the robbery because she wants Mr. Gold to say his real name . After some prodding he admits his name is Rumpelstiltskin and addresses Regina as " Your Majesty , " confirming that both are aware of their alternate identities . Regina returns the chipped cup to Mr. Gold then makes a visit to the hospital . She goes to see Belle 's counterpart , who did not die in the Enchanted Forest , but is now being held prisoner in the hospital 's mental ward . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Skin Deep " was written by consulting producer Jane Espenson , while 24 veteran , Milan Cheylov , directed the installment . Knowing that they were going to recreate the story of " Beauty and the Beast " , series co @-@ creators Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz wanted its heroine , Belle , " to exude intelligence and strength and be someone you would immediately love , " which led them to approach Emilie de Ravin . Her casting was announced in November 2011 . The actress agreed after reading the script , believing that the character was " very courageous " with a playful side that would endear her to Rumpelstiltskin . During their casting meeting , Kitsis and Horowitz told de Ravin that Belle is defined as a strong intelligent woman in a world that disapproves of those characteristics , and that de Ravin was going to be " tak [ ing ] the icon of Belle and mak [ ing ] her a woman . " 
 Espenson said that this was one of their most love @-@ centered episodes ; when they realized it was going to be airing near Valentine 's Day , they decided to " lean into " this theme . Unusual for Once Upon a Time , the theme of this episode changed during the writing process . It was initially meant to center on Rumpelstiltskin choosing power over love . However , as Espenson went through drafts and discussed them with others , she decided that Rumpelstiltskin might think he is doing this , but really his actions are motivated by not believing that he is worthy of love at all . In the interest of time , Espenson was forced to edit out many plot points , including a failed escape attempt by Belle . Despite this , she sought to trim down more time from the Storybrooke scenes and " preserve as much as we could of the fairy tale side , " as the Belle @-@ Rumpelstiltskin relationship was a love story that needed time to grow in order to be believable . 
 De Ravin was a fan of the series before being cast and was happy to be able to view the costumes up close , describing her character 's gold dress as " absolutely stunning . " The casting of her former suitor , Gaston , was announced in December 2011 with Psych actor Sage Brocklebank . De Ravin described the episode 's version of Gaston as " maybe not as cocky as the animation [ version of him ] , but it ’ s funny . " Rumpelstiltskin 's castle was shot almost entirely on greenscreen , with only a few real props being used . It was de Ravin 's first time working with this technology , which caused her to become " quite nervous . " The physical props helped her with the scenes , and " they ha [ d ] a fantastic set up of a couple of monitors that you can see a markup of basically how it ’ s going to look . " 
 The episode was included in Reawakened : A Once Upon a Time Tale – a novelization of the first season – which was published by Hyperion Books in 2013 . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 There are multiple references made to Disney 's Beauty and the Beast . The chipped tea cup that Belle accidentally drops is a reference to the character Chip in the film . Also , Belle 's fiancée in the show is named Gaston , the Disney antagonist , and he was turned into a red rose , which featured prominently in the film . In addition , most of Belle 's clothing in the fantasy world appears to be directly inspired by clothing worn by Belle in the Disney film , such as her yellow ballgown and her blue and white plainclothes . Mr. French 's flower shop is called " Game of Thorns , " a reference to Game of Thrones , a popular fantasy show and book series . The name and a logo can be seen on the side of his van at the start of the episode . David is seen reading Anna Karenina , another story about an affair that ends tragically . In the end of the episode , a reference to One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest is shown , when Regina meets a nurse , who looks like nurse Ratchet and the janitor mopping up bears a striking resemblance to the Chief in the novel and film adaptation . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Ratings and viewership for " Skin Deep " were down from the last episode . It had an 18 @-@ 49 rating of 3 @.@ 0 and was seen by 8 @.@ 65 million viewers , down 14 percent , but still came in second overall for the night . This was partially due to the fact that the episode aired in the same time @-@ slot as the 54th Grammy Awards , who had their best numbers ever since the 1984 telecast and the sudden news of Whitney Houston 's death the day prior to the event . In Canada , the episode finished in sixteenth place for the week with an estimated 1 @.@ 55 million viewers , a slight decrease from the 1 @.@ 58 million of the previous episode . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Skin Deep " received mixed reviews from television critics . 
 Amy Ratcliffe , writing for IGN , rated the episode with an 8 out of 10 . She expressed her love of Robert Carlyle , opining that " I especially liked him in the episode . He managed to show true emotion in spite of his silly Rumpelstiltskin accent , and he improves every scene he 's in . I feel like this episode will start something bigger . At least , I hope it will . " Laura Prudom of The Huffington Post felt Espenson was a " perfect fit for this episode – when she 's firing on all cylinders , the Buffy alumna is one of the best in the industry at writing layered , empowered women , even when circumstances conspire against them . " The A.V. Club 's Oliver Sava graded the episode with a C + . He felt that because Belle did not come from " humble beginnings " like the Disney version , she was a " much less interesting character . " In addition , to Sava another major failing was that the Belle @-@ Rumpelstiltskin relationship resembled Stockholm Syndrome and " doesn ’ t develop organically . " He did however love Regina 's final scene with Rumpelstiltskin , and expressed the wish that the other characters would begin remembering their pasts soon . 
 Hillary Busis of Entertainment Weekly opined that Espenson 's attempt to tell a " nightmarish , twisty tale of obsession and loss " was " decidedly mixed " due to the lack of development in the relationship between Belle and Rumpelstiltskin . Busis explained , " Yes , people fall in love quickly in traditional bedtime stories . But at least in the animated version of Beauty and the Beast , we could understand why Belle and her hairy paramour were meant to be . ' Skin Deep ' didn 't bother to explain that attraction . " In a contribution for Tor.com , Teresa Jusino defined " Skin Deep " as an " amazing retelling of the Beauty and the Beast story that contained some wonderful character moments and some great one @-@ liners ... Funny , charming , and at times harrowing , the script takes us into the depths of Rumpelstiltskin ’ s soul , showing us this character both at his most warm and at his most dark . " Jusino was critical of the subplot with David and Mary Margaret , however , saying that " it didn ’ t seem necessary as it didn ’ t really move much forward . " 
 = 172nd Infantry Brigade ( United States ) = 
 The 172nd Infantry Brigade was an infantry brigade of the United States Army headquartered at Grafenwöhr , Germany . An active duty separate brigade , it was part of V Corps and was one of five active @-@ duty , separate , combat brigades in the U.S. Army before its most recent inactivation on 31 May 2013 . 
 First activated in 1917 , the brigade was deployed to France during World War I and used to reinforce front @-@ line units . The brigade 's actions in France during that time are not completely clear . It would later be converted to a reconnaissance unit that was deployed during World War II and saw several months of combat in the European Theater . The brigade has multiple tours of duty in Operation Iraqi Freedom from 2005 until 2006 and from 2008 until 2010 and in Operation Enduring Freedom from 2011 until 2012 . Its infamous 16 @-@ month deployment was one of the longest deployments for a unit serving in the OIF campaign . Most recently the brigade served a 12 @-@ month tour in Afghanistan from 2011 until 2012 . 
 The unit has been activated and inactivated numerous times , and has also seen several redesignations . The 172nd was one of the first brigade combat teams before it was deactivated in 2006 . Reactivated in 2008 from another reflagged unit , it immediately prepared for another tour of duty in Iraq . Following a series of budget cuts and force structure reductions , the unit formally inactivated on 31 May 2013 in Grafenwöhr , Germany . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The brigade was a separate unit and did not report to a higher division @-@ level headquarters , but instead reported directly to the V Corps of United States Army Europe . It consisted of six battalions and four companies . These components included two infantry battalions , one armor battalion , one field artillery battalion , a combat engineer battalion and a support services battalion . It also contained a headquarters company , a Signal company , a military intelligence company , and an armored cavalry company for reconnaissance . 
 The Headquarters and Headquarters Company of the unit was located at Grafenwöhr , Germany . The Unit also contained the 1st Battalion , 2d Infantry , the 2nd Battalion , 28th Infantry , the 1st Battalion , 77th Field Artillery , the 9th Engineer Battalion , the 3rd Battalion , 66th Armor , and the 172nd Forward Support Battalion . In addition , the brigade contained three independent companies ; 504th Military Intelligence Company , and Echo Troop , 5th Cavalry Regiment , the 57th Signal Company . All of these subordinate units were last located in Grafenwöhr . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The 172nd Infantry Brigade ( Separate ) , officially titled the " 172d Infantry Brigade " , was first constituted on 5 August 1917 in the National Army as the 172nd Infantry Brigade . It was organized on the 25th of that month at Camp Grant , in Rockford , Illinois and assigned to the 86th Infantry Division . The brigade was assigned to the 86th Division and deployed to Europe for duty during World War I. It arrived in Bordeaux , France , in September 1918 The combat record of the unit during its World War I service is not clear , but it is known that the 86th Division was depleted when much of its force was used to reinforce other units already on the front lines . Thus , the brigade received a World War I campaign streamer without an inscription , as it was not known to have fought in any engagements . After a cease fire was signed in 1918 , the Brigade returned to the United States . It was demobilized in January 1919 at Camp Grant , and the camp itself was abandoned in 1921 . 
 On 24 June 1921 the unit was reconstituted in the Organized Reserves as Headquarters and Headquarters Company , 172nd Infantry Brigade , and again assigned to the 86th Division . It was organized in January 1922 at Springfield , Illinois and went through several redesignations , including Headquarters and Headquarters Company , 172nd Brigade , on 23 March 1925 and Headquarters and Headquarters Company , 172nd Infantry Brigade on 24 August 1936 . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 The Headquarters and Headquarters Company , 172nd Infantry Brigade , was converted and redesignated the 3rd Platoon , 86th Reconnaissance Troop , and assigned to the 86th Infantry Division on 31 March 1942 , while the Headquarters and Headquarters Company , 171st Infantry Brigade , became the remainder of the 86th Reconnaissance Troop . On 15 December 1942 the troop was mobilized and reorganized at Camp Howze , in Gainesville , Texas , as the 86th Cavalry Reconnaissance Troop , only to be reorganized and redesignated again on 5 August 1943 as the 86th Reconnaissance Troop , Mechanized . For the majority of the US involvement in World War II it remained stateside , participating in the Third Army # 5 Louisiana Maneuvers in 1943 , among other exercises , until finally staging at Camp Myles Standish , at Boston , Massachusetts on 5 February 1945 and shipping out from Boston on 19 February 1945 . 
 The 86th Reconnaissance Troop arrived in France on 1 March 1945 , acclimated and trained , and then moved to Köln , Germany , and participated in the relief of the 8th Infantry Division in defensive positions near Weiden which is now part of Lindenthal on 28 – 29 March 1945 . During its few months of combat duty in Europe , the troop participated in amphibious assaults across was Danube , Bigge , <unk> , Isar , Inn , <unk> @-@ Isar and Salzach rivers in Germany and Austria . It was assigned to First , Third , Seventh , and Fifteenth US Armies . The unit was at Salzburg on 7 May 1945 ( V @-@ E Day ) . It was then sent back stateside to prepare for operation in the Pacific . Arriving back in New York City on 17 June 1945 , the unit proceeded to Fort Gruber in Braggs , Oklahoma before staging at Camp Stoneman in Pittsburg , California on 14 August 1945 . The unit shipped out from San Francisco on 21 August 1945 and arrived in the Philippines on 7 September 1945 , five days after the Japanese surrender . 
 = = = The Cold War = = = 
 On 10 October 1945 the 86th Reconnaissance Troop ( Mechanized ) was again redesignated the 86th Mechanized Reconnaissance Troop before finally being inactivated on 30 December 1946 while still stationed in the Philippines . However the 86th Mechanized Reconnaissance Troop was reactivated again on 9 July 1952 as part of the Army Reserve . It continued serving within the Army Reserve for some years . Activation of the brigade with its new structure took place on 1 July 1963 at Fort Richardson , Alaska . The Army set up an experimental Airborne Company " Company F ( <unk> ) Airborne in 1962 in Fort Richardson . The Company Commander was Capt Lawrence . Under the new structure , the unit was renamed Company C Airborne . The Airborne Company was used to see how best to use Airborne Troops in Arctic conditions throughout the vast area of Alaska . 
 The new structure included one Light Infantry Battalion ; one Mechanized Infantry Battalion ; and one Tank Company . Its shoulder sleeve insignia was authorized for use on 28 August 1963 and its distinctive unit insignia was authorized on 8 June 1966 . The Brigade was reorganized from Mechanized Infantry to Light Infantry on 30 June 1969 , with a reduction to two mechanized infantry battalions . In 1974 the 172nd Infantry Brigade was reorganized again to include three light infantry battalions , 
 US Army Alaska was known as <unk> through the 60s and 70s , whereas after the activation of the 6th Infantry Division it was known as <unk> . The two Arctic brigades , the 171st ( 4 @-@ 9th Infantry , 1 @-@ 47th Infantry [ which was subsequently deactivated ] , and other components at Fort Wainwright ) and the 172d ( 4 @-@ 23d Infantry , 1 @-@ 60th Infantry , 1 @-@ 37th Artillery , <unk> Combat Engineer Company , and other components at Fort Richardson ) were consolidated in 1973 with the drawdown after Viet Nam . There was an administrative split between the " <unk> " ( Light Infantry Brigade ) and the " Brigade Alaska " , with the 1 @-@ 43d Air Defense , <unk> Aviation , 56th MP Company , 23d Construction Engineer Company , Northern Warfare Training <unk> then at Fort Greely , ' being assigned . 
 It was again reorganized in 1978 to a structure that included one infantry battalion , one mechanized infantry battalion , and one tank battalion The brigade was again inactivated on 15 April 1986 at Fort Richardson , Alaska , being reflagged as part of the newly reformed 6th Infantry Division . 
 = = = Transformation = = = 
 In the late 1990s , Army leaders including General Eric Shinseki began shifting the Army force toward brigade centered operations . All separate brigades had been deactivated in the 1990s as part of the US Army 's drawdown following the end of the Cold War . These <unk> , along with subsequent reorganization of US Army divisions , saw several divisional brigades stationed in bases that were far from the division 's headquarters and support units . These brigades had difficulty operating without support from higher headquarters . 
 It was Shinseki 's idea to reactivate a few separate brigades and assign them their own support and sustainment units , which would allow them to function independently of division @-@ level headquarters . These formations were termed " Brigade Combat Teams " . Such units could be stationed in bases far from major commands , not requiring division @-@ level unit support , an advantage in places like Alaska and Europe , where stationing entire divisions was unnecessary or impractical . The first of the separate brigades was to be the 172nd Infantry Brigade . On 17 April 1998 , the U.S. Army reactivated the " 172nd Infantry Brigade ( Separate ) " and reflagged the 1st Brigade , 6th Infantry Division as that unit was headquartered at Fort Wainwright , Alaska . Two years later , the 173rd Airborne Brigade was reactivated on 12 June 2000 at Caserma Ederle in Vicenza , Italy > . The 172nd was given an airborne infantry battalion , one of only three existing outside of the 82nd Airborne Division ( the other two battalions were part of the 2nd Infantry Division based in Korea ) . The 172nd Infantry was designed as a " pacific theater contingency brigade " . Located in Alaska , the 172nd would be able to deploy to any contingencies in Alaska , Europe ( over the north pole ) or the Pacific . 
 In July 2001 the US Army announced that the 172nd Infantry Brigade was to become one of the Army 's new Interim Brigade Combat Teams , later to be known as Stryker Brigade Combat Teams ( <unk> ) . Changes to the brigade included the addition of some 300 Stryker vehicles , and several Unmanned Aerial Vehicles . The transformation was intended to increase the brigade 's mobility in operations as well as reduce its logistical footprint . The project entailed around $ 1 @.@ 2 billion in construction costs for training facilities , motor pools , and other buildings . This transformation was completed when the unit was formally redesignated on 16 October 2003 . After the transformation was complete , the 172nd became the third Stryker brigade in the US Army , with a force of 3 @,@ 500 soldiers . In 2005 , the new Brigade Commander changed the motto of the infantry brigade from " Snow Hawks " to " Arctic Wolves " . In early 2005 , the brigade was alerted that it would be deployed to Operation Iraqi Freedom for the first time . To prepare , it participated in several large exercises at the Joint Readiness Training Center at Fort Polk , Louisiana . The 220th Military Police Brigade , a reserve unit , provided additional soldiers to assist the brigade in the exercises during their final preparations for deployment . 
 = = = Operation Iraqi Freedom = = = 
 In August 2005 , the 172nd Infantry Brigade deployed to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom . The unit deployed to Mosul , Iraq . 4 @-@ 14 CAV and a Stryker infantry company ( A / 4 @-@ 23 IN and later , B / 2 @-@ 1 IN ) were attached to 2nd Marine Expeditionary Force , and stationed at COP Rawah ; away from the rest of the BDE . Duties of the unit during deployment included numerous patrol operations , searches for weapons caches , and counterinsurgency operations . Its tour was to have ended on 27 July 2006 , but the U.S. Army unexpectedly extended the deployment until the end of November 2006 . During the extension , the unit was sent to Baghdad to quell growing sectarian violence concerns . The infamous extension of the deployment had happened after some of the units of the Brigade were already touched down at their home base of Fort Wainwright , AK , forcing them to fly back to staging areas in Iraq . The extension occurred after the unit 's regular 12 @-@ month tour was complete , making the deployment last for a total of 16 months . As a result of the unit 's action in Iraq , the brigade was awarded the Valorous Unit Award . 
 During this action , 26 soldiers of the brigade were killed in action , and another 350 were wounded . Ten additional soldiers in units attached to the brigade were killed . 
 = = = Inactivation 2006 = = = 
 Having returned from its extended tour in Baghdad , Iraq , the 172nd Stryker Brigade Combat Team was officially deactivated and the 1st Stryker Brigade Combat Team , 25th Infantry Division was activated in its place on 14 December 2006 . 
 The brigade 's six battalions and four separate companies were likewise reflagged as part of the change . The reflagged units were : 
 1st Battalion , 17th Infantry Regiment to 1st Battalion , 5th Infantry Regiment . 
 2nd Battalion , 1st Infantry Regiment to 1st Battalion , 24th Infantry Regiment . 
 4th Battalion , 23rd Infantry Regiment to 3rd Battalion , 21st Infantry Regiment . 
 4th Squadron , 14th Cavalry Regiment to 5th Squadron , 1st Cavalry Regiment . 
 4th Battalion , 11th Field Artillery Regiment to 2nd Battalion , 8th Field Artillery Regiment . 
 172nd Brigade Support Battalion to 25th Brigade Support Battalion . 
 A Company , 52nd Infantry Regiment to D Company , 52nd Infantry Regiment . 
 572nd Military Intelligence Company to 184th Military Intelligence Company . 
 <unk> Engineer Company to 73rd Engineer Company . 
 21st Signal Company to 176th Signal Company . 
 = = = Reactivation in Germany = = = 
 As part of the Grow the Army Plan announced 19 December 2007 , the Army will activate and retain two Infantry Brigades in Germany until 2012 and 2013 . On 6 March 2008 , it was announced that the 172nd Infantry Brigade would be activated as the first of these brigades , with the other being the 170th Infantry Brigade . On 17 March , the 172nd Infantry Brigade was formally activated in Schweinfurt , Germany by reflagging the 1st Infantry Division 's 2nd ( Dagger ) Brigade , which relocated to Ft . Riley , KS . Colonel Jeffrey Sinclair was commanding the brigade at the time . The 172nd Infantry Brigade relocated to Grafenwöhr , Germany , The unit it was activated using the assets of the 2nd Brigade , 1st Infantry Division , which had recently completed its own tour of duty in Iraq . The 172nd Infantry Brigade was activated with the following unit redesignations : 
 Headquarters and Headquarters Company , 172nd Infantry Brigade ( formed from HHC , 2 @-@ 1 ID ) 
 2nd Battalion , 28th Infantry ( reflagged from 1 – 26 Infantry ) 
 1st Battalion , 2nd Infantry ( reflagged from 1 – 18 Infantry ) 
 3rd Battalion , 66th Armor ( reflagged from 1 – 77 Armor ) 
 Troop E , 5th Cavalry ( reflagged from Troop E , 4th Cavalry ) 
 1st Battalion , 77th Field Artillery ( reflagged from 1 – 7 Field Artillery ) 
 172nd Support Battalion ( reflagged from 299th Forward Support Battalion ) 
 57th Signal Company , 9th Engineer Battalion and 504th Military Intelligence Company remain attached to 172nd but were not reflagged . 
 When the brigade converts to a modular design , the Brigade Special Troops Battalion will be given organic , unnumbered signal , engineer and military intelligence companies along with a chemical and military police platoons . 
 After its activation , the brigade began moving its components from Schweinfurt to Grafenwöhr , Germany , as part of the Grow the Army plan . Simultaneously , the brigade converted to a modular structure to become a Brigade Combat Team upon completion . In May 2008 , the brigade was alerted that it would be returning to Iraq in the fall of that year . The deployment was set to last 12 months , and was set to start after the unit 's 12 @-@ month out @-@ of @-@ action cycle ended on November 2008 . This would be the brigade 's third tour to Iraq , as it completed a tour of duty in Iraq shortly before being redesignated from the 2nd Brigade , 1st Infantry Division . The brigade began training for its deployment to the country as soon as it received orders for deployment . German military officers trained with the brigade during this preparation . The soldiers of the brigade were part of a 40 @,@ 000 @-@ soldier troop rotation into Iraq and Afghanistan , intended to maintain previous troop levels in both countries until late 2009 . In fall of 2008 , the brigade completed its transition to a brigade combat team , and was redesignated as the 172nd Infantry Brigade Combat Team . 
 In late October 2008 the brigade began moving equipment and vehicles by train from Germany in preparation for their tour in Iraq . 385 containers full of gear , as well as 75 M1A1 Abrams Tanks , M2 Bradley Infantry Fighting Vehicles , and <unk> were sent by train on 28 October. the brigade picked up additional MRAP and <unk> <unk> in Kuwait . The brigade deployed into theater by December 2008 , replacing the 4th Brigade Combat Team , 3rd Infantry Division . 
 A proposal was made to relocate the unit to White Sands Missile Range , New Mexico in 2012 as the 7th Brigade Combat Team , 1st Armored Division , pending discussions to leave two heavy brigades in Europe . 
 = = = Afghanistan = = = 
 The 172 IBCT deployed to Afghanistan in the summer of 2011 . The brigade left behind its " heavy " vehicles , Bradley fighting vehicles and Abrams tanks , for MRAPs . Soldiers will spend some of their time during the deployment patrolling on foot , as their normal heavy tracked vehicles are incompatible with rugged terrain of Afghanistan . . During this deployment the Brigade was responsible for Paktika province along the Pakistani border . One of the more controversial aspects of the deployment was the formation of the first US / Afghan Joint firing base with Afghan National Army Artillery firing in support of U.S. forces in the <unk> district . 
 Following a number of budget cuts and force structure reductions , the brigade deactivated in Germany on 31 May 2013 . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = = Unit decorations = = = 
 = = = Campaign streamers = = = 
 = Tropical cyclone scales = 
 Tropical cyclones are officially ranked on one of five tropical cyclone scales , according to their maximum sustained winds and which tropical cyclone basin ( s ) they are located in . Only a few scales of classifications are used officially by the meteorological agencies monitoring the tropical cyclones , but some alternative scales also exist , such as accumulated cyclone energy , the Power Dissipation Index , the Integrated Kinetic Energy Index , and the Hurricane Severity Index . 
 Should a tropical cyclone form in the North Atlantic Ocean or the North @-@ eastern Pacific Ocean , it will be classified using one of the categories in the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . In the Western Pacific , tropical cyclones will be ranked using the Japan Meteorological Agency 's scale . The Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre ( RSMC ) in New Delhi , India also uses a different scale to assess the maximum sustained winds of a tropical cyclone . In the Southern Hemisphere , the Météo @-@ France forecast center on La Reunion uses a scale that covers the whole of the South West Indian Ocean . Both the Australian Bureau of Meteorology and the RSMC in Nadi , Fiji use the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale . 
 The definition of sustained winds recommended by the World Meteorological Organization ( WMO ) and used by most weather agencies is that of a 10 @-@ minute average at a height of 10 m ( 33 ft ) . However , the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale is based on wind speed measurements averaged over a 1 @-@ minute period , at 10 m ( 33 ft ) above the surface . The scale used by RSMC New Delhi applies a 3 @-@ minute averaging period , and the Australian scale is based on both 3 @-@ second wind gusts and maximum sustained winds averaged over a 10 @-@ minute interval . These make direct comparisons between basins difficult . 
 Within all basins tropical cyclones are named when the sustained winds hit 35 kn ( 40 mph ; 65 km / h ) 
 = = Background = = 
 Tropical cyclones are defined as being warm cored , non @-@ frontal synoptic cyclones , that develop over tropical or subtropical waters , with organized atmospheric convection and have a definite cyclonic surface wind circulation . They are classified by the wind speeds located around the circulation centre and are ranked , by the World Meteorological Organisation 's Regional Specialized Meteorological Centers on one of five tropical cyclone scales . The scale used for a particular tropical cyclone depends on what basin the system is located in ; with for example the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale and the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scales both used in the Western Hemisphere . All of the scales rank tropical cyclones using their maximum sustained winds , which are either observed , measured or estimated using various techniques , over a period between one and ten minutes . 
 = = Atlantic , Eastern and Central Pacific = = 
 Tropical cyclones that occur within the Northern Hemisphere to the east of the anti @-@ meridian , are officially monitored by either the National Hurricane Center or the Central Pacific Hurricane Center . Within the region a tropical cyclone is defined to be a warm cored , non @-@ frontal synoptic cyclone , that develops over tropical or subtropical waters , with organized atmospheric convection and a closed well defined circulation centre . The region also defines a subtropical cyclone as a non @-@ frontal low pressure system , that has the characteristics of both tropical and extratropical cyclones . Once either of these classifications are met then the warning centers will classify the system as either a tropical or subtropical depression , if the one @-@ minute sustained winds estimated or measured as less than 33 kn ( 38 mph ; 62 km / h ) . Should the system intensify further or already have one @-@ minute sustained winds of 34 – 63 kn ( 39 – 73 mph ; 63 – 118 km / h ) , then it will be called either a tropical or subtropical storm and assigned a name . Should the tropical system further intensify and have winds estimated or measured , as greater than 64 kn ( 74 mph ; 119 km / h ) , then it will be called a hurricane and classified on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale . The lowest classification on the SSHWS is a Category 1 hurricane , which has winds of between 64 – 82 kn ( 74 – 95 mph , 119 – 153 km / h ) . Should the hurricane intensify further then it will be rated as a Category 2 hurricane , if it has winds of between 83 – 95 kn ( 96 – 110 mph , 154 – 177 km / h ) . When a system becomes a Category 3 hurricane with winds of between 96 – 112 kn ( 111 – 129 mph , 178 – 208 km / h ) , it is considered to be a major hurricane by the warning centers . A Category 4 hurricane has winds of 113 – 136 kn ( 130 – 156 mph , 209 – 251 km / h ) , while a Category 5 hurricane has winds of above 137 kn ( 157 mph , 252 km / h ) . 
 The SSHS was originally created using both wind speed and storm surge , but since the relationship between wind speed and storm surge is not necessarily definite , the scale was changed to the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale ( SSHWS ) , based entirely on wind speed . 
 Although increasing echelons of the scale correspond to stronger winds , the rankings are not absolute in terms of effects . Lower @-@ category storms can inflict greater damage than higher @-@ category storms , depending on factors such as local terrain , population density and total rainfall . For instance , a Category 2 that strikes a major urban area will likely do more damage than a large Category 5 hurricane that strikes a mostly rural region . In fact , tropical systems of less than hurricane strength can produce significant damage and human casualties , especially from flooding and landslides . 
 Historically , the term great hurricane was used to describe storms that possessed winds of at least 110 kn ( 125 mph ; 200 km / h ) , large radii ( over 160 km / 100 mi ) and that caused large amounts of destruction . This term fell into disuse after the introduction of the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale in the early 1970s . 
 A minor change to the scale was made ahead of the 2012 hurricane season , with the wind speeds for categories 3 @-@ 5 tweaked to eliminate the rounding errors , that had occurred during previous seasons when a hurricane had wind speeds of 115 kn ( 130 mph ; 215 km / h ) . 
 = = Western Pacific = = 
 Tropical cyclones that occur within the Northern Hemisphere between the anti @-@ meridian and 100 ° E , are officially monitored by the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA , RSMC Tokyo ) . Within the region a tropical cyclone is defined to be a non @-@ frontal synoptic scale cyclone originating over tropical or sub @-@ tropical waters , with organized convection and a definite cyclonic surface wind circulation . The lowest classification used by the Typhoon Committee is a tropical depression , which has 10 @-@ minute sustained winds of less than 33 kn ( 17 m / s ; 38 mph ; 61 km / h ) . Should the tropical depression intensify further it is named and classified as a tropical storm , which has winds speeds between 33 – 47 kn ( 17 – 24 m / s ; 38 – 54 mph ; 61 – 87 km / h ) . Should the system continue to intensify further then it will be classified as a severe tropical storm , which has winds speeds between 48 – 63 kn ( 25 – 32 m / s ; 55 – 72 mph ; 89 – 117 km / h ) . The highest classification on the Typhoon Committees scale is a typhoon , which has winds speeds greater than 64 kn ( 33 m / s ; 74 mph ; 119 km / h ) . 
 The China Meteorological Administration , the Hong Kong Observatory ( HKO ) , PAGASA and the JMA , all divide the typhoon category further for domestic purposes . The JMA divides the typhoon category into three categories , with a 10 @-@ minute maximum wind speed below 84 kn ( 43 m / s ; 97 mph ; 156 km / h ) assigned for the ( strong ) typhoon category . A very strong typhoon has wind speeds between 85 – 104 kn ( 44 – 54 m / s ; 98 – 120 mph ; 157 – 193 km / h ) , while a violent typhoon has wind speeds of 105 kn ( 54 m / s ; 121 mph ; 194 km / h ) or greater . The HKO and the CMA also divide the typhoon category into three categories , with both assigning a maximum wind speed of 80 kn ( 41 m / s ; 92 mph ; 150 km / h ) to the typhoon category . A severe typhoon has wind speeds of 85 – 104 kn ( 44 – 54 m / s ; 98 – 120 mph ; 157 – 193 km / h ) , while a super typhoon has winds of 100 kn ( 51 m / s ; 120 mph ; 190 km / h ) . During May 2015 PAGASA introduced the term Super Typhoon and used it for systems with winds greater than 120 kn ( 62 m / s ; 140 mph ; 220 km / h ) . 
 In addition to the National Meteorological Services of each nation the United States Joint Typhoon Warning Centre monitors the basin , and issues warnings on significant tropical cyclones for the United States Government . These warnings use a 1 @-@ minute sustained wind speed and can be compared to the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale , however , the JTWC use their own scale for intensity classifications in this basin . These classifications are Tropical Depression , Tropical Storm , Typhoon and Super Typhoon . In addition , the Taiwan Central Weather Bureau has its own scale in Chinese but uses the Typhoon Committee scale in English . 
 = = North Indian Ocean = = 
 Any tropical cyclone that develops within the North Indian Ocean between 100 ° E and 45 ° E is monitored by the India Meteorological Department ( IMD , RSMC New Delhi ) . Within the region a tropical cyclone is defined as being a non frontal synoptic scale cyclone , that originates over tropical or subtropical waters with organized convection and a definite cyclonic surface wind circulation . The lowest official classification used in the North Indian Ocean is a Depression , which has 3 @-@ minute sustained wind speeds of between 17 – 27 kn ( 20 – 31 mph ; 31 – 49 km / h ) . Should the depression intensify further then it will become a Deep Depression , which has winds between 28 – 33 kn ( 32 – 38 mph ; 50 – 61 km / h ) . The system will be classified as a cyclonic storm and assigned a name by the IMD , if it should develop gale force wind speeds of between 34 – 47 kn ( 39 – 54 mph ; 62 – 88 km / h ) . Severe Cyclonic Storms have storm force wind speeds of between 48 – 63 kn ( 55 – 72 mph ; 89 – 117 km / h ) , while Very Severe Cyclonic Storms have hurricane @-@ force winds of 64 – 89 kt ( 73 – 102 mph ; 118 – 166 km / h ) . Extremely Severe Cyclonic Storms have hurricane @-@ force winds of 90 – 119 kn ( 166 – 221 km / h , 104 – 137 mph ) . The highest classification used in the North Indian Ocean is a Super Cyclonic Storm , which have hurricane @-@ force winds of above 120 kn ( 138 mph ; 222 km / h ) . 
 Historically , a system has been classified as a depression if it is an area where the barometric pressure is low compared with its surroundings . Other classifications historically used include : cyclonic storm where the winds did not exceed force 10 on the Beaufort scale and a Cyclone where the winds are either force 11 and 12 on the Beaufort scale . Between 1924 and 1988 , tropical cyclones were classified into four categories : depression , deep depression , cyclonic storms and severe cyclonic storms . However , a change was made during 1988 to introduce the category " severe cyclonic storm with core of hurricane winds " for tropical cyclones , with wind speeds of more than 64 kn ( 74 mph ; 119 km / h ) . During 1999 the categories Very Severe Cyclonic Storm and Super Cyclonic Storm were introduced , while the severe cyclonic storm with a core of hurricane winds category was eliminated . During 2015 another modification to the intensity scale took place , with the IMD calling a system with 3 @-@ minute maximum sustained wind speeds between 90 – 119 kn ( 166 – 221 km / h , 104 – 137 mph ) : an extremely severe cyclonic storm . The United States Joint Typhoon Warning Centre also monitors the basin , and issues warnings on significant tropical cyclones on behalf of the United States Government . These warnings use a 1 @-@ minute sustained wind speed and can be compared to the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale , however , regardless of intensity in this basin the JTWC labels all systems as tropical cyclones . 
 = = South @-@ Western Indian Ocean = = 
 Any tropical cyclone that develops within the Southern Hemisphere between Africa and 90 ° E is monitored by Meteo France 's La Reunion tropical cyclone centre ( MFR , RSMC La Reunion ) . Within the region a tropical disturbance is defined to be a non @-@ frontal synoptic scale low pressure area , originating over tropical or sub @-@ tropical waters with organized convection and definite cyclonic surface wind circulation with the average wind speed estimated to be not exceeding 27 knots ( 50 km / h ) ) . 
 A tropical disturbance is MFR 's generic term for a non @-@ frontal area of low pressure that has organized convection and definite cyclonic surface wind circulation . The system should be estimated to have wind speeds of less than 28 knots ( 50 km / h , 32 mph ) . 
 A system is designated as a tropical depression or a subtropical depression when it reaches wind speeds above 28 knots ( 50 km / h , 32 mph ) . Should a tropical depression reach wind speeds of 35 knots ( 65 km / h , 40 mph ) then it will be classified as a moderate tropical storm and assigned a name by either the Sub Regional Center in Mauritius or Madagascar . No matter how strong a subtropical system is in this basin , it is always designated as a subtropical depression . 
 Should the named storm intensify further and reach winds speeds of 48 knots ( 89 km / h , 55 mph ) , then it will be classified as a severe tropical storm . A severe tropical storm is designated as a tropical cyclone when it reaches wind speeds of 64 knots ( 118 km / h , 74 mph ) . Should a tropical cyclone intensify further and reach wind speeds of 90 knots ( 166 km / h , 103 mph ) , it will be classified as an intense tropical cyclone . A very intense tropical cyclone is the highest category on the South @-@ West Indian Ocean Tropical Cyclone scale , and has winds of over 115 knots ( 212 km / h , 132 mph ) . 
 At the tenth RA I tropical cyclone committee held during 1991 , it was recommended that the intensity classifications be changed ahead of the 1993 @-@ 94 tropical cyclone season . Specifically it was decided that the classifications : Weak Tropical Depression , Moderate Tropical Depression and Severe Tropical Depression would be changed to Tropical Depression , Moderate Tropical Storm and Severe Tropical Storm . This change was implemented ahead of the 1993 @-@ 94 tropical cyclone season . The United States Joint Typhoon Warning Centre also monitors the basin , and issues warnings on significant tropical cyclones on behalf of the United States Government . These warnings use a 1 @-@ minute sustained wind speed and can be compared to the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale , however , regardless of intensity in this basin the JTWC labels all systems as tropical cyclones . 
 = = Australia and Fiji = = 
 Tropical cyclones that occur within the Southern Hemisphere to the east of 90 ° E , are officially monitored by one or more tropical cyclone warning centres . These are run by the Fiji Meteorological Service , New Zealand 's <unk> , Indonesia 's Badan <unk> <unk> dan <unk> , Papua New Guinea 's National Weather Service , while three others are run by the Australian Bureau of Meteorology . Within the region a tropical cyclone is defined as being a non @-@ frontal low pressure system of synoptic scale that develops over warm waters , with a definite organized wind circulation and 10 @-@ minute sustained wind speeds of 34 kn ( 63 km / h ; 39 mph ) or greater near the centre . Once this definition has been met then all of the centres name the system and start to use the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale , which measures tropical cyclones using a five category system based on 10 @-@ minute maximum sustained winds . A Category 1 tropical cyclone is estimated to have 10 @-@ minute sustained wind speeds of 34 – 47 kn ( 39 – 54 mph ; 63 – 87 km / h ) , while a Category 2 tropical cyclone is estimated to have 10 @-@ minute sustained wind speeds of 48 – 63 kn ( 55 – 72 mph ; 89 – 117 km / h ) . When a system becomes a Category 3 tropical cyclone it is reclassified as a Severe tropical cyclone and has wind speeds of 64 – 85 kn ( 74 – 98 mph ; 119 – 157 km / h ) . A Category 4 severe tropical cyclone has winds of 86 – 110 kn ( 99 – 130 mph ; 157 – 200 km / h ) , while the maximum rating a Category 5 severe tropical cyclone has winds of above 110 kn ( 130 mph ; 200 km / h ) . 
 For systems below tropical cyclone strength there are various terms used , including Tropical Disturbance , Tropical Low and Tropical Depression . A tropical disturbance is defined as being a non — frontal system of synoptic scale originating over the tropics , with persistent enhanced convection and / or some indication of a circulation . A tropical depression or tropical low is a disturbance with a defined circulation , where the central position can be estimated , and the maximum 10 @-@ minute average wind speed is less than 34 kn ( 39 mph ; 63 km / h ) near the centre . The FMS numbers these systems when they have a potential to develop into a tropical cyclone or persist to cause significant impact to life and property , within its area of responsibility and have been analysed for the previous 24 hours . The Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale was introduced by the BoM , ahead of the 1989 @-@ 90 cyclone season . The United States Joint Typhoon Warning Centre also monitors the basin , and issues warnings on significant tropical cyclones on behalf of the United States Government . These warnings use a 1 @-@ minute sustained wind speed and can be compared to the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale , however , regardless of intensity in this basin the JTWC labels all systems as tropical cyclones . 
 = = Alternative scales = = 
 There are other scales that are not officially used by any of the Regional Specialized Meteorological Centres or the Tropical Cyclone Warning Centres . However they are used by other organizations , such as the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . An example of such scale is the Integrated Kinetic Energy index , which measures the destructive potential of the storm surge ; it works on a scale that ranges from one to six , with six having the highest destructive potential . 
 Accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) is used by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and other agencies to express the activity of individual tropical cyclones that are above tropical storm strength and entire tropical cyclone seasons . It is calculated by taking the squares of the estimated maximum sustained velocity of every active tropical storm ( wind speed 35 knots or higher ) at six @-@ hour intervals . The numbers are usually divided by 10 @,@ 000 to make them more manageable . The unit of ACE is 104 kn2 , and for use as an index the unit is assumed . As well as being squared for ACE , wind speed can also be cubed , which is referred to as the Power Dissipation Index ( PDI ) . 
 The Hurricane Severity Index ( HSI ) is another scale used and rates the severity of all types of tropical and subtropical cyclones based on both the intensity and the size of their wind fields . The HSI is a 0 to 50 point scale , allotting up to 25 points for a Tropical cyclone 's intensity and up to 25 points for wind field size . Points are awarded on a sliding scale , with the majority of points reserved for hurricane force and greater wind fields . 
 = = Comparisons across basins = = 
 The terminology for tropical cyclones differs from one region to another . Below is a summary of the classifications used by the official warning centres worldwide . 
 = The Decay of Fiction = 
 The Decay of Fiction is a 2002 American 35mm part color and part black @-@ and @-@ white experimental film noir project directed by independent filmmaker and artist Pat O 'Neill . The film , initially conceived as a documentary , was produced by O 'Neill and Rebecca Hartzell for Lookout Mountain Films . Filming took place in Los Angeles . 
 The film is set at the site of the old Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles . It has no identifiable plot and features no recurring characters . An estimated budget of $ 250 @,@ 000 was put forth to fund the film and it took eight years to complete . It premiered on October 12 , 2002 , at the New York Film Festival . The film has also been screened at six other film festivals and at eight non @-@ festival exhibitions . It received generally favorable reviews . Multiple critics commented on the film 's visual appeal . 
 = = Production = = 
 The movie was directed by filmmaker Pat O 'Neill and produced by O 'Neill and Rebecca Hartzell . O 'Neill turned the historic Ambassador Hotel of Los Angeles into a haunted mansion full of specters using a mixture of " 35mm location shooting and a digital overlay " . He worked with 45 actors and took eight years to complete his film . It has been described as the most complicated of O 'Neill 's works to that date . O 'Neill has said that it was " a huge bust financially " ; it was made on an estimated US $ 250 @,@ 000 budget . Pat O 'Neill mentioned the film as early as 1997 in an interview with David James . It was then referred to as the " Ambassador film " and called a " documentary " . While still a work in progress , excerpts were shown at the Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art 's Ahmanson Theatre in September 2002 . 
 = = Storyline = = 
 According to O 'Neill , the film is an " intersection of fact and hallucination " . It is set inside the decaying halls of the closed Ambassador Hotel , former home to the Cocoanut Grove restaurant and the first Academy Awards ceremonies . The film superimposes reenactments of classic Hollywood films onto shots of the dilapidated establishment , with ghostly gangsters and their gun <unk> interacting with icy blondes and wisecracking bartenders in carefully deconstructed snatches of dialogue . O 'Neill 's time @-@ lapse photography lends the film an ethereal effect that serves an intentionally distancing purpose . In this study of the historic Hollywood edifice , there is no discernible plot and there are no recurring characters . The film construction has the appearance of snippets taken from lost films of the 1940s ; it uses surreal vignettes of nude men and women , stop @-@ motion animated mannequin torsos , flickering film projections and dim light bulbs to create what devolves in a sense of nightmares , giving a result that feels more like an art installation than the expected film . 
 When displayed in museum exhibitions , the interactive DVD installation is called Tracing the Decay of Fiction . The presentation is shown in a continuous loop and allows museum patrons to explore the narrative and create their own stories . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Screenings and release = = 
 = = = Festivals = = = 
 The Decay of Fiction had its festival premiere screening on October 12 , 2002 , at the New York Film Festival . Subsequent festival screenings include : 
 International Film Festival Rotterdam ( 2003 ) 
 San Francisco International Film Festival ( 2003 ) . Shown with O 'Neill 's earlier films <unk> / Step Print ( 1998 ) and <unk> ( 1998 ) 
 Wisconsin Film Festival ( 2003 ) 
 Philadelphia Film Festival ( 2003 ) 
 Athens International Film Festival as I <unk> tis <unk> ( 2003 ) 
 London Film Festival ( 2003 ) 
 = = = Exhibitions = = = 
 The film had its non @-@ festival premiere at the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles in 2003 and showcased in 2003 at <unk> , a contemporary art museum in Helsinki , Finland . Later exhibitions include : 
 Art Gallery of Ontario , Toronto , Canada ( 2003 ) . Shown with Bump City ( 1964 ) and Runs Good ( 1970 ) as part of a retrospective of O 'Neill 's work . 
 Santa Monica Museum of Art 's <unk> Station exhibition " Views from Lookout Mountain " ( 2004 ) . 
 Nelson @-@ Atkins Museum of Art , Kansas City , Missouri ( 2005 ) 
 Centre de Cultura <unk> de Barcelona , Spain ( 2005 ) . Shown with Catalan language subtitles . 
 Echo Park Film Center , Los Angeles as part of their June " <unk> " program . ( 2010 ) 
 Museum of the Moving Image , New York City ( 2012 ) . Shown August through October as part of the " Film After Film " exhibition . 
