 Sigurður Einarsson , Chairman of Kaupthing Bank 
 Sigurður was sentenced to mandatory 5 years in prison by the District Court of Reykjavik for his involvement in the Al @-@ Thani case ; following an appeal , he was sentenced to four years on 12 February 2015 by Iceland 's supreme court . 
 Sigurjón Þ . Árnason , President of Landsbanki 
 Sigurjón was acquitted by the District Court of Reykjavik for his involvement in the Imon case . The Supreme Court of Iceland overturned the ruling and sentenced Sigurjón to 3 and a half years in prison for his involvement in the Imon case . 
 <unk> Gunnarsson , Managing Director of Brokerage of Landsbanki 
 <unk> was sentenced to 9 months in prison by the District Court of Reykjavík for market manipulation in the Imon case . Out of the 9 months , 6 were suspended . 
 Styrmir Þór <unk> , President of MP Bank 
 Styrmir was twice acquitted by the District Court of Reykjavik for his involvement in the Exeter case . The Supreme Court of Iceland overturned the ruling and sentenced Styrmir to 1 year in prison for breach of trust in the Exeter case . 
 = = = Arrests by UK Serious Fraud Office = = = 
 On 9 March 2011 , Robert and Vincent Tchenguiz were arrested in London by the UK 's Serious Fraud Office as part of their ongoing investigation in conjunction with Iceland 's Special Prosecutor 's Office into the collapse of Icelandic Bank Kaupthing . Neither was , however , indicted , and in fact they sued the Serious Fraud Office for wrongful arrest , receiving large sums in compensation . 
 = = Scrutiny of Icelandic business leaders = = 
 Since the crisis began , many of Iceland 's business leaders , who had previously been considered financial gurus who greatly developed Iceland 's economy , are now under intense public scrutiny for their roles in causing the financial crisis : 
 Jón <unk> <unk> and <unk> Jónsson , the owners of the <unk> Group retail empire , which includes Hamleys , House of Fraser , The Oasis Centre and a large portion of Iceland 's media . Jón <unk> , who had been known as the " popstar businessman " due to his shaggy golden mullet , has become the subject of a satirical video on YouTube set to the theme of the movie The Godfather . In addition , a former mistress later revealed details of his " playboy lifestyle " during a trial that found him guilty of false accounting ( which prompted the <unk> Group to relocate to the United Kingdom ) . 
 Lýður Guðmundsson and <unk> Guðmundsson , the frozen food entrepreneurs who were in charge of Kaupthing . 
 <unk> Thor <unk> and <unk> Guðmundsson , the shipping and brewing moguls who owned Landsbanki . 
 Reportedly , all of those under scrutiny are now rarely seen in public and some have apparently left the country . They are also reportedly the subjects of an ongoing investigation to determine if any of their business practices warrant criminal prosecution . 
 = = Statements from former politicians = = 
 Former Prime Minister Davíð Oddsson has claimed that Iceland needs to investigate " unusual and unconventional loans " given by the banks to senior politicians during the years before the crisis . 
 Björn <unk> , the former Minister for Justice and Ecclesiastical Affairs , has started a blog detailing the problems with the business sector and the efforts to cover them up . This was cited as an example of how politicians and businessmen , who traditionally held a tight grip over the Icelandic media , have lost this control and that dozens of similar blogs have been created . Björn stated that : 
 “ I have written a lot about problems in the business sector over the last 14 years , and I can only compare some parts of it to Enron . Here companies have been playing a game , using the media and publishing to make themselves look good . We only hope that the foreign media will soon begin to understand what has been going on . ” 
 = = Political aftermath = = 
 Parts of the Icelandic public have arranged protests against the Central Bank , the Parliament and the government 's alleged lack of responsibility before and after the crisis , attracting between 3000 and 6000 people ( 1 – 2 % of Iceland 's population ) on Saturdays . 
 In early November , the President of Iceland , Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson , at an informal lunch with foreign diplomats , criticized Iceland 's traditional friends ( particularly Britain , Sweden and Denmark ) as well as the International Monetary Fund . According to a memo from the Norwegian embassy , he suggested that the Russians might want to use the Keflavík Air Base , the Russian ambassador replied that they had no need for it . The President is quoted to have said that Iceland would soon recover , even if they had to fight alone . The President does not necessarily agree with the government on these issues . 
 In October 2008 , the UK PM Gordon Brown used provisions in part 2 of the Anti @-@ Terrorism , Crime and Security Act 2001 to freeze Landsbanki holdings in the United Kingdom . Iceland 's prime minister Geir Haarde protested against what he described as " a terrorist law being applied against us " , calling it " a completely unfriendly act " . Angered by the British decision , Iceland decided to submit a formal complaint to NATO about their move , and it also provoked more than 80 @,@ 000 Icelandics ( equal to 25 % of its entire population ) to sign an online petition set up under the heading " Icelanders are not terrorists " . The relationship got even tenser when UK replied a month later by cancelling its scheduled patrol of the Icelandic airspace in December 2008 . Iceland has no standing army of its own , and relies on a long @-@ term standing agreement with NATO where a group of member states have committed in turns to defend the Icelandic airspace , and the UK Royal Air Force had now cancelled this after mutual agreement with NATO ( presumably with another member state having accepted to overtake the liability ) . 
 According to a poll from late November 2008 , 64 % were in favour of early elections , with only 29 @.@ 3 % opposed . In a poll from 22 November 2008 , the Social Democratic Alliance led with 33 @.@ 6 % , followed by the Left @-@ Green Alliance at 27 @.@ 8 % and the Independence Party at 24 @.@ 8 % ; the Progressive Party and the Liberal Party were far behind , with only 6 @.@ 3 % and 4 @.@ 3 % , respectively . 
 As the Parliament met again on 20 January 2009 , there were protests with reinvigorated force and escalation of conflict between protesters and the police . On 22 January , police used tear gas to disperse people on <unk> ( the square in front of the <unk> ) , the first such use since the 1949 anti @-@ NATO protest . 
 = = = Government resignation = = = 
 Prime Minister Geir H. Haarde announced on 23 January 2009 that he would be stepping down as leader of the Independence Party for health reasons : he has been diagnosed as having a malignant oesophageal tumour . He said he would travel to the Netherlands around the end of January for treatment . Education Minister and Independence Party vice @-@ chairman Þorgerður <unk> <unk> was to serve as Prime Minister in his absence . The leader of the Social Democratic Alliance , Foreign Minister Ingibjörg <unk> <unk> , was also unwell , undergoing treatment for a benign brain tumour since September 2008 . The government recommended that elections be held on 9 May 2009 . 
 <unk> G. Sigurðsson , Iceland 's Commerce Minister , resigned on 25 January , citing the pressures of the nation 's economic collapse , as the country 's political leaders failed to agree on how to lead country out of its financial crisis . One of his last acts as minister was to dismiss the director of the Financial Supervisory Authority ( FSA ) . <unk> acknowledged that Icelanders have lost faith in their government and political system . " I want to shoulder my part of the responsibility for that , " he said . 
 Negotiations on continuing the coalition broke down the next day , apparently over demands from the Social Democratic Alliance to take over the leadership of the government , and Geir Haarde tendered the government 's resignation to the President of Iceland , Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson . The President asked the present government to continue until a new government can be formed , and held talks with the five political parties represented in the Althing . 
 After these discussions , Ingibjörg <unk> <unk> of the Social Democratic Alliance and <unk> J. <unk> of the Left @-@ Green Movement were asked by the President to negotiate the formation of a new coalition government . Such a coalition would be five seats short of an overall majority in the Althing , but the Progressive Party ( seven seats ) was expected to support the coalition without actually joining the government . Neither party leader became Prime Minister : instead , the position went to <unk> Sigurðardóttir of the Social Democratic Alliance , then the Minister of Social Affairs and Social Security , who became the new chairwoman of her party on 28 March 2009 . 
 On 8 April 2009 , former Prime Minister Geir H. Haarde stated that he was solely responsible for accepting controversial donations to the Icelandic Independence Party in 2006 , ISK 30 million from the investment group FL Group , and ISK 25 million from Landsbanki . 
 Geir was strongly criticized in the April 2010 report of the Special Investigative Commission into the financial collapse , being accused of " negligence " along with three other ministers of his government . Iceland 's parliament voted 33 – 30 to indict Geir , but not the other ministers , on charges of negligence in office at a session on 28 September 2010 . He will stand trial before the Landsdómur , a special court to hear cases alleging misconduct in government office : it will be the first time the Landsdómur has convened since it was established in the 1905 Constitution . The trial began in Reykjavik on 5 March 2012 . Geir Haarde was found guilty on one of four charges on 23 April 2012 , for not holding cabinet meetings on important state matters . Landsdómur said Mr. Haarde would face no punishment , as this was a minor offence . 
 = = Crisis resolution = = 
 = = = Recovery starting in 2011 = = = 
 Iceland 's financial position has steadily improved since the crash . The economic contraction and rise in unemployment appear to have been arrested by late 2010 and with growth under way in mid @-@ 2011 . Three main factors have been important in this regard . First is the emergency legislation passed by the Icelandic parliament in October 2008 . It served to minimise the impact of the financial crisis on the country . The Financial Supervisory Authority of Iceland used permission granted by the emergency legislation to take over the domestic operations of the three largest banks . The much larger foreign operations of the banks , however , went into receivership . 
 A second important factor is the success of the IMF Stand @-@ By @-@ Arrangement in the country since November 2008 . The SBA includes three pillars . The first pillar is a program of medium term fiscal consolidation , involving painful austerity measures and significant tax hikes . The result has been that central government debts have been stabilised at around 80 – 90 percent of GDP . A second pillar is the resurrection of a viable but sharply downsized domestic banking system on the ruins of its gargantuan international banking system which the government was unable to bail out . A third pillar is the enactment of capital controls and the work to gradually lift these to restore normal financial linkages with the outside world . An important result of the emergency legislation and the SBA is that the country has not been seriously affected by the European sovereign debt crisis from 2010 . Despite a contentious debate with Britain and the Netherlands over the question of a state guarantee on the Icesave deposits of Landsbanki in these countries , credit default swaps on Icelandic sovereign debt have steadily declined from over 1000 points prior to the crash in 2008 to around 200 points in June 2011 . The fact that the assets of the failed Landsbanki branches are now estimated to cover most of the depositor claims has had an influence to ease concerns over the situation . 
 Finally , the third major factor behind the resolution of the financial crisis was the decision by the government of Iceland to apply for membership in the EU in July 2009 . While views on the feasibility of EU membership are quite mixed in Iceland , this action has served to enhance the credibility of the country on international financial markets . One sign of the success of the above efforts is the fact that the Icelandic government was successfully able to raise $ 1 billion with a bond issue on 9 June 2011 . This development indicates that international investors have given the government and the new banking system , with two of the three biggest banks now in foreign hands , a clean bill of health . The first two major measures were implemented by the government of Geir H. Haarde but also carried out by the government of Johanna <unk> , which then took the step to apply for EU membership . 
 Iceland has undertaken recapitalization of lenders such as injection of ISK 33 billion ( 2 @.@ 1 % of 2010 GDP ) into Housing Financing Fund at the end of 2010 , under a <unk> plan approved by the <unk> . 
 = = = Aftermath ( 2012 – 2013 ) = = = 
 By mid @-@ 2012 Iceland was regarded as one of Europe 's recovery success stories . It has had two years of economic growth . Unemployment was down to 6 @.@ 3 % and Iceland was attracting immigrants to fill jobs . Currency devaluation effectively reduced wages by 50 % making exports more competitive and imports more expensive . Ten @-@ year government bonds were issued below 6 % , lower than some of the <unk> nations in the EU ( Portugal , Italy , Ireland , Greece , and Spain ) . <unk> Thor <unk> , a member of parliament , noted that adjustments via currency devaluations are less painful than government labor policies and negotiations . Nevertheless , while EU fervor has cooled the government continued to pursue membership . 
 Iceland elected a new government in April 2013 , which as one of their top priorities wanted to negotiate a debt haircut towards foreign creditors of the three failed Icelandic banks now in receivership , as part of a deal to lift the long enforced ( since November 2008 ) capital controls . The current capital controls ban a swap / exchange of ISK denominated assets to foreign currency , and so by effect has trapped repayment of ISK denominated assets to the creditors – which in theory mean they should be interested to accept a haircut in return for getting the capital controls lifted . The Icelandic government intent somehow to route the saved money from the negotiated debt haircut for creditors into a national household debt relief fund , enabling a 20 % debt relief for all household mortgages . In July 2013 , Standard & <unk> recommended Iceland to drop the debt relief initiative , as it would only result in increased debt for the government – making it even more difficult to lend at credit markets , and it was forecasted also to ignite high inflation along with an economic recession equal to a GDP detraction of 10 % . The government has nevertheless appointed a taskforce to present proposals on how best to achieve the government 's goal about implementing a combined capital control abolition and debt relief for households , with a reporting deadline in October 2013 . 
 = Glam metal = 
 Glam metal ( also known as hair metal and often used synonymously with pop metal ) is a subgenre of heavy metal and hard rock . It often combines elements of those genres with pop music , adding catchy hooks and guitar riffs , while sometimes borrowing from the fashion of 1970s glam rock . 
 Glam metal can be traced back to acts like Aerosmith , Alice Cooper , Boston , Cheap Trick , Kiss , The New York Dolls , and Van Halen . It arose in the late 1970s and early 1980s in the United States , particularly on the Los Angeles Sunset Strip music scene , pioneered by bands such as Mötley Crüe , Poison , Guns N ' Roses , and Bon Jovi . It was popular throughout the 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s , bringing to prominence bands including Skid Row , Cinderella , and Warrant . Glam metal was also associated with flashy clothing and makeup . Poison , for example , had long shaggy or backcombed hair , accessories , metal studs , leather and make @-@ up during their live performances . 
 Glam metal lost mainstream interest in the early 1990s as the perceived excesses of glam metal created a backlash against the genre . A factor in the decline of glam metal was the rise of grunge in the early 1990s , which had a stripped @-@ down aesthetic and a complete rejection of the glam metal visual style . Glam metal has enjoyed a revival since the beginning of the new millennium with reunions of many popular acts from the genre 's 1980s heyday , as well as the retro styling of newer bands including The Darkness from United Kingdom and Steel Panther from Los Angeles . 
 = = Characteristics and terminology = = 
 Musically , glam metal uses traditional heavy metal songs , incorporating elements of hard rock and punk rock , while adding pop @-@ influenced catchy hooks and guitar riffs . Like other heavy metal songs of the 1980s , they often feature shred guitar solos . They also include extensive use of harmonies , particularly in the characteristic power ballads — slow , emotional songs that gradually build to a strong finale . These were among the most commercially successful singles in the genre and opened it up to a wider audience that would not have been attracted to traditional heavy metal . Lyrical themes often deal with love and lust , with songs often directed at a particular woman . 
 Aesthetically glam metal draws heavily on the glam rock or glitter rock of the 1970s , often with very long backcombed hair , use of make @-@ up , gaudy clothing and accessories ( chiefly consisting of tight denim or leather jeans , spandex , and headbands ) . The visual aspects of glam metal appealed to music television producers , particularly MTV , whose establishment coincided with the rise of the genre . Glam metal performers became infamous for their debauched lifestyles of drugs , strippers and late @-@ night parties , which were widely covered in the tabloid press . 
 Sociologist Deena Weinstein points to the large number of terms used to describe more commercial forms of heavy metal , which she groups together as lite metal . These include , beside glam metal : melodic metal , false metal , poodle bands , <unk> metal , pop metal or metal pop , the last of which was coined by critic Philip <unk> in 1983 to describe bands such as Van Halen and Def Leppard . AllMusic distinguishes pop metal , which refers to the whole pop @-@ tinted hard rock and heavy metal scene of the 1980s ( including Def Leppard , Bon Jovi , Europe ) , from hair metal , the characteristics of which are flashy clothing and heavy makeup ( as embodied by Poison , and Mötley Crüe ) . Use of the derogatory term hair metal started in the early 1990s , as grunge gained popularity at the expense of 1980s metal . In the " definitive metal family tree " of his documentary Metal : A Headbanger 's Journey , anthropologist Sam Dunn differentiates pop metal , which includes bands like Def Leppard , Europe , and Whitesnake , from glam metal bands that include Mötley Crüe and Poison . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Music journalist Stephen Davis claims the influences of the style can be traced back to acts like Aerosmith , Kiss , Boston , Cheap Trick , and The New York Dolls . Kiss and to a lesser extent Alice Cooper , were major influences on the genre . Finnish band Hanoi Rocks , heavily influenced themselves by the New York Dolls , have been credited with setting a blueprint for the look of hair metal . 
 Van Halen has been seen as highly influential on the movement , emerging in 1978 from the Los Angeles music scene on Sunset Strip , with a sound based around the lead guitar skills of Eddie Van Halen . He popularized a playing technique of two ‐ handed hammer ‐ ons and pull ‐ offs called tapping , showcased on the song " Eruption " from the album Van Halen . This sound , and lead singer David Lee Roth 's stage antics , would be highly influential on glam metal , although Van Halen would never fully adopt a glam aesthetic . 
 Def Leppard , often categorized with the new wave of British heavy metal , released their second album High ' n ' Dry in 1981 , mixing glam @-@ rock with heavy metal , and helping to define the sound of hard rock for the decade . Their follow @-@ up album Pyromania ( 1983 ) , certified Diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America ( over 10 million copies sold in the US ) , reached number two on the Billboard 200 . The singles " Foolin ' " , " Photograph " , and " Rock of Ages " , helped by the emergence of MTV , reached the Top 40 . Def Leppard 's Pyromania style was widely emulated , particularly by the emerging Californian scene . 
 = = = First wave ( 1981 – 85 ) = = = 
 In the early 1980s , a number of bands from across the United States began to move towards what would become the glam metal sound . Starting in 1981 , Mötley Crüe ( from Los Angeles ) released their first album Too Fast for Love , Dokken ( also from Los Angeles ) released their first Breaking the Chains , and Kix ( from western Maryland ) released their first album the self @-@ titled Kix . In 1982 , Night Ranger ( from San Francisco ) released their initial album Dawn Patrol which reached the top 40 ranking in the United States . 1983 was the breakout year for glam metal music ; Quiet Riot 's 1983 debut Metal Health was the first glam metal album , and arguably the first heavy metal album , to reach number one in the Billboard music charts and to help open the doors for additional mainstream success by subsequent metal music bands . Additionally , Night Ranger 's second album in 1983 Midnight Madness was also a breakthrough album that included the top five single " Sister Christian " . Also , in 1983 , a larger wave of glam metal albums began appearing ; Mötley Crüe released its second album Shout at the Devil , Def Leppard released its third album Pyromania , Killer Dwarfs ( from Canada ) released their self @-@ titled album Killer Dwarfs , Kix released its second album Cool Kids , Lita Ford released her initial album Out for Blood , and the band Kiss released its glam @-@ sounding Lick It Up . 
 The most active glam metal music scene was starting to appear in clubs on the Sunset Strip in Los Angeles , including The Trip , the Whisky a Go Go , and the Starwood . These clubs began to avoid booking punk rock bands because of fears of violence and began booking many area metal bands , usually on a " pay to play " basis , thus creating a vibrant scene for hard rock music . An increasing numbers of metal bands were able to produce debut albums in 1984 , including Ratt ( from Los Angeles ) with its breakthrough album Out of the Cellar Bon Jovi ( from New Jersey ) with its initial self @-@ titled album Bon Jovi , Great White with its self @-@ titled Great White , Black ' n Blue ( from Portland Oregon ) with its self @-@ titled album Black ' n Blue , Autograph with its first album Sign In Please , and W.A.S.P. with its self @-@ titled debut album <unk> .. Also , in 1984 , Lita Ford put out her second album called Dancin ' on the Edge , Quiet Riot released its follow @-@ up album to Metal Health called Condition Critical , Dokken released its second album called Tooth and Nail , and Kiss released its very glam @-@ sounding album called <unk> . 
 All of these bands played a part in the developing the overall look and sound of glam metal during the early 1980s . In 1985 , many more commercially successful glam metal albums began to appear . Mötley Crüe released Theatre of Pain , Ratt 's second album Invasion of Your Privacy , Dokken 's third album Under Lock and Key , <unk> 's first release Soldiers Under Command , Bon Jovi 's second release 7800 ° Fahrenheit , and Autograph 's second album That 's The Stuff . Los Angeles continued to foster the most important scene around the Sunset Strip , with groups like London , which had originally formed as a glam rock band in the 1970s , and had seen future members of Mötley Crüe , Cinderella and Guns N ' Roses pass through its ranks , finally releasing their début album Non Stop Rock in 1985 as well . 
 = = = Second wave ( 1986 – 91 ) = = = 
 By the mid @-@ 1980s , glam metal had begun to become a major mainstream success in America with many of these band 's music videos appearing on heavy rotation on MTV often at the top of MTV 's daily dial countdown , and some of the bands appeared on the channel 's shows such as Headbanger 's Ball , which became one of the most popular programs with over 1 @.@ 3 million views a week . The groups also received heavy rotation on radio stations such as KNAC in Los Angeles . 
 1986 was a significant year for glam metal music as one of the most commercially significant releases of the era was put out by Bon Jovi with Slippery When Wet which mixed hard rock with a pop sensitivity , and spent a total of eight weeks at the top of the Billboard 200 album chart , selling over 12 million copies in the United States . It became the first hard rock album to spawn three top ten singles , two of which reached number one . The album has been credited with widening the audience for the genre , particularly by appealing to women as well as the traditional male dominated audience , and opening the door to MTV and commercial success for other bands at the end of the decade . The Swedish band Europe released the anthemic album The Final Countdown which reached the top ten in several countries , including the U.S. and while the title single reached number one in 26 countries . Stryper made their mainstream breakthrough in 1986 with the release of their platinum album To Hell with the Devil and brought Christian lyrics to their hard rock music style and glam metal looks . Two Pennsylvania bands , with Harrisburg 's Poison and Philadelphia 's Cinderella released multi @-@ platinum début albums , respectively Look What the Cat Dragged In and Night Songs in 1986 . Van Halen released 5150 their first album with Sammy Hagar on lead vocals , which was number one in the U.S. for three weeks and sold over six million copies . Additionally , some established hard rock bands of the era such as the Scorpions , Whitesnake , Aerosmith , Kiss , Alice Cooper , and Judas Priest began incorporating glam metal elements into their sounds and images , as the genre 's popularity skyrocketed in 1985 @-@ 86 . 
 Glam metal bands continued their run of commercial success in 1987 with Mötley Crüe releasing Girls , Girls , Girls and Def Leppard releasing Hysteria producing a hard rock record of seven hit singles . Another of the greatest successes of the era was Guns N ' Roses , originally formed from a fusion of bands L.A. Guns and Hollywood Rose , who released the best @-@ selling début of all time , Appetite for Destruction . With a " grittier " and " rawer " sound than most glam metal it produced three top 10 hits , including the number one " Sweet Child O ' Mine " . Such was the dominance of the style that Californian hardcore punk band T.S.O.L. moved towards a glam metal sound in this period . Also in 1987 , L.A. band Faster Pussycat released their debut self @-@ titled album eponymous début and Dokken released the successful Back for the Attack . 
 In the last years of the decade the most notable successes were New Jersey ( 1988 ) by Bon Jovi , OU812 ( 1988 ) by Van Halen , while Open Up and Say ... Ahh ! ( 1988 ) by Poison , spawned number one hit single " Every Rose Has Its Thorn " , and eventually sold eight million copies worldwide . Britny Fox from Philadelphia and Winger from New York released their eponymous débuts in 1988 . In 1989 Mötley Crüe produced their most commercially successful album , the multi @-@ platinum number one Dr. Feelgood . In the same year eponymous débuts included Danger Danger from New York , Dangerous Toys from Austin , Texas , who provided more of a Southern rock tone to the genre , and Enuff Z <unk> from Chicago who provided an element of psychedelia to their sound and visual style . L.A. débuts included Warrant with Dirty Rotten Filthy Stinking Rich ( 1989 ) , and Skid Row with their eponymous album ( 1989 ) , which reached number six in the Billboard 200 , but they were to be one of the last major bands that emerged in the glam metal era . Glam metal entered the 1990s as one of the major commercial genres of popular music . In 1990 débuts for Slaughter , from Las Vegas with Stick It to Ya and FireHouse , from North Carolina , with their eponymous album reached number 18 and number 21 on the Billboard 200 respectively , but it would be the peak of their commercial achievement . Guns N ' Roses ' Use Your Illusion I and Use Your Illusion II ( both in 1991 ) and Van Halen 's For Unlawful Carnal Knowledge ( 1991 ) showcased the genre 's popularity . 
 = = = Decline ( 1992 – 96 ) = = = 
 The 1988 film The Decline of Western Civilization Part II : The Metal Years captured the Los Angeles scene of successful and aspiring bands . It also highlighted the excesses of glam metal , particularly the scene in which W.A.S.P. guitarist Chris Holmes was interviewed while drinking vodka on a floating chair in a swimming pool as his mother watched . As a result , it has been seen as helping to create a backlash against the genre . In the early 1990s glam metal 's popularity rapidly declined after nearly a decade of success . Successful bands lost members that were key to their songwriting and / or live performances , such as Mötley Crue 's frontman Vince Neil , Poison guitarist C.C. DeVille , Def Leppard guitarist Steve Clark and Guns N ' Roses guitarist Izzy Stradlin . Several music writers and musicians began to deride glam metal acts as " hair farmers , " hinting at the soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ popularized term " hair metal " . Another reason for the decline in popularity of the style may have been the declining popularity of the power ballad . While its use , especially after a hard @-@ rocking anthem , was initially a successful formula , in the late 1980s and early 1990s audiences lost interest in this approach . 
 One significant factor in the decline was the rise of grunge music from Seattle , with bands including Alice in Chains , Pearl Jam and Soundgarden . This was particularly obvious after the success of Nirvana 's Nevermind ( 1991 ) , which combined elements of hardcore punk and heavy metal into a dirty sound that made use of heavy guitar distortion , fuzz and feedback , along with darker lyrical themes , a stripped @-@ down aesthetic and a complete rejection of the glam metal visual style and performance . Many major labels felt they had been caught off @-@ guard by the surprise success of grunge and began turning over their personnel in favor of younger staffers more versed in the new scene . As MTV shifted its attention to the new style , glam metal bands found themselves relegated increasingly to late night airplay , and Headbanger 's Ball was cancelled at the end of 1994 , while KNAC went over to Spanish programming . Given glam metal 's lack of a major format presence on radio , bands were left without a clear way to reach their audience . Other ( earlier Hollywood ) alternative rock bands like the Red Hot Chili Peppers and Jane 's Addiction also helped supplant the popularity of the genre . 
 Some artists tried to alter their sound , while others struggled on with their original format . In 1995 , Van Halen released Balance , a multi @-@ platinum seller that would be the band 's last with Sammy Hagar on vocals . In 1996 , David Lee Roth returned briefly and his replacement , former Extreme singer Gary Cherone , left the band soon after the release of the commercially unsuccessful 1998 album Van Halen III . Van Halen would not tour or record again until 2004 . Warrant released <unk> in 1995 , an album with more of an alternative / grunge approach , which had little commercial success . 
 Meanwhile , Guns N ' Roses ' classic @-@ lineup was whittled away throughout the decade . Drummer Steven Adler was fired in 1990 , guitarist Izzy Stradlin left in late 1991 after recording Use Your Illusion I and II with the band . Tensions between the other band members and lead singer Axl Rose continued after the release of the 1993 punk rock covers album " The Spaghetti Incident ? " . Guitarist Slash left in 1996 , followed by bassist Duff McKagan in 1998 . Axl Rose , the only remaining original member at that point , worked with a constantly changing lineup in recording Chinese <unk> an album that would take over ten years to complete and see the band incorporate electronic rock , industrial rock and nu metal styles . 
 = = = Revivals and nostalgia festivals ( 1997 – present ) = = = 
 During both the late 1990s and the 2000s , glam metal began to have something of a revival . Some established acts who had managed to weather the storm enjoyed renewed popularity , others reformed and new bands emerged to emulate the glam metal style . Bon Jovi were still able to achieve a commercial hit with " It 's My Life " ( 2000 ) . They branched into country music with a version of their 2005 song " Who Says You Can 't Go Home " , which reached number one on the Hot Country Singles chart in 2006 and the rock / country album Lost Highway which reached number one in 2007 . In 2009 , Bon Jovi released The Circle , which marked a return to their hard rock sound and reached number one on the Billboard 200 . Mötley Crüe reunited with Vince Neil to record the 1997 album Generation Swine and Poison reunited with guitarist C.C. DeVille in 1999 , producing the mostly live Power to the People ( 2000 ) ; both bands began to tour extensively . There were reunions and subsequent tours from Van Halen ( with Hagar in 2004 and then Roth in 2007 ) . The long awaited Guns N ' Roses album Chinese Democracy was finally released in 2008 , but only went platinum in the US , produced no hit singles , and failed to come close to the success of the band 's late 1980s and early 1990s material . Europe 's " Final Countdown " enjoyed a new lease of popularity as the millennium drew to a close and the band reformed . Other acts to reform included Ratt , Britny Fox , Stryper ( annually ) , and Skid Row . 
 Beginning in 1999 , Monster Ballads , a series of compilation albums that feature popular power ballads , usually from the glam metal genre , capitalized on the nostalgia , with the first volume going platinum . The VH1 sponsored Rock Never Stops Tour , beginning in 1998 , has seen many glam metal bands take to the stage again , including on the inaugural tour : Warrant , Slaughter , Quiet Riot , FireHouse , and L.A. Guns . Slaughter also took part in the 1999 version with Ted Nugent , Night Ranger , and Quiet Riot . Poison and Cinderella toured together in 2000 and 2002 , and in 2005 Cinderella headlined the Rock Never Stops Tour , with support from Ratt , Quiet Riot , and FireHouse . In 2007 the four @-@ day @-@ long <unk> festival held in Oklahoma included glam metal bands Poison , Ratt and Twisted Sister . Warrant and Cinderella co @-@ headlined the festival in 2008 . Nostalgia for the genre was evidenced in the production of the glam metal themed musical Rock of Ages , which ran in Los Angeles in 2006 and in New York in 2008 . It was made into a film released in 2012 . 
 Glam metal experienced a partial resurgence around the turn of the century , due in part to increased interest on the Internet , with the successful ' Glam Slam Metal Jam ' music festival taking place in the summer of 2000 . By the early 2000s , a handful of new bands began to revive glam metal in one form or another . The Darkness 's Permission to Land ( 2003 ) , described as an " eerily realistic simulation of ' 80s metal and ' 70s glam " , topped the UK charts , going quintuple platinum . One Way Ticket to Hell ... and Back ( 2005 ) reached number 11 . The band broke up in 2006 , but reunited in 2011 , releasing the album Hot Cakes the following year . Los Angeles band Steel Panther managed to gain a following by playing 1980s style glam metal . In Sweden the sleaze rock movement attempted to revive the genre , with bands including <unk> of Jenna , <unk> and <unk> Other new acts included Beautiful Creatures and Buckcherry . The latter 's breakthrough album 15 ( 2006 ) went platinum in the U.S. and spawned the single " Sorry " ( 2007 ) , which made the top 10 of the Billboard Hot 100 . Bands known for their metalcore background such as Black Veil Brides and Blessed by a Broken Heart have changed their style to be glam metal inspired , both musically and visually , with Black Veil Brides adding a gothic spin to the traditional glam image . 
 = Priestley Riots = 
 The Priestley Riots ( also known as the Birmingham Riots of 1791 ) took place from 14 July to 17 July 1791 in Birmingham , England ; the rioters ' main targets were religious Dissenters , most notably the politically and theologically controversial Joseph Priestley . Both local and national issues stirred the passions of the rioters , from disagreements over public library book purchases , to controversies over Dissenters ' attempts to gain full civil rights and their support of the French Revolution . 
 The riots started with an attack on Birmingham 's Royal Hotel – the site of a banquet organized in sympathy with the French Revolution . Then , beginning with Priestley 's church and home , the rioters attacked or burned four Dissenting chapels , twenty @-@ seven houses , and several businesses . Many of them became intoxicated by liquor that they found while looting , or with which they were bribed to stop burning homes . A small core could not be bribed , however , and remained sober . The rioters burned not only the homes and chapels of Dissenters , but also the homes of people they associated with Dissenters , such as members of the scientific Lunar Society . 
 While the riots were not initiated by Prime Minister William Pitt 's administration , the national government was slow to respond to the Dissenters ' pleas for help . Local Birmingham officials seem to have been involved in the planning of the riots , and they were later reluctant to prosecute any ringleaders . Industrialist James Watt wrote that the riots " divided [ Birmingham ] into two parties who hate one another mortally " . Those who had been attacked gradually left , leaving Birmingham a more conservative city than it had been throughout the eighteenth century . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 = = = Birmingham = = = 
 Over the course of the eighteenth century , Birmingham became notorious for its riots , which were sparked by a number of causes . In 1714 and 1715 , the townspeople , as part of a " Church @-@ and @-@ King " mob , attacked Dissenters ( Protestants who did not adhere to the Church of England or follow its practices ) in the Sacheverell riots during the London trial of Henry Sacheverell , and in 1751 and 1759 Quakers and Methodists were assaulted . During the anti @-@ Catholic Gordon Riots in 1780 , large crowds assembled in Birmingham . In 1766 , 1782 , 1795 , and 1800 mobs protested high food prices . One contemporary described Birmingham rioters as the " bunting , beggarly , brass @-@ making , brazen @-@ faced , brazen @-@ hearted , blackguard , bustling , booby Birmingham mob " . 
 Up until the late 1780s , religious divisions did not affect Birmingham 's elite . Dissenter and Anglican lived side by side harmoniously : they were on the same town promotional committees ; they pursued joint scientific interests in the Lunar Society ; and they worked together in local government . They stood united against what they viewed as the threat posed by unruly plebeians . After the riots , however , scientist and clergyman Joseph Priestley argued in his An Appeal to the Public on the Subject of the Birmingham Riots ( 1791 ) that this cooperation had not in fact been as amicable as generally believed . Priestley revealed that disputes over the local library , Sunday Schools , and church attendance had divided Dissenters from Anglicans . In his Narrative of the Riots in Birmingham ( 1816 ) , stationer and Birmingham historian William Hutton agreed , arguing that five events stoked the fires of religious friction : disagreements over inclusion of Priestley 's books in the local public library ; concerns over Dissenters ' attempts to repeal the Test and Corporation Acts ; religious controversy ( particularly involving Priestley ) ; an " inflammatory hand @-@ bill " ; and a dinner celebrating the outbreak of the French Revolution . 
 Once Birmingham Dissenters started to agitate for the repeal of the Test and Corporation Acts , which restricted Dissenters ' civil rights ( preventing them , for instance , from attending the Universities of Oxford or Cambridge , or from holding public office ) , the semblance of unity among the town 's elite disappeared . Unitarians such as Priestley were at the forefront of the repeal campaign , and orthodox Anglicans grew nervous and angry . After 1787 , the emergence of Dissenting groups formed for the sole purpose of overturning these laws began to divide the community ; however , the repeal efforts failed in 1787 , 1789 , and 1790 . Priestley 's support of the repeal and his heterodox religious views , which were widely published , inflamed the populace . In February 1790 , a group of activists came together not only to oppose the interests of the Dissenters but also to counteract what they saw as the undesirable importation of French Revolutionary ideals . Dissenters by and large supported the French Revolution and its efforts to question the role monarchy should play in government . One month before the riots , Priestley attempted to found a reform society , the Warwickshire Constitutional Society , which would have supported universal suffrage and short Parliaments . Although this effort failed , the efforts to establish such a society increased tensions in Birmingham . 
 In addition to these religious and political differences , both the lower @-@ class rioters and their upper @-@ class Anglican leaders had economic complaints against the middle @-@ class Dissenters . They envied the ever @-@ increasing prosperity of these industrialists as well as the power that came with that economic success . Historian R. B. Rose refers to these industrialists as belonging to " an inner elite of magnates " . Priestley himself had written a pamphlet , An Account of a Society for Encouraging the Industrious Poor ( 1787 ) , on how best to extract the most work for the smallest amount of money from the poor . Its emphasis on debt collection did not endear him to the poverty @-@ stricken . 
 = = = British reaction to the French Revolution = = = 
 The British public debate over the French Revolution , or the Revolution Controversy , lasted from 1789 through 1795 . Initially many on both sides of the Channel thought the French would follow the pattern of the English Glorious Revolution of a century before , and the Revolution was viewed positively by a large portion of the British public . Most Britons celebrated the storming of the Bastille in 1789 , believing that France 's absolute monarchy should be replaced by a more democratic form of government . In these early , heady days , supporters of the Revolution also believed that Britain 's own system would be reformed as well : voting rights would be broadened and redistribution of Parliamentary constituency boundaries would eliminate so @-@ called " rotten boroughs " . 
 After the publication of statesman and philosopher Edmund Burke 's Reflections on the Revolution in France ( 1790 ) , in which he surprisingly broke ranks with his liberal Whig colleagues to support the French aristocracy , a pamphlet war discussing the Revolution began in earnest . Because Burke had supported the American colonists in their rebellion against England , his views sent a shockwave through the country . While Burke supported aristocracy , monarchy , and the Established Church , liberals such as Charles James Fox supported the Revolution , and a programme of individual liberties , civic virtue and religious toleration , while radicals such as Priestley , William Godwin , Thomas Paine , and Mary Wollstonecraft , argued for a further programme of republicanism , agrarian socialism , and abolition of the " landed interest " . Alfred <unk> calls the debate that erupted " perhaps the last real discussion of the fundamentals of politics in [ Britain ] " . However , by December 1795 , after the Reign of Terror and war with France , there were few who still supported the French cause or believed that reform would extend to Britain , and those suspected of remaining radicals became the subject of official and popular suspicion . 
 The events which precipitated the Priestley Riots came less than a month after the attempted flight and arrest of the French Royal family , and at a point when much of the early promise of the Revolution had already dissipated . However the spiralling violence of the later Revolution was still to begin . 
 = = Hints of trouble = = 
 On 11 July 1791 , a Birmingham newspaper announced that on 14 July , the second anniversary of the storming of the Bastille , there would be a dinner at the local Royal Hotel to commemorate the outbreak of the French Revolution ; the invitation encouraged " any Friend to Freedom " to attend : 
 A number of gentlemen intend dining together on the 14th instant , to commemorate the auspicious day which witnessed the emancipation of twenty @-@ six millions of people from the yoke of despotism , and restored the blessings of equal government to a truly great and enlightened nation ; with whom it is our interest , as a commercial people , and our duty , as friends to the general rights of mankind , to promote a free intercourse , as subservient to a permanent friendship . 
 Any Friend to Freedom , disposed to join the intended temperate festivity , is desired to leave his name at the bar of the Hotel , where tickets may be had at Five Shillings each , including a bottle of wine ; but no person will be admitted without one . 
 Dinner will be on table at three o 'clock precisely . 
 Alongside this notice was a threat : " an authentic list " of the participants would be published after the dinner . On the same day , " an ultra @-@ revolutionary " handbill , written by James Hobson ( although his authorship was not known at the time ) , entered circulation . Town officials offered 100 guineas ( approximately US $ 34 @,@ 000 ) for information regarding the publication of the handbill and its author , to no avail . The Dissenters found themselves forced to plead ignorance and decry the " radical " ideas promoted by the handbill . It was becoming clear by 12 July that there would be trouble at the dinner . On the morning of 14 July graffiti such as " destruction to the Presbyterians " and " Church and King for ever " were scrawled across the town . At this point , Priestley 's friends , fearing for his safety , dissuaded him from attending the dinner . 
 = = 14 July = = 
 About 90 resolute sympathizers of the French Revolution came to celebrate on the 14th ; the banquet was led by James Keir , an Anglican industrialist who was a member of the Lunar Society of Birmingham . When the guests arrived at the hotel at 2 or 3 p.m. , they were greeted by 60 or 70 protesters who temporarily dispersed while yelling , rather bizarrely and confusingly , " no popery " . By the time the celebrants ended their dinner , around 7 or 8 p.m. , a crowd of hundreds had gathered . The rioters , who " were recruited predominantly from the industrial artisans and labourers of Birmingham " , threw stones at the departing guests and sacked the hotel . The crowd then moved on to the Quaker meeting @-@ house , until someone yelled that the Quakers " never trouble themselves with anything , neither on one side nor the other " and convinced them instead to attack the New Meeting chapel , where Priestley presided as minister . The New Meeting chapel was burned to the ground , quickly followed by the Old Meeting , another Dissenting chapel . 
 The rioters proceeded to Priestley 's home , Fairhill at Sparkbrook . Priestley barely had time to evacuate and he and his wife fled from Dissenting friend to friend during the riots . Writing shortly after the event , Priestley described the first part of the attack , which he witnessed from a distance : 
 It being remarkably calm , and clear moon @-@ light , we could see to a considerable distance , and being upon a rising ground , we distinctly heard all that passed at the house , every shout of the mob , and almost every stroke of the instruments they had provided for breaking the doors and the furniture . For they could not get any fire , though one of them was heard to offer two guineas for a lighted candle ; my son , whom we left behind us , having taken the precaution to put out all the fires in the house , and others of my friends got all the neighbours to do the same . I afterwards heard that much pains was taken , but without effect , to get fire from my large electrical machine , which stood in the library . 
 His son , William , stayed behind with others to protect the family home , but they were overcome and the property was eventually looted and razed to the ground . Priestley 's valuable library , scientific laboratory , and manuscripts were largely lost in the flames . 
 = = 15 , 16 and 17 July = = 
 The Earl of Aylesford attempted to stem the mounting violence on the night of the 14th , but despite having the help of other magistrates , he was unable to control the crowd . On the 15th , the mob liberated prisoners from the local gaol . Thomas Woodbridge , the Keeper of the Prison , deputized several hundred people to help him quell the mob , but many of these joined in with the rioters themselves . The crowd destroyed John Ryland 's home , Baskerville House , and drank the supplies of liquor which they found in the cellar . When the newly appointed constables arrived on the scene , the mob attacked and disarmed them . One man was killed . The local magistrates and law enforcement , such as it was , did nothing further to restrain the mob and did not read the Riot Act until the military arrived on 17 July . Other rioters burned down banker John Taylor 's home at Bordesley Park . 
 On the 16th , the homes of Joseph Jukes , John Coates , John Hobson , Thomas Hawkes , and John Harwood ( the latter a blind Baptist minister ) were all ransacked or burned . The Baptist Meeting at Kings Heath , another Dissenting chapel , was also destroyed . William Russell and William Hutton , tried to defend their homes , but to no avail — the men they hired refused to fight the mob . Hutton later wrote a narrative of the events : 
 I was avoided as a pestilence ; the waves of sorrow rolled over me , and beat me down with multiplied force ; every one came heavier than the last . My children were distressed . My wife , through long affliction , ready to quit my own arms for those of death ; and I myself reduced to the sad necessity of humbly begging a draught of water at a cottage ! ... In the morning of the 15th I was a rich man ; in the evening I was ruined . 
 When the rioters arrived at John Taylor 's other house at Moseley , Moseley Hall , they carefully moved all of the furniture and belongings of its current occupant , the frail Dowager Lady Carhampton , a relative of George III , out of the house before they burned it : they were specifically targeting those who disagreed with the king 's policies and who , in not conforming to the Church of England , resisted state control . The homes of George Russell , a Justice of the Peace , Samuel Blyth , one of the ministers of New Meeting , Thomas Lee , and a Mr. Westley all came under attack on the 15th and 16th . The manufacturer , Quaker , and member of the Lunar Society Samuel Galton only saved his own home by bribing the rioters with ale and money . 
 By 2 p.m. on 16 July , the rioters had left Birmingham and were heading towards Kings Norton and the Kingswood Chapel ; it was estimated that one group of the rioters totalled 250 to 300 people . They burned Cox 's farm at <unk> and looted and attacked the home of a Mr. Taverner . When they reached Kingswood , Warwickshire , they burned the Dissenting chapel and its manse . By this time , Birmingham had shut down — no business was being conducted . 
 Contemporary accounts record that the mob 's last sustained assault was around 8 p.m. on the 17th . About 30 " hard core " rioters attacked the home of William Withering , an Anglican who attended the Lunar Society with Priestley and Keir . But Withering , aided by a group of hired men , managed to fend them off . When the military finally arrived to restore order on the 17th and 18th , most of the rioters had disbanded , although there were rumours that mobs were destroying property in Alcester and Bromsgrove . 
 All in all , four Dissenting churches had been severely damaged or burned down and twenty @-@ seven homes had been attacked , many looted and burned . Having begun by attacking those who attended the Bastille celebration on the 14th , the " Church @-@ and @-@ King " mob had finished up by extending their targets to include Dissenters of all kinds as well as members of the Lunar Society . 
 = = Aftermath and trials = = 
 Priestley and other Dissenters blamed the government for the riots , believing that William Pitt and his supporters had instigated them ; however , it seems from the evidence that the riots were actually organized by local Birmingham officials . Some of the rioters acted in a co @-@ ordinated fashion and seemed to be led by local officials during the attacks , prompting accusations of premeditation . Some Dissenters discovered that their homes were to be attacked several days before the rioters arrived , leading them to believe that there was a prepared list of victims . The " disciplined nucleus of rioters " , which numbered only thirty or so , directed the mob and stayed sober throughout the three to four days of rioting . Unlike the hundreds of others who joined in , they could not be bribed to stop their destructions . 
 If a concerted effort had been made by Birmingham 's Anglican elite to attack the Dissenters , it was more than likely the work of Benjamin Spencer , a local minister , Joseph Carles , a Justice of the Peace and landowner , and John Brooke ( 1755 @-@ 1802 ) , an attorney , coroner , and under @-@ sheriff . Although present at the riot 's outbreak , Carles and Spencer made no attempt to stop the rioters , and Brooke seems to have led them to the New Meeting chapel . Witnesses agreed " that the magistrates promised the rioters protection so long as they restricted their attacks to the meeting @-@ houses and left persons and property alone " . The magistrates also refused to arrest any of the rioters and released those that had been arrested . Instructed by the national government to prosecute the riot 's instigators , these local officials dragged their heels . When finally forced to try the ringleaders , they intimidated witnesses and made a mockery of the trial proceedings . Only seventeen of the fifty rioters who had been charged were ever brought to trial ; four were convicted , of whom one was pardoned , two were hanged , and the fourth was transported to Botany Bay . But Priestley and others believed that these men were found guilty not because they were rioters but because " they were infamous characters in other respects " . 
 Although he had been forced to send troops to Birmingham to quell the disturbances , King George III commented , " I cannot but feel better pleased that Priestley is the sufferer for the doctrines he and his party have instilled , and that the people see them in their true light . " The national government forced the local residents to pay restitution to those whose property had been damaged : the total eventually amounted to £ 23 @,@ 000 . However , the process took many years , and most residents received much less than the value of their property . 
 After the riots , Birmingham was , according to industrialist James Watt , " divided into two parties who hate one another mortally " . Initially Priestley wanted to return and deliver a sermon on the Bible verse " Father , forgive them , for they know not what they do , " but he was dissuaded by friends convinced that it was too dangerous . Instead , he wrote his Appeal : 
 I was born an Englishman as well [ as ] any of you . Though labouring under civil disabilities , as a Dissenter , I have long contributed my share to the support of government , and supposed I had the protection of its constitution and laws for my inheritance . But I have found myself greatly deceived ; and so may any of you , if , like me , you should , with or without cause , be so unfortunate as to incur popular odium . For then , as you have seen in my case , without any form of trial whatever , without any intimation of your crime , or of your danger , your houses and all your property may be destroyed , and you may not have the good fortune to escape with life , as I have done .... What are the old French Lettres de <unk> , or the horrors of the late demolished <unk> , compared to this ? 
 The riots revealed that the Anglican gentry of Birmingham were not averse to using violence against Dissenters whom they viewed as potential revolutionaries . They had no qualms , either , about raising a potentially uncontrollable mob . Many of those attacked left Birmingham ; as a result , the town became noticeably more conservative after the riots . The remaining supporters of the French Revolution decided not to hold a dinner celebrating the storming of the Bastille the next year . 
 = Muhammad ibn Tughj al @-@ Ikhshid = 
 Abū Bakr Muḥammad ibn <unk> ibn Juff ibn <unk> ibn <unk> ibn <unk> ibn <unk> ( 8 February 882 – 24 June 946 ) , better known by the title al @-@ <unk> ( Arabic : <unk> ) after 939 , was an Abbasid commander and governor who became the autonomous ruler of Egypt and parts of Syria ( or Levant ) from 935 until his death in 946 . He was the founder of the Ikhshidid dynasty , which ruled the region until the Fatimid conquest of 969 . 
 The son of Tughj ibn Juff , a general of Transoxianian origin who served both the Abbasids and the autonomous Tulunid rulers of Egypt and Syria , Muhammad ibn Tughj was born in Baghdad but grew up in Syria and acquired his first military and administrative experiences at his father 's side . He had a turbulent early career : he was imprisoned along with his father by the Abbasids in 905 , was released in 906 , participated in the murder of the vizier al @-@ Abbas ibn al @-@ Hasan al @-@ Jarjara 'i in 908 , and fled Iraq to enter the service of the governor of Egypt , Takin al @-@ <unk> . Eventually he acquired the patronage of several influential Abbasid magnates , chiefly the powerful commander @-@ in @-@ chief Mu 'nis al @-@ Muzaffar . These ties led him to being named governor first of Palestine and then of Damascus . In 933 , he was briefly named governor of Egypt , but this order was revoked after the death of Mu 'nis , and Ibn Tughj had to fight to preserve even his governorship of Damascus . In 935 , he was re @-@ appointed to Egypt , where he quickly defeated a Fatimid invasion and stabilized the turbulent country . His reign marks a rare period of domestic peace , stability and good government in the annals of early Islamic Egypt . In 938 Caliph al @-@ Radi granted his request for the title of al @-@ Ikhshid , which had been borne by the rulers of his ancestral Farghana Valley . It is by this title that he was known thereafter . 
 Throughout his governorship , al @-@ Ikhshid was engaged in conflicts with other regional strongmen for control over Syria , without which Egypt was vulnerable to invasion from the east , but unlike many other Egyptian leaders , notably the Tulunids themselves , he was prepared to bide his time and compromise with his rivals . Although he was initially in control of the entirety of Syria , he was forced to cede the northern half to Ibn Ra 'iq between 939 and 942 . Following Ibn Ra 'iq 's murder , al @-@ Ikhshid reimposed his control over northern Syria , only to have it challenged by the Hamdanids . In 944 al @-@ Ikhshid met Caliph al @-@ Muttaqi at ar @-@ Raqqa ; the caliph had fled there from the various strongmen vying to kidnap him and control the caliphal government in Baghdad . Although unsuccessful in persuading the Caliph to come to Egypt , he received recognition of hereditary rule over Egypt , Syria and the Hejaz for thirty years . Following his departure , the ambitious Hamdanid prince Sayf al @-@ Dawla seized Aleppo and northern Syria in the autumn of 944 , and although defeated and driven out of Syria by Ibn Tughj himself in the next year , a treaty dividing the region along the lines of the agreement with Ibn Ra 'iq was concluded in October . Ibn Tughj died nine months later , leaving his son Unujur as ruler of his domains , under the tutelage of the powerful black eunuch Abu al @-@ Misk Kafur . 
 = = Origin and early life = = 
 According to the biographical dictionary compiled by Ibn Khallikan , Muhammad ibn Tughj was born in Baghdad on 8 February 882 , on the street leading to the Kufa Gate . His family came from the Farghana Valley in Transoxiana , and claimed royal descent ; the name of his ancestor , " Khaqan " , is a Turkish royal title . His grandfather Juff left Farghana to enter military service in the Abbasid court at Samarra , as did the father of Ibn Tulun , the founder of the Tulunid dynasty . Juff and his son , Muhammad 's father Tughj , both served the Abbasids , but Tughj later entered the service of the Tulunids , who since 868 had become autonomous rulers of Egypt and Syria . Tughj served the Tulunids as governor of Tiberias ( capital of the district of Jordan , Aleppo ( the capital of the district of Qinnasrin ) and Damascus ( capital of the homonymous district ) . He played a major role in repelling the Qarmatian attack on Damascus in 903 ; although defeated in battle , he held the city itself against the Qarmatians for seven months until , with the arrival of reinforcements from Egypt , the Qarmatians were driven away . Thus Muhammad ibn Tughj spent a great part of his youth in the Tulunid Levant at his father 's side , gaining his first experiences in administration — he served as his father 's sub @-@ governor of Tiberias — and war . 
 After the death of Ibn Tulun 's son Khumarawayh in 896 , the Tulunid state quickly began crumbling from within , and failed to put up any serious resistance when the Abbasids moved to re @-@ establish direct control over Syria and Egypt in 905 . Tughj defected to the invading Abbasids under Muhammad ibn Sulayman al @-@ Katib , and was named governor of Aleppo in return ; Muhammad al @-@ Katib himself fell victim to court intrigues soon after , and Tughj along with his sons Muhammad and Ubayd Allah were imprisoned in Baghdad . Tughj died in prison in 906 , and the brothers were freed shortly after . The sons of Tughj participated in the palace coup that tried to depose the new Caliph , al @-@ Muqtadir ( reigned 908 – 932 ) , in favour of the older Ibn al @-@ Mu 'tazz in December 908 . Although the attempt failed , Muhammad ibn Tughj and his brother were able to avenge themselves for their imprisonment on the vizier al @-@ Abbas ibn al @-@ Hasan al @-@ Jarjara 'i , whom they struck down with the aid of Husayn ibn Hamdan . After the coup 's failure , the three fled : Ibn Hamdan returned to his native Upper Mesopotamia and Ubayd Allah fled east to Yusuf ibn Abi 'l @-@ Saj , while Muhammad fled to Syria . 
 In Syria , Muhammad ibn Tughj joined the service of the tax supervisor of the local provinces , Abu 'l @-@ Abbas al @-@ <unk> . He soon followed his new master to Egypt , and after al @-@ <unk> 's death in June 910 he continued serving the latter 's son . Eventually , he gained the attention of the local governor , Takin al @-@ <unk> , who sent him to govern the lands beyond the Jordan River , with his seat at Amman . In 918 , he rescued a hajj caravan , among which was one of the ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting of al @-@ Muqtadir 's mother , from Bedouin raiders , thereby improving his standing at the Abbasid court . Two years later , Ibn Tughj gained an influential patron when he briefly served under the powerful Abbasid commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Mu 'nis al @-@ Muzaffar , when he came to help defend Egypt from a Fatimid invasion . During the campaign , Ibn Tughj commanded the finest troops of the Egyptian army . The two men evidently established a rapport , and remained in contact thereafter . 
 When Takin returned to Egypt as governor in 923 , Ibn Tughj joined him there , but the two men fell out in 928 over Takin 's refusal to give Ibn Tughj the post of governor of Alexandria . Ibn Tughj escaped the capital Fustat by a ruse , and managed to obtain for himself an appointment as governor of Palestine from Baghdad ; the incumbent , al @-@ Rashidi , fled the governor 's seat at Ramla for Damascus , whose governorship he assumed . His flight , according to historian Jere L. Bacharach , may indicate that Ibn Tughj commanded a significant military force . Three years later , in July 931 , Muhammad ibn Tughj was promoted to governor of Damascus , while al @-@ Rashidi returned to Ramla . Both these appointments were likely the result of Ibn Tughj 's relation with Mu 'nis al @-@ Muzaffar , who at this time was at the zenith of his power and influence . 
 = = Takeover of Egypt = = 
 Takin died in March 933 , and his son and nominated successor , Muhammad , failed to establish his authority in Egypt . Ibn Tughj was named as the new governor in August but the appointment was revoked a month later , before he could reach Egypt , and Ahmad ibn Kayghalagh was appointed in his place . The timing of Ibn Tughj 's recall coincides with the arrest ( and subsequent murder ) of Mu 'nis by Caliph al @-@ Qahir ( r . 932 – 934 ) on 22 September , suggesting that Ibn Tughj 's nomination was in all likelihood also due to Mu 'nis . The fact that al @-@ Qahir sent a eunuch called <unk> to replace Ibn Tughj in Damascus after the fall of Mu 'nis reinforces this view . <unk> was able to take over the governorship of Aleppo ( to which he also had been appointed ) , but Ibn Tughj resisted his replacement , and defeated and took him prisoner . The Caliph then charged Ahmad ibn Kayghalagh with forcing Ibn Tughj to surrender , but although Ahmad marched against Ibn Tughj , both avoided a direct confrontation . Instead the two men met and reached an agreement of mutual support , upholding the status quo . 
 Ahmad ibn Kayghalagh soon proved incapable of restoring order to the increasingly turbulent province . By 935 , the troops were rioting over lack of pay , and Bedouin raids had recommenced . At the same time , Takin 's son Muhammad and the fiscal administrator Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Ali al @-@ Madhara 'i — the heir of a dynasty of bureaucrats that had handled the province 's finances since the time of Ibn Tulun and amassed enormous wealth — undermined Ahmad ibn Kayghalagh and coveted his position . Infighting broke out among the troops between the Easterners ( <unk> ) , chiefly Turkish soldiers , who supported Muhammad ibn Takin , and the Westerners ( Maghariba ) , probably Berbers and Black Africans , who backed Ahmad ibn Kayghalagh . With the support this time of the former vizier and inspector @-@ general of the western provinces al @-@ Fadl ibn Ja 'far ibn al @-@ Furat , whose son was married to one of Ibn Tughj 's daughters , Ibn Tughj was once more named governor of Egypt . Taking no chances , Ibn Tughj organized an invasion of the country by land and sea . Although Ahmad ibn Kayghalagh was able to delay the advance of the army , Ibn Tughj 's fleet took Tinnis and the Nile Delta and moved on to the capital Fustat . Outmanoeuvred and defeated in battle , Ahmad ibn Kayghalagh fled to the Fatimids . The victorious Muhammad ibn Tughj entered Fustat on 26 August 935 . 
 With the capital under his control , Ibn Tughj now had to confront the Fatimids . The Maghariba who refused to submit to Ibn Tughj had fled to Alexandria and then to Barqa under the leadership of Habashi ibn Ahmad , and invited the Fatimid ruler al @-@ Qa 'im ( r . 934 – 946 ) to invade Egypt with their assistance . The Fatimid invasion met with initial success : the Fatimid army 's Kutama Berbers captured the island of al @-@ Rawda on the Nile and burned its arsenal . Ibn Tughj 's admirals Ali ibn Badr and Bajkam defected to the Fatimids , and Alexandria itself was captured in March 936 . Nevertheless , on 31 March , Ibn Tughj 's brother al @-@ Hasan defeated the Fatimid forces near Alexandria , driving them out of the city and forcing the Fatimids to once again retreat from Egypt to their base at Barqa . During the campaign , Ibn Tughj notably prohibited his troops from looting , which , according to J. L. Bacharach , was indicative of his " long @-@ term view towards his stay in Egypt " . 
 = = Government of Egypt = = 
 Writing to Caliph al @-@ Radi ( r . 934 – 940 ) in 936 , Muhammad ibn Tughj could present a commendable record : the Fatimid invasion was defeated and first measures for improving the financial situation in the province had been undertaken . The Caliph confirmed him in his post and sent robes of honour . As Hugh N. Kennedy writes , " in some ways the Fatimid threat actually helped Ibn Tughj " since , as long as he supported the Abbasids , " the caliphs were prepared to give their approval to his rule in return " . His standing in the Abbasid court was sufficient for him to ask in 938 for the honorific title ( laqab ) of al @-@ Ikhshid , originally held by the kings of his ancestral homeland Farghana . Caliph al @-@ Radi granted the request , although formal approval was delayed until July 939 . After receiving official confirmation , Ibn Tughj required that he be henceforth addressed solely by his new title . 
 Very little is known about al @-@ Ikhshid 's domestic policies . Nevertheless , the silence of the sources about domestic troubles during his reign — apart from a minor Shi 'ite revolt in 942 , which was swiftly suppressed — stands in stark contrast to the usual narrative of Bedouin raids , urban riots over high prices , or military and dynastic revolts and intrigues , and indicates that he was successful in restoring internal tranquillity and orderly government in Egypt . According to the biographical dictionary of Ibn Khallikan , he was " a resolute prince , displaying great foresight in war , and a close attention to the prosperity of his empire ; he treated the military class with honour , and governed with ability and justice " . His potential rivals Muhammad ibn Takin and al @-@ Madhara 'i were quickly won over and incorporated in the new administration . The latter had tried to resist al @-@ Ikhshid 's takeover in vain , as his troops had immediately defected , and was initially imprisoned by al @-@ Ikhshid , only to be released in 939 . He soon recovered his status and influence , and briefly served as regent of al @-@ Ikhshid 's son and heir , Unujur in 946 , before being overthrown and imprisoned for a year . Thereafter , and until his death in 957 , he retired into private life . Like the Tulunids before him , al @-@ Ikhshid also took particular care to build up a considerable military force of his own , including Turkic and Black African slave soldiers . 
 = = Foreign policy and the struggle for Syria = = 
 As commander and ruler in Egypt , al @-@ Ikhshid was a patient and cautious man . He achieved his goals as much by diplomacy and ties to powerful personages in the Baghdad regime as by force , and even then he tended to avoid direct military confrontation whenever possible . His conflict with Ahmad ibn Kayghalagh was indicative of his approach : instead of a direct clash , the truce between the two gave al @-@ Ikhshid the time to reconnoitre the situation in Egypt before acting . Although following in the footsteps of Ibn Tulun , his ambitions were more modest and his objectives more practical , as became particularly evident in his policies towards Syria and the rest of the Caliphate . Historically , possession of Syria , and particularly Palestine , was a foreign policy objective for many rulers of Egypt , to foreclose the most likely invasion route into the country . Ibn Tulun before and Saladin after al @-@ Ikhshid were two typical examples of Egyptian rulers who spent much of their reigns securing control of Syria , and indeed used Egypt mostly as a source of revenue and resources to accomplish this goal . Al @-@ Ikhshid differed from them ; Bacharach describes him as a " cautious , conservative realist " . His goals were limited but clear : his main concern was Egypt proper and the establishment of his family as a hereditary dynasty over it , while Syria remained a secondary objective . Unlike other military strongmen of the time , he had no intention of entering the contest for control of Baghdad and the caliphal government through the all @-@ powerful office of amir al @-@ umara ; indeed , when Caliph al @-@ Mustakfi ( r . 944 – 946 ) offered him the post , he turned it down . 
 = = = Conflict with Ibn Ra 'iq = = = 
 Following the expulsion of the Fatimids from Egypt , al @-@ Ikhshid had his troops occupy all of Syria up to Aleppo , allying himself , as Ibn Tulun had done , with the local tribe of Banu Kilab to strengthen his hold over northern Syria . As governor of Syria , his remit extended to the borderlands ( thughur ) with the Byzantine Empire in Cilicia . Thus in 936 / 7 or 937 / 8 ( most likely in autumn 937 ) he received an embassy from the Byzantine emperor , Romanos I Lekapenos ( r . 920 – 944 ) , to organize a prisoner exchange . Although carried out in the name of Caliph al @-@ Radi , it was a special honour and an implicit recognition of al @-@ Ikhshid 's autonomy , since correspondence and negotiations for such events were normally directed to the Caliph rather than provincial governors . The exchange took place in autumn 938 , resulting in the release of 6 @,@ 300 Muslims for an equivalent number of Byzantine captives . As the Byzantines held 800 more prisoners than the Muslims , these had to be ransomed and were gradually released over the next six months . 
 While the amir al @-@ umara Ibn Ra 'iq was in power in Baghdad ( 936 – 938 ) with al @-@ Ikhshid 's old friend al @-@ Fadl ibn Ja 'far ibn al @-@ Furat as vizier , relations with Baghdad were good . Following Ibn Ra 'iq 's replacement by the Turk Bajkam , however , Ibn Ra 'iq received a nomination by the Caliph to the governorship of Syria and in 939 marched west to claim it from al @-@ Ikhshid 's forces . Ibn Ra 'iq 's appointment enraged al @-@ Ikhshid , who sent an envoy to Baghdad to clarify the situation . There Bajkam informed him that the Caliph might appoint whomever he chose , but that it ultimately did not matter : it was military strength that would determine who was governor of Syria and even of Egypt , not any appointment by a figurehead caliph . If either Ibn Ra 'iq or al @-@ Ikhshid emerged victorious from the conflict , caliphal confirmation would soon follow . Al @-@ Ikhshid was even more infuriated by the reply , and reportedly for a time even threatened to give one of his daughters to the Fatimid caliph al @-@ Qa 'im and to have coins minted and the Friday prayer read in his name rather than the Abbasid caliph , until the Abbasids formally reconfirmed his position . The Fatimids themselves were preoccupied with the revolt of Abu Yazid . 
 From ar @-@ Raqqa , Ibn Ra 'iq 's troops swiftly took over the districts of northern Syria , where al @-@ Ikhshid 's brother Ubayd Allah was governor , while the Egyptian forces retreated south . By October or November , Ibn Ra 'iq 's men had reached Ramla and moved on into the Sinai . Al @-@ Ikhshid led his army against Ibn Ra 'iq , but after a short clash at al @-@ <unk> , the two men came to an understanding , dividing Syria between them : the areas from Ramla to the south would be under al @-@ Ikhshid , and the areas to the north under Ibn Ra 'iq . In May or June 940 , however , al @-@ Ikhshid learned that Ibn Ra 'iq had once again moved against Ramla . Once more , the Egyptian ruler led his army to battle . Although defeated at al @-@ Arish , al @-@ Ikhshid was able to quickly rally his troops and ambush Ibn Ra 'iq , preventing him from entering Egypt proper and forcing him to retreat back to Damascus . Al @-@ Ikhshid sent his brother , Abu Nasr al @-@ Husayn , with another army against Ibn Ra 'iq , but he was defeated and killed at Lajjun . Despite his victory , Ibn Ra 'iq opted for peace : he gave Abu Nasr an honourable burial and sent his son , Muzahim , as envoy to Egypt . True to his political strategy , al @-@ Ikhshid accepted . The agreement saw the restoration of the territorial status quo of the previous year , but with al @-@ Ikhshid paying an annual tribute of 140 @,@ 000 gold dinars . The deal was cemented by the marriage of Muzahim with al @-@ Ikhshid 's daughter Fatima . 
 = = = Conflict with the Hamdanids = = = 
 Peace did not last for long , as the political turmoil in Baghdad continued . In September 941 , Ibn Ra 'iq assumed once more the post of amir al @-@ umara at the invitation of Caliph al @-@ Muttaqi ( r . 940 – 944 ) , but he was not as powerful as before . Unable to stop the advance of another strongman , Abu 'l @-@ Husayn al @-@ Baridi of Basra , both Ibn Ra 'iq and the Caliph were forced to abandon Baghdad and seek the help of the Hamdanid ruler of Mosul . The latter soon had Ibn Ra 'iq assassinated ( April 942 ) and succeeded him as amir al @-@ umara with the laqab of Nasir al @-@ Dawla . Al @-@ Ikhshid used the opportunity to reoccupy Syria for himself , joining his forces in person in June 942 , and venturing as far as Damascus , before returning to Egypt in January 943 . The Hamdanids also staked claim on Syria at the same time , but the sources do not record details of their expeditions there . Nasir al @-@ Dawla 's position as amir al @-@ umara also proved to be weak , and in June 943 he was ousted by the Turkish general Tuzun . In October , Caliph al @-@ Muttaqi , fearing that Tuzun intended to replace him , fled the capital and sought refuge with the Hamdanids . Although Nasir al @-@ Dawla and his brother Sayf al @-@ Dawla sheltered the Caliph , they also did not confront Tuzun 's troops , and in May 944 they reached an agreement that gave Upper Mesopotamia and northern Syria to the Hamdanids in exchange for recognizing Tuzun 's possession of Iraq . Nasir al @-@ Dawla sent his cousin al @-@ Husayn ibn Sa 'id to take over the Syrian provinces allotted to him in this agreement . The Ikhshidid forces either defected or retreated , and al @-@ Husayn swiftly took over the districts of Qinnasrin and Hims . 
 In the meantime , al @-@ Muttaqi with Sayf al @-@ Dawla had fled to ar @-@ Raqqa before Tuzun 's advance , but the Caliph grew increasingly suspicious of the Hamdanids , and wrote to al @-@ Ikhshid ( perhaps as early as the winter of 943 ) , asking for aid . The latter immediately responded by leading an army into Syria . The Hamdanid garrisons withdrew before him , and in September 944 , al @-@ Ikhshid reached ar @-@ Raqqa . Distrusting the Hamdanids given their treatment of Ibn Ra 'iq , he waited until Sayf al @-@ Dawla had left the city before entering it to meet the Caliph . Al @-@ Ikhshid tried without success to persuade al @-@ Muttaqi to come with him to Egypt , or at least to stay in ar @-@ Raqqa , while the Caliph tried to get al @-@ Ikhshid to march against Tuzun , which the latter refused . The meeting was not entirely fruitless , as al @-@ Ikhshid secured an agreement that virtually repeated the terms of a similar treaty between the Tulunid Khumarawayh and Caliph al @-@ Mu 'tamid in 886 . The Caliph recognized the authority of al @-@ Ikhshid over Egypt , Syria ( with the thughur ) , and the Hejaz ( carrying with it the prestigious guardianship of the two holy cities of Mecca and Medina ) , for a period of thirty years , with the right of hereditary succession for al @-@ Ikhshid 's sons . This development had already been anticipated by al @-@ Ikhshid the previous year , when he named his son Unujur as his regent during his absences from Egypt , although Unujur had not yet come of age , and had required an oath of allegiance ( bay 'a ) to be sworn to him . Nevertheless , as Michael Brett comments , the territories conferred were " mixed blessings " , as the holy cities were exposed to Qarmatian raids , while the marches of the thughur were increasingly menaced by the Byzantines , and Aleppo ( with northern Syria ) was coveted by the Hamdanids . 
 As it happened , al @-@ Muttaqi was persuaded by the emissaries of Tuzun , who protested his loyalty , to return to Iraq , only to be seized , blinded and deposed on 12 October and replaced by al @-@ Mustakfi . Al @-@ Mustakfi reconfirmed al @-@ Ikhshid 's governorship , but by this point it was an empty gesture . According to J. L. Bacharach , although the 13th @-@ century historian Ibn Sa 'id al @-@ Maghribi reports that al @-@ Ikhshid immediately took the bay 'a and read the Friday prayer in the new caliph 's name , based on the available numismatic evidence , he appears to have delayed recognition of both al @-@ Mustakfi and his Buyid @-@ installed successor al @-@ Muti ( r . 946 – 974 ) for several months by refraining from including them in his coinage , in an act that was a deliberate and clear statement of his de facto independence from Baghdad . This independence was also acknowledged by others ; the contemporary De Ceremoniis records that in the correspondence of the Byzantine court , the " Emir of Egypt " was accorded a golden seal worth four solidi , the same as the Caliph in Baghdad . 
 Following his meeting with al @-@ Muttaqi , al @-@ Ikhshid returned to Egypt , leaving the field open for the ambitious Sayf al @-@ Dawla . The Ikhshidid forces left behind in Syria were relatively weak , and the Hamdanid leader , having gained the support of the Banu Kilab , had little difficulty in capturing Aleppo on 29 October 944 . He then began extending his control over the provinces of northern Syria down to Hims . Al @-@ Ikhshid sent an army under the eunuchs Abu al @-@ Misk Kafur and <unk> against the Hamdanid , but it was defeated near Hama and retreated back to Egypt , abandoning Damascus and Palestine to the Hamdanids . Al @-@ Ikhshid was then forced to once again campaign in person in April 945 , but at the same time he sent envoys proposing to Sayf al @-@ Dawla an agreement along the lines of the one with Ibn Ra 'iq : the Hamdanid prince would get to keep northern Syria , while al @-@ Ikhshid would pay him an annual tribute for the possession of Palestine and Damascus . Sayf al @-@ Dawla refused and reportedly even boasted that he would conquer Egypt itself , but al @-@ Ikhshid held the upper hand : his agents managed to bribe several Hamdanid leaders , and he won over the citizens of Damascus , who barred their gates before the Hamdanid and opened them for al @-@ Ikhshid . The two armies met near Qinnasrin in May , where the Hamdanids were defeated . Sayf al @-@ Dawla fled to ar @-@ Raqqa , leaving his capital Aleppo to be captured by al @-@ Ikhshid . 
 Nevertheless , in October the two sides came to an agreement , broadly on the lines of the earlier Ikhshidid proposal : al @-@ Ikhshid acknowledged Hamdanid control over northern Syria , and even consented to sending an annual tribute in exchange for Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's renunciation of all claims on Damascus . The Hamdanid ruler was also to marry one of al @-@ Ikhshid 's daughters or nieces . For al @-@ Ikhshid , the maintenance of Aleppo was less important than southern Syria with Damascus , which was Egypt 's eastern bulwark . Provided that these remained under his control , he was more than willing to allow the existence of a Hamdanid state in the north . The Egyptian ruler knew that he would have difficulty in asserting and maintaining control over northern Syria and Cilicia , which had traditionally been influenced more by Upper Mesopotamia and Iraq . By abandoning its claims on these distant provinces , not only would Egypt be spared the cost of maintaining a large army there , but the Hamdanid emirate would also fulfil the useful role of a buffer state against incursions from both Iraq and a resurgent Byzantine Empire . Indeed , throughout al @-@ Ikhshid 's rule , and that of his successors , relations with the Byzantines were quite friendly , as the lack of a common border and the common hostility to the Fatimids guaranteed that the interests of the two states did not clash . Despite Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's attempt to push again into southern Syria soon after al @-@ Ikhshid 's death , the border agreed in 945 held , and even outlived both dynasties , forming the dividing line between Mesopotamian @-@ influenced northern Syria and the Egyptian @-@ controlled southern part of the country until the Mamluks seized the entire region in 1260 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 In mid @-@ spring 946 , al @-@ Ikhshid sent emissaries to the Byzantines for yet another prisoner exchange ( which eventually would take place under Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's auspices in October ) . Emperor Constantine VII ( r . 913 – 959 ) sent an embassy under John Mystikos in response , which arrived at Damascus on 11 July . On 24 July 946 , al @-@ Ikhshid died in Damascus . The succession of his son Unujur was peaceful and undisputed , due to the influence of the powerful and talented commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Kafur . One of the many Black African slaves recruited by al @-@ Ikhshid , he remained the paramount minister and virtual ruler of Egypt over the next 22 years , assuming power in his own right in 966 until his death two years later . Encouraged by his death , in 969 the Fatimids invaded and conquered Egypt , beginning a new era in the country 's history . 
 Medieval historians noted the many parallels between al @-@ Ikhshid and his Tulunid predecessors , especially Khumarawayh . Ibn Sa 'id even reported that according to Egyptian astrologers , the two men had entered Egypt on the same day of the year and with the same star in the same ascendant . There were important differences , however : al @-@ Ikhshid lacked the " flamboyance " ( Hugh Kennedy ) of the Tulunids . Al @-@ Ikhshid 's caution and self @-@ imposed restraint in his foreign policy objectives also stood in stark contrast with his contemporaries and other rulers of Egypt who preceded and followed him , earning him a reputation of extreme caution , often misinterpreted as timidity by contemporaries . He was also described as less cultivated than his predecessor Ibn Tulun . Unlike Ibn Tulun , who built an entire new capital at al @-@ Qatta 'i and a famous mosque , al @-@ Ikhshid was neither a patron of artists and poets nor a major builder . According to historian Thierry Bianquis , he was described by medieval chroniclers as " a choleric and gluttonous man , yet shrewd and inclined toward avarice " , but with a fondness for luxuries imported from the east , and especially perfumes . His love of eastern luxuries soon spread among the upper classes of Fustat as well and influenced the style and fashion of local Egyptian products in turn , which began to imitate them . 
 = Sleaford Navigation = 
 The Sleaford Navigation was a 12 @.@ 5 mile ( 20 @.@ 1 km ) canalisation of the River Slea in Lincolnshire , England , which opened in 1794 . It ran from a junction with the River Witham , near Chapel Hill to the town of Sleaford through seven locks , most of which were adjacent to mills . Lack of finance meant that it stopped short of its intended terminus , but it gradually grew to be successful financially . The coming of the railways in 1857 led to a rapid decline , and it was officially abandoned by an act of Parliament in 1878 , but remained open for a further three years . The lower part of it remained navigable until the 1940s , when it was blocked by a sluice . 
 Interest in restoring the canal began in 1972 , and navigation was restored to the first 8 miles ( 13 km ) with the re @-@ opening of Lower Kyme lock in 1986 . The Sleaford Navigation Trust has been working towards restoring the whole waterway , and succeeded in purchasing the Sleaford end of the river bed in 2004 . A short section at Sleaford was opened in 2010 , following the installation of a lift bridge . 
 Nearby , Navigation House , which served as the clerk 's office , has been restored as a visitor centre about the canal , and the adjacent seed warehouse has been turned into The National Centre for Craft & Design . 
 = = History = = 
 The River Slea rises to the west of Sleaford , near Ancaster , and flows in an easterly direction , passing through Sleaford on its way to South Kyme , beyond which it is called the Kyme Eau , joining the River Witham at Chapel Hill . Kyme Eau had been navigable since at least the reign of Edward III , for in 1375 Gilbert d <unk> was accused of illegally collecting tolls on boats carrying food products to the people of Kesteven . He had been doing so for 12 years , and he defended his case before the king , explaining that the river was navigable from Dog Dyke to Brent Fen , but that it suffered from silting and the banks were in a poor state of repair . Having agreed to carry out repairs , he was granted the right to levy tolls by letters patent . 
 With influential local landowners such as Sir Jenison Gordon of Haverholme Priory and Sir Christopher <unk> of Aswarby wanting to improve communications to the area , a proposal to link Sleaford by canal to Grantham was considered in 1774 , but was replaced by a scheme to provide a navigable link along the Slea and the Kyme Eau to the Witham in 1783 . Following a public meeting in Sleaford on 16 January , a committee was formed to promote the scheme , and in order for it to be profitable , negotiations began with the Commissioners of the River Witham , to reduce the tolls on that river for traffic to and from the Slea . Although initially rebuffed , the committee persisted , and the Commissioners eventually agreed to terms . 
 At the time , the River Slea was not navigable beyond Kyme , as the channel was inadequate , and there were fish weirs and water mills on its course . Three attempts were made to obtain an Act of Parliament to authorise improvements , but all were defeated . In 1791 , William Jessop and John Hudson were commissioned to prepare a new survey and plans . Jessop was a canal engineer of some repute , with experience of several navigations , including the River Trent at Newark , while Hudson was less well known , but had experience of canal building in eastern England and Yorkshire . Their report was published on 25 November 1791 , and estimated that the improvements would cost £ 9 @,@ 979 . The plans obtained the support of Sir Joseph Banks , a baronet who was a patron of the natural sciences , and had been the President of the Royal Society since 1778 . The fourth attempt to obtain an act of Parliament was successful , probably due to his influence . 
 The Act was passed on 11 June 1792 , creating The Company of Proprietors of the Sleaford Navigation , which was empowered to make and maintain a Navigation from Sleaford Castle Causeway , through the town of Sleaford , along the course of Sleaford Mill Stream and Kyme Eau , to the River Witham , at or near Chappel Hill . It had authority to raise £ 13 @,@ 000 in capital for the project , with an additional £ 6 @,@ 500 if necessary . Most of the money was raised within Lincolnshire , with half of the shares being bought by people living in Sleaford . Six proprietors were elected to serve on a committee , which expressed its thanks to Joseph Banks at its first meeting . By the end of 1793 , £ 16 @,@ 000 had been raised to fund construction . 
 The Horncastle Canal was being constructed at the same time , and the two companies negotiated to find an engineer who would oversee both projects . They approached Henry <unk> , but he did not accept , and so William Cawley from Mickle Trafford in Cheshire was appointed . Five locks were required to negotiate the mills , and there were additional locks at Lower Kyme and near Flax Dyke , in the parish of <unk> . They were built as broad locks , 60 by 15 feet ( 18 @.@ 3 by 4 @.@ 6 m ) , and the total fall from Sleaford was 42 feet ( 13 m ) . Six contracts with a total value of £ 4 @,@ 000 , for the construction of locks and bridges , were awarded to John Dyson Sr. , who worked with Peter Tyler and John <unk> . Defects were reported with the lock at Haverholme in 1794 , and when the opening of the canal was announced , Dyson produced advertisements which stated that the canal would not open unless he was paid for the work he had carried out . The company responded that the only place to sort out such disagreements was in a law court , and the opening went ahead on 6 May 1794 . The enabling act specified that the terminus would be at Castle Causeway , from where it would follow the southern mill stream to pass through the south bridge , and then along the Sleaford millstream through Old Sleaford and New Sleaford . Financial difficulties meant that it stopped short of its intended terminus , and instead the company built a wharf to the east of what is now Carre Street in Sleaford . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 Trade on the navigation was adequate , but the company was hampered by the overrun in the cost of construction . Dividends were paid to shareholders in 1795 , 1817 , 1818 and 1824 , but profits had improved by 1826 , and regular dividends were then paid . Between 1836 and 1856 , they ranged from five per cent to eight per cent . Rather than the proprietors collecting the tolls , they were let to toll collectors . In 1816 , John Keyworth paid £ 1 @,@ 010 for the privilege , while by 1839 , Joshua Bower had to pay £ 1 @,@ 590 . This practice ceased in 1851 , as receipts fell . 
 While the navigation prospered , there were plans to extend it . The first plan was for an extension to the west to <unk> , suggested on 1827 . Six years later J. Rofe and his son revived the idea , first proposed in 1774 , for a 16 @-@ mile ( 26 km ) link from Sleaford to Grantham . In the same year , a Sleaford trader attempted to get the navigation extended to its authorised terminus at Castle Causeway , but the company stated that at the time of construction , only £ 700 had been left for the final 500 yards ( 460 m ) to the causeway , and as that would not have been enough , they had provided a suitable wharf at the present terminus . While none of these extensions were pursued , plans for the installation of a weighing machine on the wharf in 1837 escalated , and resulted in a residence for the clerk of the canal and a weighing office being built . A crane was installed in 1841 , but success was soon threatened by the coming of the railways . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 A railway from Grantham to Sleaford opened in 1857 . This was extended to Boston in 1859 , and so offered direct competition to the navigation . The decline was rapid . Income fell from £ 981 in 1858 to £ 168 in 1868 , and the share price dropped from £ 40 to £ 10 between 1860 and 1863 . The company was trading at a loss by 1871 , and although an Act of Abandonment was obtained on 17 June 1878 , the navigation did not actually close until 14 May 1881 , which was also the date of the final meeting of the proprietors . The Act required the company to fill in the three locks nearest to Sleaford , but there were special provisions for the remaining structures . The next three were on a stretch of river bordered by land belonging to Haverholme Priory , and were to be put into good order and handed over to Murray Finch Hatton , earl of Winchilsea & Nottingham , who owned the Priory . He could then maintain or abandon them , but was required to construct sluices if he chose to abandon them . The final lock was to be handed over to the commissioners of the River Witham , once it was in good order , and they could remove the gates and fill in the lock if they chose to do so . 
 Although officially closed , both Finch Hatton and the Witham Commissioners chose to retain the locks , and the lower 6 @.@ 5 miles ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) of the navigation from Ewerby Waithe Common to the River Witham remained navigable until the 1940s . Lower Kyme lock was then replaced by a sluice , which prevented navigation until a lock was reinstated in 1986 . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 In 1972 , Ronald Russell produced the book Lost Canals of England and Wales , in which he had compiled details of 78 canals then considered to be derelict . This acted as a catalyst for several restoration schemes , including one for the Sleaford Navigation . This plan initially centred on the canal head in Sleaford , and promoted by the Sleaford Civic Society . On 4 November 1977 , the Sleaford Navigation Society was formed , with the wider aim of restoring navigation to the whole canal , and publishing research into other Lincolnshire navigations . The society managed to gain the support of the Anglian Water Authority for their plans in 1980 , which resulted in the restoration of the Kyme Eau lock , re @-@ opened in November 1986 . With the raising of a low footbridge and the construction of a winding hole at South Kyme , the first 8 miles ( 13 km ) of the waterway were returned to navigation . In 1991 , work commenced on Cobblers lock , and was completed by 1994 , although it has not been fitted with gates as the banks of the section above it need strengthening before the water levels can be raised . 
 Funded by a Derelict Land Grant , the engineering consultants <unk> carried out a feasibility study in 1994 , which concluded that full restoration was possible . A new administrative structure for the project was created in 1997 , when the Sleaford Navigation Trust was formed , and the Navigation Society was disbanded . The Trust has continued to work on restoring the structures of the canal , campaigning successfully to prevent the Navigation Warehouse from being demolished in 1998 . The local council organised funding for the restoration of the warehouse and the former offices of the canal company in 2002 , and Lincolnshire County Council funded a further study which looked at how to provide an adequate water supply for a re @-@ opened canal . The former seed warehouse now forms part of The Hub , housing the National Centre for Craft and Design , which is supported by the Arts Council and is one of the leading centres for the promotion and exhibition of international craft and design in the UK . 
 In 2004 , the Navigation Trust was able to buy the bed of the river between Carre Street in Sleaford and Bone Mill , which included the lock and its island at Cogglesford Mill . Lower Kyme lock was refurbished in the winter of 2008 . The upper gate is a vertical guillotine gate , and the mechanism required 350 turns of a handle to raise the gate , and another 350 to lower it again . New lock gates were fitted , and a new geared mechanism requiring fewer turns made the lock easier to operate . Around 0 @.@ 6 miles ( 0 @.@ 97 km ) of the waterway from Sleaford to Cogglesford Mill lock were reopened , following the construction of a lifting bridge in the town centre . This was installed in late December 2008 , although the hydraulic operating gear was not fitted until January 2010 . Work was also carried out to construct a new slipway on Eastgate Green , to allow trailed boats to be launched onto the town section . This involved careful planning to avoid damage to 27 mature trees , and the widening of 92 feet ( 28 m ) of the bank to create a mooring point . Funding was provided by Lincolnshire County Council , the Inland Waterways Association , and Waste Recycling Environmental Ltd ( WREN ) , which administers the Landfill Communities Fund . An official opening of the new bridge and facilities took place on 3 July 2010 , when three boats were launched from the slipway . Members from canoe clubs at Boston and Sleaford attended . 
 = = Course = = 
 The upper terminus of the canal was at Navigation Yard , near Sleaford town centre . Navigation House , the former residence of the clerk , is now a Grade II listed building , and has been refurbished . It houses an interpretation centre where visitors can learn of the history of the canal . The River Slea between Navigation Yard and Bone Mill lock is owned by the Canal Trust . A short distance below the terminus , a new steel lift bridge crosses the canal , after which a stream leaves the east bank . This is the old course of the river , which rejoins the canal below Cobblers lock . The first lock is 0 @.@ 6 miles ( 0 @.@ 97 km ) from Sleaford , and allowed boats to pass <unk> Mill , an 18th @-@ century watermill which has been restored , and is still used to grind flour . It is managed by North Kesteven District Council . The railway line from Lincoln to Spalding crosses next , after which Dyers Mill or Bone Mill lock is reached , 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from Sleaford and overshadowed by the A17 Sleaford bypass bridge . 
 Corn Mill lock is situated 2 @.@ 4 miles ( 3 @.@ 9 km ) from Sleaford , and the buildings of Holdingham Mill are Grade II listed . They include a small hexagonal toll house , which was used by the lock keeper . Next is Paper Mill lock , after which the canal follows a more easterly direction , to reach Haverholme lock after 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) . Nearby was Haverholme Priory , founded by Gilbertine priors in 1139 . The Grade II listed ruins are of a much later date , being part of a Tudor style country house built in 1835 by H. E. Kendall . The bridge over the canal , built in 1893 , is also Grade II listed . At 4 @.@ 7 miles ( 7 @.@ 6 km ) , Cobblers lock is reached , which has been the limit of navigation since 1986 . Just beyond it , there is a pumping station on the south bank and the canal make a right @-@ angle bend , to skirt Ewerby Waithe Common , after which there is another right angle bend by Ferry Farm , where Ferry Bridge now carries Ferry Lane over the canal . After a short distance , there is a bend called Heckington Tunnel , where a section of the Car Dyke , a Roman waterway which ran for 85 miles ( 137 km ) , heads off in a southerly direction , with the <unk> Drain running parallel to it . 
 Somewhere here , the name of the river changes from the Slea to the Kyme Eau . The village of South Kyme follows , with its four @-@ storey fortified tower , built in the 14th century for Sir Gilbert d <unk> . It is 77 feet ( 23 m ) high , and was surrounded by a moat . Two road bridges and a footbridge cross the navigation in the village . <unk> Grounds , a low @-@ lying area of fenland , lies to the north of the village , and <unk> Drain , the main drainage ditch , is pumped into the river by a pumping station on the west bank . After passing Terry Booth Farm on the east bank , the 18th century buildings of which are Grade II listed , and a farm with the same name on the west bank , Lower Kyme lock is reached , 10 @.@ 6 miles ( 17 @.@ 1 km ) from Sleaford . The Twenty Foot Drain and its pumping station join the river as it makes another sharp turn to the east , to reach a set of flood doors and Chapel Hill bridge , beyond which is the River Witham , flowing south @-@ east to Boston . 
 = = Points of interest = = 
 = Thunderbirds Are Go = 
 Thunderbirds Are Go is a 1966 British science @-@ fiction film based on Thunderbirds , a 1960s television series starring marionette puppets and featuring scale model effects in a filming process dubbed " Supermarionation " . Written by Thunderbirds creators Gerry and Sylvia Anderson , directed by David Lane and produced by AP Films , Thunderbirds Are Go develops the franchise with a plot focusing on the futuristic spacecraft Zero @-@ X and its manned mission to Mars . When Zero @-@ X suffers a mechanical failure during re @-@ entry , it is up to International Rescue , with the aid of the Thunderbird machines , to save the astronauts on board before the spacecraft is obliterated in a crash landing . 
 Filmed from March to June 1966 and premiering in December , Thunderbirds Are Go includes , in a first for an AP Films production , cameo appearances from puppets of real @-@ life celebrities Cliff Richard and The Shadows , who also contributed to the musical score . It is also the first motion picture to have been filmed with an early form of video assist technology known as " Add @-@ a @-@ Vision " , and incorporated landscape footage that was shot on location in Portugal . Special effects pieces , produced under the supervision of Derek Meddings and including rocket launch sequences , space shots and a miniature representation of the Martian surface , required six months to complete . 
 Despite positive initial reviews , which praised the film as a well @-@ made cinematic transfer of the Thunderbirds television series , Thunderbirds Are Go soon proved to be a box office failure for the Andersons . The disappointment of this outcome was intensified by the knowledge that Series Two of Thunderbirds would be cut down to six episodes and that AP Films ' upcoming television project would be a brand @-@ new series , which would later be titled Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons and screened from 1967 . To add to the lukewarm public response , negative critical reception of Thunderbirds Are Go has targeted , besides other aspects , the characterisation of the puppet cast , the running time dedicated to model and effects shots , and the fantasy dream sequence starring Cliff Richard and The Shadows , which has been described as a poor scriptwriting idea on the part of the Andersons . 
 Surprised by the underperformance of Thunderbirds Are Go , the United Artists distributors authorised the production of a sequel . However , Thunderbird 6 received a similarly unenthusiastic response on its release in 1968 , and the Thunderbirds franchise was abandoned until the appearance of a reboot , starring live actors , in 2004 . Meanwhile , the Zero @-@ X astronauts were featured in their own strip in the Anderson @-@ related TV Century 21 comic until 1969 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 2065 , the Zero @-@ X spacecraft launches from Glenn Field as the first attempt at a manned mission to Mars . Unknown to Captain Paul Travers and his crew of two astronauts and two scientists , criminal mastermind the Hood has infiltrated the ship to photograph Zero @-@ X 's wing mechanism . When his foot becomes trapped in the hydraulics , the Hood causes a systems failure and Zero @-@ X loses control . While the villain manages to extract his bloodied foot and parachute from the undercarriage , Travers and his crew eject in an escape pod and Zero @-@ X crashes into the ocean before leaving Earth 's atmosphere . 
 In 2067 , at the conclusion of an investigation into the loss of Zero @-@ X , the Inquiry Board of the Space Exploration Center reaches a verdict of sabotage . In the meantime , a second Mars mission has been planned . Days before the launch of the new Zero @-@ X , International Rescue agrees to a request to organise security in view of the possibility of another sabotage threat . Jeff Tracy dispatches Scott to Glenn Field in Thunderbird 1 , while Virgil in Thunderbird 2 and Alan in Thunderbird 3 are assigned to escort Zero @-@ X as it leaves the atmosphere . Posing as a reporter at the pre @-@ launch press conference , Lady Penelope ensures that Travers and the other four crewmembers are delivered St. Christopher brooches . Ostensibly for luck , these are in fact homing devices ( a plot device previously used in the episode " The Duchess Assignment " ) . The next day , a search for Dr Grant 's brooch checks negative . Scott unmasks the man waiting for lift @-@ off on board Zero @-@ X as the Hood in another of his disguises . The saboteur flees Glenn Field in a car , which Penelope and Parker pursue in FAB1 . The Hood transfers to a speedboat , and then a helicopter piloted by an accomplice ; Parker shoots the aircraft down with the Rolls @-@ Royce 's built @-@ in machine gun and the Hood is seemingly killed . Meanwhile , the real Grant is returned to Zero @-@ X and the spacecraft launches without further incident . 
 Mission accomplished , Penelope invites Scott and Virgil to join her at " The Swinging Star " , a fashionable nightclub . Landing back on Tracy Island after escorting Zero @-@ X , Alan feels unappreciated when Jeff insists that he remain on standby at base while his brothers spend the night partying . In bed , Alan experiences a surreal dream in which Parker " flies " him and Penelope in FAB1 to a version of The Swinging Star located in space . Present at the interstellar nightclub are Cliff Richard Jr and The Shadows , who perform a song titled " Shooting Star " and an instrumental , " Lady Penelope " . The dream sequence ends abruptly when Alan plummets from The Swinging Star back to Earth and awakes to discover he has fallen out of bed . 
 After a six @-@ week flight , the Zero @-@ X Martian Exploration Vehicle lands on Mars on 22 July . While investigating the barren surface , the crew are puzzled to encounter strange rock formations arranged into coils . Space Captain Greg Martin blasts one of the structures with the MEV gun and Dr Pierce prepares to leave the vehicle to collect samples . However , the other formations stir into motion and reveal themselves to be one @-@ eyed " Rock Snakes " . Under attack from the extraterrestrials , which are able to shoot fireballs from their " mouths " , the Zero @-@ X explorers are forced to effect a premature departure from the Martian surface . Docking with the orbiting command module piloted by Space Navigator Brad Newman , the astronauts start the flight back to Earth . 
 As Zero @-@ X re @-@ enters Earth 's atmosphere on 2 September , a lifting body launched to assist the controlled descent fails to interface , damaging the escape unit circuit ( <unk> ) . With Zero @-@ X locked in descent and set to impact Craigsville , Florida , Jeff sends out Scott and Brains in Thunderbird 1 and Virgil , Alan and Gordon in Thunderbird 2 . <unk> into Zero @-@ X 's undercarriage , Alan must risk being trapped on board the spacecraft as Brains advises him on re @-@ routing the damaged escape circuit . With Craigsville evacuated , Alan is left seconds to detach his cable . Travers and the others eject just in time , before Zero @-@ X crashes spectacularly into Craigsville . Collected by Penelope and Parker in FAB1 , Alan is driven to the real Swinging Star and Penelope , joined by the Tracy family , Brains and Tin @-@ Tin , all disguised to conceal their identities , propose a toast to Alan as the " hero of the day " . 
 = = Production = = 
 When shooting on Series One of Thunderbirds wrapped in late 1965 , Gerry Anderson and his ITC financier , Lew Grade , agreed that a feature film adaptation , to be shot at the same time as the prospective Series Two , would be the next logical step in the expansion of the AP Films Thunderbirds franchise . With United Artists contracted to distribute the film and the Rank Organisation to exhibit , a budget of £ 250 @,@ 000 was set and Anderson and his wife , Sylvia , commenced work on the script at a Portuguese villa rented to them by Grade . The couple decided to base the plot on the American @-@ Soviet " Space Race " , in particular the 1960s contest to land astronauts on the Moon , but adapt this story for the futuristic Thunderbirds universe by changing the destination of the mission to Mars . 
 In the pre @-@ production stages of their next puppet series , Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons , the Andersons would opt to script a second appearance of the Zero @-@ X spacecraft to link the continuities of Thunderbirds and its sequel , which is supposed to be set in the same fictional universe . Captain Scarlet would also prove to be a progression from Thunderbirds Are Go in terms of its depiction of extraterrestrial life on Mars , although the Mysteron antagonists of this series would be more ambitious than the Rock Snakes of the film by actively seeking to attack Earth . The final rescue of the crippled Zero @-@ X emulates that of the airliner Fireflash in the Thunderbirds episode " Operation Crash @-@ Dive " . 
 The role of director fell to David Lane , who had filled this position for several of the Series One episodes and also had editing and special effects experience at AP Films . Aged 24 , with this appointment Lane became the youngest film director in Britain at the time . Frustrated with the creative limitations of puppets and concerned that the television series would not adapt well to a film , Alan Pattillo , the Andersons ' initial choice , declined the role . 
 The insertion of Alan 's dream sequence set at interstellar nightclub The Swinging Star was spearheaded by Sylvia , who expanded these scenes with a proposed musical interlude to be performed by puppet versions of Cliff Richard and The Shadows , Richard 's backup band in the 1960s . Richard and Bruce Welch owned homes in Portugal near to the Andersons , and it was there that the two agreed to " appear " in the film as Supermarionation puppets . Also signed on to contribute to the film 's score , Richard and the band recorded a song titled " Shooting Star " , with Richard providing the vocals , and an instrumental piece , " Lady Penelope " . Anderson concedes that the sequence does not progress the plot , stating in her autobiography that it was " sheer indulgence that would not have been possible on our television budget . " Stephen La Rivière , documenting the making of Thunderbirds Are Go in his book Supermarionation : A History of the Future , considers the sequence the strangest ever created by AP Films . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The returning characters of the Tracy family , the other inhabitants of Tracy Island , Lady Penelope , Parker and the Hood are voiced , with one exception , by the Series One cast of Thunderbirds . Voice actors introduced in Thunderbirds Are Go are : 
 Jeremy Wilkin as Virgil Tracy . The only character whose voice actor was changed between Series One and Thunderbirds Are Go , since David Holliday had returned to the United States in the interim , the film and Series Two version of Virgil was voiced by Wilkin , an English @-@ born Canadian actor who emigrated back to London in the 1960s . Wilkin would maintain a professional relationship with the Andersons for seven years after the film , voicing the character of Captain Ochre in Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons , supporting roles in Joe 90 and also the character of The Bishop for The Secret Service , before minor appearances in two of the live @-@ action Anderson productions of the 1970s , UFO and The Protectors . 
 Paul Maxwell as Zero @-@ X Captain Paul Travers . Maxwell , a Canadian actor who often played American characters in 1960s British television , also provided voices for Thunderbirds Series Two and voiced the character of Captain Grey for several episodes of Captain Scarlet . His previous acting for the Andersons had come in 1963 with Fireball XL5 , as the star character Colonel Steve Zodiac . 
 Alexander <unk> as Space Captain Greg Martin . A French @-@ born actor with experience on The Saint and Gideon 's Way ( in the role of Chief Inspector David Keen ) , <unk> made one guest appearance on UFO in the 1970s . 
 Bob Monkhouse as Space Navigator Brad Newman . Monkhouse , an actor in such films as Carry On Sergeant ( 1958 ) , would later host the British game show The Golden Shot between 1967 and 1972 . He first approached Gerry Anderson for permission to film a comedy sketch based on Stingray , but ended up agreeing to replace Alfred Marks , who had withdrawn from the film due to a fee dispute , as Newman . Monkhouse recalled the conversation : " [ Anderson ] said , ' How much would you charge for the job ? ' I said , ' Gerry , I 'd do it for nothing . ' And that was the first time I ever heard the phrase , ' The price is right ' . " He affected an American accent for his parts in the film . 
 Neil McCallum as Dr Ray Pierce . With a role in the 1956 children 's series Space School , after Thunderbirds Are Go Canadian actor McCallum made contributions to Captain Scarlet , UFO , The Protectors and ( beyond the Anderson productions ) Department S and Randall and Hopkirk ( Deceased ) . 
 Charles Tingwell as Dr Tony Grant . Appearing in the medical drama Emergency – Ward 10 in the 1960s , Tingwell 's work for the Andersons included Thunderbirds Series Two , Captain Scarlet ( for which he was the voice of Dr Fawn ) and one episode of UFO , after which he returned to his native Australia . 
 Cliff Richard as Cliff Richard Jr . Contracted in Portugal , where he owned a house " next @-@ door @-@ but @-@ one " to Gerry and Sylvia Anderson , after negotiations with his agent , Peter Gormley , singer Richard says of his casting that he was " thrilled " to be part of the well @-@ known and popular Thunderbirds franchise . Richard has fond memories of the making of his Supermarionation lookalike puppet : " It was quite a hoot ... I was never really sure if I looked like my puppet or it looked like me . " 
 The Shadows ( consisting of band members Brian Bennett , Hank Marvin , John <unk> and Bruce Welch ) as Themselves , complementing Cliff Richard Jr in Alan Tracy 's dream sequence set at The Swinging Star . Bennett remembers the puppet that was based on his likeness : " The first thing I did was to ask if I could keep him when filming was finished , but apparently he was to be turned into another character after the film had been finished . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Pre @-@ production for Thunderbirds Are Go lasted three months , and a shooting schedule of sixteen weeks was allotted to coincide with the filming of episodes for Series Two . Principal photography commenced on 3 March 1966 and ended nearly four months later in late June . The AP Films staff were split into an " A " and a " B " Unit , " A " to concentrate on the film and " B " the television episodes . As a result of the division , henceforth the television shooting would be completed at the rate of one episode per month , whereas Series One had been filmed at a faster rate with the completion of two episodes in the same time . 
 While director of photography Paddy Seale and special effects supervisor Derek Meddings handled Thunderbirds Are Go , camera and effects roles for Series Two were delegated to their assistants , Julien <unk> and Jimmy Elliott . Two unused buildings on the Slough Trading Estate were purchased to address the increased demands on the production team , combining with the pre @-@ existing puppet workshop and art department and publicity centres to form an AP Films production base of five buildings . Converted by January 1966 , one of these former factory units contained new puppet stages , while the other was dedicated to one large sound stage on which all model and effects work would be completed . 
 = = = = Cinematography = = = = 
 Thunderbirds Are Go was filmed in widescreen Techniscope , a subset of Technicolor , with an aspect ratio of 2 @.@ 35 : 1 . This represented a significant departure from the 4 : 3 picture used for the television episodes . The anamorphic lenses of Panavision , a popular system for Hollywood productions during the 1960s , proved to be unsuitable for special effects shots due to the depth of field of the cameras . Techniscope , on the other hand , could be used in conjunction with spherical lenses while attaining the " letterbox " image of mainstream films that were shot on 35 mm film . All AP Films productions had up to this point been filmed on Arriflex Cameras , but for the film these were replaced with the Mitchell brand . 
 Thunderbirds Are Go is also the first film to have been shot with the " Livingston Electronic <unk> Unit " . Also known as " Add @-@ a @-@ Vision " , this system consisted of a viewfinder , connected to video monitors , that was used to capture an image directly from the shooting camera . This enabled production personnel to inspect filmed footage on the set with a higher definition than had been possible with a more basic system used for AP Films television series . Add @-@ a @-@ Vision also benefited the puppeteers , who were stationed several metres above the set on gantries and had until this point not been permitted a useful view of the marionette movements below them . Based on German video assist devices , Add @-@ A @-@ Vision was developed by John Read , director of photography for Thunderbirds , in collaboration with <unk> Electronics , and also incorporated a form of playback function to aid staff while viewing rushes . 
 To enhance the illusion of the puppets , David Lane ensured that camera shots frequently omitted the tops of the heads and the visible control wires , and also incorporated low @-@ angle shots for dramatic effect . Location shooting in Portugal was arranged for Lane , Derek Meddings and camera operator Alan Perry to film overhead landscape shots for the climax in which Alan rescues the Zero @-@ X astronauts during re @-@ entry . However , when the footage was deemed unsatisfactory , it was replaced with a painted backdrop made by associate producer Reg Hill . 
 Shots were also recorded for the end of Alan 's dream , when the character tumbles from The Swinging Star back to Earth to discover that he has only fallen out of bed . To achieve this " spiralling shot " , the team was carried by helicopter to an altitude of approximately 5 @,@ 000 feet above an island off the coast of Portugal . The aircraft was then left to " autogyro " downwards as Perry recorded the view of the island looming up from below . Once again , however , the shot was declared inadequate and a model version was made at the AP Films Studios in Slough . 
 = = = = Puppets = = = = 
 Promising Television Mail that AP Films ' latest venture would be " bigger and better than anything we have ever done before " , Gerry Anderson realised that design defects would not be as quickly forgiven in a film adaptation as on the smaller screen . Puppets from the Thunderbirds television series were therefore expertly revamped , with new paint , wigs and costumes , while models and sets such as the Thunderbird machines were re @-@ built from scratch with greater attention to detail . During production , the AP Films puppet wardrobe had a stock of over 700 costumes , with 150 extra costumes made mainly as spares in case of damage or loss . 
 Some of the main puppet cast to feature in the film , such as Scott Tracy , were re @-@ made from the original marionettes , while previously unseen characters such as the Zero @-@ X astronauts , Cliff Richard and the bandmembers of The Shadows were sculpted especially . Whereas guest star puppets for Series One had been recycled for each appearance and moulded in Plasticine , since this was the first occasion when puppets in an AP Films production were intended to represent real @-@ life celebrities , most of the supporting puppets were made from fibreglass to the same standards of workmanship as the main puppets . 
 From facial measurements and still photographs of the human templates , sculpting supervisor John Brown constructed Cliff Richard , while Brian Bennett was entrusted to Christine Glanville , Hank Marvin to Terry Curtis , John <unk> to Mary Turner and Bruce Welch to Tim Cooksey . Curtis went on to sculpt Zero @-@ X crewmembers Captain Paul Travers and Co @-@ Pilot Greg Martin , modelling the first on 1960s James Bond actor , Sean Connery and the latter partly on himself , in addition to the Glenn Field Controller , Commander Casey . 
 The puppets of Thunderbirds Are Go are of identical proportions to the television puppets . However , while production of the film continued , AP Films developed a prototype with a latex mouth to result in more realistic movement of the lips and jaws . However , this animatronic technology proved to be insufficiently advanced and the idea was abandoned . For the later television series Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons , a brand @-@ new puppet design of realistic anatomical proportions made its debut appearance when the solenoid of the lip @-@ synch mechanism was relocated from the puppet head to the torso area . 
 Thunderbird 6 , a sequel film shot simultaneously with Captain Scarlet , stars puppets intended to compromise between the first and second generations . Although the heads and hands remained large in relation to the torso and legs , the sculptors reduced the explicit caricature evident in the Thunderbirds television episodes and Thunderbirds Are Go to leave puppets sized in intermediate proportions . 
 = = = = Set design = = = = 
 The heads of the art department , Bob Bell and Keith Wilson , divided their efforts so that Bell contributed mostly to the film and Wilson to the Series Two episodes . Sets constructed by Bell especially for Thunderbirds Are Go included the Glenn Field Control Tower and Press Conference Room , the interiors of The Swinging Star , and re @-@ designed versions of various locations on Tracy Island . 
 The appearance of the Space Exploration Center 's Inquiry Room was influenced by Sylvia Anderson , who in her role as producer supervised design aspects and wanted the light @-@ blue uniforms of the SEC officials to be vividly contrasted with a tangerine and black <unk> backdrop . Director David Lane recalls that the Inquiry Room scene depicted a panel made up of 20 puppets , an achievement which would not have been possible in one of the Thunderbirds television episodes due to the smaller budget . 
 Of his approach to directing the film , Lane explains , " Thunderbirds Are Go was done like an episode but on a bigger scale . Whereas we would think that it might be nice to do a particular shot on the series but couldn 't afford to , with Thunderbirds Are Go we just did it because we had the money . " For the Swinging Star hall sequence , all the visual elements except Alan and Lady Penelope are displayed in black and white , with background characters appearing in the form of enlarged still photographs . On the surrealism of the Swinging Star scenes , aspects of which include pink space clouds made of dry ice and a giant guitar on which Cliff Richard and The Shadows perform part of " Shooting Star " , Anderson explains that the production team " recreated a Busby Berkeley sequence " , and that the appearance of puppet versions of real @-@ life celebrities boosted the publicity value of the film . 
 = = = = Special effects = = = = 
 Derek Meddings and a team of 28 technicians completed the special effects shots for the film in six months . Their main assignments included the Zero @-@ X launches , re @-@ shot , widescreen launch sequences for the Thunderbird machines , the car chase between Lady Penelope and Parker in FAB1 and the Hood , scenes at The Swinging Star , the Mars shots involving the MEV and the mysterious Rock Snakes , and the ultimate destruction of Zero @-@ X in the climax . Over 300 effects shot were completed with scale models . The team made use of the extra space afforded to them by the new special effects building to experiment with floor @-@ level shots and other more creative camera angles . 
 The requirement to re @-@ create the various Thunderbird machines was particularly problematic in the case of Thunderbird 2 , as Meddings explains : " Unfortunately , its replacement was not only the wrong colour , it was a completely different shape . Although we had several more built in different scales , I never felt our model makers managed to re @-@ capture the look of the original . " Meddings was also responsible for the design of the Zero @-@ X spacecraft , for the representation of which a fibreglass model , 7 ft ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) long , weighing 50 lb ( 23 kg ) and costing £ 2 @,@ 500 , was built . The appearance of the Zero @-@ X interior was based on then unfinished aircraft Concorde , a prototype of which was under construction at Filton Airfield in Bristol . 
 A long shot of a Zero @-@ X lifting body falling through the atmosphere and exploding was the only special effects sequence filmed outside the building . Instead , it was mounted on a gantry at a nearby power station against a real sky backdrop and the team used Cordtex explosive strips , gunpowder , naphtha , magnesium and petroleum gel to create a " fireball " effect . Although it took months to construct , the studio 's destruction of the Zero @-@ X model was complete in two days . The effects shots for Thunderbirds Are Go later became so well known in the film industry that the work of Meddings and his team was consulted during pre @-@ production on the 1986 James Cameron film , Aliens . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 The film went through post @-@ production in the autumn to be finished in time for a Christmas release . Len Walter , who had edited episodes for Series One , reprised his role for Thunderbirds Are Go . The workprint of the film ran more than 15 minutes over the maximum runtime permitted by United Artists , forcing Walter to cut several minor scenes that were not essential to the plot . 
 One set of deleted scenes charted the Space Exploration Center 's attempts to enlist International Rescue to escort the second Zero @-@ X. Meanwhile , the Hood telepathically contacts his half @-@ brother Kyrano , coercing him to relay the Tracy family 's actions . With the removal of the one scene in which he appears , Kyrano , another character voiced by David Graham , was completely cut from the film . A second deleted scene featured Lady Penelope and Parker en route to Glenn Field via New York , flying on board the aircraft Fireflash which made its first appearance in the pilot episode of Thunderbirds . Another deleted scene saw Jeff Tracy give a speech , broadcast worldwide over the Trans American TV Network . 
 No copies of the deleted scenes are known to survive . However , some still images remain . One photograph , in which Brains and Alan are seen standing behind a camera , is from the scene in which Jeff prepares for the broadcast of his speech , and appeared as the cover of issue 35 of FAB magazine . Another photograph , this one of the Hood in his temple with a film clapperboard in the foreground , has also survived . The only remaining film footage was edited into the 1968 Joe 90 episode " International Concerto " , which includes a few seconds of video from the Trans American TV Network sequence . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 With Walter 's editing complete , composer Barry Gray recorded the score in six sessions between 9 and 11 October at Anvil Studios near Denham in Buckinghamshire . To achieve proper symphonic sound , an orchestra of 70 musicians , aided by Gray 's own electronic effects , was organised . The Band of the Royal Marines ' rendition of the " Thunderbirds March " which accompanies the end credits of the film was recorded in one morning under the supervision of Gray and conductor Lieutenant Colonel Vivian Dunn at the Royal Marines School of Music in Deal , Kent . Three weeks were then allotted for visual wrap @-@ up work , the insertion of the opening titles and minor animation , sound editing and dubbing . On its submission to the British Board of Film Classification in November , the film was awarded a U certificate . 
 An animated introduction to the film presents the main puppet cast , and is accompanied by the re @-@ recorded version of the " Thunderbirds March " . The end credits note the musical contributions of " Shooting Star " and " Lady Penelope " by Cliff Richard and The Shadows and the " Thunderbirds March " performed by the Band of the Royal Marines . Other credits are self @-@ referential " acknowledgements " to individuals and companies who apparently assisted in the production of the film : these include the characters of Space Colonel Harris ( the chairman of the Space Exploration Center committee ) and Commander Casey , and the Century 21 " Space Location Unit " . A humorous disclaimer then reads : " None of the characters appearing in this photoplay intentionally resemble any persons living or dead ... since they do not yet exist ! " 
 = = Release = = 
 When filming for Thunderbirds Are Go concluded in June 1966 , four episodes of Series Two had been completed on the monthly shooting schedule . Two additional episodes of Series Two , " Ricochet " and " Give or Take a Million " , were filmed by " A " and " B " Units respectively . By December , Lew Grade had failed to sell the TV series to American broadcasters , recommending to Gerry Anderson that AP Films cancel production on Thunderbirds after the completion of six episodes for Series Two and start preparation for a new series , which would become Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons . For the development of this series , the staff of AP Films , on the advice of Merchandising Executive Keith Shackleton , agreed to change the name of the company to " Century 21 Productions " , a name first carried by Thunderbirds Are Go to associate the film more closely with the related Anderson comic TV Century 21 . Thunderbirds Are Go became the first Anderson project to be publicised , in full , as " A Gerry Anderson Century 21 Production " . 
 Thunderbirds Are Go was screened for United Artists executives to a positive response before receiving its premiere at the London Pavilion in Piccadilly on 12 December 1966 . Opening at a gala for the Barnardo 's Charity , several crew and actors were in attendance , including Gerry and Sylvia Anderson , Grade , Cliff Richard and his sister Donella and The Shadows . The exterior of the Pavilion , adorned with neon and representations of the Thunderbird machines , led into the foyer in which puppets and models from the film had been put on display , with publicity posters promising audiences " The Most Advanced Spacecraft Ever Created " and stipulating that " Adults Should Be Accompanied By Children " . The Band of the Royal Marines provided a rendition of the " Thunderbirds March " both before and after the screening . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The release of Thunderbirds Are Go in December 1966 was one element of that year 's " Thunderbirds Christmas " which witnessed a merchandising scramble to market tie @-@ in media such as toys , games and novels . An initial review in Kine Weekly praised the film as a " colourful extension of Gerry Anderson 's very popular television series " , while the News of the World described it as " breath @-@ taking entertainment " . On 18 December , the Sunday Express published a similarly glowing review , in which the concept of the Zero @-@ X mission to Mars was described as " awesome " and visuals commended : " Of course , the cast are all puppets , the sets , models , and the story unabashed nonsense . But it 's great all the same . Your kids will take you , of course . " In the Daily Mail , the transfer of the puppets from television to film was well received : " So who needs people ? These handsome , stiff @-@ necked , shiny @-@ faced Thunderbirds puppets have broken spectacularly out of black @-@ and @-@ white TV and on to the cinema screen . " 
 However , after the splendour of the premiere and the praise of some reviewers , when the Andersons departed on a tour of Britain to promote the film it was revealed that public interest was mediocre and box office revenue poor , as Gerry Anderson explains : " When we got off the plane at the first destination we were told that the film was in trouble . Cinemas were apparently half @-@ full . When we got to the next big city we got more news that made us even more depressed – box office figures were inexplicably low wherever we went . " Anderson proposes that the presence of Thunderbirds on television damaged the chances of its big @-@ screen transfer , asserting , " The only thing we could think was that at that time the audience was not used to seeing a feature film version of a television show . So people would see Thunderbirds and think , ' We 've seen it on television . ' " Sylvia Anderson offers a similar explanation : " Although we still had our loyal television fans , they remained just that – firmly seated in front of their television screens and not in the cinema . " 
 Supermarionation historian Stephen La Rivière suggests that the film also faced competition on its release in 1966 from other new family films such as Leslie H. Martinson 's Batman and James Hill 's Born Free . Reviews were , in general , turning less positive : although the Slough Observer described the film as " basically a Technicolor large @-@ screen extension " of its television original , The Times was critical , asserting that the plotting and characterisation handed down from the television episodes were too thin to sustain a film and that the various air- and spacecraft launch sequences were intended less for visual appeal than padding to maintain feature length . 
 In his 1993 programme guide to the Anderson productions , John Peel comments that Thunderbirds Are Go is " well @-@ made " and that it fulfils its promise to deliver visual spectacle , coming off as the more favourable of the two Thunderbirds films , although the plot is partly recycled from the television episodes , and the dream sequence is " painfully silly " and " embarrassingly awful " . La Rivière agrees with Peel 's view that the Thunderbird machines are underused , and that the extended model shots and infrequent appearances from the Tracy family may have been a disappointment to the intended audience of children . 
 Revisiting Thunderbirds Are Go from more recent perspectives has led to different interpretations : Jeff Stafford of Turner Classic Movies regards the film in its entirety as a " pop culture novelty as fascinating and endearing as a toy from one 's childhood . " He agrees , however , that the model sequences are protracted : " You 'll feel yourself growing older as cranes and hydraulic lifts slowly – very slowly – prepare for a missile launch . " Meanwhile , William Gallagher of BBC Online offers a positive review , asserting that Thunderbirds Are Go is " every bit as good " as the television series . However , he also suggests that its status as a film adaptation faithful to its original is an inherent weakness , and that Thunderbirds functions better as a television series , writing of the film 's content : " Certainly there 's no greater profundity or universal theme to the film , it is just an extended episode . " Gallagher rates Thunderbirds Are Go three stars out of five , as does a review on the Film4 website . 
 = = = Sequel = = = 
 Despite the underperformance of Thunderbirds Are Go , Gerry Anderson received two awards for Thunderbirds in 1966 , first with the presentation of a Silver Medal for Outstanding Artistic Achievement by the Royal Television Society , and then an appointment as an Honorary Fellow of the British Kinematograph , Sound and Television Society . Dismissing the box office failure of Thunderbirds Are Go as a one @-@ off misfortune , United Artists advised Anderson to produce a second film , which would be titled Thunderbird 6 . Anderson remembers the period of transition : " None of us ... could understand why the film hadn 't succeeded , so it was decided we would make another one . " 
 Budgeted at £ 300 @,@ 000 – an increase of one fifth over Thunderbirds Are Go – in their approach to writing the sequel the Andersons decided to script a more light @-@ hearted adventure to counter the seriousness of the original . However , Thunderbird 6 would also receive a less @-@ than @-@ enthusiastic public reception , spelling the end of Thunderbirds as a film and television franchise until the arrival of the live @-@ action adaptation , Thunderbirds , almost four decades later in 2004 . 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Books and comics = = = 
 Thunderbirds Are Go was novelised by writer Angus P. Allan and published by Armada Books in 1966 . The events of the film from the perspective of the Zero @-@ X mission were also adapted for a four @-@ part " photographic picturisation " in the comic TV Century 21 ( launched in 1965 and renamed TV21 in 1968 ) . After this re @-@ telling of the events of Thunderbirds Are Go , comic strips published until 1969 charted the continuing adventures of the astronauts , led as ever by Captain Paul Travers , in missions to the other planets in the Solar System , and then beyond , on board the " Mark III " model of Zero @-@ X. 
 The connection between Thunderbirds and its successor series , Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons , also featured prominently in issues published between June and September 1967 , leading up to the television debut of Captain Scarlet . In these issues , Captain Black of the Spectrum Organisation commands another Mars mission in Zero @-@ X and ( as depicted in the pilot of Captain Scarlet ) falls under the manipulation of another native extraterrestrial race besides the Rock Snakes , " The Mysterons " . The involvement of Zero @-@ X reaches a climax when the spacecraft , occupied by the possessed Black , lands back at Glenn Field and the Mysteron agent escapes capture by the authorities . 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 A re @-@ recorded version of Barry Gray 's score received vinyl releases from United Artists in 1967 and Silva Screen Records in 1987 . The collection was later converted for CD in 1990 and re @-@ released by EMI in 1992 . Also comprising four tracks of incidental music from the Thunderbirds television episodes , the 1992 release consists of items titled " Alan 's Dream " , " Martian Mystery " , " Astronauts in Trouble " and " Swinging Star " ( composed by Gray ) , " Shooting Star " ( performed by Cliff Richard and The Shadows ) and " Lady Penelope " ( performed by The Shadows ) , and two versions of both the " Thunderbirds Theme " and " Zero @-@ X Theme " ( as composed by Gray or performed by The Shadows ) . The original recordings of the film soundtrack of Thunderbirds are Go and Thunderbird 6 were released by La @-@ La Land Records on a limited edition CD in 2014 . 
 In Regions 2 and 4 , Thunderbirds Are Go was first released on DVD by MGM in 2001 , with special features including an audio commentary with director David Lane and producer Sylvia Anderson , the theatrical trailer , stills and production galleries . A 2004 " International Rescue Edition " , including Region 1 and marketed both separately and as part of a box set with the sequel film , Thunderbird 6 , boasts remixed Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 surround sound and expands on the original extra material with three documentaries detailing the production of the film . A limited edition high definition Blu @-@ ray Disc release of Thunderbirds are Go and Thunderbird 6 was released on 13 May 2014 . 
 = Algo Centre Mall = 
 The Algo Centre Mall ( legally Eastwood Mall since 2005 but almost never referred to as such ) was a mall and hotel located in the middle of Elliot Lake , Ontario 's commercial district on Highway 108 . It is the largest commercial complex in the area . When the community was hit by uranium mine closures in the 1990s , the complex gradually refocused , hosting multiple services , such as a library , constituency offices , and public health offices . In recent years , many businesses located in the mall either closed or moved to outside locations . Still , the mall was a community hub , with most of the area 's clothing stores and its largest grocery store , employing upwards of 250 local residents . It accounted for 10 % of community 's retail space and 6 % of the total wages . 
 The mall was plagued by structural problems and leaks throughout its history . It underwent a partial structural failure on June 23 , 2012 , when a 12m x 24m ( 39 ' -by @-@ 79 ' ) segment of the rooftop parking deck collapsed into the building , crashing through the upper level lottery kiosk adjacent to the food court and escalators to the ground floor below . More than 20 people received non @-@ life @-@ threatening injuries and two people died in the collapse . An investigation and class action lawsuits into the collapse are ongoing and the mall has been demolished . 
 = = History = = 
 <unk> Realty Holdings Ltd . , the real estate branch on the Algoma Central Railway first commissioned The Algo Centre Mall project . The project was subsequently approved by the Ontario Municipal Board in 1978 , with an estimated cost of $ 10 million . Construction then began in 1979 with the project being finished the next year . The 80 @-@ room Algo Inn , the town 's largest hotel and retirement residence , was also built into the mall . In its first year , 1980 , the mall featured <unk> , Dominion , and Shoppers Drug Mart , and a total of 35 units . A distinct architectural feature of the building was rooftop parking . 
 After the closure of the uranium mines in Elliot Lake , in 1990 , the revenue prospects of the mall dropped sharply , with no recovery in sight . This prompted the Algoma Central Company to write off over $ 5 million in lost property value , despite 98 % occupancy . 
 In 1996 , a report commissioned by the Town , Downtown Core and Industrial Area Improvements , presented a less @-@ than @-@ favourable assessment of the structure 's exterior : 
 A very significant building within the downtown core is formed by the Algo Mall / Algo Inn . Situated above Ontario Avenue and fronted by parking lots , this large building is clad mostly in brown <unk> metal siding . The entrances are remote and do not address the street . The scale of the building , its introverted nature and the lack of tactile materials , detail , and transparency at the pedestrian level , do little to contribute to the urban environment . The Mall and the Hotel are a terrific amenities and likely contribute greatly to the attraction of shoppers and visitors to the downtown core , but the design is less than sensitive to its urban environment . 
 The current owners , Eastwood Incorporated , acquired the company in August 2005 for the price of $ 6 @.@ 2 million . Owned by Bob Nazarian , his firm was registered in 1994 as a numbered company . At various points , the company has owned strip malls in Kitchener and London , Ontario . Algo had retained Marino Locations Limited to redevelop the property " to accommodate new specialty retailers and possible new anchor / big @-@ box retailers that are not yet in the market . The possibility for exterior pads also exists on the surrounding lands . " ( Read Jones <unk> Ltd. also performed a redevelopment feasibility study on the mall in late 2010 , early 2011 ; part of the cost was not repaid . ) Between August 2005 and June 2012 , the mall had a series of five managers . 
 Along with the Algo Inn and numerous independent stores and services , the mall includes : 
 At some point in the summer of 2008 , a location of <unk> , a department store , closed . The Bargain ! Shop purchased the brand in August of that year , taking over some <unk> . In September that year , Mayor Rick Hamilton located his campaign office at the mall . In January 2009 , the Elliot Lake Model Railroad Club opened at the local civic centre , moving from the mall . In 2010 , a new Shoppers Drug Mart opened away from the mall , more than doubling the 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) unit it had at Algo . The mall was offered for sale in 2010 , for $ 9 @.@ 9 million , an increase of $ 3 @.@ 7 million from the purchase price five years prior . In 2011 , the hotel office was victim of a break @-@ and @-@ enter , with an attempt to do the same at Zellers . 
 The mall hosted car shows , charity head shavings , antique appraisals , promotions for community events , an annual rocking chair marathon for charity , amongst other community events . 
 Despite the centre 's issues , it remained a community hub ; the mayor notes that it was both the social centre of the community , and residents would visit weekly , and in some cases daily . 
 = = Structural problems = = 
 By 1990 , the mall was already regularly plagued with leaks and water damage . 
 The Elliot Lake Standard reported in 2008 on " greater than normal " leaks causing damages to multiple units . Starlight Cafe closed permanently , despite being profitable soon after opening , as customers would occasionally need umbrellas to stand at the take @-@ out counter . Drip @-@ tarps installed by the mall in the kitchen of the restaurant were ineffective . The cafe owner was not made aware of the leaks before starting her lease in 2007 , and was successful in a lawsuit against the owner . Scotiabank had closed for a few weeks in 2008 as a precaution . ( Scotiabank began construction on a new location in July 2011 , to replace their mall location . ) Some businesses suggested that additional leaks started after the new owner started repairs to the roof . Tenants noticed a reduced amount of traffic after leaks started , and buckets were scattered throughout the mall . 
 In 2009 , leaks in the mall roof and mold caused Elliot Lake city councilors to consider moving the Elliot Lake Public Library out of the mall and back to the Solomon Building , where it had been before 1992 . Many books were damaged , despite library staff using tarps to cover shelves . At some points , entire sections were blocked for public health reasons . Much of the leaking was said to be corrected , before council considered the issue , and an environmental study was completed . Some library board members and councilors worried that liability insurance wouldn 't cover them in the mall , despite reassurances by library management and the city 's insurance broker . With a multi @-@ use complex in the works , some of the library board was concerned with a five @-@ year lease that mall management was pursuing , despite the library 's preference for a 2 @.@ 5 @-@ year lease . In the end , the library remained at the mall . 
 Some tenants suggest that mall business owners were said to not be vocal about their disappointments , unless " water is dripping right on their head ( or ) if the water is destroying their business " ; conversely , one previous mall manager suggests he was called daily by tenants about the issue , before 2008 repairs started . The owner was aware of the mall 's roof problems when purchasing the facility , and suggested there would be renovations to the mall , but would not commit to a date for completing roof repairs or interior upgrades . Ultimately , over $ 1 million was spent in an attempt to repair the roof . Architect John <unk> of Kitchener was hired to oversee the project ; Canadian Construction Controls of Breslau declined to bid to install a membrane created by Carlisle <unk> Systems . Taking issue with the $ 1 million cost , Nazarian cancelled the project , hiring Peak Restoration ; only a fraction of Peak 's $ 823 @,@ 657 worth of work was paid for , and the lien expired in 2010 . The mall manager left soon after , in summer 2008 , suggesting that he believes mall maintenance staff were set to repair the roof . In spite of the issues , the mall would use the roof for events . In 2011 and 2012 , it served as the site for the Heart and Stroke Foundation 's Big Bike ride . 
 In summer 2011 , a piece of concrete fell through the ceiling at a mall restaurant , Hungry Jack 's . Reports were filed with the mall manager and the city , with an inspector scheduled to visit two weeks following the incident . The inspector did not show , and mall management did not reply . Hungry Jack 's is near to the eventual mall roof collapse . Mall owners continued repair and maintenance work in 2012 , spending $ 120 @,@ 000 into repairs within the 12 @-@ month period leading up to June 2012 . An engineering and structural study " turned up nothing " , according to the mall manager . Even after the repair , there were photos of serious interior damage to the mall 's roof . A local plumber that had done work for the mall suggested there was obvious signs of water damage , eight months before the collapse . In March 2012 , the mall management pleaded guilty in provincial court , after their fire alarms and sprinklers did not meet code . The mall spent $ 50 @,@ 000 to upgrade the infrastructure to avoid further fines . The process included adding a new roof to the hotel , gutting the second and third floors , including the hotel lounge . 
 The problem was very obvious to residents of the town . During the press conference announcing the class @-@ action lawsuit , a resident suggested that some residents had placed " bets " on when the building would collapse . Ontario 's Ministry of Labour visited the mall six times in the three years before the collapse . 
 At the 2013 inquest into the roof collapse ( see # Government reaction below ) , testimony has revealed that many unpublicized structural problems at the mall dated all the way back to its initial construction in the late 1970s . In particular , the expansion joint above the escalators , the failure of which appears to have caused the roof deck collapse , was already not properly binding to the concrete , in turn allowing water to seep into the building 's seams , as early as 1981 — barely a year after the mall 's original opening . The expansion joint was fixed many times , and fully replaced twice , during the building 's lifetime , yet always began tearing away from the concrete again shortly after the repairs were complete . 
 = = 2012 roof collapse = = 
 At approximately 2 : 20 pm EDT ( 1820 GMT ) on Saturday , June 23 , 2012 , part of a 12m x 24m ( 39 ' -by @-@ 79 ' ) segment of the parking deck / roof collapsed at the Algo Centre Mall , sending metal and concrete debris crashing down through two floors of the shopping centre , injuring more than 20 people and resulting in the deaths of two people . 
 Soon after the collapse , the owners arrived at the mall . A representative spoke on behalf of the owner , stating " I 'd rather not [ comment ] , because we have talked to our lawyers and we ’ re going to be in the City Hall to represent ourselves . But nevertheless , we are very much concerned [ about ] this accident . " 
 By approximately 4 : 00 pm , local authorities alerted the Commissioner of Community Safety , Dan <unk> . <unk> called the Toronto @-@ based Heavy Urban Search and Rescue ( HUSAR ) at 4 : 25 pm . The HUSAR crew , after assembling their equipment and travelling the 540 kilometers from Toronto , arrived by 2 : 00 am Sunday , June 24 , and immediately began work . 
 After initial assessments , the HUSAR team felt they had the proper equipment for the mission . In the early hours of Monday morning , June 25 – and despite discovering signs of life – rescue work was suspended due to the danger of additional concrete falling on the potential survivors and the HUSAR rescuers . 
 Following the announcement , numerous residents of the town began to sign a list volunteering to enter the structure themselves to continue the search ; the owners also announced their intention to seek a court injunction ordering the resumption of search and rescue efforts . After an appeal from local MPP Michael <unk> , whose constituency office was in the mall , Ontario Premier Dalton McGuinty urged rescue workers to resume their search for survivors . 
 HUSAR later stated that the rescue teams were continuing to strategize alternate methods during the work suspension , and that the local residents and the Premier 's call did not influence their actions . Shortly after 10 p.m. on June 25 , approximately 19 hours after the initial search was suspended , HUSAR confirmed that it would resume its efforts , including a willingness to employ " drastic measures " , including the use of heavy equipment to pull down the unstable escalator structure and part of an external wall from the outside . Prime Minister Stephen Harper also offered the assistance of the Canadian Forces on June 26 . 
 Two bodies were recovered from the debris on Wednesday , June 27 — four days after the collapse . 
 The area which collapsed included two kiosks . The deceased had been a lottery kiosk employee and her customer . Lucie Aylwin , 37 , worked just once a week at the lottery booth , earning extra money for her wedding . Aylwin held a full @-@ time job with Collège Boréal , a French language college , as an employment consultant and recruiter in the college 's ' Employment Options <unk> ' office , located elsewhere in the Algo Centre Mall . <unk> <unk> , 74 , was a widow and mother believed to be opening pull @-@ tab lottery tickets , which must be opened in view of the booth operator . After the bodies of the two victims were retrieved , and HUSAR confirmed no other victims were trapped in the rubble , efforts shifted to official investigations . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 On March 8 , 2013 , the engineering firm <unk> , commissioned by the Ontario Provincial Police , released the results of their forensic engineering investigation to the Elliot Lake Inquiry . The investigation found that the collapse was caused by a two @-@ stage failure of the welding on a connection , due to extensive corrosion . The corrosion was caused by improper waterproofing and the placement of a parking lot on the roof , which allowed water , contaminated with road salt ( which accelerated the corrosion ) to corrode the structure . 
 = = = <unk> and cost @-@ cutting during planning stages = = = 
 The report states that there were two critical errors made during the planning stages . Firstly , the parking lot for the mall was located on the roof of the building without there being sound waterproofing , and secondly the structural inefficiency of the hollow concrete slabs which prevented the installation of effective waterproofing later on . 
 John Kadlec of Beta Engineering originally planned the use of 8 @-@ inch HCS , which he specified could withstand 120 pounds per square foot , a load which exceeded specifications on all 8 @-@ inch HCS . During the bidding process , the owners were advised by a bidder , <unk> , that the specified load could not be handled by the HCS without reinforcements from a composite concrete topping . However , Kadlec advised the owners that the plans called for 8 @-@ inch HCS which could withstand the load without reinforcement from topping . The contract was thus awarded to Coreslab , despite Coreslab 's design tables indicating that the specified project loads were 38 % higher than the maximum load . In 1992 , over a decade after the mall 's construction , Coreslab retracted the claim to be able to support the load without the use of a composite topping . 
 Two different waterproofing systems were proposed to the owner by Harry S. Peterson Co . The first system called for a rubberized asphalt membrane to be applied over the non @-@ composite concrete topping , while the second , one called for no membrane , and simply controlling leaks with a polyurethane sealant . The second system reduced initial building costs by $ 136 @,@ 000 . HSP argued strongly for the second option , and convinced the owner to install the second system . The report called this system " intrinsically flawed " , and leaks were noticed immediately after construction . 
 = = = Leaking = = = 
 Leaks were noticed immediately after the installation of the topping . Harry S. Peterson Co. attempted many times to fix the leaks . In 1991 , the owners contracted Trow to investigate the chronic leaking and find a solution . Two options were provided , but upon consulting with Coreslab , it was determined that neither plans could go forward due to the HCS not being able to support additional loads . 
 These leaks allowed water to seep through the topping and access the iron frame of the building . This corroded much of the building 's frame during the mall 's three decades in operation . The corrosion was eventually so severe that the weld on a connection failed , resulting in the collapse . 
 = = = Inquiry = = = 
 John Kadlec , a consulting engineer on the original construction , has testified that he raised concerns at the time about sloppy workmanship and inadequate construction materials at the site , including structural columns that were already crooked , steel beams that were already rusting despite being new , and the ultimately fateful decision to place the complex 's parking area on the roof . According to Kadlec , the construction company opted to resolve the structural issues not by redoing the construction , but by anchoring the building 's back wall to the rock outcropping behind it . James <unk> , the building 's original architect , testified that he also strongly objected to the rooftop parking , but had little choice once <unk> made their decision to proceed with that plan . 
 The son of the mall 's owner , admitted that the company had pressured engineers to remove information on leaks and corrosion from a report and that fictional repair invoices from a shell company , Empire Roofing and Restoration , were used to mislead mortgage holder Royal Bank of Canada about the building 's condition . 
 Speakers at the inquiry have also testified that a significant volume of city traffic regularly cut across the roof deck as a bypass of the traffic lights at the corner of Hillside Drive and Ontario Avenue , resulting in more stress on the structure than it had been designed to handle . The <unk> report speculated that a heavy vehicle might have contributed to a previously undetected partial failure of the support structure a few months prior to the final collapse . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The province has ordered a review of both HUSAR and Emergency Management Ontario . 
 The collapse focused attention on the Harper government 's cancellation of the Joint Emergency Preparedness Program , which provides funds to Canada 's five HUSAR teams . The province and the National Fire Protection Association denounced the cuts . The Canadian Centre for Emergency Preparedness suggested that such cuts would necessitate Canada asking for assistance from the United States in similar situations . Also cancelled by the Conservative federal government was the Canadian Emergency Management College , established in 1954 to train first responders . A spokesperson for Public Safety Minister Vic Toews deflected criticism of the cuts , noting that 90 per cent of emergencies are managed municipally or provincially . 
 As of the end of June , the economic impact of Algo Centre 's closure was unknown , but described by Mayor Rick Hamilton as " huge " . Estimates suggest 250 people worked at the mall or hotel . The nearest significant cities to Elliot Lake are Sudbury and Sault Ste . Marie , both over 100 kilometres away by road ; residents were said to be fielding requests from others for essentials like clothing , not readily available without the mall . Apart from the mall 's Foodland store , there is only one other grocery store , a No <unk> , in the city ; that store and a nearby video store quickly made efforts to expand their merchandise selections to include some clothing items . 
 The Elliot Lake & District Chamber of Commerce has established a committee to help retailers from the building ; at one meeting , Premier McGuinty assured that they 'd remove rigid program requirements for assistance programs . The East Algoma Community Futures Development Corporation approved interest free " transitional loans " of up to $ 25 @,@ 000 for affected businesses . TD Bank 's local branch contributed $ 10 @,@ 000 to the Elliot Lake Food Bank . Foodland announced it will rebuild , and pay employees up to six months wages during the process . 
 Mall owner Nazarian received death threats , which pushed him into hiding , and a class action lawsuit had already been launched by June 28 , according to his lawyer . 
 John Pomerleau , owner of Alternative Funeral Service which is located in the Algo Centre Mall said in July that more than 30 cremation urns were still trapped in the mall and it was unknown if or when they could be recovered . 
 The Algo Centre Mall may contain asbestos which may have been released during the collapse and rescue demolition of the mall . 
 Foodland leased the city 's Collins Hall recreational facility for conversion into a temporary grocery store , which opened in October 2012 . Foodland 's permanent new store opened at Pearson Plaza on April 1 , 2016 ; the Collins Hall facility will now be converted back to recreational use , with several of the chain 's structural improvements to the building — including upgrades to the lighting system and improvements to the building 's accessibility for people with disabilities — remaining in place as a donation to the city . 
 The public library branch , as well as some government offices which had been located at the mall , were temporarily relocated to the former White Mountain Academy of the Arts . 
 = = = Government reaction = = = 
 The Ontario Provincial Police ( OPP ) is assisting the coroner 's office in investigating the two deaths . Once completed , the OPP could launch a criminal investigation , if warranted . The Ministry of Labour will have an engineer examine for further structural problems , and thus whether the mall needs to be torn down . Investigating the cause of the collapse is the city 's responsibility . 
 Global News reporter Jennifer Tryon attempted to file a Freedom of Information request for documents on June 29 , but was refused ; an employee came out from the back of the offices , and turned the City Clerk 's chair around , so that they couldn 't respond . City officials then called the OPP . After the request , the city issued a two line statement that documents are now part of investigations . OPP noted that the documents are still available through Freedom of Information requests , and that the situation likely didn 't warrant an emergency call to police . The reporter was provided a <unk> application on police arrival , and told to ignore instructions from their superiors on calling police . Tryon , producer Kieron O 'Dea and cameraman Trevor Owens would later receive a Canadian Screen Award nomination for Breaking National News <unk> at the 1st Canadian Screen Awards . 
 A public inquiry was established on July 19 , 2012 by the Government of Ontario . The inquiry itself started March 4 , 2013 . As part of the inquiry , portions of a 700 @-@ page engineering report ( <unk> report ) into the collapse were made public . 
 = = = Lawsuit = = = 
 On June 28 , four days after the collapse , the mall owner 's lawyer stated that a class action lawsuit had already been launched . 
 A class action lawsuit was launched by Elaine Quinte and Jack Quinte , who owned Hungry Jack 's in the mall . The lawsuit lists Algo Centre Mall , Eastwood Mall Inc . , Robert Nazarian , the City of Elliot Lake , the Province of Ontario , and the unnamed engineer " who approved the structure of the mall a short time prior to this incident . " 
 = = = Demolition = = = 
 Local area MPP Michael <unk> raised concerns that confidential records must be extracted , such as those from the public health department . He expressed concern that the information might end up in the local landfill . Documents were never extracted from Algo Mall . 
 Many health , social assistance and Service Canada files were found at the city landfill . Documents found among the rubble by a private source said to be photocopies of clients drivers licenses , social insurance numbers , health cards and birth certificates . The private source never removed any documents from the landfill site , although it is unknown if anyone else entered the landfill site after hours while the demolition was progressing . 
 = = New mall = = 
 A new shopping mall , given the tentative / construction name Pearson Plaza , is being built less than a kilometre south of Algo Centre Mall , on the site of the former Nordic Hotel ( later Huron Lodge ) at Hillside Drive South and Ontario Avenue . The first store in the new mall officially opened on April 1 , 2016 . 
 = Cyclone Akash = 
 Cyclone Akash ( JTWC designation : 01B , also known as Cyclonic Storm Akash ) was the first named tropical cyclone of the 2007 North Indian Ocean cyclone season . Warned by both India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) and Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) , it formed from an area of disturbed weather on the Bay of Bengal on May 12 , and gradually organized as it drifted northward . An eye began to develop as it approached land , and after reaching peak 3 @-@ min sustained winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) it struck about 115 km ( 70 mi ) south of Chittagong in Bangladesh . Akash rapidly weakened over land , and advisories were discontinued on May 15 . 
 The storm initially brought heavy rainfall to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands . Upon striking Bangladesh , Cyclonic Storm Akash produced a moderate storm tide , along with strong winds and heavy rains . The storm left dozens of boats missing , with three fisherman confirmed killed and another 50 missing . Near the coast , thousands of houses were damaged from the flooding caused by the storm . In Burma , its storm tide caused some coastal flooding . In all , 14 people were killed and damages amounted to US $ 982 million . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 During the second week of May , low pressures persisted across the Bay of Bengal . An area of convection developed on May 11 , and the next day the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) classified it as a depression . The system drifted northward , and initially moderate wind shear kept the deep convection on the periphery of the consolidating low @-@ level circulation center . Gradually , banding features developed along the eastern semicircle , and with decreasing amounts of wind shear the system organized further . By May 13 , the pressure had dropped to 1000 mbar as wind shear levels dropped significantly . An anticyclone developed over the system , while a mid @-@ latitude trough over northeastern India provided favorable outflow . Convection continued to consolidate around the low @-@ level circulation , and with well @-@ defined banding features and a central dense overcast over the center of circulation , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) upgraded it to Tropical Cyclone 01B at 1121 UTC on May 13 while located about 545 km ( 340 mi ) west @-@ northwest of Yangon , Burma . 
 Upon first being upgraded , the storm tracked steadily northward due to a break in a mid @-@ level ridge . Early on May 14 , IMD upgraded the system to deep depression status , and six hours later classified it as Cyclonic Storm Akash after attaining 3 @-@ min sustained winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . Akash continued to organize , with deep convection wrapping fully around the low @-@ level circulation . An eye began to form as the storm approached land , and at 1800 UTC on May 14 JTWC estimated 1 @-@ min sustained winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Officially , Akash attained peak 3 @-@ min sustained winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) and a minimum central pressure of 988 hPa . Additionally , meteorologists in Burma estimated Akash peaked with winds of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) . As it interacted with the mid @-@ latitude westerlies , it began to become extratropical . Shortly after reaching peak winds , Akash made landfall about 115 km ( 70 mi ) south of Chittagong . The storm weakened rapidly as it continued inland , and early on May 15 IMD issued its final advisory on the system ; shortly thereafter , JTWC discontinued advisories . The name was contributed by India , Akash means Sky in Hindi language . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 In its daily tropical weather outlook , the India Meteorological Department warned fishermen on the Andaman and Nicobar Islands to not go into the ocean due to the anticipated rough seas . Upon approaching the coast of Bangladesh , officials canceled all flights to and from the Shah Amanat International Airport . Additionally , authorities at the port of Chittagong worked to protect cargo ships from the storm , and it was ultimately closed for a period of 19 hours . In preparation for Akash , officials advised coastal residents to evacuate further inland ; about 80 @,@ 000 total residents left for emergency shelters . About 40 @,@ 000 Red Cross volunteers were prepared to aid those potentially affected . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The India Meteorological Department estimated winds of 45 – 55 km / h ( 28 – 34 mph ) affected the Andaman and Nicobar Islands , though no land reports were received . In Sittwe in Burma , the storm produced a storm tide of 3 m ( 10 ft ) , which flooded coastal areas . 
 In Chittagong , about 115 km ( 70 mi ) north of where Akash moved ashore , surface stations reported peak winds of 37 km / h ( 23 mph ) and a pressure of <unk> Near its landfall location , Akash produced high tides that flooded coastal areas with up to 1 @.@ 5 m ( 5 ft ) of water , destroying at least 30 businesses . The cyclone destroyed 205 houses and left an additional 845 damaged . Akash caused moderate crop damage near the coast , including 2 ha ( 4 @.@ 9 acres ) of destroyed lands of shrimp farms . Heavy precipitation was reported , with one station reporting a total of 53 mm ( 2 @.@ 12 in ) ; the rainfall caused flooding in inland areas . The heavy rains , caused by outer bands of the cyclone before it made landfall , limited play in Chittagong in the third One Day International cricket match between India and Bangladesh , before the match was abandoned . Strong winds caused power outages throughout Cox 's Bazar District , and downed about 200 trees on St. Martin 's Island . The cyclone left a total of 10 boats unaccounted for , with about 50 fishermen missing . In total , three fisherman were confirmed killed , all on St. Martin 's Island , with two people left hospitalized . The passage of Cyclone Akash left many people homeless . Initially there was no response from the government . In all , 14 people were killed by Akash and damages amounted to US $ 982 million . 
 = Francis Nicholson = 
 Francis Nicholson ( 12 November 1655 – March 16 , 1728 [ O.S. March 5 , 1727 ] ) was a British military officer and colonial administrator . His military service included time in Africa and Europe , after which he was sent as leader of the troops supporting Sir Edmund Andros in the Dominion of New England . There he distinguished himself , and was appointed lieutenant governor of the dominion in 1688 . After news of the Glorious Revolution reached the colonies in 1689 , Andros was overthrown in the Boston Revolt . Nicholson himself was soon caught up in unrest in New York , and fled to England . 
 He next served as lieutenant governor or governor of Virginia and Maryland . He supported the founding of the College of William and Mary , and quarreled with Andros after Andros was selected over him as governor of Virginia . In 1709 he became involved in colonial military actions during Queen Anne 's War , leading an aborted expedition against Canada . He then led the expedition that successfully captured Port Royal , Acadia on 2 October 1710 . Afterward he served as governor of Nova Scotia and Placentia , and was the first royal governor of South Carolina following a rebellion against its proprietors . He rose to the rank of Lieutenant @-@ General , and died a bachelor in London in 1728 . 
 He supported public education in the colonies , and was a member of both the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts and the Royal Society . He also influenced American architecture , being responsible for the layout and design of Annapolis , Maryland and Williamsburg , Virginia . He was one of the earliest advocates of colonial union , principally for reasons of defense against common enemies . 
 = = Early life and military service = = 
 Nicholson was born in the village of <unk> , Yorkshire , England , on 12 November 1655 . Little is known of his ancestry or early life , although he apparently received some education . He served as a page in the household of Charles Paulet ( later the Marquess of Winchester and the Duke of Bolton ) , under whose patronage his career would be advanced . He waited on Paulet 's daughter Jane , who married John Egerton , Earl of Bridgewater , another patron who promoted his career . 
 His military career began in January 1678 when Paulet purchased for him an ensign 's commission in the Holland Regiment , in which he saw service against the French in Flanders . The regiment saw no combat , and was disbanded at the end of the year . In July 1680 he purchased a staff lieutenant 's commission in the newly formed 2nd Tangier Regiment , which was sent to English Tangier to reinforce the garrison holding the city . Tangier 's council was then headed by the Duke of York ( later King James II ) , and its governor was Colonel Percy Kirke . Nicholson distinguished himself in the service , carrying dispatches between the enemy Moroccan camp , Tangier , and London . In addition to favorable notice from Kirke , this brought Nicholson to the attention of the powerful colonial secretary , William Blathwayt . Tangier was abandoned in 1683 , and his regiment returned to England . During the service in Tangier he met a number of people who would figure prominently North American colonial history , including Thomas Dongan and Alexander Spotswood . 
 Nicholson was probably with the regiment when it put down Monmouth 's Rebellion in 1685 , but his role in some of the more unsavory behaviour on the part of Kirke 's troops is unknown . Kirke , who had been selected by Charles II as the governor of the prospective Dominion of New England , was strongly criticized for his role in the quashing of the rebellion , and James withdrew his nomination . The dominion 's governorship instead went to Sir Edmund Andros , and Nicholson , now a captain , accompanied Andros as commander of a company of infantry to Boston in October 1686 . Andros sent Nicholson on what was essentially a reconnaissance mission to French Acadia . Under the cover of delivering a letter protesting a variety of issues to the Acadian governor , Nicholson made careful observations of Port Royal 's defenses . Nicholson impressed Andros in this service , and was soon appointed to the dominion 's council . 
 = = Dominion lieutenant governor = = 
 In 1688 the Lords of Trade extended the dominion to include New York and East and West Jersey . Nicholson was commissioned the dominion 's lieutenant governor , and traveled with Andros to New York to take control of those colonies . Nicholson 's rule , in which he was assisted by a local council but no legislative assembly , was seen by many New Yorkers as the next in a line of royal governors who " had in a most arbitrary way subverted our ancient privileges " . Nicholson justified his rule by stating that the colonists were " a conquered people , and therefore ... could not could not so much [ as ] claim rights and <unk> as Englishmen " . 
 Nicholson was at first seen as an improvement over the Catholic Thomas Dongan , the outgoing governor . However , the province 's old guard was unhappy that Andros removed all of the provincial records to Boston , and then Nicholson alarmed the sometimes hardline Protestant population by preserving the trappings of the chapel in Fort James that Dongan and the handful of New York 's Catholics had used for worship . In response to a rumored Dutch invasion of England ( a rumor that turned out to be true ) , Nicholson in January 1689 ordered the provincial militias to be on alert to protect the province for the king . Unknown to Nicholson , events in England had already changed things . 
 = = = Rebellion in Boston = = = 
 After James was deposed by William and Mary in the Glorious Revolution in late 1688 , Massachusetts rose up in rebellion against Andros , arresting him and other dominion leaders in Boston . The revolt rapidly spread through the dominion , and the New England colonies quickly restored their pre @-@ dominion governments . When news of the Boston revolt reached New York a week later , Nicholson took no steps to announce news of it , or of the revolution in England , for fear of raising prospects of rebellion in New York . When word of the Boston revolt reached Long Island , politicians and militia leaders became more assertive , and by mid @-@ May dominion officials had been ousted from a number of communities . At the same time , Nicholson learned that France had declared war on England , bringing the threat of French and Indian attacks on New York 's northern frontier . In an attempt to mollify panicked citizenry over rumored Indian raids , Nicholson invited the militia to join the army garrison at Fort James . 
 Because New York 's defenses were in poor condition , Nicholson 's council voted to impose import duties to improve them . This move was met with immediate resistance , with a number of merchants refusing to pay the duty . One in particular was Jacob Leisler , a well @-@ born German Calvinist immigrant merchant and militia captain . Leisler was a vocal opponent of the dominion regime , which he saw as an attempt to impose " popery " on the province , and may have played a role in subverting Nicholson 's regulars . On 22 May Nicholson 's council was petitioned by the militia , who , in addition to seeking more rapid improvement to the city 's defenses , also wanted access to the powder magazine in the fort . This latter request was denied , heightening concerns that the city had inadequate powder supplies . This concern was further exacerbated when city leaders began hunting through the city for additional supplies . 
 = = = Rebellion in New York = = = 
 A minor incident on 30 May 1689 in which Nicholson made an intemperate remark to a militia officer then flared into open rebellion . Nicholson , who was well known for his temper , told the officer " I rather would see the Towne on fire than to be commanded by you " . Rumors flew around the town that Nicholson was in fact prepared to burn it down . The next day Nicholson summoned the officer , and demanded he surrender his commission . Abraham de Peyster , the officer 's commander and one of the wealthiest men in the city , then engaged in a heated argument with Nicholson , after which de Peyster and his brother Johannis , also a militia captain , stormed out of the council chamber . 
 The militia was called out , and descended en masse to Fort James , which they occupied . An officer was sent to the council to demand the keys to the powder magazine , which Nicholson eventually surrendered , to " hinder and prevent bloodshed and further <unk> " . The following day , a council of militia officers called on Jacob Leisler to take command of the city militia . He did so , and the rebels issued a declaration that they would hold the fort on behalf of the new monarchs until they sent a properly accredited governor . 
 At this point the militia controlled the fort , which gave them control over the harbor . When ships arrived in the harbor , they brought passengers and captains directly to the fort , cutting off outside communications to Nicholson and his council . On 6 June , Nicholson decided to leave for England , and began gathering depositions for use in proceedings there . He left the city on 10 June for the Jersey shore , where he hoped to join Thomas Dongan , who was expected to sail for England soon thereafter . However , it was not until 24 June that he actually managed to sail ; he was denied passage on a number of ships , and eventually purchased a share of Dongan 's brigantine in order to get away . In the meantime , Leisler proclaimed the rule of William and Mary on 22 June , and on the 28th a provincial committee of safety , acting in the absence of legitimate authority , chose Leisler to be the province 's commander @-@ in @-@ chief . 
 Upon Nicholson 's arrival in London in August , he outlined the situation in New York to the king and the Lords of Trade , urging the appointment of a new governor of New York , preferably himself . Despite the efforts of Charles Paulet ( now Duke of Bolton ) and other patrons , William in November instead chose Colonel Henry Sloughter to be the next governor of New York . The king did , however , acknowledge Nicholson 's efforts with the lieutenant governorship of Virginia . 
 = = Virginia and Maryland = = 
 Nicholson was lieutenant governor of Virginia until 1692 , serving under the absentee Governor Lord Howard of Effingham . During this tenure , he was instrumental in the creation of the College of William and Mary and named as one of its original trustees . He worked to improve the provincial militia , and approved the establishment of additional ports of trade in the province . The latter was not without some opposition from some of the larger merchants in the province , who saw the additional ports as a competitive threat . During this time Nicholson was one of the only high @-@ level representatives of Crown Rule in the colonies : most Crown Rule had been eliminated in the northern colonies , and the other southern colonies were governed by proprietary governors . Nicholson recommended to the King that , in order to better establish a common social order and a coordinated defense , Crown Rule should be established over all of the colonies as quickly as possible , including the conversion of the proprietary colonies to crown colonies . 
 Lord Effingham resigned the Virginia governorship in February 1692 , beginning a contest between Nicholson and Andros for the Virginia governorship . Andros , who was in London and was a more senior figure , was awarded the post , much to Nicholson 's annoyance . The episode deepened a growing dislike between the two men . One contemporary chronicler wrote that Nicholson " especially [ resented ] Sir Edmund Andros , against whom he has a particular pique on account of some earlier dealings " , and Nicholson , placated with the lieutenant governorship of Maryland , worked from then on to unseat Andros . When Andros arrived in September 1692 , Nicholson graciously received him before sailing for London . 
 Nicholson was still in England in 1693 when Maryland Governor , Sir Lionel Copley died . Under provisions of his commission , and at the request of the Maryland governor 's council , Andros went to Maryland in September 1693 to organize affairs , and again in May 1694 to preside over the provincial court . For these services he was paid £ 500 . When Nicholson , now appointed governor of Maryland , arrived in July , he found the provincial treasury empty , and testily demanded that Andros return the payment . Andros refused , and Nicholson appealed to the Lords of Trade . They ruled in October 1696 that Andros had to return £ 300 . 
 Nicholson , a committed Anglican as a member of the Church of England , sought to reduce Roman Catholic influence in the Maryland government , and moved the old colonial capital from the Catholic stronghold of St. Mary 's City in southern Maryland 's St. Mary 's County along the Potomac River to what was then called " Anne Arundel 's Town " ( also known briefly as " Providence " ) , which was later renamed " Annapolis " in honour of the future monarch , Princess Anne . He chose its site and laid out the plan for the town , placing the Anglican ( later Episcopal church and the state house in well @-@ designed public spaces ( known later as " State Circle " and " Church Circle " ) and the use of diagonal avenues to connect various parts of the town ( foreseeing details of Pierre L 'Enfant 's , ( 1754 @-@ 1825 ) , plan for the National Capital or " Federal City " in Washington and the District of Columbia , a century later . Architectural historian Mark Childs describes Annapolis , along with Williamsburg , Virginia , which Nicholson also laid out during his later tenure there , as some of the best @-@ designed towns in the British Empire . 
 Nicholson was a supporter of public education , promoting laws to support it , and funded the construction of " King William 's School " ( predecessor / ancestor to today 's St. John 's College , a noted academic humanities , liberal arts school , <unk> a " classical education " and " The Great Books " ) . He became embroiled in a dispute with William Penn from the Middle Atlantic colony to the north , over how to deal with the issue of piracy . In Maryland , Nicholson vigorously cracked down on the practices of some colonists to tolerate pirates , who brought goods and hard currency into the provinces . Aware that Penn 's governor was similarly tolerant ( he was said to be taking bribes to allow pirates to trade in Pennsylvania ) , Nicholson ordered that ships destined for Pennsylvania be stopped and searched in Maryland waters , and collected duties if they were carrying European finished goods . Penn protested to the Board of Trade , and the dispute subsided when Nicholson moderated his tactics . During Nicholson 's rule in Maryland , he specifically denied that the colonists had the Rights of Englishmen , writing that " if I had not hampered them [ colonial interests ] in Maryland , and kept them under , I should never have been able to govern them . " 
 Nicholson 's feud with Andros persisted , and Nicholson acquired a powerful ally in James Blair , the founder of the College of William and Mary . The two were able to gain the support of the Anglican establishment in England against Andros , and filed a long list of complaints with the Lords of Trade . These efforts were successful in convincing Andros to request permission to resign , and in December 1698 , Nicholson was given the governorship of Virginia . Andros angrily refused to give Nicholson his records . During his term , which lasted until 1705 , Nicholson was largely at the mercy of his council , which was dominated by a small group of powerful Virginia families . The Andros rule had been so unpopular in Virginia that Nicholson 's instructions gave him little leeway in acting without their consent . At one point Nicholson characterized the Virginia council as " mere brutes who understand not manners " . Nicholson made a number of unsuccessful attempts to alter the balance of power , including moving the provincial capital from Jamestown to Middle Plantation , which was renamed Williamsburg . Although he was opposed by the upper house , the colonial legislature was generally supportive of him , and he continued to be favored by the London government . 
 Nicholson was exposed to French activities on the Mississippi River while governor of Maryland . He warned the Board of Trade in 1695 that the French were working to complete the designs of explorer Robert La Salle to gain control of the river and dominate the Indian relations in the interior , which " may be of fatal consequence " to the English colonies . He reiterated the warning in a 1698 report , and suggested that the Board of Trade issue instructions to all of the governors encouraging the development of trade with Indians across the Appalachian Mountains . " I am afraid " , he wrote , " that now please God , there is a peace , the French will be able to doe more <unk> to these <unk> , than they were able to doe in the [ King William 's ] War . " These observations were among the earliest anyone made concerning the threat French expansion posed to the English , and some of his suggestions were ultimately adopted as policy . He actively promoted the idea of expansionist trade on the frontier with other colonial governors , including Bellomont of New York , and Blake of South Carolina . 
 Following a political crisis in England and the accession of Queen Anne to the throne in 1702 , a Tory ministry emerged that sidelined most of Nicholson 's Whig patrons . Despite his best efforts to retain his post , he was recalled and replaced in 1705 by Edward Nott . He returned to London , where he was active in the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts , and was awarded membership in the Royal Society for his scientific observations of North America . He also acted as a consultant to the Board of Trade , and thus maintained an awareness of colonial issues . 
 = = Queen Anne 's War = = 
 During King William 's War in the 1690s Nicholson asked the House of Burgesses to appropriate money for New York 's defense , since it was threatened from New France and acted as a buffer to protect Virginia . The Burgesses refused , even after Nicholson appealed to London . When Queen Anne 's War broke out in 1702 , Nicholson lent New York £ 900 of his own money , with the expectation that it would be repaid from Virginia 's quit rents ( it was not ) . The publicity of this scheme increased dislike of him in Virginia , and may have played a role in his recall . Virginia was not militarily affected by the war . These efforts by Nicholson to gain broader colonial support for the war were followed by larger proposals to London , suggesting , for example , that all of the colonies be joined under a single viceroy , who would have power of taxation and control of a standing army . According to historian John Fiske , Nicholson was one of the first people to propose uniting all of the North American colonies in this way . 
 In the course of the ten @-@ year conflict in North America now known as Queen Anne 's War , Samuel Vetch , a Scottish businessman with interests in New York and New England , came to London during the winter of 1708 – 9 and proposed to the Queen and the Board of Trade a major assault on New France . He recruited Nicholson to join the effort , which was to include a sea @-@ based attack on Quebec with Royal Navy support , and a land @-@ based expedition to ascend the Hudson River , descend Lake Champlain , and attack Montreal . Nicholson was given command of the land @-@ based effort while Vetch was to command the provincial militia of New England that were to accompany the fleet . Arriving in Boston in April 1709 Nicholson and Vetch immediately began raising the forces and supplies needed for these operations . Nicholson was able to draw on his earlier connections to New York 's aristocracy to recruit the needed forces from there , with additional units coming from New Jersey and Connecticut . He raised a force of about 1 @,@ 500 regulars and provincial militia and 600 Iroquois , and in June began the construction of three major encampments between Stillwater , just north of Albany , and the southern end of Lake Champlain , while awaiting word of the fleet 's arrival in Boston . The expedition turned out to be a disaster . Many men became sick and died from the poor conditions in the camps as the summer dragged on without any news of the fleet . Supplies ran short the men became mutinous and began deserting . Finally , in October Nicholson learned that , due to circumstances in Europe , the fleet 's participation had been canceled in July . By this time the men were deserting by whole units and destroyed all of the fortifications and stores . 
 In the aftermath of the debacle Nicholson returned to London , taking four Indian chiefs with him , and petitioned Queen Anne for permission to lead a more limited expedition against Port Royal , the capital of French Acadia . The Queen granted the petition , and Nicholson was in charge of the forces that captured Port Royal on 2 October 1710 . This battle marked the conquest of Acadia , and began permanent British control over the territory they called Nova Scotia . Nicholson published an account of the expedition in his 1711 Journal of an Expedition for the Reduction of Port Royal . The victorious Nicholson returned to England to petition Queen Anne for another expedition to capture the center of New France , Quebec . The resulting naval expedition was led by Admiral Hovenden Walker , and Nicholson led an associated land expedition that retraced the route he had taken in 1709 toward Lake Champlain . Many ships of Walker 's fleet foundered on rocks near the mouth of the Saint Lawrence River , and the whole expedition was cancelled , much to Nicholson 's anger ; he was reported to tear off his wig and throw it to the ground when he heard the news . 
 = = Nova Scotia and South Carolina = = 
 Nicholson returned to London after the failed expedition , and began working to acquire for himself the governorship of Nova Scotia . After the 1710 victory , Samuel Vetch had become its governor , but his rule over the colony ( where he only really controlled Port Royal itself ) was somewhat ineffective . Vetch and the Tory ministry then in power disagreed on how to handle affairs , especially with respect to the resident French Catholic population , and Nicholson capitalized on these complaints . In a dispute marked by bitterness and sometimes extreme accusations ( Vetch , for example , accused Nicholson of Jacobite sympathies ) , Nicholson was awarded the post in October 1712 . His commission also included the governorship of Placentia , and authority as auditor of all colonial accounts . He only spent a few weeks in Port Royal in 1714 , leaving most of the governance to lieutenant governor Thomas <unk> . These few weeks were marked by discord with the Acadians , who sought to capitalize on the change of governor to gain concessions Nicholson was not prepared to give . Nicholson also issued order restricting the interaction between the troops and the town , resulting in the further reduction of already @-@ poor morale in the Port Royal garrison . He also cracked down on open trade between British colonial merchants and the French , requiring the licensing of any British merchant wanting to trade at French ports . 
 Nicholson spent most of his time as Nova Scotia governor in Boston , where he devoted a significant amount of time investigating Vetch 's finances . Vetch interpreted Nicholson 's hostile and intrusive examination of his affairs as a largely partisan attempt to smear him . He called Nicholson a " malicious madman " who would do anything that " fury , malice , and madness could inspire . " Nicholson attempted to prevent Vetch from sailing for England where he might better defend himself , forcing Vetch to flee beyond Nicholson 's reach to New London , Connecticut , in order to get a ship for England . With the accession of George I to the throne and the change to a Whig ministry , Vetch succeeded in clearing his name and recovered his post from Nicholson , who was accused by Vetch and others of neglecting the province . 
 Nicholson next served as the first royal governor of South Carolina from 1721 to 1725 . The colonists had rebelled against the rule of the proprietors , and Nicholson was appointed in response to their request for crown governance . The rebellion had been prompted by inadequate response by the proprietors to Indian threats , so Nicholson brought with him some British troops . He established a council composed primarily of supporters of the rebellion , and gave it significant latitude to control colonial affairs . As he had in some of his other posts , he used enforcement of the Navigation Acts as a means to crack down on political opposition . He established local governments modeled on those he set up in Maryland and Virginia , including the 1722 incorporation of Charleston . He expended both public money and his own to further both education and the Church of England , and introduced ground @-@ breaking judicial administration into the colony . He negotiated agreements and territorial boundaries with the Cherokee , and promoted trade , pursuing policies similar to those he had advocated while in Maryland and Virginia . He introduced a commissioner of Indian affairs into the colonial government , a post that survived until the crown assumed the duties of managing Indian affairs in the 1750s . 
 Like other colonies , South Carolina suffered from chronic shortages of currency , and issued bills of credit to compensate . During Nicholson 's administration this was done several times , but the inflationary consequences did not reach crisis proportions until after he left the colony . It did , however , anger merchant interests enough to raise complaints against him with the Board of Trade . Combined with long @-@ running but false accusations by William Rhett and other supporters of the proprietors that Nicholson was improperly engaged in smuggling , he felt the need to return to England to defend himself against these charges . He returned to London in 1725 , carrying with him Cherokee baskets that became part of the earliest collections in the British Museum . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In England , Nicholson was promoted to lieutenant @-@ general . He never married , and died in London on 5 / 16 March 1728 / 9 . He was buried in the parish of St George Hanover Square . A claim cited in some 19th @-@ century biographies that he was knighted turned out to be false when his will was discovered early in the 20th century . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Nicholson was notorious for his temper . He was , according to historian George Waller , " subject to fits of passion " . In one story , an Indian said of Nicholson , " The general is drunk . " When informed that Nicholson did not partake of strong drink , the Indian replied , " I do not mean that he is drunk with rum , he was born drunk . " Waller also points out that his " hasty and overmastering temper led him into great excesses " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Nicholson Hall of the College of William and Mary is named in honor of Francis Nicholson . 
 = Hepatitis C = 
 Hepatitis C is an infectious disease caused by the hepatitis C virus ( HCV ) that primarily affects the liver . During the initial infection people often have mild or no symptoms . Occasionally a fever , dark urine , abdominal pain , and yellow tinged skin occurs . The virus persists in the liver in about 75 % to 85 % of those initially infected . Early on chronic infection typically has no symptoms . Over many years however , it often leads to liver disease and occasionally cirrhosis . In some cases , those with cirrhosis will develop complications such as liver failure , liver cancer , or esophageal and gastric varices . 
 HCV is spread primarily by blood @-@ to @-@ blood contact associated with intravenous drug use , poorly sterilized medical equipment , needlestick injuries in healthcare , and transfusions . With blood screening the risk from a transfusion is less than one per two million . It may also be spread from an infected mother to her baby during birth . It is not spread by superficial contact . It is one of five known hepatitis viruses : A , B , C , D , and E. Diagnosis is by blood testing to look for either antibodies to the virus or its RNA . Testing is recommended in all people who are at risk . 
 There is no vaccine against hepatitis C. Prevention includes harm reduction efforts among people who use intravenous drugs and testing donated blood . Chronic infection can be cured about 90 % of the time with treatments that include the medications sofosbuvir or <unk> . Previous to this a combination of peginterferon and ribavirin was used which had a cure rate around 50 % and greater side effects . Getting access to the newer treatments however can be expensive . Those who develop cirrhosis or liver cancer may require a liver transplant . Hepatitis C is the leading reason for liver transplantation , though the virus usually recurs after transplantation . 
 An estimated 130 – 200 million people worldwide are infected with hepatitis C. In 2013 about 11 million new cases occurred . It occurs most commonly in Africa and Central and East Asia . About 343 @,@ 000 deaths due to liver cancer and 358 @,@ 000 deaths due to cirrhosis occurred in 2013 due to hepatitis C. The existence of hepatitis C – originally identifiable only as a type of non @-@ A non @-@ B hepatitis – was suggested in the 1970s and proven in 1989 . Hepatitis C infects only humans and chimpanzees . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 = = = Acute infection = = = 
 Hepatitis C infection causes acute symptoms in 15 % of cases . Symptoms are generally mild and vague , including a decreased appetite , fatigue , nausea , muscle or joint pains , and weight loss and rarely does acute liver failure result . Most cases of acute infection are not associated with jaundice . The infection resolves spontaneously in 10 – 50 % of cases , which occurs more frequently in individuals who are young and female . 
 = = = Chronic infection = = = 
 About 80 % of those exposed to the virus develop a chronic infection . This is defined as the presence of detectable viral replication for at least six months . Most experience minimal or no symptoms during the initial few decades of the infection . Chronic hepatitis C can be associated with fatigue and mild cognitive problems . Chronic infection after several years may cause cirrhosis or liver cancer . The liver enzymes are normal in 7 – 53 % . Late relapses after apparent cure have been reported , but these can be difficult to distinguish from reinfection . 
 Fatty changes to the liver occur in about half of those infected and are usually present before cirrhosis develops . Usually ( 80 % of the time ) this change affects less than a third of the liver . Worldwide hepatitis C is the cause of 27 % of cirrhosis cases and 25 % of hepatocellular carcinoma . About 10 – 30 % of those infected develop cirrhosis over 30 years . Cirrhosis is more common in those also infected with hepatitis B , schistosoma , or HIV , in alcoholics and in those of male gender . In those with hepatitis C , excess alcohol increases the risk of developing cirrhosis 100 @-@ fold . Those who develop cirrhosis have a 20 @-@ fold greater risk of hepatocellular carcinoma . This transformation occurs at a rate of 1 – 3 % per year . Being infected with hepatitis B in addition to hepatitis C increases this risk further . 
 Liver cirrhosis may lead to portal hypertension , ascites ( accumulation of fluid in the abdomen ) , easy bruising or bleeding , varices ( enlarged veins , especially in the stomach and esophagus ) , jaundice , and a syndrome of cognitive impairment known as hepatic encephalopathy . <unk> occurs at some stage in more than half of those who have a chronic infection . 
 = = = <unk> complications = = = 
 The most common problem due to hepatitis C but not involving the liver is mixed cryoglobulinemia ( usually the type II form ) — an inflammation of small and medium @-@ sized blood vessels . Hepatitis C is also associated with the autoimmune disorder Sjögren 's syndrome , a low platelet count , lichen planus , porphyria cutanea tarda , <unk> acral erythema , insulin resistance , diabetes mellitus , diabetic nephropathy , autoimmune thyroiditis , and B @-@ cell lymphoproliferative disorders . 20 – 30 % of people infected have rheumatoid factor — a type of antibody . Possible associations include Hyde 's <unk> <unk> and <unk> glomerulonephritis . <unk> with associated abnormal heart rhythms has also been reported . A variety of central nervous system disorders has been reported . Chronic infection seems to be associated with an increased risk of pancreatic cancer . 
 = = = Occult infection = = = 
 Persons who have been infected with hepatitis C may appear to clear the virus but remain infected . The virus is not detectable with conventional testing but can be found with ultra @-@ sensitive tests . The original method of detection was by demonstrating the viral genome within liver biopsies , but newer methods include an antibody test for the virus ' core protein and the detection of the viral genome after first concentrating the viral particles by ultracentrifugation . A form of infection with persistently moderately elevated serum liver enzymes but without antibodies to hepatitis C has also been reported . This form is known as cryptogenic occult infection . 
 Several clinical pictures have been associated with this type of infection . It may be found in people with anti @-@ hepatitis @-@ C antibodies but with normal serum levels of liver enzymes ; in antibody @-@ negative people with ongoing elevated liver enzymes of unknown cause ; in healthy populations without evidence of liver disease ; and in groups at risk for HCV infection including those on hemodialysis or family members of people with occult HCV . The clinical relevance of this form of infection is under investigation . The consequences of occult infection appear to be less severe than with chronic infection but can vary from minimal to hepatocellular carcinoma . 
 The rate of occult infection in those apparently cured is controversial but appears to be low . 40 % of those with hepatitis but with both negative hepatitis C serology and the absence of detectable viral genome in the serum have hepatitis C virus in the liver on biopsy . How commonly this occurs in children is unknown . 
 = = Virology = = 
 The hepatitis C virus ( HCV ) is a small , enveloped , single @-@ stranded , positive @-@ sense RNA virus . It is a member of the <unk> genus in the family <unk> . There are seven major genotypes of HCV , which are known as genotypes one to seven . The genotypes are divided into several subtypes with the number of subtypes depending on the genotype . In the United States , about 70 % of cases are caused by genotype 1 , 20 % by genotype 2 and about 1 % by each of the other genotypes . Genotype 1 is also the most common in South America and Europe . 
 The half life of the virus particles in the serum is around 3 hours and may be as short as 45 minutes . In an infected person , about 1012 virus particles are produced each day . In addition to replicating in the liver the virus can multiply in lymphocytes . 
 = = Transmission = = 
 The primary route of transmission in the developed world is intravenous drug use ( IDU ) , while in the developing world the main methods are blood transfusions and unsafe medical procedures . The cause of transmission remains unknown in 20 % of cases ; however , many of these are believed to be accounted for by IDU . 
 = = = Drug use = = = 
 Intravenous drug use ( IDU ) is a major risk factor for hepatitis C in many parts of the world . Of 77 countries reviewed , 25 ( including the United States ) were found to have prevalences of hepatitis C in the intravenous drug user population of between 60 % and 80 % . Twelve countries had rates greater than 80 % . It is believed that ten million intravenous drug users are infected with hepatitis C ; China ( 1 @.@ 6 million ) , the United States ( 1 @.@ 5 million ) , and Russia ( 1 @.@ 3 million ) have the highest absolute totals . Occurrence of hepatitis C among prison inmates in the United States is 10 to 20 times that of the occurrence observed in the general population ; this has been attributed to high @-@ risk behavior in prisons such as IDU and tattooing with <unk> equipment . Shared intranasal drug use may also be a risk factor . 
 = = = Healthcare exposure = = = 
 Blood transfusion , transfusion of blood products , or organ transplants without HCV screening carry significant risks of infection . The United States instituted universal screening in 1992 and Canada instituted universal screening in 1990 . This decreased the risk from one in 200 units to between one in 10 @,@ 000 to one in 10 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 per unit of blood . This low risk remains as there is a period of about 11 – 70 days between the potential blood donor 's acquiring hepatitis C and the blood 's testing positive depending on the method . Some countries do not screen for hepatitis C due to the cost . 
 Those who have experienced a needle stick injury from someone who was HCV positive have about a 1 @.@ 8 % chance of subsequently contracting the disease themselves . The risk is greater if the needle in question is hollow and the puncture wound is deep . There is a risk from mucosal exposures to blood , but this risk is low , and there is no risk if blood exposure occurs on intact skin . 
 Hospital equipment has also been documented as a method of transmission of hepatitis C , including reuse of needles and syringes ; multiple @-@ use medication vials ; infusion bags ; and improperly sterilized surgical equipment , among others . Limitations in the implementation and enforcement of stringent standard precautions in public and private medical and dental facilities are known to be the primary cause of the spread of HCV in Egypt , the country with highest rate of infection in the world . 
 = = = Sexual intercourse = = = 
 Whether hepatitis C can be transmitted through sexual activity is controversial . While there is an association between high @-@ risk sexual activity and hepatitis C , and multiple sexual partners are a risk factor for hepatitis C , there is no conclusive evidence that hepatitis C can be transmitted by sexual activity , since people who report transmission with sex as their only risk factor may actually have used drugs but denied it . The majority of evidence supports there being no risk for heterosexual couples with only one sexual partner . Sexual practices that involve higher levels of trauma to the anogenital mucosa , such as anal penetrative sex , or that occur when there is a concurrent sexually transmitted infection , including HIV or genital ulceration , do present a risk . The United States Department of Veterans Affairs recommends condom use to prevent hepatitis C transmission in those with multiple partners , but not those in relationships that involve only a single partner . 
 = = = Body modification = = = 
 <unk> is associated with two to threefold increased risk of hepatitis C. This can be due to either improperly sterilized equipment or contamination of the dyes being used . Tattoos or piercings performed either before the mid @-@ 1980s , " underground , " or <unk> are of particular concern , since sterile techniques in such settings may be lacking . The risk also appears to be greater for larger tattoos . It is estimated that nearly half of prison inmates share unsterilized tattooing equipment . It is rare for tattoos in a licensed facility to be directly associated with HCV infection . 
 = = = Shared personal items = = = 
 Personal @-@ care items such as razors , toothbrushes , and <unk> or <unk> equipment can be contaminated with blood . Sharing such items can potentially lead to exposure to HCV . Appropriate caution should be taken regarding any medical condition that results in bleeding , such as cuts and sores . HCV is not spread through casual contact , such as hugging , kissing , or sharing eating or cooking utensils . Neither is it transmitted through food or water . 
 = = = Mother @-@ to @-@ child transmission = = = 
 Mother @-@ to @-@ child transmission of hepatitis C occurs in less than 10 % of pregnancies . There are no measures that alter this risk . It is not clear when transmission occurs during pregnancy , but it may occur both during gestation and at delivery . A long labor is associated with a greater risk of transmission . There is no evidence that breast @-@ feeding spreads HCV ; however , to be cautious , an infected mother is advised to avoid breastfeeding if her nipples are cracked and bleeding , or if her viral loads are high . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 There are a number of diagnostic tests for hepatitis C , including HCV antibody enzyme immunoassay or ELISA , recombinant immunoblot assay , and quantitative HCV RNA polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) . HCV RNA can be detected by PCR typically one to two weeks after infection , while antibodies can take substantially longer to form and thus be detected . 
 Chronic hepatitis C is defined as infection with the hepatitis C virus persisting for more than six months based on the presence of its RNA . Chronic infections are typically asymptomatic during the first few decades , and thus are most commonly discovered following the investigation of elevated liver enzyme levels or during a routine screening of high @-@ risk individuals . Testing is not able to distinguish between acute and chronic infections . Diagnosis in the infant is difficult as maternal antibodies may persist for up to 18 months . 
 = = = Serology = = = 
 Hepatitis C testing typically begins with blood testing to detect the presence of antibodies to the HCV , using an enzyme immunoassay . If this test is positive , a confirmatory test is then performed to verify the immunoassay and to determine the viral load . A recombinant immunoblot assay is used to verify the immunoassay and the viral load is determined by an HCV RNA polymerase chain reaction . If there is no RNA and the immunoblot is positive , it means that the person tested had a previous infection but cleared it either with treatment or spontaneously ; if the immunoblot is negative , it means that the immunoassay was wrong . It takes about 6 – 8 weeks following infection before the immunoassay will test positive . A number of tests are available as point of care testing which means that results are available within 30 minutes . 
 Liver enzymes are variable during the initial part of the infection and on average begin to rise at seven weeks after infection . The elevation of liver enzymes does not closely follow disease severity . 
 = = = Biopsy = = = 
 Liver biopsies are used to determine the degree of liver damage present ; however , there are risks from the procedure . The typical changes seen are lymphocytes within the parenchyma , lymphoid follicles in portal triad , and changes to the bile ducts . There are a number of blood tests available that try to determine the degree of hepatic fibrosis and alleviate the need for biopsy . 
 = = = Screening = = = 
 It is believed that only 5 – 50 % of those infected in the United States and Canada are aware of their status . Testing is recommended for those at high risk , which includes injection drug users , those who have received blood transfusions before 1992 , those who have been in jail , those on long term hemodialysis , and those with tattoos . Screening is also recommended in those with elevated liver enzymes , as this is frequently the only sign of chronic hepatitis . Routine screening is not currently recommended in the United States . In 2012 , the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) added a recommendation for a single screening test for those born between 1945 and 1965 . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 As of 2016 , no approved vaccine protects against contracting hepatitis C. However , there are a number of vaccines under development and some have shown encouraging results . 
 A combination of harm reduction strategies , such as the provision of new needles and syringes and treatment of substance use , decreases the risk of hepatitis C in intravenous drug users by about 75 % . The screening of blood donors is important at a national level , as is adhering to universal precautions within healthcare facilities . In countries where there is an insufficient supply of sterile syringes , medications should be given orally rather than via injection ( when possible ) . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 HCV induces chronic infection in 50 – 80 % of infected persons . Approximately 40 – 80 % of these clear with treatment . In rare cases , infection can clear without treatment . Those with chronic hepatitis C are advised to avoid alcohol and medications toxic to the liver , and to be vaccinated for hepatitis A and hepatitis B. Ultrasound surveillance for hepatocellular carcinoma is recommended in those with accompanying cirrhosis . 
 = = = Medications = = = 
 Treatment with antiviral medication is recommended in all people with proven chronic hepatitis C who are not at high risk of dying from other causes . People with the highest complication risk should be treated first , with the risk of complications based on the degree of liver scarring . The initial recommended treatment depends on the type of hepatitis C virus with which a person is infected . 
 HCV genotype 1a : 12 weeks of ledipasvir and sofosbuvir OR 12 to 24 weeks of paritaprevir , ombitasvir , <unk> , and ribavirin 
 HCV genotype 1b : 12 weeks of ledipasvir and sofosbuvir OR 12 weeks of paritaprevir , ombitasvir , and <unk> 
 HCV genotype 2 : 12 to 16 weeks of sofosbuvir and ribavirin 
 HCV genotype 3 : 12 weeks of sofosbuvir , ribavirin , and pegylated interferon 
 HCV genotype 4 : 12 weeks of ledipasvir and sofosbuvir OR paritaprevir , ritonavir , ombitasvir , and ribavirin , OR 24 weeks of sofosbuvir and ribavirin 
 HCV genotype 5 or 6 : sofosbuvir and ledipasvir 
 <unk> with ribavirin and interferon appears to be around 90 % effective in those with genotype 1 , 4 , 5 , or 6 disease . <unk> with just ribavirin appears to be 70 to 95 % effective in type 2 and 3 disease but has a higher rate of adverse effects . Treatments that contain ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for genotype 1 has success rates of around 93 to 99 % but is very expensive . In genotype 6 infection , pegylated interferon and ribavirin is effective in 60 to 90 % of cases . There is some tentative data for <unk> use in type 6 disease as well . 
 Prior to 2011 , treatments consisted of a combination of pegylated interferon alpha and ribavirin for a period of 24 or 48 weeks , depending on HCV genotype . This produces cure rates of between 70 and 80 % for genotype 2 and 3 , respectively , and 45 to 70 % for genotypes 1 and 4 . Adverse effects with these treatments were common , with half of people getting flu like symptoms and a third experiencing emotional problems . Treatment during the first six months is more effective than once hepatitis C has become chronic . 
 = = = Surgery = = = 
 Cirrhosis due to hepatitis C is a common reason for liver transplantation though the virus usually ( 80 – 90 % of cases ) recurs afterwards . Infection of the graft leads to 10 – 30 % of people developing cirrhosis within five years . Treatment with pegylated interferon and ribavirin post transplant decreases the risk of recurrence to 70 % . 
 = = = Alternative medicine = = = 
 Several alternative therapies are claimed by their proponents to be helpful for hepatitis C including milk thistle , ginseng , and colloidal silver . However , no alternative therapy has been shown to improve outcomes in hepatitis C , and no evidence exists that alternative therapies have any effect on the virus at all . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 The responses to treatment is measured by sustained viral response ( SVR ) , defined as the absence of detectable RNA of the hepatitis C virus in blood serum for at least 24 weeks after discontinuing the treatment , and rapid virological response ( RVR ) defined as undetectable levels achieved within four weeks of treatment . Successful treatment decreases the future risk of hepatocellular carcinoma by 75 % . 
 Prior to 2012 sustained response occurs in about 40 – 50 % in people with HCV genotype 1 given 48 weeks of treatment . A sustained response is seen in 70 – 80 % of people with HCV genotypes 2 and 3 with 24 weeks of treatment . A sustained response occurs about 65 % in those with genotype 4 after 48 weeks of treatment . The evidence for treatment in genotype 6 disease is sparse and what evidence there is supports 48 weeks of treatment at the same doses used for genotype 1 disease . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 It is estimated that 150 – 200 million people , or ~ 3 % of the world 's population , are living with chronic hepatitis C. About 3 – 4 million people are infected per year , and more than 350 @,@ 000 people die yearly from hepatitis C @-@ related diseases . During 2010 it is estimated that 16 @,@ 000 people died from acute infections while 196 @,@ 000 deaths occurred from liver cancer secondary to the infection . Rates have increased substantially in the 20th century due to a combination of intravenous drug abuse and reused but poorly sterilized medical equipment . 
 Rates are high ( > 3 @.@ 5 % population infected ) in Central and East Asia , North Africa and the Middle East , they are intermediate ( 1 @.@ 5 % <unk> % ) in South and Southeast Asia , sub @-@ Saharan Africa , Andean , Central and Southern Latin America , Caribbean , Oceania , Australasia and Central , Eastern and Western Europe ; and they are low ( < 1 @.@ 5 % ) in Asia @-@ Pacific , Tropical Latin America and North America . 
 Among those chronically infected , the risk of cirrhosis after 20 years varies between studies but has been estimated at ~ 10 – 15 % for men and ~ 1 – 5 % for women . The reason for this difference is not known . Once cirrhosis is established , the rate of developing hepatocellular carcinoma is ~ 1 – 4 % per year . Rates of new infections have decreased in the Western world since the 1990s due to improved screening of blood before transfusion . 
 In the United States , about 2 % of people have hepatitis C , with the number of new cases per year stabilized at 17 @,@ 000 since 2007 . The number of deaths from hepatitis C has increased to 15 @,@ 800 in 2008 and by 2007 had overtaken HIV / AIDS as a cause of death in the USA . This mortality rate is expected to increase , as those infected by transfusion before HCV testing become apparent . In Europe the percentage of people with chronic infections has been estimated to be between 0 @.@ 13 and 3 @.@ 26 % . 
 In England about 160 @,@ 000 people are chronically infected . Between 2006 and 2011 28 @,@ 000 about 3 % , received treatment . 
 The total number of people with this infection is higher in some countries in Africa and Asia . Countries with particularly high rates of infection include Egypt ( 22 % ) , Pakistan ( 4 @.@ 8 % ) and China ( 3 @.@ 2 % ) . It is believed that the high prevalence in Egypt is linked to a now @-@ discontinued mass @-@ treatment campaign for schistosomiasis , using improperly sterilized glass syringes . 
 = = History = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1970s , Harvey J. Alter , Chief of the Infectious Disease Section in the Department of Transfusion Medicine at the National Institutes of Health , and his research team demonstrated how most post @-@ transfusion hepatitis cases were not due to hepatitis A or B viruses . Despite this discovery , international research efforts to identify the virus , initially called non @-@ A , non @-@ B hepatitis ( <unk> ) , failed for the next decade . In 1987 , Michael Houghton , Qui @-@ Lim Choo , and George Kuo at Chiron Corporation , collaborating with Dr. D.W. Bradley at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , used a novel molecular cloning approach to identify the unknown organism and develop a diagnostic test . In 1988 , Alter confirmed the virus by verifying its presence in a panel of <unk> specimens . In April 1989 , the discovery of HCV was published in two articles in the journal Science . The discovery led to significant improvements in diagnosis and improved antiviral treatment . In 2000 , Drs. Alter and Houghton were honored with the Lasker Award for Clinical Medical Research for " pioneering work leading to the discovery of the virus that causes hepatitis C and the development of screening methods that reduced the risk of blood transfusion @-@ associated hepatitis in the U.S. from 30 % in 1970 to virtually zero in 2000 . " 
 Chiron filed for several patents on the virus and its diagnosis . A competing patent application by the CDC was dropped in 1990 after Chiron paid $ 1 @.@ 9 million to the CDC and $ 337 @,@ 500 to Bradley . In 1994 , Bradley sued Chiron , seeking to invalidate the patent , have himself included as a <unk> , and receive damages and royalty income . He dropped the suit in 1998 after losing before an appeals court . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 World Hepatitis Day , held on July 28 , is coordinated by the World Hepatitis Alliance . The economic costs of hepatitis C are significant both to the individual and to society . In the United States the average lifetime cost of the disease was estimated at 33 @,@ 407 USD in 2003 with the cost of a liver transplant as of 2011 costing approximately 200 @,@ 000 USD . In Canada the cost of a course of antiviral treatment is as high as 30 @,@ 000 CAD in 2003 , while the United States costs are between 9 @,@ 200 and 17 @,@ 600 in 1998 USD . In many areas of the world , people are unable to afford treatment with antivirals as they either lack insurance coverage or the insurance they have will not pay for antivirals . In the English National Health Service treatment rates for hepatitis C are higher among wealthier groups per 2010 @-@ 2012 data . Spanish anaesthetist Juan <unk> infected 275 patients between 1988 and 1997 as he used the same needles to give both himself and the patients opioids . For this he was jailed . 
 = = Research = = 
 As of 2011 , there are about one hundred medications in development for hepatitis C. These include vaccines to treat hepatitis , immunomodulators , and <unk> inhibitors , among others . These potential new treatments have come about due to a better understanding of the hepatitis C virus . 
 The combination of sofosbuvir and <unk> in one trial ( reported in 2015 ) resulted in cure rates of 99 % . 
 = = = Animal models = = = 
 One barrier to finding treatments for hepatitis C is the lack of a suitable animal model . Despite moderate success , current research highlights the need for pre @-@ clinical testing in mammalian systems such as mouse , particularly for the development of vaccines in poorer communities . Currently , chimpanzees remain the available living system to study , yet their use has ethical concerns and regulatory restrictions . While scientists have made use of human cell culture systems such as hepatocytes , questions have been raised about their accuracy in reflecting the body 's response to infection . 
 One aspect of hepatitis research is to reproduce infections in mammalian models . A strategy is to introduce liver tissues from humans into mice , a technique known as xenotransplantation . This is done by generating chimeric mice , and exposing the mice HCV infection . This engineering process is known to create humanized mice , and provide opportunities to study hepatitis C within the 3D architectural design of the liver and evaluating antiviral compounds . Alternatively , generating inbred mice with susceptibility to HCV would simplify the process of studying mouse models . 
 = = Special populations = = 
 = = = Children and pregnancy = = = 
 Compared with adults , infection in children is much less well understood . Worldwide the prevalence of hepatitis C virus infection in pregnant women and children has been estimated to 1 – 8 % and 0 @.@ 05 – 5 % respectively . The vertical transmission rate has been estimated to be 3 – 5 % and there is a high rate of spontaneous clearance ( 25 – 50 % ) in the children . Higher rates have been reported for both vertical transmission ( 18 % , 6 – 36 % and 41 % ) . and prevalence in children ( 15 % ) . 
 In developed countries transmission around the time of birth is now the leading cause of HCV infection . In the absence of virus in the mother 's blood transmission seems to be rare . Factors associated with an increased rate of infection include membrane rupture of longer than 6 hours before delivery and procedures exposing the infant to maternal blood . Cesarean sections are not recommended . Breastfeeding is considered safe if the nipples are not damaged . Infection around the time of birth in one child does not increase the risk in a subsequent pregnancy . All genotypes appear to have the same risk of transmission . 
 HCV infection is frequently found in children who have previously been presumed to have non @-@ A , non @-@ B hepatitis and cryptogenic liver disease . The presentation in childhood may be asymptomatic or with elevated liver function tests . While infection is commonly asymptomatic both cirrhosis with liver failure and hepatocellular carcinoma may occur in childhood . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The rate of hepatitis C in immunosuppressed people is higher than the normal population . This is particularly true in those with human immunodeficiency virus infection , recipients of organ transplants and those with hypogammaglobulinemia . Infection in these people is associated with an unusually rapid progression to cirrhosis . 
 = Crustacean = 
 Crustaceans ( Crustacea / <unk> / ) form a very large group of arthropods , usually treated as a subphylum , which includes such familiar animals as crabs , lobsters , crayfish , shrimp , krill and barnacles . Thanks to recent molecular studies , it is now well accepted that the crustacean group comprises all animals in the Pancrustacea clade other than hexapods . In other words , some crustaceans are more closely related to insects and other hexapods than they are to certain other crustaceans . 
 The 67 @,@ 000 described species range in size from Stygotantulus <unk> at 0 @.@ 1 mm ( 0 @.@ 004 in ) , to the Japanese spider crab with a leg span of up to 3 @.@ 8 m ( 12 @.@ 5 ft ) and a mass of 20 kg ( 44 lb ) . Like other arthropods , crustaceans have an exoskeleton , which they moult to grow . They are distinguished from other groups of arthropods , such as insects , myriapods and chelicerates , by the possession of biramous ( two @-@ parted ) limbs , and by their larval forms , such as the nauplius stage of branchiopods and copepods . 
 Most crustaceans are free @-@ living aquatic animals , but some are terrestrial ( e.g. woodlice ) , some are parasitic ( e.g. <unk> , fish lice , tongue worms ) and some are sessile ( e.g. barnacles ) . The group has an extensive fossil record , reaching back to the Cambrian , and includes living fossils such as <unk> <unk> , which has existed apparently unchanged since the Triassic period . More than 10 million tons of crustaceans are produced by fishery or farming for human consumption , the majority of it being shrimp and prawns . Krill and copepods are not as widely fished , but may be the animals with the greatest biomass on the planet , and form a vital part of the food chain . The scientific study of crustaceans is known as <unk> ( alternatively , <unk> , <unk> or <unk> ) , and a scientist who works in <unk> is a <unk> . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The body of a crustacean is composed of segments , which are grouped into three regions : the cephalon or head , the thorax , and the <unk> or abdomen . The head and thorax may be fused together to form a cephalothorax , which may be covered by a single large carapace . The crustacean body is protected by the hard exoskeleton , which must be moulted for the animal to grow . The shell around each somite can be divided into a dorsal tergum , ventral sternum and a lateral pleuron . Various parts of the exoskeleton may be fused together . 
 Each somite , or body segment can bear a pair of appendages : on the segments of the head , these include two pairs of antennae , the mandibles and maxillae ; the thoracic segments bear legs , which may be specialised as pereiopods ( walking legs ) and maxillipeds ( feeding legs ) . The abdomen bears pleopods , and ends in a telson , which bears the anus , and is often flanked by uropods to form a tail fan . The number and variety of appendages in different crustaceans may be partly responsible for the group 's success . 
 Crustacean appendages are typically biramous , meaning they are divided into two parts ; this includes the second pair of antennae , but not the first , which is usually uniramous , the exception being in the Class Malacostraca where the antennules may be generally biramous or even <unk> . It is unclear whether the biramous condition is a derived state which evolved in crustaceans , or whether the second branch of the limb has been lost in all other groups . Trilobites , for instance , also possessed biramous appendages . 
 The main body cavity is an open circulatory system , where blood is pumped into the haemocoel by a heart located near the dorsum . Malacostraca have <unk> as the oxygen @-@ carrying pigment , while copepods , ostracods , barnacles and branchiopods have <unk> . The alimentary canal consists of a straight tube that often has a gizzard @-@ like " gastric mill " for grinding food and a pair of digestive glands that absorb food ; this structure goes in a spiral format . Structures that function as kidneys are located near the antennae . A brain exists in the form of ganglia close to the antennae , and a collection of major ganglia is found below the gut . 
 In many decapods , the first ( and sometimes the second ) pair of pleopods are specialised in the male for sperm transfer . Many terrestrial crustaceans ( such as the Christmas Island red crab ) mate seasonally and return to the sea to release the eggs . Others , such as woodlice , lay their eggs on land , albeit in damp conditions . In most decapods , the females retain the eggs until they hatch into free @-@ swimming larvae . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The majority of crustaceans are aquatic , living in either marine or freshwater environments , but a few groups have adapted to life on land , such as terrestrial crabs , terrestrial hermit crabs , and woodlice . Marine crustaceans are as ubiquitous in the oceans as insects are on land . The majority of crustaceans are also motile , moving about independently , although a few taxonomic units are parasitic and live attached to their hosts ( including sea lice , fish lice , whale lice , tongue worms , and <unk> exigua , all of which may be referred to as " crustacean lice " ) , and adult barnacles live a sessile life – they are attached headfirst to the substrate and cannot move independently . Some <unk> are able to withstand rapid changes of salinity and will also switch hosts from marine to non @-@ marine species . Krill are the bottom layer and the most important part of the food chain in Antarctic animal communities . Some crustaceans are significant invasive species , such as the Chinese mitten crab , <unk> sinensis , and the Asian shore crab , Hemigrapsus sanguineus . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 = = = Mating system = = = 
 The majority of crustaceans have separate sexes , and reproduce sexually . A small number are hermaphrodites , including barnacles , <unk> , and Cephalocarida . Some may even change sex during the course of their life . Parthenogenesis is also widespread among crustaceans , where viable eggs are produced by a female without needing fertilisation by a male . This occurs in many branchiopods , some ostracods , some isopods , and certain " higher " crustaceans , such as the <unk> crayfish . 
 = = = Eggs = = = 
 In many groups of crustaceans , the fertilised eggs are simply released into the water column , while others have developed a number of mechanisms for holding on to the eggs until they are ready to hatch . Most decapods carry the eggs attached to the pleopods , while <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and many isopods form a brood pouch from the carapace and thoracic limbs . Female Branchiura do not carry eggs in external <unk> but attach them in rows to rocks and other objects . Most <unk> and krill carry the eggs between their thoracic limbs ; some copepods carry their eggs in special thin @-@ walled sacs , while others have them attached together in long , tangled strings . 
 = = = Larvae = = = 
 Crustaceans exhibit a number of larval forms , of which the earliest and most characteristic is the nauplius . This has three pairs of appendages , all emerging from the young animal 's head , and a single naupliar eye . In most groups , there are further larval stages , including the zoea ( pl. <unk> or <unk> ) . This name was given to it when naturalists believed it to be a separate species . It follows the nauplius stage and precedes the post @-@ larva . <unk> larvae swim with their thoracic appendages , as opposed to <unk> , which use cephalic appendages , and megalopa , which use abdominal appendages for swimming . It often has spikes on its carapace , which may assist these small organisms in maintaining directional swimming . In many decapods , due to their accelerated development , the zoea is the first larval stage . In some cases , the zoea stage is followed by the mysis stage , and in others , by the megalopa stage , depending on the crustacean group involved . 
 = = Classification = = 
 The name " crustacean " dates from the earliest works to describe the animals , including those of Pierre Belon and Guillaume Rondelet , but the name was not used by some later authors , including Carl Linnaeus , who included crustaceans among the " <unk> " in his Systema Naturae . The earliest nomenclaturally valid work to use the name " Crustacea " was Morten Thrane Brünnich 's <unk> Fundamenta in 1772 , although he also included chelicerates in the group . 
 The subphylum Crustacea comprises almost 67 @,@ 000 described species , which is thought to be just 1 ⁄ 10 to 1 ⁄ 100 of the total number as the majority of species remain as yet undiscovered . Although most crustaceans are small , their morphology varies greatly and includes both the largest arthropod in the world – the Japanese spider crab with a leg span of 3 @.@ 7 metres ( 12 ft ) – and the smallest , the 1 @-@ micrometre @-@ long ( 0 @.@ <unk> in ) Stygotantulus <unk> . Despite their diversity of form , crustaceans are united by the special larval form known as the nauplius . 
 The exact relationships of the Crustacea to other taxa are not completely settled as of April 2012 . Studies based on morphology led to the Pancrustacea hypothesis , in which Crustacea and Hexapoda ( insects and allies ) are sister groups . More recent studies using DNA sequences suggest that Crustacea is paraphyletic , with the hexapods nested within a larger Pancrustacea clade . 
 Although the classification of crustaceans has been quite variable , the system used by Martin and Davis largely supersedes earlier works . <unk> and Branchiura , here treated as part of <unk> , are sometimes treated as their own classes . Six classes are usually recognised : 
 = = Fossil record = = 
 Crustaceans have a rich and extensive fossil record , which begins with animals such as <unk> and <unk> from the Middle Cambrian age Burgess Shale . Most of the major groups of crustaceans appear in the fossil record before the end of the Cambrian , namely the <unk> , <unk> ( including barnacles and tongue worms ) and Malacostraca ; there is some debate as to whether or not Cambrian animals assigned to <unk> are truly ostracods , which would otherwise start in the Ordovician . The only classes to appear later are the Cephalocarida , which have no fossil record , and the Remipedia , which were first described from the fossil <unk> <unk> , but do not appear until the Carboniferous . Most of the early crustaceans are rare , but fossil crustaceans become abundant from the Carboniferous period onwards . 
 Within the Malacostraca , no fossils are known for krill , while both Hoplocarida and Phyllopoda contain important groups that are now extinct as well as extant members ( Hoplocarida : mantis shrimp are extant , while Aeschronectida are extinct ; Phyllopoda : <unk> are extinct , while Leptostraca are extant ) . Cumacea and Isopoda are both known from the Carboniferous , as are the first true mantis shrimp . In the Decapoda , prawns and <unk> appear in the Triassic , and shrimp and crabs appear in the Jurassic ; however , the great radiation of crustaceans occurred in the Cretaceous , particularly in crabs , and may have been driven by the adaptive radiation of their main predators , bony fish . The first true lobsters also appear in the Cretaceous . 
 = = Consumption by humans = = 
 Many crustaceans are consumed by humans , and nearly 10 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 tons were produced in 2007 ; the vast majority of this output is of decapod crustaceans : crabs , lobsters , shrimp , crawfish , and prawns . Over 60 % by weight of all crustaceans caught for consumption are shrimp and prawns , and nearly 80 % is produced in Asia , with China alone producing nearly half the world 's total . Non @-@ decapod crustaceans are not widely consumed , with only 118 @,@ 000 tons of krill being caught , despite krill having one of the greatest <unk> on the planet . 
 = I Kissed a Girl ( Glee ) = 
 " I Kissed a Girl " is the seventh episode of the third season of the American musical television series Glee , and the fifty @-@ first overall . Written by Matthew Hodgson and directed by Tate Donovan , the episode aired on Fox in the United States on November 29 , 2011 , and featured the election for a new senior class president at McKinley High . It also covered the special congressional election between Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) and Burt Hummel ( Mike O 'Malley ) , plus repercussions from the outing of Santana ( Naya Rivera ) during the congressional campaign . 
 The episode as a whole received mixed to negative reviews from critics , though several praised Santana 's scene with her grandmother . The music was viewed more favorably by reviewers , and earned mixed to positive reactions . Six songs are covered in the episode , including Katy Perry 's " I Kissed a Girl " . All six were released as downloadable singles , and five of them charted on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 Upon its initial airing , this episode was viewed by 7 @.@ 9 million American viewers and garnered a 3 @.@ 2 / 8 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The total viewership and ratings were up from the previous episode , " Mash Off " , which had aired two weeks before . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Santana ( Naya Rivera ) is about to be suspended for hitting Finn ( Cory Monteith ) , but he claims it was merely a stage slap . He then blackmails Santana into having her glee club , the Troubletones , temporarily meet with her former club , New Directions , so he can show her how they all support her . Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) and Blaine ( Darren Criss ) sing " Perfect " to her , which leaves her unimpressed , but Finn 's slow , stripped @-@ down rendition of " Girls Just Want to Have Fun " is better received . 
 Puck ( Mark Salling ) ostensibly sings " I 'm the Only One " for Santana , but delivers most of the song to an embarrassed Shelby ( Idina Menzel ) in front of a suspicious Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) . Quinn later tries to seduce him , but he refuses and calls her crazy . Shelby calls Puck for assistance when her daughter Beth has a minor medical emergency ; the two later have sex , but she regrets it and asks him to leave . Angered , Puck returns to Quinn , and she reveals her desire to have a second baby with him . Puck refuses , and tries to comfort her ; he offers to share an important secret if she promises not to tell anyone . 
 Kurt 's quest to become senior class president appears doomed and along with it his college prospects ; he confesses to Rachel ( Lea Michele ) that he is thinking about stuffing the ballot box to ensure that he wins . Sue 's ( Jane Lynch ) congressional campaign is also in trouble : to combat allegations that she is a lesbian , Sue decides to start an arbitrary relationship with a man , and chooses former <unk> Cooter Menkins ( Eric Bruskotter ) , who has been having difficulty connecting with Coach Beiste ( Dot @-@ Marie Jones ) due to her emotional armor . A distraught Beiste sings " Jolene " , confesses her love for Cooter and tells Sue she won 't give him up without a fight . Sue loses the congressional election to Burt Hummel ( Mike O 'Malley ) . 
 An arrogant jock tries to seduce Santana to " make her normal " . The female members of both glee clubs defend her , and together they sing " I Kissed a Girl " . Santana comes out to her parents , who are accepting , but when she tells her <unk> ( grandmother ) , she tells Santana to leave and never return , saying it is a sin to speak of such things . 
 Kurt and his father Burt are called in to see Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) , where it is revealed that although Kurt apparently won his election by 190 votes , more votes have been cast than there are students . Kurt admits that he contemplated cheating , but decided against doing so . Nevertheless , Kurt is disqualified and Brittany wins the election . Kurt tells Finn and Rachel that he is still under suspicion , and after he leaves , Rachel admits to Finn that she was the one who stuffed the ballot box because she wanted to help Kurt . 
 To end the week , Santana sings " Constant Craving " to the combined glee clubs , inter @-@ cut with Shelby and Kurt also singing . Rachel then arrives and confesses that she was the one who committed election fraud : the incident will go on her permanent record , she is suspended for a week and she is banned from participating in the impending show choir Sectionals competition . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Matthew Hodgson and directed by Tate Donovan . Filming began on October 13 , 2011 , while the fifth and sixth episodes , " The First Time " and " Mash Off " respectively , were still shooting , though the fifth episode finished the following day . The final day of filming was November 1 , 2011 . 
 Series co @-@ creator Ian Brennan revealed to TV Guide that the episode would have not one election in it , but two : both senior class president and the congressional special election would occur on the same day , and McKinley High will be a polling place for the latter . According to Brennan , " People are voting for both elections in the school , with signs pointing voters in different directions " , and there will be a " very surprising twist " in the final results . 
 Football recruiter Cooter Menkins ( Bruskotter ) returns in this episode , and becomes a bone of contention between Coach Beiste and Sue . Other recurring guest stars who appear in this episode include Principal Figgins ( Theba ) , teachers Shelby Corcoran ( Menzel ) and Mrs. Hagberg ( Mary Gillis ) , Kurt 's father and congressional candidate Burt Hummel ( O 'Malley ) , Coach Beiste ( Jones ) , cheerleader Becky Jackson ( Lauren Potter ) , school reporter Jacob Ben Israel ( Josh Sussman ) , Troubletones member Sugar Motta ( Vanessa Lengies ) and New Directions member Rory Flanagan ( Damian McGinty ) . 
 Music in the episode includes the song from which it gets its title , Katy Perry 's " I Kissed a Girl " , which was previously sung by Tina for her glee club audition in the show 's pilot . Jones performs Dolly Parton 's " Jolene " during the episode , her second time singing on the show ; her first was a duet with Matthew Morrison in the second season episode " Blame It on the Alcohol " . All six songs from the episode have been released as singles including " I Kissed a Girl " and " Jolene " ; the other four are k.d. lang 's " Constant Craving " sung by Rivera , Menzel and Colfer , Cyndi Lauper 's " Girls Just Want to Have Fun " in the Greg Laswell version sung by Monteith , Melissa Etheridge 's " I 'm the Only One " sung by Salling and a clean version of Pink 's " Fuckin ' Perfect " entitled " Perfect " , sung by Colfer and Criss . 
 On August 6 , 2012 , co @-@ creator Ryan Murphy uploaded a deleted scene in which Santana comes out to Sue and her fellow Cheerios to YouTube . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " I Kissed a Girl " was first broadcast on November 29 , 2011 in the United States on Fox . It received a 3 @.@ 2 / 8 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and attracted 7 @.@ 90 million American viewers during its initial airing , up from the 7 @.@ 08 million viewers and 3 @.@ 0 / 8 rating / share for the previous episode , " Mash Off " , which was broadcast on November 15 , 2011 . 
 Viewership was also up significantly in the United Kingdom and Canada . In the United Kingdom , " I Kissed a Girl " was watched on Sky1 by 1 @.@ 09 million viewers , an increase of over 21 % compared to " Mash Off " two weeks before , when 900 @,@ 000 viewers were watching . In Canada , 1 @.@ 79 million viewers watched the episode , which made it the eighth most @-@ viewed show of the week , up ten slots and 9 % from the 1 @.@ 64 million viewers who watched " Mash Off " two weeks prior . 
 In Australia , " I Kissed a Girl " was broadcast on January 27 , 2012 . It was the first new episode since " Mash Off " had aired on November 16 , 2012 , and was in a new Friday evening time slot as opposed to the previously scheduled Wednesday broadcasts . It was watched by 575 @,@ 000 viewers , down over 15 % from the previous new episode , which was watched by 683 @,@ 000 viewers . David Dale of the Sydney Morning Herald was scathing in his opinion of the show 's rescheduling : " Channel Ten must be insane to waste a new season of Glee on a night when the target audience are all out trying to get alcohol with fake IDs . Look at the pathetic numbers in the Friday chart . " 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode as a whole received mixed to negative reviews from critics . Rae Votta of Billboard wrote that it " stumbles as much as it shines , with two plot lines @-@ worth of structure that make sense , and two that fall completely flat " . Rolling Stone 's Erica Futterman stated that " while there were undeniably significant plot moments , the emotional depth was lacking " , and Robert Canning of IGN said it was " kind of boring " and nothing happened to " make it better than bland " . AOLTV 's Crystal Bell found it frustrating , and said that the " worst part " was that it " made me stop caring about these characters " . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club wrote that " a ton of it just didn 't work " . The Houston Chronicle 's Bobby Hankinson looked on the episode more favorably , however , and maintained that while it did not achieve the level of the previous two , it was a " pretty strong outing nonetheless " . 
 Lesley Goldberg of The Hollywood Reporter said that the scene where Santana comes out to her grandmother only to be rejected was a " powerful moment and Rivera delivered in a way equal to Chris Colfer and Mike O 'Malley 's scenes during Kurt 's coming out " . Bell also complimented the sequence , though she criticized the next scene for showing " a happy , smiling Santana " with no further explanation , and Canning and Kubicek were also unhappy with her abrupt change in mood , as if nothing had happened . VanDerWerff , though he called the coming @-@ out scene " a moment that 's played with a sort of bracing honesty and moving empathy " for what Santana was going through , stated that the " Santana storyline has been one of the best things about the back half of season two and this front half of season three , and the scenes that should be its emotional crux are occurring in our imaginations " , such as when she comes out to her parents . Goldberg called the fact that Finn suffered no consequences for his outing of Santana " a missed opportunity " . Bell , however , thought that his telling Santana that " he cares about her and doesn 't want her to hold her feelings for women in anymore " was " one of the most touching scenes of the series " , though Kubicek characterized Finn 's statement that he cared for her because Santana " was his first " as creepy . MTV 's Kevin P. Sullivan <unk> the choice to perform " I Kissed a Girl " as " poor comprehension of song lyrics " , since Santana " is a lesbian and not just [ a ] drunk girl who kissed another girl after drinking " . VanDerWerff wondered why Santana was so happy during the song , since she had just experienced " the sort of outrageous bigotry she 'll have to put up with for the rest of her life " . 
 Quinn 's increasingly odd behavior was commented on by several reviewers . Chaney wrote that she was acting " in an irrational manner that has no connection with reality " , and Bell wondered if co @-@ creator Murphy was " trying to make her the most hated character on ' Glee ' ever " . Amy Reiter of The Los Angeles Times , though she noted that " Quinn 's character just gets weirder and weirder " , wrote that Puck gets it right : " Quinn 's the craziest , most self @-@ involved character on the show " , but " has a resilience that may take her far in life " and needs a " healthy dose of self @-@ esteem " . VanDerWerff was initially pleased that the show " acknowledged that all of her actions are driven by a deep , sucking need to be loved " and that " Puck gently told her that she was better than that , that she could put herself together again " , but not that it then " just turned into more pointless Puck / Shelby / Quinn drama . Ugh . " Critics such as Kubicek were even more scathing about Shelby and the storyline with Puck that led to the pair having sex during the episode : " The dumbest storyline Glee has ever done gets even dumber . " Sullivan called it " the most divisive plot line of the season " , and Bell asked , " Instead of these super creepy scenes between Puck and Shelby , can we please get more screen time for Shelby and Rachel ? " 
 Votta criticized the show for the " pointless adult love triangle " involving Coach Beiste , Sue , and Cooter Menkins . VanDerWerff described Jones as " one of the show 's greatest gifts " , and lamented that they had her " fighting with Sue Dynasty @-@ style over a recruiter for Ohio State " . Bell called the scene where Beiste " confesses her love for Cooter " a " simply sweet scene that 's only ruined by Sue 's grumpy presence " , and Sue 's decision to go after Cooter a " crazy plot " . Votta looked at Sue 's pursuit of Cooter through a different lens : " in an episode that should be about kids who are looking for approval and the various ways they do and don 't achieve that " , the show gives a " completely opposite message from Sue 's quest to prove her straightness " , which " muddles " the show 's messages . Chaney thought that Sue " was back in fine , vindictive catchphrase @-@ spewing form " , and noted that " all the election subplots were tied up remarkably quickly " . This last point did not sit well with Berk , who wrote that the show resolved " what was one of the more interesting subplots in one of the least interesting ways " , and Canning was disappointed that the episode did not have " more with Burt " . As for Burt 's son , Kurt , Votta wanted to " leap through the television and explain to him that student council elections mean absolutely nothing " to his future college prospects , and Kubicek declared himself " sick " of that plot thread , which he called " just plain moronic " . 
 = = = Music and performances = = = 
 The musical performances received mixed to positive reviews . Hankinson wrote that it was a " strong night " . Chaney thought it was " decent but not as strong " as the previous episode , " Mash Off " ; Futterman had a similar take and called it a " hodge @-@ podge of songs that fit the bill but don 't necessarily stand out " , and " musically meh " . Bell wrote that " the music was awful " , and she was upset because she " really like [ s ] chick rock " , the musical focus of the episode . 
 Chaney was not very excited by Kurt and Blaine 's rendition of " Perfect " , while Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal called it an " almost cloying duet " . Entertainment Weekly 's Abby West thought it was " sweetly " sung and " perfectly lovely " , and Michael Slezak of TVLine said it " really picked up steam " as it progressed . Votta said that " what we got " was " wonderfully done , and a perfect balance of Darren Criss and Chris Colfer 's musical strengths " , but she was perplexed that they " cut the verses most relevant to Santana " yet " kept the cheeky rap bridge " . In contrast , she thought Puck 's performance of " I 'm the Only One " was " the most awkward thing Glee has done in a while , and drags on forever " , though she added that Salling sounded " great " . Slezak expressed the wish that Puck would get to do " a mashup or an interesting arrangement " , and gave the song a " C + " , while Futterman said the song was " a strain on his voice " and the presentation " another cookie @-@ cutter classroom setting " . BuddyTV 's John Kubicek called it the " kind of song Puck should always do . " 
 Finn 's performance of " Girls Just Want to Have Fun " received the most commentary . Bell wrote that " his cover of Greg Laswell 's cover " of the Lauper song " may just be my favorite Finn solo ever " . Kubicek described the " slowed @-@ down , acoustic version " as " insanely good " , and Flandez called it " poignant " and " surprising and appealing " . West said it was " the best showcase for his voice in recent memory " . Slezak called it his " favorite performance by Finn in the last two seasons " , and added that Monteith " sounded terrific " . While Votta thought the rendition was " sweet " and " well sung " , she wrote that it " felt a little off @-@ center " ; Chaney described it as " not terribly compelling " . Sullivan called it a " horrifyingly creepy " performance . 
 Coach Beiste 's first solo number , " Jolene " , was called " haunting " by Vanity Fair 's Brett Berk , who gave it four stars out of five , and Slezak said it was a " killer use of Dolly Parton " even if " Beiste isn 't the strongest vocalist " . Both Futterman and Kubicek noted a lack of emotion in Beiste 's voice , but they also noted the emotion in her face , which Kubicek said " more than made up for it " . Chaney wrote that " the execution felt emotionally flat " and gave it a " C " , but West graded it a " B + " and said , " Coach Beiste 's pain ..... was clear in Dot Marie Jones ' sad @-@ hearted rendition " . 
 Chaney called " I Kissed a Girl " the " liveliest , most enjoyable number of the night " . Kubicek said that " the ladies rocked out " , but his " favorite parts " were " Rory 's reaction shots " , which West also mentioned favorably . Futterman declared it as " an OK rendition " . For " Constant Craving " , she noted some " nice harmonies " , but " in what seems to be a trend this episode , the song falls flat as a whole " . Kubicek stated that without Santana 's " pent @-@ up emotions " , there was " no subtext , just text " . Chaney wrote that the performance was " not stunning , but certainly strong " . Votta said that Santana " kills " on the song , Hankinson stated that " Shelby and Santana were awesome " and Slezak called it " gorgeous and totally relevant " . 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 Five of the six cover versions released as singles debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 : " Perfect " debuted at number fifty @-@ seven , " Girls Just Want to Have Fun " at number fifty @-@ nine , " I Kissed a Girl " at number sixty @-@ six , " I 'm the Only One " at number eighty @-@ six and " Constant Craving " at number eighty @-@ nine . The first three of those singles also debuted on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 : " Perfect " at number seventy @-@ one , " Girls Just Want to Have Fun " at number seventy @-@ five and " I Kissed a Girl " at number eighty @-@ seven . " Jolene " did not chart in either country . 
 Both " Girls Just Want to Have Fun " and " Constant Craving " were featured on the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 7 . Three additional songs from the episode were included in the five bonus tracks available on the Target edition of the album : " Perfect " , " I 'm the Only One " and " I Kissed a Girl " . 
 = Sex ( book ) = 
 Sex is a coffee table book written by American singer Madonna , with photographs taken by Steven Meisel Studio and film frames shot by Fabien Baron . The book was edited by Glenn O 'Brien and was released on October 21 , 1992 , by Warner Books , Maverick and Callaway Books . Approached with an idea for a book on erotic photographs , Madonna expanded on the idea and conceived the book and its content . Shot in early 1992 in New York City and Miami , the locations ranged from hotels and burlesque theaters , to the streets of Miami . The photographs were stolen before publishing , but were quickly recovered . 
 The book had a range of influences , from punk rock to earlier fashion iconoclasts such as Guy Bourdin and his surrealism , and Helmut Newton , in its stylized , sado @-@ masochistic look . Sex has photographs that feature adult content and softcore pornographic as well as simulations of sexual acts , including sadomasochism and <unk> . Madonna wrote the book as a character named " Mistress Dita " , inspired by 1930s film actress Dita Parlo . It also includes cameos by actress Isabella Rossellini , rappers Big Daddy Kane and Vanilla Ice , model Naomi Campbell , gay porn star Joey Stefano , actor Udo Kier , socialite Tatiana von Fürstenberg , and nightclub owner Ingrid Casares . 
 The packaging for the book is made of aluminium , which was Madonna 's idea , and is spiral bound and enclosed in a Mylar sheet . Due to the scandalous nature of the photographs and the media mayhem surrounding it from the initial preview of the book , Madonna did not have to promote Sex , except for a pre @-@ release party and some television specials . Her publishers were extremely apprehensive about the release as well as its commercial potential . Sex was released alongside her fifth studio album Erotica , which was released a day earlier . 
 The book was an instant commercial success , managing to sell over 150 @,@ 000 copies on its first day of release and topping the New York Times Best Seller list . It was received negatively by both critics and fans of the singer , who felt she had " gone too far . " Through the years , however , critical reception towards Sex has become more positive , with academics deeming it a defining phase in Madonna 's career . Sex is noted for its impact on society and culture as well as on Madonna herself , and is considered a bold , post @-@ feminist work of art . The book has since become one of the most sought @-@ after out @-@ of @-@ print books ever released and still remains the best and fastest @-@ selling coffee table book of all time . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 According to Giselle Benatar of Entertainment Weekly , there are two versions of how Madonna came up with the idea for the book . One was that she conceived the idea of an erotic photography book during the shooting of the film A League of Their Own in the summer of 1991 . The second one is that Judith Regan , vice @-@ president and editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Simon & Schuster , flew to Los Angeles in March 1991 to meet with Madonna and her manager Freddy DeMann , armed with a proposal for a similar collection of photo @-@ erotica . The singer had initially verified whether Regan had approached any other celebrities with this concept , as Madonna would be interested to be a part of it only if it was a unique idea . By the end of the meeting Madonna had agreed " in principle " to do a book called Madonna 's Book of Erotica and Sexual Fantasies . She told Regan that DeMann would call her and work out the details regarding the book . However , Madonna never got back in touch with Regan , who assumed that the singer did not want to proceed with the idea . Madonna 's publicist Liz Rosenberg never confirmed nor denied Regan 's claim , but according to Benatar , Madonna started working on Sex before wrapping up A League of Their Own . At first Warner Bros. Records and the executive directors at Time Warner were reluctant to allow Madonna to publish such a book , but finally gave in to the idea . Madonna , however , was forced to sign a contract that forbade her from showing child pornography , bestiality and religious imagery . Not long after signing this agreement Madonna founded Maverick , a multi @-@ media entertainment company . Since by contract she had total artistic control over any of the work released by Maverick , the agreement she signed with Time Warner concerning what not to do in Sex became obsolete . 
 Originally to be titled X , Madonna changed her mind when Spike Lee 's film Malcolm X began to be promoted . ( The film was released three weeks after the book . ) She would go on to tell Vogue magazine : " This is a really good symbol , and I thought of it first . " Warner Bros. commented that Sex was very difficult to produce , requiring contributions from many different printing and publishing companies . They also stated that in order to generate any profit , the book would have to sell at least 350 @,@ 000 copies . Madonna hired top @-@ notch talent for the development of the book ; she counted on the help of friends from the music , film and fashion industry . The singer hired Fabien Baron as the art director , fashion photographer Steven Meisel , editor Glenn O 'Brien , make @-@ up artist Francois <unk> and hairstylist Paul <unk> . The Sex book had a range of influences – from punk rock to earlier fashion iconoclasts like Guy Bourdin and his surrealism , and Helmut Newton , in its stylized , sado @-@ masochistic look . Madonna originally wanted the book to be of an oval shape in order to simulate a condom but the printing and manufacturing of such a book would have been too expensive . Meisel would later comment : " Madonna and I can keep up with each other " and that " I 'm doing things to make people think too . It 's not really to antagonize or to push people 's buttons . It 's really to present another way of seeing things . " 
 The pictures were taken almost entirely in Super 8 format , and most of the photo shoots took place in New York City and Miami . Locations in New York City included the Hotel Chelsea and Times Square 's all @-@ male burlesque Gaiety Theatre ( dancers from theatre participated in one of the book 's photo sessions ) , whereas in Miami the majority of the sessions were shot at a house Madonna had purchased just before starting the project , and in several beaches and streets . One morning during the four @-@ day Florida shoot Madonna was prancing around her 14 @-@ bedroom house in Miami completely naked , when someone jokingly suggested she go out on the street , then , according to Baron " the next thing we 're in the street " where allegedly " cars screeched to a halt , motorists whistled , and one entranced cyclist fell off his bike . " This was just one of the many crazy episodes that took place during the shooting of the book . According to Baron , during the photo shoots " [ Madonna ] ' d do something crazy and then we 'd come up with something even crazier " . One of the most shocking photographs made for the book , which featured two women in post @-@ punk attire flanking Madonna with one of them holding a knife to Madonna 's crotch , was dismissed as it was considered too violent . At some point , while the book was being produced , some of the photographs were stolen , but were quickly recovered by the FBI . According to New York magazine , there were approximately 80 @,@ 000 photographs taken for the book , but only a handful made the final cut . The printing of the book was extended for 15 days making the total production process last about eight months . 
 = = Design and content = = 
 Wrapped and sealed in a polyethylene terephthalate ( PET ) Mylar bag , Sex contains 128 pages and is spiral bound with an aluminium cover that has the word " Sex " stamped in the middle and a warning label . The front page also shows Madonna against a sky blue backdrop . Three different types of paper were used for the printing of Sex and the design was overseen by Madonna and Baron & Baron Inc . ( consisting of Fabien Baron and the photographer <unk> Fat <unk> ) who had previously collaborated with the singer designing the cover art of her fifth studio album , Erotica . As this was the first project for Maverick , the packaging was crucial ; however Madonna did not have faith in Warner Book 's " mass @-@ market " publication process . Hence Baron suggested to transfer the packaging job to Nicholas Callaway 's bespoke Callaway Editions . Charles Melcher , co @-@ publisher with Callaway for the book , said that they usually did " exquisite art books , $ 100 high end , beautiful things " . But it was a challenge for them to process Madonna 's ideas into reality . The artist wanted the packaging to be sealed , so that the reader had to tear it up and read . They considered various kinds of clasps before zeroing on the idea of the sealed bag as a reference to a condom package . The metal cover was Madonna 's idea , who took the inspiration from the 1979 album , Metal Box by the band Public Image Ltd . Melcher recollects , " We were talking about materials for the cover , and we went into her kitchen . [ Madonna ] pointed at the metal plate at the back of her stove and said , ' I want something like this ' . I was very impressed with the way she interacted with her world to source things . " The company bought about 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 pounds ( 680 @,@ 000 kg ) of aluminium , a pound for each book . The designers had to do the front and the back covers , while rolling , stamping and ionizing the metal . 
 The book opens up with the introduction : " Everything you are about to see and read is a fantasy , a dream , pretend " . Throughout Sex , Madonna offers poems , stories , and essays . She also uses the pseudonym " Mistress Dita " as a homage to German actress Dita Parlo ; her friends in these stories are Bunny , Dex , Stella , <unk> and Stranger . According to biographer J. Randy Taraborrelli , a big part of the book is read as a letter to a pornographic magazine . As a thank you for recovering the stolen pictures during the making of the book , in the credits of the book Madonna mentioned the FBI for " ... rescuing photographs that would have made J. Edgar Hoover roll over . " Madonna also wanted to explore the notion of power in Sex . Melcher said that the artist wanted to talk about " gentle and hard , soft and violent [ in Sex ] . She was playing out all those elements in her book . That was reflected in the materials : <unk> , soft paper on the inside and hard metal coating on the outside . " 
 Just like the text — which was mostly written on top of photographs — the photographs on the book are highly sexual and depict nudity , simulations of sexual acts , bondage , homosexuality and <unk> , with accessories such as knives , whips , masks and chains ; however , full intercourse is never shown . Aside from unknown models , featured in the book are actress Isabella Rossellini , rappers Big Daddy Kane and Madonna 's then boyfriend Vanilla Ice , model Naomi Campbell , gay porn star Joey Stefano , actor Udo Kier , socialite Tatiana von Fürstenberg , and nightclub owner Ingrid Casares ; however the heterosexual photos in the book involve only Madonna and Vanilla Ice . Madonna herself is featured partially or completely naked . One of the book 's most famous photographs shows Madonna hitchhiking completely naked in Miami . The book also reflects a great part on Dita 's perspective towards her own sexuality . Dita writes in Sex that her " pussy " is a temple of learning and that exposing it , is really a homage to it ( " It 's hard to describe it smells like a baby to me fresh and full of life . I love my pussy , it is the complete summation of my life " ) . Sex contains statements like " ass fucking is the most pleasurable way to get fucked and it hurts the most too " . Others include " [ t ] here is something comforting about being tied up . Like when you were a baby and your mother strapped you in the car seat . She wanted you to be safe . It was an act of love " and " I wouldn 't want a penis . It would be like having a third <unk> it seems like a contraption that would get in the way . I think I have a dick in my brain " . In Sex , Dita also pointed out that " A lot of people are afraid to say what they want . That 's why they don 't get what they want " . The book includes Madonna 's perspective on pornography : 
 I don 't see how a guy looking at a naked girl in a magazine is degrading to women . Everyone has their sexuality . It 's how you treat people in everyday life that counts , not what turns you on in your fantasy . If all a person ever did was get off on porno movies I would say they are probably dysfunctional sexually , but I don 't think it 's unhealthy to be interested in that or get off on that . I 'm not interested in porno movies because everybody is ugly and faking it and it 's just silly . They make me laugh , they don 't turn me on . A movie like In the Realm of the Senses turns me on because it 's real . I 've been told there are some good Traci Lords movies but I 've never seen them . I wouldn 't want to watch a snuff movie . I wouldn 't want to watch anyone get really hurt , male or female . But generally I don 't think pornography degrades women . The women who are doing it want to do it . No one is holding a gun to their head . I don 't get that whole thing . I love looking at Playboy magazine because women look great naked . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The initial preview of the book was met with a huge amount of controversy , as it showed a nude Madonna wearing a rabbit 's tail , shaving the pubic hair of a naked man , and cavorting outdoors with a dog , suggesting bestiality . The Vatican urged its people to boycott the release , saying that it was " morally intolerable " . Indian customs officials said that the book offended the country 's public morality . The Press Trust of India ( PTI ) , India 's domestic news agency , quoted a top customs official as saying the book would be seized under a section of the Customs Act prohibiting entry of indecent literature . Citizens of Alexandria , Louisiana filed a complaint with the city 's police department on behalf of a group called the Rapides Parish Chapter of American Family Association , claiming that it violated Louisiana 's anti @-@ obscenity laws . South US Baptists did not want their Bibles coming off the same printing presses as Madonna 's Sex and threatened to stop doing business with a Chicago printer . The Nashville @-@ based Baptist Sunday School Board , a division of the Southern Baptist Convention , reviewed their $ 2 @.@ 1 million ( $ 3 @,@ 541 @,@ 167 in 2016 dollars ) printing contract with R.R. Donnelley & Sons . Board President James Draper said he was infuriated that Donnelley also printed " such an obscene book " . Entertainment Tonight reported that Madonna herself had initiated the mayhem with the explicit content in the music video for " Erotica " , walking bare breasted at designer Jean Paul Gaultier 's fashion show and posing nude in Vanity Fair magazine . A writer for The Sacramento Bee said that since the press wanted " controversy " , Madonna was willing to provide them " fodder " with her " antiques " . 
 Madonna then said she was " doing this to liberate America — free us all of our hang @-@ ups " . She told Spin magazine " We live in a very repressed society , and I deal with erotic themes . The point I try to make is : Why should we feel ashamed of our sexuality ? " . Later she revealed that " [ This book ] does not condone unsafe sexual practices " . Nicholas Callaway from Callaway Arts & Entertainment said that the book was " inevitably going to be controversial . The book explores every aspect of sexual fantasy . It 's hard to calculate the effect , [ but ] , Sex should be considered ' art ' " . Originally it was rumored that Time Warner was nervous about the release of the book ; however , in an interview with Vanity Fair , William Sarnoff , president of Warner Books , said he felt that Madonna " should pursue all avenues of creativity as she defines it " . The Warner company had also previously assured that they would make sure Sex reached its main target audience and also reminded that the book was safely wrapped in a Mylar bag to prevent in @-@ store peeping and contained a warning label . Michael Kilian of the Chicago Tribune published an article on October 7 , 1992 , regarding the then upcoming release of Sex : " Prepare thyself , [ ... ] , The mega @-@ event of the millennium is to occur in precisely two weeks . It 's an event far more mega than the November election , the collapse of communism or even the crowning of <unk> Cornett as the new Miss America . " Kilian also described it as the " personal sexual fantasy picture book in all Christendom , then it goes far beyond all previous ' truly twisted ' personal sexual fantasy picture books — perhaps beyond all imagining what such a book could be " . 
 On October 15 , Madonna threw a pre @-@ release party at New York City 's Industria <unk> , and signed all the invitations under her Sex alter ego " Dita " . During the party , Madonna showed up dressed as Little Bo Peep and even carried with her a stuffed toy lamb . Madonna 's publicist Liz Rosenberg showed concern at first due to " what the parents of America 's impressionable teens will soon be thinking " but later said that it " all depends on your idea of lovemaking , which in Madonna 's case , should give new meaning to the word erotic " . Both Waldenbooks and Barnes & Noble prepared corporate statements that the managers could share with customers who are offended by Sex . ( Both statements defended the right of bookstores to provide " diversity and choice " to customers and say censorship is not the role of bookstores . ) Many book stores , too , stated that the book would not be sold to anyone under 18 and that it would be for display only behind the cash register . Bookstore owner David Epstein stated that " The feeling of most people who have ordered the book is that Madonna is something special , that this is cutting @-@ edge art , [ ... ] , they 're not the kind of people who are buying it because it 's smut and dirty pictures . People are interested in it as art . " 
 Sex was finally released on October 21 , 1992 , by editorials Callaway and Warner Books ; it was also the first work released by Madonna 's company Maverick . To accompany its release , a comic book as well as a promotional single containing a stripped @-@ down version of " Erotica " , titled " Erotic " , were made available . The book was released by Madonna as alongside her fifth studio album Erotica , which had been released a day earlier . With an initial print run of one million copies of the first edition in five continents and in five languages , the price of the book was $ 50 ( $ 84 in 2016 dollars ) at retail , making sex an " expensive visual book " . Nevertheless , the book managed to break records regarding the number of copies pre @-@ ordered before the release . Nicholas Callaway pointed out that the book was an unprecedented hit , because the print run of an average art book ranges between 5 and 10 @,@ 000 units . He described it as " the largest initial release of any illustrated book in publishing history " . 
 Due to the high scandal and controversy surrounding the book , there wasn 't really any need for Madonna to promote it ; however , one of the few promotions for the book Madonna did , was appearing on the cover of the October edition of Vogue , where she appeared dressed in " Hippie trip " fashion . These photographs were taken by Meisel . After the book was released , on October 22 , 1992 , MTV aired a special called The Day in Madonna , hosted by Kurt Loder ( the title of this special was a pun of the title of the channel 's daily show The Day in Rock ) , which profiled the release of Madonna 's Sex and her album Erotica , even taking the book to the streets to allow people , including a sex therapist and group of real @-@ life New York City <unk> , to view it . MTV also interviewed many people who had viewed the book on the day of its release at the HMV music store in New York City . In celebration of the release of the book , the store held a Madonna look @-@ alike contest and set up a booth where people could view the book for one dollar a minute , with all of the proceeds going to <unk> , the music industry organization founded to help fund AIDS research . 
 = = Critical and commercial reception = = 
 The book received negative reaction from critics , conservative and feminist " anti @-@ porn " groups , due to its sexually explicit photographs which many characterized as " hardcore pornography " . Taraborrelli opined that much of the book appears surprising and not shocking . He derided the whole concept as childish and impetuous rather than an adult book . According to him , though Madonna insisted that she was trying to demystify sexuality altogether , the author believed she just wanted to publish pornographic text and pictures and get away with it . " She was being a brat , not a revolutionary " , the author concluded . Author Lucy O 'Brien declared that the book was a bold , harrowing exercise in frustration , and despite Madonna 's attempt at invincibility , the book appeared as " a curious act of self @-@ destruction " . " The overwhelming effect of the book is numbing , " complained Rolling Stone . " The images are derivative , and Madonna herself seems far too eager to shock ; that , not even prurient arousal , seems the ideal response the book tirelessly seeks . The potency of Sex 's subject matter is dissipated by Madonna and Meisel 's self @-@ congratulatory – and silly – sense of their own ' bravery , ' as if their naughty games were somehow revolutionary . " 
 Roger Catlin from the Hartford Courant said that the passages from the book were " too dirty to quote here , even the funny ones " . The Daily Beast said that " the book is neither groundbreaking ( save that it features a major star ) nor particularly sexy [ ... ] Sex is convincing only when it 's playful , as when she appears nude in a Miami pizzeria , chewing a slice while a baffled customer looks on . Elsewhere , she 's simply undressed with no place to go " . Richard Harrington from The Washington Post gave the book a mixed review by saying : " Is Sex shocking ? not really . Mostly because it 's Madonna , and somehow we 've come to expect this from her . Is Sex boring ? surprisingly , yes " . During her review of the book , British author Zoë Heller from The Independent wrote that it was " the women who once saw Madonna as a witty feminist role model who have been most alarmist about her latest pornographic incarnation " and that " previously , they say , Madonna played with traditional images of feminine sexuality in a subversive , ' empowering ' way . But now , with sado @-@ masochism and rape fantasies , she has gone too far . " Calvin Tomkins , author and art critic for The New Yorker , wrote that " unfortunately , the book is going to be mistaken for pornography " . Vanity Fair deemed it " the dirtiest coffee table book to ever be published " . Caryn James from The New York Times was negative in her review stating that " There is plenty here to offend the meek ( whips and chains ) , the self @-@ righteous ( gay men and lesbians ) , not to mention the tasteful ( a tacky and cluttered art design ) " . Vicki Goldberg from the same newspaper was also dismissive of the photography of the book saying that " Unfortunately , not many of the images are very good photographically . Many are just pictures , or just porn " . Writing for Spin magazine , Bob Guccione , Jr. gave the book a particularly unfavorable review : 
 Madonna has overstayed her welcome . She 's becoming the human equivalent of the Energizer Bunny , flashing us her breasts in every magazine that 'll let her . [ ... ] Her book Sex , is a rip @-@ off . Because it 's not about sex , it 's more about a hatred of it . [ ... ] The book is not erotic . It 's all somehow , astonishingly , dead . As sexy as a body chart at the doctor 's office . Because it 's just as precise and soulless . [ Sex ] is a con job because instead of being flagrant pornography , it dresses itself up as Great Art . The text is pretentious and derives most , if not all , of its impact from the fact that it 's Madonna talking , quite a lot ... Any other model would sound no more or less coarse , just uninteresting . 
 Despite all the controversy and negative backlash , which included the book being banned in Japan shortly after its release , Sex proved to be a commercial success , selling 150 @,@ 000 copies on its release day in the United States alone . Hundreds of copies of the book were pre @-@ ordered , prompting book sellers to say that Sex was " shattering their sales records for advance purchases " . A week later , the book 's sales exceeded the 500 @,@ 000 units and eventually topped The New York Times Best Seller list . Giselle Benatar wrote in her article " Sex & Money " : " This isn 't the publishing event of the year , it 's the publishing event of the century . " A day earlier , Tyra Braden from The Morning Call wrote that she and some friends concluded that the book " might become a collector 's item a few years down the road " . In just three days , the book had managed to sell more than 1 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Social impact and aftermath = = 
 Dubbed at the time " The Queen of obscene " , Madonna and the Sex era is considered by many as the artist 's most controversial and transgressive period . The book , widely panned by the press , is regarded as one of the factors that shaped the social reaction and critique towards Madonna during the early 1990s . Her fifth studio album Erotica was affected by the negative press surrounding the book . In March 1993 , Spin magazine wrote an article praising the book , but months later in Mexico , social <unk> Nino <unk> presented a television special called ¿ Y <unk> qué <unk> ? ( English : So what 's your opinion ? ) , where the audience , among them a priest , presented their arguments as to why " this morally clueless singer shouldn 't be allowed to perform in the country " , making reference to The Girlie Show World Tour , which was set to visit Mexico . Later , during her concert in Mexico , Madonna wore a <unk> sombrero and simulated an orgy with her dancers onstage , as a response to these comments . Continuing her provocative imagery , Madonna starred in the erotic thriller Body of Evidence , which featured the singer fully nude and in scenes engaged in simulated sexual acts . In March 1994 , Madonna appeared as a guest on the Late Show with David Letterman , using profanity that was required to be censored on television and handing Letterman a pair of her underwear and asking him to smell it . The releases of her sexually explicit film , album and book , and the aggressive appearance on Letterman all made critics regard Madonna as a sexual renegade . She faced strong negative publicity from critics and fans , who commented that " she had gone too far " and that her career was over . Later on the song " Human Nature " from her sixth studio album Bedtime Stories ( 1994 ) , Madonna addressed the public backlash the book was still receiving , particularly with the lines " Did I say something wrong ? Oops , I didn 't know I couldn 't talk about sex . I must have been crazy , " as well as the line " What was I thinking ? " . 
 The perfect iconic goddess of True Blue had all gone . In the same way that sixties beauties like Nico , Marianne Faithfull and Brigitte Bardot set about destroying their beauty after they were famous , the very thing they felt limited them , Madonna annihilated hers . Within a few short years she moved from teasing flirtation to desperate sexual display . It is ironic that after the triumph of Like a Prayer , she hits this bathos . Being a blond again set her off in the wrong direction . It was as if with the Sex book she showed the underside of the Hollywood dream . 
 Madonna herself would later say : " I wouldn 't say I regret it . I 've made mistakes and learned from them . Most people want to hear me say that I regret publishing my Sex book . I don 't . What was the problem was releasing my Erotica album at the same time . I love that album and it got overlooked . " However , author Andy Koopmans in his book Madonna ( 2002 ) would comment that the singer regretted both publishing Sex and recording Erotica and that the book " had affected everything she did later " . It was not until 2003 that Madonna would once again declare that she regretted nothing ; " I 'm not apologising in any shape or form [ ... ] I was interested in pushing buttons and being rebellious and being mischievous and trying to bend the rules . There was a lot of irony in the Sex book and I am poking fun at a lot of things and I am being kind of silly and adolescent and I am being very f you , if a man can do it , I can do it . " A year earlier on 2002 , Naomi Campbell confessed to " have a lot of respect for Madonna being bold enough to come out and do a book on sex . I 've never reneged on that " . However , in 2009 , rapper Vanilla Ice , who was Madonna 's boyfriend at the time of the book 's creation , confessed to not being happy with the book once he saw it . " My friends were like , ' Dude , that 's cool man ' , but I was like , ' I 'm dating her , it 's not cool to see your girlfriend with all these other people ' [ ... ] It kinda ruined the whole thing . I wonder what her kids think of that book ? Here she is writing kids ' books now but they 're going to see it and go , ' Mommy , what were you thinking ? ' " Another of the book 's models , actress Isabella Rossellini , told Out magazine that she regretted her participation on the book ; " I don 't think the book worked , even though the photos were extraordinary , and some of them quite memorable . I think there was a little bit of a moralistic sort of ' I 'll teach you how to be free ! ' – and that bothered the hell out of me . " 
 Later reviews towards Sex have become more positive . The authors of The <unk> of America : The Rise of Porn Culture , What It Means , and Where We Go from Here ( 2008 ) have commented that " the book is particularly interesting in the way that , like many of Madonna 's works , it portrays sex in terms of domination and power " , whereas Jane <unk> , editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Cosmopolitan praised Madonna 's " liberated behavior on Sex [ ... ] the fact that she takes all forms of pornography and systematically demystifies it by putting it under her control " , in an article in 1996 . Brian McNair , author of Striptease Culture : Sex , Media and the Democratisation of Desire ( 2002 ) praised this period of Madonna 's career , saying that she had " porno elegance " and that " Sex is a cultural phenomenon of global proportions and thanks to this Madonna established her iconic status and cultural influence " . Priya Elan from The Guardian , wrote : " That the Sex book came after a record @-@ breaking album and tour felt like a shrinkwrapped curve ball . But Madge was expressing something unique " . Elan felt that the book was part of a " slower reveal that began with confessional tracks such as ' Oh Father ' ( from 1989 's Like a Prayer ) and continued with the many scenes of narcissism captured in [ the documentary ] In Bed With Madonna " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Sex is now considered a bold , post @-@ feminist , work of art , besides being labeled a " cultural book " . Martin Amis from The Observer wrote an essay discussing the book 's cultural meaning . Critical theorist Douglas Kellner affirmed that with Sex " Madonna became herself , an artifact of pop culture " . French academic writer Georges Claude Guilbert ( author of three books about Madonna ) described Sex as one of the most successful publicity stunts in history whereas Russell W. Belk , author of Handbook of Qualitative Research Methods in Marketing mentioned that the book is a quality product in marketing . In 1992 , Madonna had generated more than US $ 500 million ( $ 843 @,@ 134 @,@ 930 in 2016 dollars ) to Time Warner in sales of both albums and the Sex book , despite the negative feedback . However , Taraborrelli commented in his book , Madonna : An Intimate Biography , that those " who knew Madonna well at that time , knew what was really going on with her : the Sex book — and the outrageous antics that preceded it and would follow it — was really just something she used as a barrier between her and the rest of the world . " For years it had seemed to Madonna that both her personal and professional life was extremely scrutinized by the public and media , and although she had started this scrutinizing by her provocative works , she was tired of it . Being vexed at this interest in her personal life , Madonna fought back by creating the persona of a renegade , something so outrageous as to defy explanation , something found objectionable by most people . Taraborrelli said that in Madonna 's view , " she had no other way of fighting back " . The Boston Globe 's Matthew Gilbert analyzed the singer 's provocative attempt in an article published in the newspaper : 
 Madonna 's motive for baring her breasts to the public feels more like personal gratification , less like commitment to a cause . She 's not out to change the world . Let 's face it : Few people get erotic in front of millions of viewers for purely selfless political reasons . It 's hard to escape the view of Madonna as a difficult Catholic adolescent aiming the finger at everything repressive . And many of her songs are addressed to an authority figure of her youth – from God and Jesus Christ to her own father . The heart of Madonna 's outrageousness seems to lie beneath her liberal rationales , as if she 's acting out something private and the world is her couch , not to mention her bank . Her politics are largely <unk> . 
 According to some writers , Sex also helped Madonna make a name in the porn industry , and earned her the title of S & M 's first cultural ambassador and was praised for recreating " porn @-@ chic " . Humberto Quiroga <unk> pointed out that it was the fact that Sex was considered pornographic that helped it become a bestseller . Steve Bachmann , on his book Simulating Sex : Aesthetic Representations of Erotic Activity pointed out that " perhaps one of the most interesting aspects of Madonna 's sexual phenomenon is the extent to which her book marked a new threshold in the pornographic franchise " . McNair wrote in his book that " Sex brought out the personal underground to the surface of pop culture " . London art critic Sarah Kent wrote in Time Out magazine that the timing of Sex was " impeccable . Obsessions about the human body was in vogue , with Madonna 's book as well as artist Andres Serrano 's " <unk> shots " and Jeff Koons ' The Jeff Koons Handbook , the latter portrayed fairytale pictures of the artist having sex with his pornographic actor wife , <unk> . 
 Sex has also become an important book in the LGBT community . Ben Shapiro , author of Porn Generation : How Social Liberalism Is <unk> Our Future wrote that due to its iconic status " Sex adorns the coffee tables of hundreds of gay men and sperm banks " . Mark Blankenship , from the LGBT @-@ oriented website New Now Next stated that " literature changed forever " with the publishing of Sex . Madonna 's portrayal of lesbian love scenes in the book sparked debates about her own sexual orientation . This was an adjunct to the singer 's public relationship with comedian Sandra Bernhard , with whom she cavorted around , visiting lesbian night @-@ clubs as well as partying . The LGBT community felt it was an important portrayal for them . They debated whether Madonna was " ripping " them off for publicity . As Carolin Grace from Diva magazine noted : " Madonna became meaningful in early nineties , when Sex came out , and at that point lesbian culture was really changing . " She noted how women were coming out about their sexuality and the book 's handling of the taboo issue were " a legacy , our contribution to the show . The lesbian sub @-@ cultural references borrowed by Madonna aren 't our only possessions . " O 'Brien argues in her book Madonna : Like an Icon , that the book had a confusing philosophy . According to the female critics , who pointed out the vacuousness of Madonna 's remarks about porn and abuse , the singer did not have a correct idea that behind these fantasies the " reality is too hard for her to endure " , referring to the daily hustles that women have to face at red light districts and brothels . The author felt that despite the courageous premise of genuine exploration of queer sex , the book crossed over into pornography and a wrong portrayal for the community , while being flippant and commercial . She drew an example of the death of pornographic actor Joey Stefano , one of the models of the book , from drug overdose . Stefano had been thrilled to be a part of the book , but was underpaid . Once Madonna and her team were done with the shoot , " they packed up and left the Gaiety ... They left behind the mundane reality and the boys who have to deal with it seven days a week . " 
 Sex has also become an object of modern culture references . American performance artist Ann Magnuson , who had worked with Madonna on the 1985 film Desperately Seeking Susan , released a parody of the book 's photo sessions , where she simulated sex with a giant stuffed bear . In 2010 , writer @-@ performer Greg <unk> released a book parody of Sex , titled Sex in Drag , which featured over 70 parodied images from the book . In a deleted scene from a 1993 episode ( Krusty Gets Kancelled ) of the animated sitcom The Simpsons , aired as part of The Simpsons 138th Episode Spectacular , Krusty the Clown attempts to market a book extremely similar to Sex as a means of resolving his financial woes . Krusty is seen in a suggestive pose on the front cover . Unlike Madonna , however , Krusty apparently never appeared fully nude , as he quickly claimed that he used a body double . In 2008 , Madonna 's look and attire she wore to the Sex pre @-@ release party was ranked by People magazine as one of Madonna 's " 50 Looks We Can 't Forget " . In April 2012 , a nude picture of Madonna taken by Meisel was put up for sale . The picture , an outtake from the book , features a naked Madonna lying on a bed , sporting bleach @-@ blonde hair and dark eye make @-@ up , smoking a cigarette and partially covered by a sheet . The picture was bought by an unnamed collector for almost US $ 24 @,@ 000 ( $ 24 @,@ 737 in 2016 dollars ) . In 2011 , according to the <unk> , Sex was the most requested out @-@ of @-@ circulation publication and still remains the best @-@ selling coffee table book . In 2015 , the book was included on Rolling Stone 's list of " 20 Great Moments in Rock Star Nudity " . Author Keith Harris wrote : " No celebrity had ever commanded control over her own naked image so audaciously as Madonna in [ Sex ] " . 
 = Troll Satellite Station = 
 Troll Satellite Station ( Norwegian : Troll <unk> ) , commonly abbreviated TrollSat , is a satellite ground station located at Troll in Queen Maud Land , Antarctica . The earth station is owned by Kongsberg Satellite Services ( KSAT ) , a joint venture between the Kongsberg Group and the Norwegian Space Center . The radomes are located on top of Jutulsessen , a nunatak area next to the research station at Troll . The research station is operated by the Norwegian Polar Institute , which also maintains the earth station . TrollSat started operations on 1 March 2007 and was officially opened on 20 January 2008 . 
 The earth station serves low Earth orbit satellites and consists of a 7 @.@ 3 @-@ meter ( 24 ft ) antenna capable of S band and X band reception . Information is relayed using a 4 @.@ 8 @-@ meter ( 16 ft ) and a 7 @.@ 6 @-@ meter ( 25 ft ) C band uplink . Operations control is carried out by KSAT in Tromsø , Norway . Satellites using TrollSat include Radarsat , GeoEye , WorldView and Galileo . The system is coordinated with Svalbard Satellite Station ( SvalSat ) in Longyearbyen , Norway , which combined offer downloading twice per orbit . 
 = = History = = 
 Troll was established as a research station by the Norwegian Polar Institute in 1990 . The station took its name from the surrounding jagged mountains , which resemble trolls of Norse mythology . Already at this time , there were proposals by the Norwegian Space Centre to establish an earth station at Troll , but the lack of all @-@ year activity stranded the plans . Instead , SvalSat was established to serve as an earth station for NASA 's Earth Observing System ( EOS ) . Longyearbyen was selected because of its high latitude , which allows all satellites with an orbit above 500 kilometers ( 300 mi ) to use only a single ground station — yet download from every orbit . The Svalbard facility opened on 15 April 1999 and was originally owned by the Norwegian Space Centre . Kongsberg Satellite Services was established in 2002 to jointly operate SvalSat and Tromsø Satellite Station ( TSS ) . 
 In 2003 , Norwegian authorities decided to extend its operations in Antarctica by establishing an all @-@ year research station . By then , Norway was the only country with a territorial claim to Antarctica to not have an all @-@ year research station on the continent . Construction was carried out from December 2004 through February 2005 . To ease logistics , Norway took the initiative to establish Dronning Maud Land Air Network ( DROMLAN ) , a cooperation between the countries with bases in Queen Maud Land to streamline transport costs . The permanent Troll Airfield was opened on 11 February 2005 . 
 The basis for TrollSat was an agreement signed in 2006 between the Norwegian Polar Institute , the Norwegian Space Centre and Kongsberg Satellite Services . It specified that the Space Centre would install a Kongsberg @-@ built radome , while the Polar Institute would provide power and undertake maintenance . In exchange , they could freely use the earth station for their own transmission needs . The commercial activities would be carried out by Kongsberg Satellite Services . A concern was raised regarding if satellite downloading would violate the Antarctic Treaty , but the Ministry of Foreign Affairs negated . The station started operations on 1 March 2007 and was officially opened by Prime Minister of Norway , Jens Stoltenberg . 
 = = Operation = = 
 SvalSat is owned and operated by Kongsberg Satellite Services ( KSAT ) , which is again equally owned by Kongsberg Defence and Aerospace and the Norwegian Space Centre , the latter which is again owned by the Ministry of Trade and Industry . KSAT is not tied to a particular operator of satellites and the antennas communicate with multiple satellites , thus reducing costs compared to dedicated ground stations . For a typical satellite , data is delivered to the end customer no more than thirty minutes after downloading . 
 KSAT operates two polar ground stations optimized for low Earth orbit ( LEO ) satellites , the other being SvalSat at Longyearbyen in Svalbard , Norway . These are the only two ground stations able to communicate with all orbits of LEO satellites . By using both stations , customers can download data twice per orbit , twenty @-@ six times per day , with only a forty @-@ minute maximum delay . 
 The ground station is connected to KSAT 's Tromsø Network Operation Center , which is also connected to the TSS and SvalSat . This allows for redundancy as also TSS and TrollSat can be used to communicate with the satellites . The operation center is responsible for backup , scheduling and conflict resolution . The facility uses interoperability and shared ground services , such as a common protocol for communication and similar design of the antennas , to increase flexibility and reduce costs and risk . 
 TrollSat sees only a fraction of the business of SvalSat . Troll is used for downloading from the Canadian Space Agency 's Radarsat @-@ 1 and Radarsat @-@ 2 , and the private GeoEye @-@ 1 , WorldView @-@ 1 and WorldView @-@ 2 . It will also be one of thirty ground stations for the European Space Agency ( ESA ) ' s satellite navigation system Galileo , and is Norway 's main contribution to the project . It further serves ESA 's Envisat and several National Aeronautics and Space Administration satellites . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Troll is located in the eastern part of Princess Martha Coast in Queen Maud Land , on the nunatak bare ground area Jutulsessen , at 1 @,@ 270 meters ( 4 @,@ 170 ft ) above mean sea level . Troll is completely surrounded by the Antarctic ice sheet and is 235 kilometers ( 146 mi ) from the coast . The research station facilities are owned by the Government of Norway through the Norwegian Directorate of Public Construction and Property . Operation of the facility carried by another government agency , the Norwegian Polar Institute . The station has a cold and dry climate , being located in a desert . The annual mean temperature is − 25 ° C ( − 13 ° F ) , with the summer temperature able to reach about 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) , and the lowest during the winter at − 50 ° C ( − 58 ° F ) . Storms , which can occur throughout the year , can occasionally make outdoor activity impossible . 
 TrollSat targets satellites in a polar orbit and consists of a single radome with an 7 @.@ 3 @-@ meter ( 24 ft ) low Earth orbit antenna capable of S band and X band reception . To relay the information , TrollSat has a 4 @.@ 8 @-@ meter ( 16 ft ) and a 7 @.@ 6 @-@ meter ( 25 ft ) C band uplink to provide 45 megabit per second broadband connection to Europe and North America . 
 = Carolina Panthers = 
 The Carolina Panthers are a professional American football team based in Charlotte , North Carolina . The Panthers compete in the National Football League ( NFL ) , as a member club of the league 's National Football Conference ( NFC ) South division . The club is worth approximately US $ 1 @.@ 56 billion , according to Forbes , and is controlled by founder Jerry Richardson and his family , who have a 48 percent stake ; the remainder of the team is held by a group of 14 limited partners . The team president is Danny Morrison , and the head coach is Ron Rivera . 
 The Panthers were announced as the league 's 29th franchise in 1993 , and began play in 1995 . The Panthers played well in their first two years , finishing 7 – 9 in 1995 ( an all @-@ time best for an NFL expansion team 's first season ) and 12 – 4 the following year , winning the NFC West before ultimately losing to the eventual Super Bowl champion Green Bay Packers in the NFC Championship Game . They did not have another winning season until 2003 , when they won the NFC Championship Game and reached Super Bowl XXXVIII , losing 32 – 29 to the New England Patriots . After recording playoff appearances in 2005 and 2008 , the team failed to record another playoff appearance until 2013 , the first of three consecutive NFC South titles . After losing in the divisional round to the San Francisco 49ers in 2013 and the Seattle Seahawks in 2014 , the Panthers finally returned to the Super Bowl in 2016 , but lost to the Denver Broncos . The Panthers have reached the playoffs seven times , advancing to four NFC Championship Games and two Super Bowls . They have won six division titles , one in the NFC West and five in the NFC South . 
 The Carolina Panthers are legally registered as Panther Football , LLC . The team is headquartered in Bank of America Stadium in uptown Charlotte ; also the team 's home field . They are one of the few NFL teams to own the stadium they play in , which is legally registered as Panthers Stadium , LLC . The Panthers are supported throughout the Carolinas ; although the team has played its home games in Charlotte since 1996 , it played home games at Memorial Stadium in Clemson , South Carolina during its first season . The team hosts its annual training camp at Wofford College in Spartanburg , South Carolina . The Panthers ' uniform is a black , white , and blue jersey , typically worn with white and silver pants . 
 = = History = = 
 On December 15 , 1987 , entrepreneur Jerry Richardson announced his bid for an NFL expansion franchise in the Carolinas . A North Carolina native , Richardson was a former wide receiver on the Baltimore Colts who had used his 1959 league championship bonus to co @-@ found the Hardee 's restaurant chain , later becoming president and CEO of TW Services . Richardson drew his inspiration to pursue an NFL franchise from George Shinn , who had made a successful bid for an expansion National Basketball Association ( NBA ) team in Charlotte , the Charlotte Hornets . Richardson founded Richardson Sports , a partnership consisting of himself , his family , and a number of businessmen from North and South Carolina were also recruited to be limited partners . Richardson looked at four potential locations for a stadium , ultimately choosing uptown Charlotte . To highlight the demand for professional football in the Carolinas , Richardson Sports held preseason games around the area from 1989 to 1991 . The first two games were held at Carter – Finley Stadium in Raleigh , North Carolina , and Kenan Memorial Stadium in Chapel Hill , North Carolina , while the third and final game was held at Williams @-@ Brice Stadium in Columbia , South Carolina . The matchups were between existing NFL teams . In 1991 , the group formally filed an application for the open expansion spot , and on October 26 , 1993 , the 28 NFL owners unanimously named the Carolina Panthers as the 29th member of the NFL . 
 The Panthers first competed in the 1995 NFL season ; they were one of two expansion teams to begin play that year , the other being the Jacksonville Jaguars . The Panthers were put in the NFC West to increase the size of that division to five teams ; there were already two other southeastern teams in the division , the Atlanta Falcons and the New Orleans Saints . Former Pittsburgh Steelers defensive coordinator Dom Capers was named the first head coach . The team finished its inaugural season 7 – 9 , the best performance ever from a first @-@ year expansion team . They performed even better in their second season , finishing with a 12 – 4 record and winning the NFC West division , as well as securing a first @-@ round bye . The Panthers beat the Dallas Cowboys in the divisional round before losing the NFC Championship Game to the eventual Super Bowl champions , the Green Bay Packers . The team managed only a 7 – 9 finish in 1997 and slipped to 4 – 12 in 1998 , leading to Capers ' dismissal as head coach . 
 The Panthers hired former San Francisco 49ers head coach George Seifert to replace Capers , and he led the team to an 8 – 8 record in 1999 . The team finished 7 – 9 in 2000 and fell to 1 – 15 in 2001 , winning their first game but losing their last 15 . This performance tied the NFL record for most losses in a single season and it broke the record held by the winless 1976 Buccaneers for most consecutive losses in a single season ( both records have since been broken by the 2008 Lions ) , leading the Panthers to fire Seifert . 
 After the NFL 's expansion to 32 teams in 2002 , the Panthers were relocated from the NFC West to the newly created NFC South division ; The Panthers ' rivalries with the Falcons and Saints were maintained , and they would be joined by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers . New York Giants defensive coordinator John Fox was hired to replace Seifert and led the team to a 7 – 9 finish in 2002 . Although the team 's defense gave up very few yards , ranking the second @-@ best in the NFL in terms of yards conceded , they were hindered by an offense that gained very few yards , ranking as the second @-@ worst in the league in terms of yards gained . The Panthers improved to 11 – 5 in the 2003 regular season , winning the NFC South and making it to Super Bowl XXXVIII before losing to the New England Patriots 32 – 29 in what was immediately hailed by sportswriter Peter King as the " Greatest Super Bowl of all time " . King felt the game " was a wonderful championship battle , full of everything that makes football dramatic , draining , enervating , maddening , fantastic , exciting " and praised , among other things , the unpredictability , coaching , and conclusion . The game is still viewed as one of the best Super Bowls of all time , and in the opinion of Charlotte @-@ based NPR reporter Scott <unk> , the Panthers ' Super Bowl appearance represented the arrival of Charlotte onto the national scene . 
 Following a rocky 1 – 7 start in 2004 , the Panthers rebounded to win six of their last seven games despite losing 14 players for the season due to injury . They lost their last game to New Orleans , finishing the 2004 season at 7 – 9 . Had they won the game , the Panthers would have made the playoffs . The team improved to 11 – 5 in 2005 , finishing second in the division behind Tampa Bay and clinching a playoff berth as a wild @-@ card . In the first round of the playoffs , the Panthers went on the road to face the New York Giants , beating them 23 – 0 for the NFL 's first playoff shutout against a home team since 1980 . The following week , they beat Chicago 29 – 21 on the road , but lost key players Julius Peppers , a defensive end , and <unk> Foster , a running back , who were both injured during the game . The Panthers were then defeated 34 – 14 by the Seattle Seahawks in the NFC Championship Game , ending their season . Although the Panthers went into the 2006 season as favorites to win the NFC South , they finished with a disappointing 8 – 8 record . The team finished the 2007 season with a 7 – 9 record after losing quarterback Jake Delhomme early in the season due to an elbow injury . In 2008 , the Panthers rebounded with a 12 – 4 regular season record , winning the NFC South and securing a first @-@ round bye . They were eliminated in the divisional round of the playoffs , losing 33 – 13 to the Arizona Cardinals after Delhomme turned the ball over six times . Delhomme 's struggles carried over into the 2009 season , where he threw 18 interceptions in the first 11 games before breaking a finger in his throwing hand . The Panthers were at a 4 – 7 record before Delhomme 's season @-@ ending injury , and his backup , Matt Moore , led the team to a 4 – 1 finish to the season for an 8 – 8 overall record . 
 In 2010 , after releasing Delhomme in the offseason , the Panthers finished with a league @-@ worst ( 2 – 14 ) ; their offense was the worst in the league . John Fox 's contract expired after the season ended , and the team did not retain him or his staff . They hired Ron Rivera to replace Fox as head coach and drafted Auburn 's Heisman Trophy @-@ winning quarterback Cam Newton with the first overall pick in the 2011 NFL Draft . The Panthers opened the 2011 season 2 – 6 , but finished with a 6 – 10 record , and Newton was awarded the AP Offensive Rookie of the Year award after setting the NFL record for most rushing touchdowns from a quarterback ( 14 ) in a single season and becoming the first rookie NFL quarterback to throw for over 4 @,@ 000 yards in a single season . He also was the first rookie quarterback to rush for over 500 yards in a single season . In 2012 , the Panthers again opened the season poorly , losing five out of their first six games , leading longtime general manager Marty <unk> to be fired in response . The team slid to a 2 – 8 record before winning five of their last six games , resulting in a 7 – 9 record . This strong finish helped save Rivera 's job . The Panthers would have a winning season the following year , finishing with a 12 – 4 record and winning their third NFC South title and another playoff bye , but they were beaten by the 49ers in the Divisional Round . In 2014 , the Panthers opened the season with two wins , but after 12 games sat at only 3 – 8 – 1 due in part to a seven @-@ game winless streak . A four @-@ game winning streak to end the season secured the team their second consecutive NFC South championship and playoff berth , despite a losing record of 7 – 8 – 1 . The Panthers defeated the Arizona Cardinals 27 – 16 in the wild card round to advance to the divisional playoffs , where they lost to eventual NFC champion Seattle 31 @-@ 17 . The 2015 season saw the Panthers start the season 14 – 0 and finish the season 15 – 1 , which tied for the best regular season record in NFC history . The Panthers also secured their third consecutive NFC South championship , as well as their first overall top seeded playoff berth . In the 2015 – 16 playoffs , the Panthers defeated the Seattle Seahawks in the NFC Divisional playoffs 31 – 24 , after shutting them out in the first half 31 @-@ 0 and the Arizona Cardinals 49 – 15 ( highest score in NFC Championship history ) in the NFC Championship Game to advance to Super Bowl 50 , their first Super Bowl appearance since the 2003 season . The Panthers lost a defensive struggle to the AFC Champion Denver Broncos 24 @-@ 10 . 
 = = Logo and uniforms = = 
 In choosing the team name , the Richardsons did not run focus groups with potential fans . Their intention had always been the ' Panthers ' ; Jerry Richardson began driving a car with the license plate ' <unk> ' near the end of 1989 . By the time they had been announced as the 29th NFL team in October 1993 , the Panthers ' logo and helmet design had already been finalized , but the uniform design was still under creation . After discussion , the Panthers organization decided on jerseys colored white , black , and blue , and pants colored white and silver . The exact tone of blue , which they decided would be " process blue " ( a shade lighter than Duke 's and darker than North Carolina 's ) , was the most difficult color to choose . 
 The team 's uniform has remained largely the same since its creation , with only minor alterations such as changing the sock color of the team 's black uniforms from blue to black and changing the team 's shoes from white to black . Richardson , a self @-@ described traditionalist , said that no major uniform changes would be made in his lifetime , but the Panthers changed their logo and logotype in 2012 , the first such change in team history . According to the team , the changes were designed to give their logo an " aggressive , contemporary look " as well to give it a more three @-@ dimensional feel . 
 The Panthers have three main jersey colors : black , white , and blue . Their blue jerseys , designated their alternate uniforms , are the newest and were introduced in 2002 . NFL regulations allow the team to use the blue jersey up to two times in any given season . In all other games , the team must wear either their white or black jerseys ; in NFL games , the home team decides whether to wear a dark or white jersey , while the away team wears the opposite . The Panthers typically pair their white jerseys with white pants , while the black and blue jerseys are paired with silver pants ; there have only been a few exceptions to these combinations . The first such instance was in 1998 , when the team paired their white jerseys with silver pants in a game against the Indianapolis Colts . The second instance was in 2012 during a game against the Denver Broncos , when they paired their black jerseys with new black pants ; this created an all @-@ black uniform , with the exception of blue socks and silver helmets . The decision to wear blue socks was made by team captain Steve Smith , who felt the blue socks gave the uniforms a more distinct appearance compared with other teams that have all @-@ black uniforms . The all @-@ black uniforms won the " Greatest Uniform in NFL History " contest , a fan @-@ voted contest run by NFL.com in July 2013 . In July 2013 , the team 's equipment manager , Jackie Miles , said the Panthers intended to use the all @-@ black uniform more in the future . The Panthers wore the all @-@ black uniform three times the following season , once each in the preseason and regular season , and the third time during the home divisional round playoff game vs the 49ers . During the Panthers ' 2015 Thanksgiving Day game against the Dallas Cowboys , they debuted an all @-@ blue uniform as part of Nike 's " Color Rush " series . 
 The team 's uniform did not change significantly after Nike became the NFL 's jersey supplier in 2012 , but the collar was altered to honor former Panthers player and coach Sam Mills by featuring the phrase " Keep Pounding " . Nike had conceived the idea , and the team supported the concept as a way to expose newer fans to the legacy of Mills , who died of cancer in 2005 . Mills had introduced the phrase , which has since become a team slogan , in a speech that he gave to the players and coaches prior to their 2003 playoff game against Dallas ; in the speech , Mills compared his fight against cancer with the team 's on @-@ field battle , saying " When I found out I had cancer , there were two things I could do – quit or keep pounding . I 'm a fighter . I kept pounding . You 're fighters , too . Keep pounding ! " 
 = = Stadium and practice facilities = = 
 The Panthers played their first season at Memorial Stadium in Clemson , South Carolina , as their facility in uptown Charlotte was still under construction . Ericsson Stadium , called Bank of America Stadium since 2004 , opened in the summer of 1996 . Bank of America Stadium is owned entirely by the Panthers , making them one of the few teams in the NFL to own the facility they play in . The stadium was specially designed by HOK Sports Facilities Group for football . It also serves as the headquarters and administrative office of the Panthers . On some days of the week , the stadium offers public tours for a fee . Private tours for groups are offered for a fee seven days a week , though there are some exceptions , and such tours must be arranged in advance . Two bronze panther statues flank each of the stadium 's three main entrances ; they are the largest sculptures ever commissioned in the United States . The names of the team 's original PSL owners are engraved on the base of each statue . The two people in the Panthers Hall of Honor , team executive Mike McCormack and linebacker Sam Mills , are honored with life @-@ sized bronze statues outside the stadium . Mills , in addition to being the only player in the Hall of Honor , is the only player to have had his jersey number ( # 51 ) retired by the Panthers as of 2016 . 
 The Panthers have three open @-@ air fields next to Bank of America Stadium where they currently hold their practices ; during the 1995 season , when the team played their home games in South Carolina , the team held their practices at Winthrop University in Rock Hill , South Carolina . Because the practice fields , along with the stadium , are located in uptown Charlotte , the fields are directly visible from skyscrapers as well as from a four @-@ story condominium located across the street . According to Mike Cranston , a running joke said that the Panthers ' division rivals had pooled their resources to purchase a room on the building 's top floor , and that a fire at the condominium was caused by the Panthers organization . In order to prevent people from seeing inside the field while the team is practicing , the team has added " strategically planted trees and a tarp over the ... fence surrounding the fields " . Additionally , they employ a security team to watch for and chase away any people who stop alongside the fence surrounding the field . In the event of bad weather , the team moves their practices to an indoor sports facility about 10 miles from the stadium . The team does not own this facility . The Panthers have hosted their annual training camp at Wofford College in Spartanburg , South Carolina , since 1995 . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Pat <unk> of ESPN.com observed that while there is " a bit of a wine @-@ and @-@ cheese atmosphere at Panthers games ... there is a strong core of diehard fans who bring energy to Bank of America Stadium . Charlotte lives and dies with the Panthers because there aren 't a lot of other options in the sports world " . The Panthers are also supported in South Carolina ; Nikki Haley , the state 's Governor , declared July 30 , 2012 , " Carolina Panthers Day " in her state , saying that " when it comes to professional teams , the Carolina Panthers are the team that South Carolina calls their own " . Sports Illustrated graded the Panthers as having the 10th highest " NFL Fan Value Experience " in 2007 , attributing much of the fan atmosphere to the team 's newness when compared to the established basketball fanbase . They also observed that the stadium has scattered parking lots , each of which has a different tailgating style . Some have fried chicken , pork , or Carolina @-@ style barbecue , while others have live bands and televisions . Pickup football games in the parking lots are common , but fans tend to " behave themselves " , in part due to blue laws that prevent the sale of alcohol before noon on Sundays . 
 The Carolina Panthers have sold out all home games since December 2002 , and their home attendance has ranked in the NFL 's top ten since 2006 . 
 = = = Mascot , cheerleaders , and drumline = = = 
 Sir Purr , an anthropomorphic black cat who wears a jersey numbered ' 00 ' , has been the Panthers ' mascot since their first season . During games , Sir Purr provides sideline entertainment through skits and " silly antics " . The mascot participates in a number of community events year @-@ round , including a monthly visit to the patients at Levine Children 's Hospital . Sir Purr also hosts the annual Mascot Bowl , an event which pits pro and college mascots against each other during halftime at a selected Panthers home game . 
 The team 's cheerleaders are the Carolina <unk> , a group of 24 women who lead cheers and entertain fans at home games . The <unk> participate in both corporate and charity events . The team 's drumline is <unk> , an ensemble of snare , tenor , and bass drummers as well as cymbal players . <unk> performs for fans outside the stadium and introduces players prior to home games ; it consists of drummers from across the Carolinas . 
 = = = Keep Pounding Drum = = = 
 Starting with the 2012 season , the Panthers introduced the Keep Pounding Drum , inspired by the aforementioned motivational speech by Sam Mills before the team 's 2004 playoff game against the Cowboys . Prior to each home game , an honorary drummer hits the six @-@ foot tall drum four times to signify the four quarters of an American football game . According to the team , the drummers " come from a variety of backgrounds and occupations , but all have overcome a great trial or adversity that has not only made them strong but also pushes them to make others around them stronger " . Drummers have included current and former Panthers players , military veterans , Make @-@ A @-@ Wish children , and athletes from other sports , including NBA MVP and Charlotte native Stephen Curry , US women 's national soccer team players Whitney Engen and Heather O 'Reilly , and 6 @-@ time NASCAR Cup Series champion Jimmie Johnson . 
 = = = Songs and Traditions = = = 
 During the inaugural season of the Panthers , the team had an official fight song , which the team played before each home game . The song , " Stand and Cheer " , remains the team 's official fight song , but the team does not typically play it before home games . Due to negative fan reaction " Stand and Cheer " was pulled in 1999 . Since 2006 , the song has returned . In recent seasons the team has played Neil Diamond 's " Sweet Caroline " and Chairmen of the Board 's " I 'd Rather Be In Carolina " immediately after home victories . A " keep pounding " chant was introduced during the 2015 season which starts before the opening kickoff of each home game . As prompted by the video boards , one side of the stadium shouts " keep " and the other side replies with " pounding " . The chant is similar to ones that take place at college football games . 
 = = = Charity and community work = = = 
 The Carolina Panthers support a variety of non @-@ profits in North and South Carolina through the Carolina Panthers Charities . Four annual scholarships are awarded to student athletes through the Carolina Panthers Graduate Scholarship and the Carolina Panthers Players Sam Mills Memorial Scholarship programs . Carolina Panthers Charities also offers grants to non @-@ profits that support education , athletics , and human services in the community . The Panthers and Fisher Athletic has provided six equipment grants to high school football teams in the Carolinas each year since 2010 . Carolina Panthers Charities raises funds at three annual benefits : the Countdown to Kickoff Luncheon , the team 's first public event each season ; Football 101 , an educational workshop for fans ; and the Weekend Warrior Flag Football Tournament , a two @-@ day non @-@ contact flag football tournament . Another annual benefit is Taste of the Panthers , a gourmet food tasting which raises funds for Second Harvest Food Bank of <unk> . 
 In 2003 the Panthers and Carolinas <unk> Foundation established the Keep Pounding Fund , a fundraising initiative to support cancer research and patient support programs . The Panthers community has raised more than $ 1 @.@ 4 million for the fund through direct donations , charity auctions , blood drives , and an annual <unk> stadium run . The Panthers and Levine Children 's Hospital coordinate monthly hospital visits and VIP game @-@ day experiences for terminally ill or hospitalized children . 
 In addition to these team @-@ specific efforts , the Panthers participate in a number of regular initiatives promoted by the NFL and USA Football , the league 's youth football development partner . These include USA Football Month , held throughout August to encourage and promote youth football ; A Crucial Catch , the league 's Breast Cancer Awareness Month program ; Salute to Service , held throughout November to support military families and personnel ; and PLAY 60 , which encourages young NFL fans to be active for at least 60 minutes each day . 
 = = = Radio and television = = = 
 Radio coverage is provided by flagship station <unk> ( 1110 AM ) and through the Carolina Panthers Radio Network , with affiliates throughout the Carolinas , Georgia , and Virginia . The Panthers ' radio broadcasting team is led by Mick Mixon , Eugene Robinson , and Jim <unk> . The radio network broadcasts pre @-@ game coverage , games with commentary , and post @-@ game wrap @-@ ups . It also live @-@ broadcasts Panther Talk , a weekly event at Bank of America Stadium which offers fans a chance to meet a player and ask questions of the staff . 
 National broadcasting and cable television networks cover regular season games , as well as some preseason games . Locally , Fox owned and operated station <unk> airs most regular @-@ season games , while any home games against an AFC team air on CBS affiliate WBTV . Any appearances on Monday Night Football are simulcast on ABC affiliate <unk> @-@ TV , while any late @-@ season appearances on Thursday Night Football are simulcast on WBTV . Sunday night and some Thursday night games are aired on NBC affiliate <unk> @-@ TV . 
 All preseason games and team specials are televised by the Carolina Panthers Television Network on flagship station <unk> in Charlotte and fourteen affiliate stations throughout the Carolinas , Georgia , Virginia , and Tennessee . The television broadcasting team consists of play @-@ by @-@ play commentator Mike Morgan , color analyst and former Panthers player Mike Rucker , and sideline reporter Pete <unk> . The network also hosts The Panthers Huddle , a weekly show focusing on the Panthers ' upcoming opponent . Panthers Gameday , the Panthers ' postgame show , is hosted by sports anchor Russ Owens and former Panthers lineman Kevin <unk> on <unk> @-@ TV . 
 The Panthers also offer game broadcasts in Spanish on an eight @-@ station network fronted by <unk> @-@ FM in <unk> , South Carolina , as well as additional radio affiliates in Mexico . Jaime Moreno provides the play @-@ by @-@ play while his nephew , Luis Moreno , Jr . , is the color commentator . They have become popular even among English @-@ speaking Panther fans for their high @-@ energy , colorful announcing style . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 The Panthers have developed heated rivalries with the three fellow members of the NFC South ( the Atlanta Falcons , Tampa Bay Buccaneers , and New Orleans Saints ) . The team 's fiercest rivals are the Falcons and Buccaneers . 
 The Falcons are a natural geographic rival for the Panthers , as Atlanta is only 230 miles ( 370 kilometers ) south on I @-@ 85 . The two teams have played each other twice a year since the Panthers ' inception , and games between the two teams feature large contingents of Panthers fans at Atlanta 's Georgia Dome . 
 The Panthers ' rivalry with Tampa Bay has been described as the most intense in the NFC South . The rivalry originated in 2002 with the formation of the NFC South , but became particularly heated before the 2003 season with verbal bouts between players on the two teams . It escalated further when the Panthers went to Tampa Bay and beat them in what ESPN.com writer Pat <unk> described as " one of the most physical contests in recent memory " . The rivalry has resulted in a number of severe injuries for players on both teams , some of which have been caused by foul play . One of these plays , an illegal hit on Tampa Bay punt returner Clifton Smith , sparked a brief melee between both teams in 2009 . 
 During their time in the NFC West , the Panthers began developing a rivalry with the San Francisco 49ers . This rivalry faded after the NFL moved the Panthers out of the NFC West . 
 The Panthers also have a new rivalry with the Seattle Seahawks after playing them six times since the 2012 season , including twice in the playoffs . Carolina is 2 – 4 against Seattle during this stretch and 1 – 1 in the NFL playoffs . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current roster = = = 
 = = = Hall of Honor = = = 
 The Carolina Panthers Hall of Honor was established in 1997 to honor individuals for their contributions to the Carolina Panthers organization . Each inductee is honored with a life @-@ sized bronze statue outside of Bank of America Stadium 's North Entrance , while the names of each original PSL owner are written on the black granite base at each of the six panther statues . A rule added in the mid @-@ 2000s by the Panthers organization requires all potential inductees to be retired for at least five years before they are eligible for induction . 
 = = = Pro Football Hall of Fame enshrinees = = = 
 Nominees for the Pro Football Hall of Fame , which " honor [ s ] individuals who have made outstanding contributions to professional football " , are determined by a 46 @-@ member selection committee . At least 80 % of voters must approve the nominee for him to be inducted . 
 = = Ownership and administration = = 
 Jerry Richardson is the owner and founder of the Carolina Panthers . Richardson and his family own about 48 % of the team , with the remaining 52 % owned by a group of 14 limited partners . Richardson paid $ 206 million for the rights to start the team in 1993 ; according to Forbes , the Panthers are worth approximately $ 1 billion as of 2012 . They ranked the Carolina Panthers as the 16th @-@ most valuable NFL team and the 23rd most valuable sports team in the world . 
 Mike McCormack , a Hall of Fame lineman for the Cleveland Browns and former coach and executive for the Seattle Seahawks , was the Panthers ' first team president , presiding in that role from 1994 until his retirement in 1997 ; McCormack was inducted as the first person in the Carolina Panthers Hall of Honor later that year . Jerry Richardson 's son , Mark , was appointed as the team 's second president in 1997 and served in that role until he stepped down in 2009 . His brother Jon , who had been president of Bank of America Stadium , stepped down at the same time . The resignations of Mark and Jon Richardson were unexpected , as it was thought that the two would eventually take over the team from their father . Mark Richardson was replaced by Danny Morrison , who had previously served as the athletic director of both Texas Christian University and Wofford College , Richardson 's alma mater . 
 = = = Coaches = = = 
 The Carolina Panthers have had four head coaches . Dom Capers was the head coach from 1995 to 1998 and led the team to one playoff appearance . Counting playoff games , he finished with a record of 31 – 35 ( <unk> ) . George Seifert coached the team from 1999 to 2001 , recording 16 wins and 32 losses ( .333 ) ; he is the only head coach in team history not to have led the team to a playoff appearance . John Fox , the team 's longest @-@ tenured head coach , led the team from 2002 to 2010 and coached the team to three playoff appearances including Super Bowl XXXVIII which the Panthers lost . Including playoff games , Fox ended his tenure with a 78 – 74 ( .513 ) record , making him the only Panthers coach to finish his tenure with the team with a winning record . Ron Rivera , the team 's current head coach , has held the position since 2011 and has led the team to three playoff appearances including Super Bowl 50 which the Panthers also lost . Counting playoff games , he has a career record of 50 – 35 – 1 ( <unk> ) . Statistically , Rivera has the highest winning percentage of any Panthers head coach . 
 = = = Current staff = = = 
 = = Team records = = 
 Since they began playing football in 1995 , the Panthers have been to four NFC Championship Games ; they lost two ( 1996 and 2005 ) and won two ( 2003 and 2015 ) . The Panthers have won six division championships : the NFC West championship in 1996 and the NFC South championship in 2003 , 2008 , 2013 , 2014 , and 2015 . They are the first and only team to win the NFC South back to back and have won the NFC South more times than any other team in the division . They have finished as runners @-@ up in their division six times , finishing second @-@ place in the NFC West in 1997 and 1999 and finishing second @-@ place in the NFC South in 2005 , 2006 , 2007 , and 2012 . They have qualified for the playoffs 7 times , most recently in 2015 . 
 Kicker John <unk> is the team 's career points leader . <unk> scored 1 @,@ 482 points during his 16 seasons ( 1995 – 2010 ) with the Panthers . Quarterback Jake Delhomme , who played with the team from 2003 to 2009 , is the career passing leader , having thrown for 19 @,@ 258 yards over his seven seasons with the team . Running back DeAngelo Williams is the career rushing leader for the Carolina Panthers . Williams , during his tenure with the team ( 2006 – 2014 ) , rushed for 6 @,@ 846 yards with the Panthers . Wide receiver Steve Smith , the team 's leading receiver , recorded 12 @,@ 197 receiving yards during his 13 @-@ year ( 2001 – 2013 ) tenure with the team . 
 = Unearthed Arcana = 
 Unearthed Arcana ( abbreviated UA ) is the title shared by two hardback books published for different editions of the Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role @-@ playing game . Both were designed as supplements to the core rulebooks , containing material that expanded upon other rules . 
 The original Unearthed Arcana was written primarily by Gary Gygax , and published by game publisher TSR in 1985 for use with the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons first edition rules . The book consisted mostly of material previously published in magazines , and included new races , classes , and other material to expand the rules in the Dungeon Masters Guide and Players Handbook . The book was notorious for its considerable number of errors , and was received negatively by the gaming press whose criticisms targeted the over @-@ powered races and classes , among other issues . Gygax intended to use the book 's content for a planned second edition of Advanced Dungeons & Dragons ; however , much of the book 's content was not reused in the second edition , which went into development shortly after Gygax 's departure from TSR . 
 A second book using the Unearthed Arcana title was produced by Wizards of the Coast for Dungeons & Dragons third edition in 2004 . The designers did not reproduce material from the original book , but instead attempted to emulate its purpose by providing variant rules and options to change the game itself . 
 = = Advanced Dungeons & Dragons = = 
 = = = Development history = = = 
 The original Unearthed Arcana was written by Gary Gygax with design and editing contributions by Jeff Grubb and Kim Mohan , respectively , and published by TSR in 1985 . Gygax reportedly produced the book to raise money as TSR was deeply in debt at the time . He announced in the March 1985 issue of Dragon magazine that Unearthed Arcana would be released in the summer of that year . He proposed the book as " an interim volume to expand the Dungeon Masters Guide and Players Handbook " , as the information was spread out in several places and difficult to keep track of . Unearthed Arcana was to include material previously published in Dragon , written by Gygax and updated and revised for the book . The book would also contain previously unpublished material , some of it written by other contributors to Dragon . According to British writer Paul Cockburn , some of the material in Unearthed Arcana had been previously published in Imagine magazine . 
 The original Unearthed Arcana contains errors in its text , which readers discovered and reported to Dragon magazine . Even some positive reviews of the book pointed out the considerable number of mistakes . Dragon editor Kim Mohan , with ideas from Gygax , Frank Mentzer , and Jeff Grubb , addressed the many errors found in the book . In the November 1985 issue of Dragon magazine , Mohan printed four pages of rules corrections as well as new supplementary material intended to be inserted into the book , and some explanations and justifications for items which were not actually errors , and compiled a two @-@ page list of type corrections meant to be pasted into further revisions of Unearthed Arcana . Dragon also devoted the entirety of its " Sage Advice " column in the January 1987 issue to answering readers ' questions about Unearthed Arcana , as a follow @-@ up to Mohan 's prior column . However , the errata were not incorporated into later printings of the manual . 
 The original Unearthed Arcana was reproduced in a premium edition with gilded pages , released on February 19 , 2013 , after the premium reprints of the 1st Edition Player 's Handbook , Dungeon Masters Guide , and Monster Manual . This reprint is the first printing of the book to be modified with the errata previously published in Dragon magazine incorporated into the corrected text . 
 = = = Contents = = = 
 The 128 @-@ page Unearthed Arcana was written for use with the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons first edition rules and was divided into two sections : one for players and one for the Dungeon Master ( or " DM " , the game organizer ) . The book provided new races , classes , and other expansion material . The book gives details on using " subraces " of the standard races , such as dark elves ( drow ) , and deep gnomes ( <unk> ) , for use as player characters and non @-@ player characters . 
 Unearthed Arcana includes the barbarian ( found in Dragon # 63 ) , cavalier ( found in Dragon # 72 ) , and thief @-@ acrobat ( found in Dragon # 69 ) character classes , and also includes expansions and revisions of the druid and ranger classes . The book presents a large addition to the range of character races , including the drow and <unk> . The book includes new weapons , and revised information on character level maximums for non @-@ human player characters . Unearthed Arcana details the weapon specialization rules , in which a fighter or ranger " can adopt a weapon as a special arm , and receive bonuses in its use " . The book also describes the <unk> attribute , and contains new spells . The DM 's section covers suggestions for handling player characters , social class and rank tables , many new magic items , weaponless combat rules , and nonhuman deities . 
 = = = Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition = = = 
 By 1985 Gygax was planning a second edition for the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons ( AD & D ) rules , and intended beginning work on this in 1986 . He intended to incorporate material from Unearthed Arcana , Oriental Adventures , and the original Players Handbook into the new edition 's Players Handbook . Gygax used the book to explore some ideas he had for the new edition , such as changing the mechanics for hit dice ( the measurement of a character 's " health " in the game ) , and altering the game 's mechanics to allow the game system to work other genres , and to allow characters to have skills that complement the character classes . Shortly after announcing his intentions for second edition , Gygax was removed as TSR 's President and Chairman of the Board . In 1986 he resigned all positions with TSR , leaving the shape and direction of the Dungeons & Dragons game to other designers . 
 The designers of second edition Advanced Dungeons & Dragons removed material from the original Players Handbook in the new edition , as well as much of the new material that had appeared in Unearthed Arcana , which they considered to be " unbalanced " . The book had five printings after the release of AD & D 2nd edition with the last printing published two years after the new edition was released . 
