 = = Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition = = 
 The second book to use the name Unearthed Arcana was written by Andy Collins , Jesse Decker , David Noonan , and Rich Redman , and published in February 2004 by Wizards of the Coast , for use with the Dungeons & Dragons third edition rules . Cover art was by Matt <unk> , with interior art by Steven <unk> , Ed Cox , Wayne England , Emily <unk> , David <unk> , Jeremy Jarvis , Doug Kovacs , John and Laura <unk> , David Martin , Dennis Crabapple McClain , Mark Nelson , James <unk> , Steve Prescott , David Roach , Richard <unk> , Ron Spencer , Stephen Tappin , Joel Thomas , and Ben Thompson . The designers aimed the book at experienced players and DMs looking for something new , encouraging them to customize the game 's rules . The designers did not want the third edition book to be like the original Unearthed Arcana mechanically , because according to Andy Collins : " Every book on the market looks like the original Unearthed Arcana . New classes , new spells , new magic items - that 's the default " recipe " for a d20 product these days . We saw no need to do that with this book . " Where the original Unearthed Arcana had simply expanded the rules and options of the core game , this 224 @-@ page supplement was aimed at providing an extensive list of variant rules and options to change the standard game itself . The volume of options added was intentionally excessive ; according to the designers , a Dungeon Master who reads the book must be prepared to " Drink from the fire hose " and to think before using options that may radically imbalance the game . The book ends with a checklist of the included variants , preceded by a short chapter discussing ways of transitioning among multiple games using different rulesets ( one of which explicitly emulates the " Eternal Champion " stories of Michael Moorcock ) . 
 = = Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition = = 
 After no appearance in 4th edition , Unearthed Arcana made a return for 5th edition in February 2015 . But instead of being a retail book like the previous volumes , 5th edition Unearthed Arcana is so far a digital @-@ only article released every month . Explicitly said to be " written in pencil , not ink " , the Unearthed Arcana articles showcase new work @-@ in @-@ progress content consisting of options for players and Dungeon Masters alike such as class archetypes , playable races , and rule variants . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reaction to Unearthed Arcana was often critical . According to Lawrence Schick , in his 1991 book Heroic Worlds , " Many players regard the new character classes introduced in this volume as overly powerful and out of line with those in the Player 's Handbook . " 
 Paul Cockburn reviewed the original Unearthed Arcana in issue 73 of White Dwarf magazine ( January 1986 ) , rating it 4 out of 10 overall . He summed up the book 's contents by calling them " A rules extension package of reprints , most of which add very little of interest or value to anybody 's game . " Cockburn predicted that the book would be a huge commercial success due to the seemingly never @-@ filled appetite some people have for new material . However , he felt that as a rules companion book it would not be used universally by gaming tournaments or by other publishers , or even players moving from one group to another , and that the book would wind up causing problems and confusion for gamers . Cockburn criticized the weapons specialization rules and the new character generating method , called the barbarian class " a farce " after losing their prohibition from magic , and considered the extended number of character races " virtually ridiculous " , as it added several over @-@ powerful races to the list . Cockburn noted that the bulk of the book was taken up by the new spells ; while he felt these spells were OK , he said they " add nothing very scintillating to the game " . Cockburn compared the cavalier class to the paladin , calling the cavalier " everything the paladin should have been in the first place " , and felt that when compared to the thief class the acrobat " offers possibilities that should have been attached to the thief from the beginning " . 
 Following Cockburn 's review , UA was subjected to further criticism by Allan Miles in two articles published in the magazine . In White Dwarf 85 ( January 1987 ) , " More Than Skin Deep " , a general discussion of the subject of PC race in AD & D , touched upon the subject in the context of Unearthed Arcana . " Arcana or <unk> ? " in White Dwarf 89 ( May 1987 ) covered the volume specifically , opening with the observation that the material published in the book was now " definitely affecting the way the game is played , " despite the fact that the bulk of its reception had been negative . Miles began by mentioning the aspects of the book that he considered predominantly unproblematic , such as the addition of new spells , magic items , weapons , and the introduction of minimum starting values for hit points . He then went on to discuss the areas he considered disruptive of game balance at length , including the new methods for character generation , malleable limits to demi @-@ human class levels and characteristics themselves , the rules regarding the new <unk> attribute , aspects of the Cavalier and Barbarian classes , changes to Thief alignment requirements , and the results of UA 's version of weapon specialization . 
 William B. Haddon 's review of the third edition Unearthed Arcana on RPGnet lauded the book 's content while criticizing the interest level of the content as " very flat " . He found the power level unbalanced for each of the new sub @-@ systems introduced , and found little in the suggested rules that he wanted to use . He did note that the book was " jam packed " with pages of variants , ideas and suggestions , and found that the " Behind the Curtain " explanations from the designers gave him insight into their thought process behind the book 's contents . Haddon called the book 's art " terrible , " explaining that " It looks cartoony and has little of the flavor or strength found in the art of so many other WotC products . " 
 = USS Hawaii ( CB @-@ 3 ) = 
 Hawaii ( CB @-@ 3 ) was originally intended to be the third member of the Alaska class of large cruisers . She was the first United States Navy ship to be named after the Territory of Hawaii . Because her construction was delayed by higher @-@ priority ships such as aircraft carriers , her keel was not laid until December 1943 , about two years after her sister ship Guam . 
 After her launch on 3 November 1945 , Hawaii began fitting out , but post @-@ war budget cutbacks necessitated the cancellation of the ship on 17 February 1947 . For a time it was planned that she would be converted to be the U.S. ' first guided missile cruiser , but this did not come to fruition . A conversion to a large command ship was later contemplated ; planning went far enough that money was allocated in the 1952 budget for this purpose , but with one ( Northampton ) complete and a second ( Wright ) already chosen , no work was started upon Hawaii . Having been laid up for twelve years , the ship was towed to breakers to be scrapped on 20 June 1959 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The initial impetus for the design of the Alaska class came from the commerce @-@ raiding abilities of German and Japanese ships ; the three Deutschland @-@ class cruisers , also known as " pocket battleships " , the two Scharnhorst @-@ class battleships , and Japan 's large force of both heavy and light cruisers . By the time that they were built , their role had expanded to protect carrier groups . It was thought that the class 's bigger guns , greater size and higher speed would give them a marked advantage in this role over heavy cruisers , and they would also provide insurance against reports that Japan was building " super cruisers " more powerful than American cruisers limited by the London Naval Treaty . 
 Hawaii was 808 feet 6 inches ( 246 @.@ 43 m ) long overall and had a beam of 91 feet 1 inch ( 27 @.@ 8 m ) and a draft of 31 feet 10 inches ( 9 @.@ 7 m ) . She displaced 29 @,@ 779 long tons ( 30 @,@ 257 t ) as designed and up to 34 @,@ 253 long tons ( 34 @,@ 803 t ) at full combat load . The ship was powered by four General Electric geared steam turbine sets , each driving one propeller , and eight oil @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers rated at 150 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 110 @,@ 000 kW ) and a top speed of 33 knots ( 61 km / h ; 38 mph ) . The ship had a cruising range of 12 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 22 @,@ 000 km ; 14 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 15 kn ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . She carried four floatplanes , housed in two hangars , with a pair of aircraft catapults mounted amidships . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of nine 12 inch L / 50 Mark 8 guns in three triple gun turrets , two in a superfiring pair forward and one aft of the superstructure . The secondary battery consisted of twelve 5 @-@ inch L / 38 dual @-@ purpose guns in six twin turrets . Two were placed on the centerline superfiring over the main battery turrets , fore and aft , and the remaining four turrets were placed on the corners of the superstructure . The light anti @-@ aircraft battery consisted of 56 quad @-@ mounted 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) Bofors guns and 34 single @-@ mounted 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) Oerlikon guns . A pair of Mk 34 gun directors aided gunlaying for the main battery , while two Mk 37 directors controlled the 5 @-@ inch guns and a Mk 57 director aided the 40 mm guns . The main armored belt was 9 in ( 229 mm ) thick , while the gun turrets had 12 @.@ 8 in ( 325 mm ) thick faces . The main armored deck was 4 in ( 102 mm ) thick . 
 = = Construction , conversion proposals and eventual fate = = 
 Along with the five Montana @-@ class battleships and the final three Alaska @-@ class cruisers , the construction of Hawaii was suspended in May 1942 before work began . This freed materials and facilities so that they could be used to build additional ships which could be completed faster and were needed in the war zones , like anti @-@ submarine escorts . Over 4 @,@ 000 long tons ( 4 @,@ 100 t ) of steel plates and shapes which had been destined for Hawaii was redirected to other ships in July 1942 . However , Hawaii was added back onto the construction queue on 25 May 1943 , unlike CB @-@ 4 through CB @-@ 6 , which were canceled on 24 June 1943 . Her keel was laid on 20 December 1943 , and she was finally launched on 3 November 1945 , about two years after Guam . The ship was sponsored by Mary P. Farrington , the wife of the delegate from the Territory of Hawaii to the United States House of Representatives , Joseph Farrington . After her launch , little , if any , work was done before construction was halted in either February or April 1947 due to the reduction in defense expenditures after World War II ; the ship was 82 @.@ 4 % complete when work was halted . The turrets for the main battery had been fitted and the superstructure was mostly finished , although the former were removed when the ship was moved into the reserve fleet at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard . 
 = = = Guided @-@ missile cruiser designs = = = 
 Similar to the incomplete battleship Kentucky , Hawaii was considered for a conversion to be a test platform for the development of guided missiles in September 1946 . Designated CB ( SW ) , the cruisers ' gun armament would have consisted of sixteen 3 @-@ inch / 70 caliber guns in eight dual mounts . Most missiles would have been mounted toward the bow , while two " missile launching pits " would be located near the stern . For this task , no armor would have been needed , and previously installed armor was to be taken off the ship when required . These plans never came to fruition , so Hawaii remained in the Reserve Fleet , still incomplete . 
 Two years later , in 1948 , a similar conversion plan was put forth . This plan , designated Project SCB 26A , proposed that Hawaii be converted into a Ballistic Guided Missile Ship . This plan called for Hawaii to be completed with 12 vertical launchers for U.S.-made V @-@ 2 short @-@ range ballistic missiles and 6 launchers for the SSM @-@ N @-@ 2 Triton surface @-@ to @-@ surface cruise missile . Triton was an attempt to give the Navy a reliable cruise missile that it could launch off of its ships . The design process began with an approval from the U.S. Navy in September 1946 . After " formulating performance objectives and possible design baselines " , the designers settled on attempting to fit a 36 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 16 @,@ 000 kg ) ramjet @-@ powered cruiser missile onto solid @-@ fuel rocket boosters that could carry the missile 2 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 700 km ; 2 @,@ 300 mi ) at Mach 1 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 5 in 1950 . After lowering the ambitious goals to more realistic levels in 1955 , a fully operational version was expected by 1965 , but with tests for the SSM @-@ N @-@ 9 / RGM @-@ 15 Regulus II planned for that year and the up @-@ and @-@ coming UGM @-@ 27 Polaris submarine @-@ launched cruise missile , the project was terminated in 1957 . One source has a variation of this scheme , with the developmental XPM ( Experimental Prototype Missile ) from Operation Bumblebee replacing the Triton launchers . XPM eventually led to the RIM @-@ 8 Talos surface @-@ to @-@ air missile . 
 Hawaii would have also been able to launch the JB @-@ 2 " Loon " cruise missile from a hydraulic catapult installed on her forward flight deck ; lastly , an aircraft crane and twin aircraft catapults were to be added on the stern of the ship . Interestingly the conversion , as envisioned , would have looked similar to a completed Graf Zeppelin @-@ class aircraft carrier . The conversion was authorized in the same year ( 1948 ) and was scheduled to be completed in 1950 ; the ship 's classification was changed to CBG @-@ 3 to reflect the planned overhaul . However , the conversion was canceled in 1949 , along with any other plans for surface ships equipped with ballistic missiles , due to the volatility of the rocket fuels and the shortcomings with guidance systems that were available . 
 = = = Large command ship = = = 
 Yet another conversion of Hawaii , this time to a " large command ship " , was contemplated from August 1951 . In this role , she would have been similar to Northampton , but larger . This conversion would have boasted expansive flag facilities and fully capable radar and communication systems for commanding carrier task forces , though there would have been no facilities for amphibious operations . Armament would have consisted of sixteen 5 " / 54 caliber guns in single mounts ; this gun size was specified because 3 " / 50 caliber guns were believed to be too light . Two radars would have been mounted : an AN / SPS @-@ 2 on top of a forward tower , and an AN / SPS @-@ 8 on the aft superstructure . In addition , an SC @-@ 2 was to be mounted on top of a short tower aft of the stack ( though forward of the SPS @-@ 8 ) ; this would have been used for " troposphere scatter communications " . 
 Two Mk37 / 25 fire @-@ control directors were planned , both fore and aft of the superstructure . The conversion plans were authorized , and her classification was changed to CBC @-@ 1 to reflect this on 26 February 1952 . Money to begin the project was included in the 1952 budget , but the only work done on the ship was the removal of the 12 " turrets , as it was intended that experience from Northampton should be analyzed before a full conversion . However , when it was seen that a smaller and cheaper ship — like the light carrier Wright — could do the same duty , the Hawaii project was canceled in 1953 . She reverted to her original designation of CB @-@ 3 on 9 September 1954 . 
 = = = Polaris study = = = 
 In February 1957 , a study entitled " Polaris Study – CB @-@ 3 " was published , proposing that Hawaii be stripped of all her guns in favor of twenty Polaris missiles , mounted in the hull vertically in roughly the same location as the third main turret would have been located , two Talos surface @-@ to @-@ air missile ( SAM ) launchers , one each fore and aft , two Tartar SAMs mounted on either side of the superstructure , and a single ASROC anti @-@ submarine weapon mounted where the second main turret would have been placed . Nothing further was done with the study . 
 = = = Disposal = = = 
 On 9 June 1958 , Hawaii was struck from the Naval Vessel Register and the ship was sold to the Boston Metals Company of Baltimore on 15 April 1959 . The still @-@ incomplete Hawaii was towed to Baltimore , arriving there on 6 January 1960 , and was subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = Maddison Elliott = 
 Maddison Gae Elliott OAM ( born 3 November 1998 in Newcastle , New South Wales ) is an Australian swimmer . At the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London , she became the youngest Australian Paralympic medallist by winning bronze medals in the women 's 400 m and 100 m freestyle S8 events . She then became the youngest Australian gold medallist when she was a member of the women 's 4 × 100 m freestyle relay 34 points team . She has been selected to represent Australia at the 2016 Rio Paralympics . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Maddison Gae Elliott was born on 3 November 1998 . She has right side cerebral palsy as a result of a neonatal stroke , and was diagnosed with the condition when she was four years old . In addition to swimming , she participated in athletics , and by 2010 held six Australian age group classification records . In 2016 , she was living in <unk> Heights , New South Wales , and a year 12 student at Bishop Tyrrell Anglican College . She has an older sister <unk> Elliott . 
 = = Swimming = = 
 Elliott is an S8 classified swimmer who was ranked first in the world in the S8 50 m backstroke in 2012 . She is a member of <unk> Swimming Club , started swimming when she was six months old , and commenced competitive swimming in 2009 . She made her national team debut that same year at the Youth Paralympic Games , where she won five gold medals . 
 By 2010 , she held three Australian age group classification records , and the 2010 New South Wales Multi @-@ Class Long Course Swimming Championships , she had five first @-@ place finishes . She represented Australia at the 2011 Oceania Paralympic Championships , and later that year competed in the Canberra hosted Australian Multi @-@ Class Age Swimming Championships . At that event , she won a bronze , five silver and three gold medals . She was selected to represent Australia at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London in swimming . 
 On 31 August 2012 at the London Aquatics Centre , Elliott slashed 23 seconds off her personal best time to win a bronze medal in the S8 400 m freestyle . She became , at age 13 , the youngest ever Australian to win a Paralympic medal , a record formerly held by Elizabeth Edmondson . She went on to win silver in S8 50 m freestyle , bronze in the S8 100 m Freestyle , and gold in the Women 's 4x100 m Freestyle Relay – 34 Points . Afterwards , she met with Prince Harry and gave him a Lizzie the <unk> Neck Lizard , the mascot of the Australian Paralympic Committee and Australia 's Paralympic Teams . This resulted in the Australian Chef de Mission , Jason Hellwig , officially presenting Lizzie to the Chairman of the London Organising Committee of the Olympic and Paralympic Games ( LOCOG ) , Lord Coe , who gave him a Mandeville in return . 
 In November 2012 , Elliott and <unk> McCracken , the youngest members of the 2012 Paralympic Team , were together named the Paralympic Junior Athlete of the Year . She won gold medals in the Women 's 50 m and 100 m Freestyle S8 events and a silver medal in the Women 's 400 m Freestyle S8 at the August 2013 IPC Swimming World Championships in Montreal , Canada , and was awarded a Medal of the Order of Australia in the 2014 Australia Day Honours " for service to sport as a Gold Medallist at the London 2012 Paralympic Games . " 
 Elliott won a gold medal at the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow in the women 's 100 m S8 freestyle in a world record time of 1 : 05 @.@ 32 , breaking the record set by Jessica Long in 2012 . At the 2015 IPC Swimming World Championships , she won the gold medals in the women 's 50 m freestyle S8 , women 's 100 m freestyle S8 in a world record time of 1 @.@ 04 @.@ 71 , women ’ s 100 m backstroke S8 and women 's 4 × 100 m freestyle relay 34 points , silver medals in the women 's 400 m freestyle S8 and women 's 4 × 100 m medley relay 34 points and a bronze medal in the women 's 100 m butterfly S8 . Her success at the IPC World Championships led to her being awarded Swimming Australia 's 2015 Paralympic Swimmer of the Year . In November 2015 , she was awarded the New South Wales Institute of Sport Regional Athlete of the Year . 
 = Arden Valley Road = 
 Arden Valley Road is a scenic road located in Southfields , New York , in the United States , that travels through Harriman State Park and is owned by the Palisades Interstate Park Commission . At 5 @.@ 2 miles ( 8 @.@ 4 km ) long , it begins at New York State Route 17 ( NY 17 ) in Southfields and ends at Seven Lakes Drive in Harriman State Park . Arden Valley Road also serves a trout stocking area for the Ramapo River . The road is located entirely in Orange County and is home to the Elk 's Pen Trailhead in Harriman State Park . In 1921 , plans arose by the commission to construct the road , which was completed the same year and stretched along the borderline with the Harriman estate . Major William A. Welch ordered 75 elk from Yellowstone National Park to be placed in a wired cage between Arden and Southfields in 1919 . The elk eventually disappeared from the pen by 1942 , and the area became the current Elk 's Pen trailhead for trails within Harriman State Park . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Arden Valley Road begins at an intersection with NY 17 in the hamlet of Southfields ( within the town of Tuxedo ) . The road immediately becomes a part of the right @-@ of @-@ way for the Appalachian Trail , a roughly 2 @,@ 100 @-@ mile ( 3 @,@ 400 km ) trail spanning the eastern United States . The road heads into Harriman State Park and crosses a pain of train tracks before passing over the New York State Thruway . The highway continues along the border of Harriman State Park ; at the Elk 's Pen Trailhead , the Appalachian Trail leaves Arden Valley Road and heads into the park . 
 The road intersects with Island Pond Road , a dirt path in Harriman , as it heads along the border . Arden Valley Road intersects with Crooked Road thereafter . Harris Mine is visible to the left as the road proceeds around the base of Echo Mountain . To the southeast of Lindley Mountain , Arden Valley Road turns east and into the park . Arden Valley Road passes Lake Cohasset and Upper Lake Cohasset as it heads eastward . The road intersects with the Long Path and Ramapo – Dunderberg – Appalachian Trails soon afterward . Bradley Mine is visible to the left , and Arden Valley Road comes to an end at <unk> Circle . , where the road continues eastward as <unk> Brook Road . 
 = = History = = 
 Construction of the Arden Brook Valley Road , which intended to connect Lake Cohasset and the brand new Upper Cohasset Lake started around 1922 , with money given by the New York State Legislature in 1921 Construction of the new road was completed in 1922 , extending along the borderline with the Harriman estate . Originally , people to cross the Erie Railroad tracks and the Ramapo River to continue along Arden Valley Road . This was remedied by building an underpass under the Erie Railroad and a ford over the Ramapo River . When the New York State Thruway was constructed through the Hudson Valley in 1953 , engineers included the ford in construction , and as of 1999 , the structure still stands . 
 In 1919 , Major William A. Welch ordered 75 elk from Yellowstone National Park ; however , some had died en route . The remaining elk were kept in a wired cage between Arden and Southfields . By 1935 , some of the animals were still alive . However , by 1942 , all of the elk had died . The remaining area is now known as the Elk 's Pen Trailhead , which serves the Appalachian and Arden – <unk> Trails . The remains of the pen still currently stand . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Orange County . 
 = 52nd ( Oxfordshire ) Regiment of Foot = 
 For other units with the same regimental number , see 52nd Regiment of Foot ( disambiguation ) 
 The 52nd ( Oxfordshire ) Regiment of Foot was a light infantry regiment of the British Army throughout much of the 18th and 19th centuries . The regiment first saw active service during the American War of Independence , and were posted to India during the Anglo @-@ Mysore Wars . During the Napoleonic Wars , the 52nd were part of the Light Division , and were present at most of the major battles of the Peninsula campaign , becoming one of the most celebrated regiments , described by Sir William Napier as " a regiment never surpassed in arms since arms were first borne by men " . They had the largest British battalion at Waterloo , 1815 , where they formed part of the final charge against Napoleon 's Imperial Guard . They were also involved in various campaigns in India . 
 The regiment was raised as a line regiment in 1755 and numbered as the " 54th Foot " ; they were renumbered as the " 52nd Regiment of Foot " in 1757 . In 1781 , the regional designation " 52nd ( Oxfordshire ) Regiment of Foot " was given , and in 1803 the regiment was the first regular British Army regiment to be designated " Light Infantry " . In 1881 the regiment was merged with the 43rd ( Monmouthshire ) Regiment of Foot to become the regiment later known as the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry . 
 = = Regimental structure = = 
 Throughout the period of the 52nd 's existence , the British Army comprised both infantry and cavalry line regiments , as well as the Household Divisions . The regiments of the line were numbered and , from 1781 , were given territorial designations – " Oxfordshire " in the 52nd 's case – which roughly represented the area from which troops were drawn . This was not rigid , and most English regiments had a significant proportion of Irish and Scots . Regiments comprised at least one battalion , often two – as the 52nd did intermittently – and occasionally more . Commanded by a lieutenant colonel , an infantry battalion was composed of ten companies , of which eight were " centre " companies , and two flank companies : one a grenadier and one ( in regular line regiments ) a specialist light company . Companies were commanded by captains , with lieutenants and ensigns ( or subalterns ) beneath him . Ideally , a battalion comprised 1000 men ( excluding NCOs , musicians and officers ) ; the 1st ( or senior ) battalion of a regiment would frequently draw fit recruits from the 2nd battalion to maintain its strength . If also sent on active service , the 2nd battalion would consequently be weaker . In periods of long service , battalions were generally operating under strength . Seriously under @-@ strength battalions might be dissolved , or temporarily drafted into other regiments , as happened to the 52nd on several occasions . 
 The 52nd was initially a one @-@ battalion regiment , but increased recruiting resulted in the creation of a second battalion in 1798 . While the 1st Battalion saw some action in Spain and Portugal in 1800 – 1801 , the 2nd remained stationed in England . In 1803 the regiment 's fittest officers and men were concentrated in the 1st battalion , for training as light infantry , and the 2nd battalion was transferred to the 96th Foot . A new second battalion was raised in 1804 . Both battalions saw extensive action during the Napoleonic Wars , and they were brigaded together for a time during the Peninsula Campaign , but heavy losses at Badajoz in 1812 resulted in the reduction of the 2nd battalion to a cadre ( skeleton staff ) . The 2nd was eventually reformed with new recruits and saw service in Holland in 1813 – 14 . Following the conclusion of the war in 1814 , both battalions were billeted in England , where the 2nd 's effectives were transferred to the 1st battalion , in preparation for further service . The 2 / 52nd remained in England during the Waterloo Campaign , and were disbanded in 1815 . Subsequently , the 52nd remained a one @-@ battalion regiment until their merger with the 43rd . 
 = = Light infantry = = 
 Initially raised as a regular line regiment , the 52nd fought in the line during the American wars and the early Indian campaigns , and did not become a light regiment until 1803 . However , they were the first regular British regiment to be so designated . Prior to this , the British Army had relied on irregulars and mercenaries to provide most of its light infantry or , when conditions demanded it , temporarily seconded regular line companies . While regular regiments were required to include one company of light infantry from 1758 , the training of such light troops was inconsistent , and frequently inadequate . Consequently , when beginning a restructure of the British Army in the late 18th century , the Duke of York recognised a need for dedicated light troops , especially coming into a war against Napoleon and his experienced light infantry , the chasseurs . During the early war against the French , the British Army was bolstered by light infantry mercenaries from Germany and the Low Countries , but the British light infantry companies proved inadequate against the more effective French tirailleurs during the Flanders campaign , and in the Netherlands in 1799 , and infantry reform became urgent . 
 In 1801 , the " Experimental Corps of Riflemen " was raised ( later designated the 95th Rifles ) , and a decision was made to train some line regiments in light infantry techniques , so they might operate as both light and line infantry . Sir John Moore , a proponent of the light infantry model , suggested that his own regiment of line infantry , the 52nd , be first to undergo this training , at Shorncliffe Camp . They were followed shortly afterwards by the 43rd Foot , by whose side they would fight many campaigns as part of the Light Division . Several other line regiments were designated " light infantry " in 1808 . 
 Moore wrote of the 52nd in his diary that " it is evident that not only the officers , but that each individual soldier , knows perfectly what he has to do ; the discipline is carried on without severity , the officers are attached to the men and the men to the officers . " This had much to do with the method of training ; unlike other regiments , light infantry officers drilled with the men and were expected to be familiar with drill routines , including weapons training . The ranks also received additional training , and were encouraged to develop initiative and self @-@ direction ; while skirmishing in the field they would need to react without direct orders . While most regiments of the time fought in tight formation , allowing easy administration of orders , light infantry worked in small groups , in advance of the main line , so complicated bugle calls were developed to pass orders . Consequently , the bugle became the emblem of the light infantry regiments . 
 When skirmishing , light infantry fought in pairs , so that one soldier could cover the other while loading . Line regiments fired in volleys , but skirmishers fired at will , taking careful aim at targets . While some consideration was given to equipping light infantry with rifles , due to their improved accuracy , the expected difficulty and expense in obtaining sufficient rifled weapons resulted in the standard infantry musket being issued to most troops . The accuracy of the musket decreased at long range and , since the French chasseurs and voltigeurs also used muskets , it is likely that skirmishers ' firefights took place at ranges of only 50 yards ( or less ) . 10 yards provided the accuracy of point @-@ blank range . Although the French infantry ( and , earlier , the Americans ) frequently used multi @-@ shot and grapeshot in their muskets , the British light infantry used only standard ball ammunition . 
 Light infantry were equipped more lightly than regular line regiments , and marched at 140 paces per minute . Tasks of the light infantry included advance and rear guard action , flanking protection for armies and forward skirmishing . They were also called upon to take regular line formations during battles , or to act as part of fortification storming parties . During the Peninsular War , they were regarded as the army 's elite corps . 
 = = Regimental history = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The 52nd began as a standard infantry line regiment in 1755 , when Colonel <unk> Lambton received papers to raise a new regiment , to be numbered as the 54th Foot . It was renumbered as the " 52nd Regiment of Foot " in 1757 , and was stationed in England and Ireland . ( At the same time , the previous 52nd Foot was renamed the 50th Foot . ) In 1765 , the Regiment was posted to Canada . The regiment , under the command of Colonel John Clavering , departed Cork , Ireland aboard the transport Pitt , for Quebec . En route , the ship ran aground in dense fog in the Gulf of St Lawrence , near the coast of Nova Scotia ; the wreck remained intact enough for all on board , including the soldiers ' wives , to disembark safely , transferring their effects and regimental provisions to shore . General Murray , Governor of Quebec , sent a schooner to retrieve the personnel and belongings , and carry them to Quebec . 
 = = = American War of Independence = = = 
 Twenty years after its founding , the regiment saw active service in the American War of Independence , from 1774 to 1778 . The 52nd was shipped to America from Canada , arriving in Boston , and fought in the battles of Lexington and Bunker Hill in 1775 . Major @-@ General William Howe led the main assault at Bunker Hill with Brigadier Robert Pigot leading the 52nd and 43rd Foot in support . This was the first occasion that the 52nd fought alongside the 43rd . They suffered heavy casualties at Bunker Hill , and in their grenadier company , only 8 men were left unwounded . In August , 1778 , the men were drafted into other regiments and the officers returned to England . The regiment obtained new recruits and in 1782 the introduction of county titles for regiments resulted in the 52nd adding " Oxfordshire " to their name . 
 = = = Indian Wars = = = 
 In 1783 , the 52nd arrived in Madras , for nine years of war spanning the Second and Third Anglo @-@ Mysore Wars . The Second War had begun in 1778 , when the British responded to news of war against France by moving against French @-@ held bases in India . Hyder Ali , then ruler of Mysore , sided with the French and marched against the British . Hyder died in 1782 , and was succeeded by his son , Tippu Sultan , who continued the war through some minor campaigns until a peace treaty was signed in 1784 . Shortly afterwards , a detachment from the 52nd took part in the 1785 siege of Cannanore . The 52nd stormed the breach at Cannanore , under command of Sir Martin Hunter . 
 In 1786 , Lord Cornwallis was appointed Governor @-@ general , and the war against Tippu Sultan was resumed after Tippu attacked British allies in 1789 . ( This was known as the Third Mysore war ) . Initially , military actions were fairly minor . In 1790 , the 52nd were involved at <unk> and in a battle near Seringapatam . In 1791 , the regiment fought at Bangalore in March , and <unk> ( near Seringapatam ) in May . In December that year , the flank companies from the 52nd and 76th Foot , with sepoy grenadiers , formed the storming party during the assault on <unk> ; the defenders abandoned the fortress , and it was successfully taken at the cost of just one British soldier wounded . Throughout the assault , the band of the 52nd played to spur on the attackers . The 52nd were also present at the February 1792 siege of Seringapatam , where the battalion 's grenadier company received heavy casualties while crossing the Kaveri River . During that battle , the 52nd came to the aid of Lord Cornwallis , whose companies were exposed and in danger of capture . Tippu Sultan sued for peace during the siege , and a treaty was signed in 1792 , ending the war . However , in August 1793 the regiment took part in an assault on Pondicherry . 
 = = = French Revolutionary Wars = = = 
 In 1793 war broke out with Revolutionary France . Following the French occupation of the Netherlands in January 1795 and the creation of the Batavian Republic , an assault was planned on the Dutch colony at Ceylon . A force commanded by Colonel James Stuart , of the 72nd Foot , and including the 52nd , left India for Ceylon , laying siege to Trincomalee ; by February 1796 the island was in British hands . The 52nd returned to Britain in 1798 where , bolstered by new recruits , a second battalion was created . In 1800 the 1 / 52nd took part in the <unk> Bay , Vigo , Cadiz and Ferrol expeditions and , after short stations in Gibraltar and Lisbon , returned to England in 1801 . In January 1803 , the regiment 's 2nd battalion was transferred into the 96th Foot ; prior to the transfer , the fittest men and officers were seconded by the 1st battalion , which was converted into " a corps of light infantry " , and began training under Major @-@ General Moore ( who was also Colonel of the 52nd ) at Shorncliffe Camp . They formed a brigade with the 95th Rifles , and three line regiments . Much of the training was undertaken by Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Kenneth MacKenzie , who devised many of the tactics of light infantry training . A new second battalion was raised in 1804 . 
 = = = Napoleonic Wars = = = 
 Both battalions of the 52nd experienced active service throughout the Napoleonic Wars , their paths occasionally overlapping . In 1806 – 7 , the 1st battalion were stationed in Sicily , where they helped train local soldiers ; later , they accompanied Moore to Sweden . In August 1806 , the 2nd battalion accompanied the expedition to Copenhagen , taking part in the 1807 assault against Copenhagen , which was led by General Wellesley . The 2 / 52nd landed in Portugal in August 1808 and , with the 2 / 43rd , were positioned in the village of Vimeiro to provide cover for the army landings at the nearby <unk> Bay . Three companies of the 2 / 52nd were posted with the advance guard , and were the first to encounter the enemy during the Battle of Vimeiro . Following the battle , the British commander Wellesley was superseded in turn by two superiors , Sir Harry Burrard and Sir Hew Dalrymple respectively , who signed the Convention of Sintra . The three commanders were recalled to England to explain their actions , and the command of the British troops devolved on Sir John Moore , the 52nd 's colonel . 
 In October , Sir John Moore led the army into Spain , reaching as far as Salamanca . In December , they were reinforced by 10 @,@ 000 troops from England , including the ' 1st Flank Brigade ' , which consisted of 1 / 52nd , 1 / 43rd and 1 / 95th and led by Robert Craufurd . Moore 's army now totalled 25 @,@ 000 , but his advance was cut short by the news that Napoleon had defeated the Spanish , held Madrid , and was approaching with an army of 200 @,@ 000 . Moore turned his men , and retreated to Corunna , over mountain roads and through bitter winter weather . French cavalry pursued the British Army the length of the journey , and a Reserve Division was set up to provide rearguard protection for the British troops . The core of this Reserve , commanded by Edward Paget , consisted of the 1 / 52nd and 1 / 95th battalions , who displayed none of the ill @-@ discipline which plagued other regiments during the retreat , but " made a stand at every defile and <unk> , buying time for the rest of the army to get away . " Following the secondment of the 1 / 52nd and 1 / 95th to the Reserve , Craufurd 's 1st Flank Brigade was reformed , and comprised the 1 / 43rd , 2 / 52nd and 2 / 95th . The 1st Flank Brigade deployed with the Reserve for a time , protecting the crossing of the river <unk> near Benavente , before it separated from the Reserve and the main army and marched to Vigo , with over 4 @,@ 000 other troops , for eventual transportation to England . The 1 / 52nd remained with the main army , which was caught by the French at Corunna . During the ensuing battle , in January 1809 , Moore was killed ; the army , including the 1 / 52nd , were evacuated to England . 
 = = = Wellesley 's Peninsular Campaign = = = 
 The 1 / 52nd , along with 1 / 43rd and 1 / 95th , returned to the Peninsula in June 1809 , where they were designated the " Light Brigade " , under the command of General Craufurd . <unk> in Lisbon and hearing of the army 's engagement with the French , they undertook a forced march to Talavera , arriving mere hours after the battle . The march was an extraordinary achievement , covering 42 miles in 26 hours , at a time when an infantry march of 15 miles a day was standard . Henceforth , the 1 / 52nd generally remained in advance of the army , as a forward party , a role which was to be theirs throughout much of the war . In February 1810 , Portuguese Cazadores were added to Craufurd 's brigade , creating the Light Division , the 1 / 52nd forming a brigade with 1st Cazadores and four companies from the 95th , under Lt @-@ Col Barclay . While holding a forward outpost , the Light Division was involved in the Battle of the <unk> , in July 1810 , and took part in the Battle of Bussaco , where the Light Division held the left against the main French charge , which they successfully repulsed , inflicting high casualties ; 1200 Frenchmen were killed , wounded or captured , while the Light Division suffered only 120 casualties . When Wellington 's army retreated back to the Lines of Torres Vedras , late 1810 , the Light Division acted as rearguard . The French were unable to broach the Torres Vedras defences , but engaged the British army in a number of small skirmishes , such as those fought by the Light Division , under the temporary command of Sir William Erskine , at Casal Novo – where they unwittingly came upon 11 French divisions in the fog – and <unk> ( April 1811 ) , an engagement of which Wellington later wrote : " I consider that the action that was fought by the Light Division [ ... ] with the whole of the [ French ] 2nd Corps , to be the most glorious that British troops were ever engaged in . " 
 After returning to England in 1809 , the 52nd 's 2nd battalion had joined the unsuccessful Walcheren Campaign in the Netherlands . Walcheren was surrounded by marshes , and many of the officers and men came down with " Walcheren Fever " ( malaria ) , which was to recur for years afterwards , and deplete the strength of the battalion . They eventually returned to the Peninsula in 1811 and were brigaded with their first battalion , who were manning outposts near Almeida . In early May , battle was engaged at Fuentes d <unk> ; initially set in the reserve , the Light Division came to the aid of the struggling British 7th Division , and provided a fighting retreat , as Wellington retired his army . For the rest of the year , both battalions of the 52nd , with the Light Division , manned outposts , which were constantly moved to mark the changing French positions . 
 January 1812 saw the siege of Ciudad Rodrigo . Companies from the Light Division , under the 52nd 's Colonel Colborne , captured the Francisco redoubt on 9 January , and thereafter built trenches for the main assault , under enemy fire . Once the army 's artillery had breached the walls , a 4 @-@ column assault was planned for 19 January , the Light Division forming the column which assaulted the breach near the Convent of San Francisco . Lt John Gurwood of the 52nd led the Forlorn Hope , followed by 300 " <unk> " under the command of the 52nd 's Major George Napier . The breach was carried and the fortress was taken within half an hour , at high cost . Amongst the 1300 British and Portuguese casualties was Craufurd , who died several days later . The army turned its attention to Badajoz , another strong fortress , which the British had failed to carry on an earlier occasion . The Light Division dug trenches near Fort <unk> , which was stormed , and established batteries . On 6 April , the breaches were deemed practicable , and the Light Division were ordered to storm the breach at Santa Maria . As the Light Division 's Forlorn Hope reached the ditch , the French exploded a mine . Various other barricades and gunpowder defences were in place , and the toll at the breaches was heavy . Wellington ordered a withdrawal . Elsewhere , the fortress walls were achieved by escalade , encouraging an attack on the breaches again . The fortress was taken , at great cost ( over 5000 British casualties ) , and for three days the army sacked and pillaged the town in undisciplined revenge . The 52nd and the 43rd together lost 39 officers and 700 men , resulting in a reduction of the 2 / 52nd , who saw no more action in the Peninsula . 
 Soon after the assault on Badajoz , Wellington marched his men to confront the French near Salamanca . For a month the armies marched and counter @-@ marched against each other , seeking advantage , and on 22 July Wellington attacked in the Battle of Salamanca , achieving a comprehensive victory . The Light Division were in the reserve during the battle , and afterwards pursued and harried the retreating French . August saw the army in Madrid , where the 1 / 52nd remained while Wellington led a force on to Burgos , which he attempted to take . The siege was unsuccessful , and it was lifted by Wellington in October ; the 1 / 52nd , with the Light Division , covered the army 's retreat back into Portugal . This " Winter Retreat " bore similarities with the earlier retreat to Corunna , as it suffered from poor supplies , bitter weather and rearguard action , including one skirmish near the River <unk> , where the 43rd and 1 / 52nd lost 95 men . Ciudad Rodrigo was reached on 19 November , where the 1 / 52nd were billeted and resupplied with both men and clothing . Diversions were set up , including the " Light Division Theatre " , in which the 52nd were described as " highly gentlemanly men , of steady aspect ; they mixed little with other corps , but attended the theatricals of the 43rd with circumspect good humour , and now and then relaxed . " 
 In spring , 1813 , the army returned to the offensive , leaving Portugal and marching northwards through Spain to Vitoria where the French stood in preparation for battle , which took place on 21 June . The Light Division held the centre of the Allied line , and took the bridges of <unk> and Tres <unk> . The battle proved an overwhelming victory for the British , and the following day the 1 / 52nd , with the Light Division , were sent in pursuit of the retreating French , skirmishing with the enemy rearguard . In August , volunteers from the 1 / 52nd were involved in the storming of San Sebastian . The 1 / 52nd crossed into France on 7 October , when they stormed redoubts above Vera . The 1 / 52nd also fought in the battles at Nivelle ( November 1813 ) , Nive ( December 1813 ) and Orthes ( February 1814 ) . During the battle of Orthes , the 52nd led an assault up the ridge under heavy fire , an advance which was later described by Sir Harry Smith as the most majestic he had ever seen . 
 = = = The Hundred Days and end for Napoleon = = = 
 Napoleon abdicated on 6 April 1814 , but the news arrived in Wellington 's camp too late to prevent the Battle of Toulouse , on 10 April , during which battle the 1 / 52nd 's Lieutenant Whichcote was first into the city . 
 Over this later period , the 2 / 52nd , who had left the Peninsula , were bolstered with new recruits and were sent to Holland in 1813 – 14 , as part of Sir Thomas Graham 's force which made an unsuccessful attack on Bergen op Zoom in March 1814 . Afterwards they spent some time in Belgium before returning home to England . 
 Once peace agreements had finally been settled – the French Governor of Bayonne being the last , on 26 April – the army left the Peninsula ; the infantry marched to Bordeaux for transportation to their new postings . The 1 / 52nd were returned to England and , on 6 June 1814 , stood on the quayside at Dover with their Light Division comrades from the 43rd and 95th as part of the official welcome for the Allied sovereigns visit to England . 
 They were later billeted in Hythe and Chatham , where they were joined by the 2 / 52nd , returned from Belgium , who transferred their effectives to the 1st battalion . 
 = = = Waterloo Campaign = = = 
 In January , 1815 , the 1 / 52nd departed Portsmouth for Cork , where they were due to embark for America , where fighting in the War of 1812 continued . Gales prevented sailing , and by the time conditions had improved , news had arrived of Napoleon 's escape from Elba . The 1 / 52nd were sent to Belgium , at the start of the Hundred Days . Napoleon marched swiftly through France to meet the Allies , who had formed two armies , with the Duke of Wellington commanding the Anglo @-@ Allies , and Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher commanding the Prussians . 
 The 52nd were assigned to Lt @-@ Gen Hill 's II Corps , as part of the 2nd Division 's 3rd Brigade , under General Adam . As a response to Napoleon 's movements , on 15 June , II Corps were posted west and southwest of Brussels , with a cavalry screen . Wellington 's forward army engaged the French at Quatre Bras on 16 June , but he later fell back to remain in contact with his Prussian allies , who had retreated following the Battle of Ligny , and took position near the village of Waterloo . 
 The field at Waterloo was 5 @.@ 5 km wide , with two parallel ridges running west to east , creating a shallow valley 1 @.@ 4 km across . The Allies took position on the northern ridge . As the army prepared for battle on 18 June , the 2nd Division were initially held in reserve , placed in the centre left , behind Major @-@ General Cooke 's 1st Division . Following the French cavalry 's battering of the British squares over the afternoon , Adam 's brigade was brought up to reinforce the right . In this position the 52nd endured a heavy bombardment , of which Ensign Leeke of the 52nd reported afterwards " the old officers , who had served during the whole of the Peninsular War , stated that they were never exposed to such a cannonade as the 52nd squares had to undergo on this occasion for 2 ½ hours from French artillery ½ mile to the front " . While the 52nd 's squares stood waiting , British artillery fired over their heads . 
 Activity was happening elsewhere on the field , however , and as the battle drew to a close , Napoleon 's Middle Guard launched an assault on the British line , to the 52nd 's left , and were met by a number of regiments including the 1st Foot Guards , who repulsed the 3rd Chasseurs , but had to themselves retreat when the 4th Chasseurs moved forward to threaten their left . The 52nd , under Sir John Colborne , wheeled to the left , deploying parallel to the French column , and fired volleys against their left flank . William Hay , a Light Dragoon watching from the right , later recalled that " so well @-@ directed a fire was poured in , that down the bank the Frenchmen fell and , I may say , the battle of Waterloo was gained . " Seeing the 52nd begin an advance , Wellington reputedly ordered " Go on , Colborne , they won 't stand ! " ; the battalion then advanced diagonally across the field . When this was later followed by a bayonet charge by all of General Adam 's 3rd Brigade , the Guard broke , forced into full retreat . Having pursued the French down the escarpment of Mont St Jean , the 52nd crossed the valley floor ( that at the start of the battle had separated the armies ) and on the other side attacked a square of Old Guard ( part of the personal body guard of Napoleon , ) that had formed up to the British right of the inn La Belle Alliance and forced it to retreat . 
 The 1 / 52nd were the largest battalion at Waterloo , and one of the few British battalions operating at full strength . Of the 1 @,@ 130 men and officers present , 168 were wounded , and 38 killed . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 The 1st battalion were sent to Paris after Waterloo , and remained stationed in France until 1818 . In 1816 , the 2nd battalion were disbanded , in line with the other reductions in the army which occurred following the conclusion of the Napoleonic Wars . 
 Returning to England in 1818 , the 52nd were stationed in the Midlands , where they were responsible for domestic peacekeeping and policing under the command of Lt. Col. Charles Rowan , experience which fitted Rowan for his 1829 posting to establish a military @-@ style metropolitan police service under Sir Robert Peel . 
 In 1821 , the regiment were posted to Dublin . Over the following years the 52nd received a number of overseas postings . Between 1823 and 1831 , the regiment was stationed at , in turn , New Brunswick , Nova Scotia , Newfoundland , and Prince Edward Island . In early 1842 , the 52nd performed garrison duty in Barbados , where British units frequently supplemented the local forces . In 1842 , the regiment returned to Canada , and were posted to New Brunswick , Nova Scotia , Prince Edward Island , and Quebec ; they left Canada in 1845 . 
 The 52nd later returned to India , arriving in Allahabad in 1853 . The regiment found the heat and dust of India gruelling , and Major Bayley , of the 52nd , described the great clouds of dust which rose over their columns in the march from Allahabad to <unk> in 1853 – 4 ; " it was worse in the rear than in the front ; so , in order that everyone should have a fair chance , the order of march was changed daily . " They were in India during the Indian Rebellion of 1857 , where they took part in the Siege of Delhi . Once breaches had been made by the artillery by a bombardment of the walls , an attempt was made on the city on 14 September . The Kashmir Gate was blown by a party of engineers , accompanied by Bugler Robert Hawthorne of the 52nd , who won the Victoria Cross for his bravery . The 52nd led the assault on the blown gate ; amidst the action , Lance Corporal Henry Smith also won the Victoria Cross . After six days of heavy fighting , the city was won . 
 The 52nd remained in India until 1865 , when they returned to England . Over the next sixteen years they received postings in Ireland , England , Malta and Gibraltar . In 1881 , due to the Childers Reforms , they were merged with the 43rd ( Monmouthshire ) Regiment of Foot , a regiment they had fought alongside as part of the Light Division during many campaigns . The newly combined unit was named the " Oxfordshire Light Infantry " – the 52nd becoming the 2nd Battalion – and in 1908 the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry . In 1958 , the Ox & Bucks became the 1st Green Jackets ( 43rd and 52nd ) , and in 1966 were merged into the Royal Green Jackets . In 2007 , the Royal Green Jackets became part of The Rifles . 
 = = Colours and honours = = 
 Like most British regiments , the 52nd carried flags known as " colours " : the First , or " King 's Colour " , and the Second , or " Regimental Colour " . The First had the Union Flag with the Regiment 's number in the centre , surrounded by a wreath . Following the presentation of their colours in 1799 , the 52nd 's King 's Colour included the Royal Cipher in the centre , a non @-@ standard addition . The Second was in the colour of the regimental facings ( buff , in the 52nd 's case ) with a small Union Flag in the corner ; the regimental number took the centre . The colours were carried into battle for identification , and as a rallying point , in the care of sergeants or ensigns . Attending the colours in battle was dangerous , since they were a target for enemy artillery and assault ; due to the symbolic significance of the colours , their loss was a grave issue , and extreme measures were often taken to prevent such dishonour occurring . The skirmishing and forward positions maintained by light infantry frequently made the bearing of colours inconvenient . For this reason , the newly raised 95th Rifles received no colours , but the converted line regiments , such as the 52nd , retained their existing colours . While some light infantry regiments opted not to carry them in the Peninsula , the 52nd and 43rd did . 
 Battle honours are awarded to a regiment for their performance in certain battles and campaigns , and are displayed on their colours . The 52nd received the following honours : Hindoostan , Vimeiro , Corunna , Bussaco , Fuentes d <unk> , Ciudad Rodrigo , Badajoz , Salamanca , Vitoria , Nivelle , Nive , Orthes , Toulouse , Peninsula , Waterloo and Delhi 1857 . 
 = = Badges and decorations = = 
 = = = Regimental badge = = = 
 The Regimental Badge of the 52nd showed a bugle horn , suspended by cords from a knot , with the number " 52 " below the tassels . 
 The bugle horn had been the badge of light infantry regiments since 1770 , adapted from the Hanoverian <unk> regiments , and became standard for the newly formed Light Infantry regiments , since it represented the bugle calls used for skirmishing orders instead of the standard line infantry drum . The regimental badge was worn on much of the equipment , including the <unk> and belts , and also frequently on <unk> and officers ' shoulder wings . 
 = = = Valiant Stormers = = = 
 During the Peninsular War , the 52nd fulfilled their dual role as line and light infantry by contributing to fortress assault parties . The companies that led the breach assaults were known as the " Forlorn Hope " , ( from the Dutch " <unk> hoop " ( lost troop ) ) . It was deemed an act of high honour , since the lead troops faced the greatest danger . The 52nd contributed to the Forlorn Hope at the sieges of Ciudad Rodrigo , Badajoz ( 1812 ) and San Sebastian . Officers and sergeants who survived would be very likely be put up for battlefield promotions ( although it was not assured ) while other ranks would receive laurels from their commander also with the chance of promotion being greatly increased . The 52nd , however , offered its own recognition : those who survived the Forlorn Hope at Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz were entitled to wear on their right arm a badge displaying a laurel wreath and the letters " V.S. " for " Valiant Stormer " . This honour was awarded by the 52nd 's commanding officer , and was restricted to the 52nd . 
 = = = Victoria Cross = = = 
 The Victoria Cross ( VC ) was instituted in 1856 as the British Empire 's highest decoration for valour . From that date , until the 52nd merged with 43rd in 1881 , two soldiers from the 52nd were awarded the Victoria Cross , both at Delhi in 1857 : Bugler Robert Hawthorne and Lance Corporal Henry Smith . 
 Bugler Hawthorne accompanied a party of engineers , led by Lieutenants Home and Salkeld of the Bengal Engineers , who had been ordered to lay a charge and blow the Kashmir Gate , so that entry to the city might be obtained . Once the charges had been detonated , Hawthorne sounded the advance , and then attended to a wounded officer from the explosion party , all the while enduring intense fire from the city 's defenders . Three others from the explosion party were awarded VCs : Sgt Smith , Lt. Home and Lt. Salkeld , who was the first recipient of the VC . 
 Lance Corporal Smith 's medal was won during the following assault on the blown gate , when he " most gallantly carried away a wounded comrade under a heavy fire of grape and musketry , in the <unk> <unk> of the city of Delhi , on the morning of the assault " . 
 Both VC medals are on display at the Royal Green Jackets Museum in Winchester . 
 = = Colonels = = 
 Colonels of the regiment were : 
 = = = = The 54th Regiment of Foot - ( 1755 ) = = = = 
 1755 – 1758 : Maj @-@ Gen. <unk> Lambton 
 = = = = The 52nd Regiment of Foot - ( 1756 ) = = = = 
 1758 – 1760 : Lt @-@ Gen Edward Sandford 
 1760 – 1762 : Gen Sir John Sebright , 6th Baronet 
 1762 – 1777 : Lt @-@ Gen Sir John Clavering 
 1778 – 1801 : Gen Cyrus <unk> 
 = = = = The 52nd ( Oxfordshire ) Regiment of Foot - ( 1782 ) = = = = 
 1801 – 1809 : Lt @-@ Gen Sir John Moore KB 
 = = = = The 52nd ( Oxfordshire ) Regiment of Foot , Light Infantry - ( 1803 ) = = = = 
 1809 – 1822 : Lt @-@ Gen Sir Hildebrand Oakes , 1st Baronet GCB 
 1822 – 1839 : Gen Sir George Walker , 1st Baronet 
 1839 – 1844 : Lt @-@ Gen Sir Thomas Arbuthnot 
 1844 – 1847 : Lt @-@ Gen Sir Edward Gibbs 
 1847 – 1861 : Gen Sir Archibald Maclaine 
 1861 – 1879 : F.M. Sir William Rowan , GCB 
 1879 – 1881 : Gen John Leslie Dennis , CB 
 = = Uniform and equipment = = 
 Throughout most of the regiment 's life , the 52nd Foot wore traditional British Army red coats , with buff facings . During the American wars , the coat was long tailed , with buff facings , buff waistcoat and breeches . The grenadier company wore a <unk> hat with the King 's Crest and the regimental number . Officers wore crimson sash , gorget and silver epaulettes . 
 When becoming a light infantry regiment in 1803 , the uniform accordingly changed . Light infantry dress has its origins in the American War of Independence , when uniforms were altered to allow ease in the field . " Wings " , similar to those worn by grenadiers , were added to the shoulders and lacing was dispensed with , to make the quick removal of coats possible . At that time , the irregular light infantry also sought less conspicuous dress than the traditional red coat . However , conservatism returned with the new regular light infantry ; while the 95th Rifles were permitted to retain the green clothing used by the German regiments , the seconded line regiments were required to retain the red coat , which remained an impediment to their skirmishing duties . 
 Thus , throughout the Napoleonic wars , the 52nd foot continued to wear red uniforms with buff facings . The officers had silver lace , while the other ranks ' lace was worn in pairs , red with orange stripes ( according to 1802 regulations ) ; in 1812 a commentator described the lace as red with two blue stripes . Light infantry officers wore short jackets , rather than the tailed coats of the other line regiments , with white piping , silver buttons , and silver and scarlet shoulder wings . The uniform was completed with a crimson sash ; to match the buff facings and turn @-@ backs , the officers generally wore buff breeches , or grey overalls . Field officers of the 52nd wore silver epaulettes , with regimental badge , overtop the light infantry wings , to designate rank . An 1810 order stipulated these be badged with a star ( for majors ) , a crown ( lieutenant colonels ) or star and crown ( colonels ) . Light infantry also commonly wore a narrow waist belt instead of the customary shoulder belt . The 52nd did not adopt the " Belgic cap " but retained the stovepipe shako throughout the Napoleonic period ; it was adorned with the brass bugle badge and green plumes of the light infantry . In the 52nd , officers ' plumes were made from horsehair . Officers generally carried a stirrup @-@ hilted sabre . 
 Officers were responsible for providing ( and paying for ) their own uniforms ; consequently , variable style and decoration was present , according to the officer 's private means . Equipment could consume a significant portion of an officer 's pay ; during the Napoleonic era , the 52nd 's plain regimental sabre , for example , cost 4 guineas , approximately 16 days ' pay for an ensign . 
 The red coat remained standard uniform for the British Army until khaki was introduced as standard in 1885 , although some allowances were made for colonial conditions , with the use of lighter materials , and slight change of design . However , the uniform and equipment remained quite restrictive , particularly in colonial warfare . In 1841 , the light bob 's situation was compared unfavourably with his enemy 's light marching order : " Buckle him up in a tight red jacket , when the thermometer is about 80 ° ; place across his breast two buff @-@ leather belts , about a quarter of an inch in thickness , and each what the milliners call a nail in breadth ; hang to one of them a cartouche @-@ box containing sixty rounds of ball cartridges , each of these about above an ounce in weight ; strap across his shoulders a square well @-@ packed wallet , containing four shirts , with or without frills , and other notions ; plant a cap on his head which in point of weight is equal to an iron pot ; then place over his shoulder a musket and bayonet weighing a stone ; with three days ' provisions in his haversack , and a couple of quarts of liquid in a canteen . " 
 While no official service uniform was developed for the tropics , during the Mutiny in India in 1857 , many of the regiments fought in their undress uniform ( white drill ) , rather than the standard uniform . The 52nd were the first regiment to dye their white uniforms khaki for use in the field . This early khaki was a grey colour . For most purposes , they discarded their coats and , adopting the Indian traditions , wore their shirts out , rather than tucked in ; shirts were also dyed . The 52nd also developed turbans to wear over their standard @-@ issue forage caps . Following the mutiny , regiments returned to the standard red clothing . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Despite its continual merging with other units from 1881 , the legacy of the 52nd remains . Many of the 52nd 's battle honours are represented on the Belt Badge of The Rifles ( being a rifle regiment , The Rifles do not carry colours ) . Various museums record the actions of the 52nd and hold collections of artifacts and memorabilia , including the Royal Green Jackets Museum , and the Soldiers of Oxfordshire Trust , whose archives are managed by the Oxfordshire County Council . 
 Some officers of the 52nd recorded their experiences in the regiment . One of the most notable was the Reverend William Leeke who , as a young ensign , carried the Regimental Colours at Waterloo . He believed that the actions taken by Sir John Colborne ( Lord Seaton ) and the 52nd to defeat the Imperial Guard at the close of the battle had been unjustly overlooked in official dispatches and histories , and wrote his memoirs so that " the truth , with regard to what we knew the 52nd had achieved at Waterloo , [ should ] see the light " . In 1866 , his two @-@ volume work The History of Lord Seaton 's Regiment , ( the 52nd Light Infantry ) at the Battle of Waterloo was published , and has served as a primary source for most Waterloo historians since . Also to publish memoirs , although less successfully , was Reginald Wilberforce , grandson of slavery abolitionist William Wilberforce , who wrote , in 1894 , An <unk> Chapter of the Indian Mutiny ; on publication , the book was criticised by his fellow officers of the 52nd for its inaccuracy . 
 = Skin & Bone ( film ) = 
 Skin & Bone is a 1996 American drama film . It is the story of three Los Angeles @-@ area hustlers , or male prostitutes , and their female pimp . The three men are at different stages of their hustling careers : Dean is just beginning ; Billy is somewhat more experienced but still naive ; and Harry actively wants to get out , and is looking to break into film acting . <unk> , the pimp , sends each of the three young men into increasingly dangerous scenarios with clients , until both Billy and Harry are killed . The film stars B. Wyatt as Harry , Alan Boyce as Dean , Garret Scullin as Billy and Nicole Dillenberg as Ghislaine . 
 Director Everett Lewis financed the film almost entirely , using money earned working on other films . Skin & Bone was originally intended to be entirely improvised , but after a year of filming Lewis decided to script some of it to add shape to the story . The film alternates between black and white and color , marking shifts between depictions of a character 's fantasy and reality . 
 Critical responses to the film were mixed . Some reviewers thought it little more than pretentious titillation , while others praised the performances and direction and congratulated Lewis for raising some difficult questions . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Skin & Bone is an episodic account of three Los Angeles @-@ area hustlers , Harry , Billy and Dean , and Ghislaine , their pimp . Ghislaine ( Nicole Dillenberg ) constantly drives the streets of Los Angeles arranging client appointments . She relies on Harry ( B. Wyatt ) , the most experienced member of her stable , to train new recruits , including Billy ( Garett Scullin ) and Dean ( Alan Boyce ) . 
 Harry services both male and female clients and always acts as a top ; many male clients hire him to beat them . He fantasizes about a woman ( " Lovely Girl " [ Susannah Melvoin ] ) he once knew . He has convinced himself that he is not a prostitute but an " actor " providing " fantasies . " In his unsuccessful pursuit of an acting career , Harry goes on a casting call for a cop movie . The casting director asks if he will do nudity , implying a casting couch scenario . Harry says he 's an artist and loses the role . 
 Billy , though experienced , is still somewhat goofy and absent @-@ minded . He sometimes helps Harry with scenes and Harry tries to convince him too that he is an actor and not a prostitute . On several occasions , Billy picks up men only to discover that the man is not actually his client . In one case he and the man fall in love and they plan to get Billy out of the business and start a life together . Shortly thereafter , Billy mistakes a man ( Michael Haynes ) for a client in a public restroom and that man stabs him to death . 
 Dean is Ghislaine 's most recent recruit . While training him , Harry again tries to impart the notion that their job is just acting . Following his training and first successful trick ( with a woman ) , Dean is humiliated when two women force him to start and stop masturbating seemingly at random . Dean then performs as a " nude cleaner " for a client . He learns that the client is an ex @-@ Marine who was paralyzed in combat and still longs for the boy with whom he fell in love , who was killed . The client is still able to achieve an erection and Dean has sex with him . 
 Harry is at an appointment with a regular , a uniform fetishist called " The General " ( <unk> A. Jones ) . Usually Harry beats him , but unknown to Harry , the client has arranged for something different with Ghislaine . After showing Harry a picture of himself in which he closely resembles Harry , the General orders Harry to strip . When Harry hesitates , the General attacks him from behind , binds his hands with tape and rapes him . 
 Harry asks his acting agent to set up an " interview " with another casting director . He lets the man fuck him . Later at Dean 's place , Harry finds Dean sitting alone burning himself with a cigarette . Dean tells Harry he ran away from home after his father had him arrested at age 14 for stealing a candy bar . Dean was put in a cell with several men who took turns raping him . 
 After allowing himself to be used by the casting director , Harry gets a small role as a cop in the film for which he had previously been rejected . On @-@ set he impresses the producers and they offer him a part in a TV series . 
 Ghislaine sends Harry to the local morgue with $ 2 @,@ 500 to bribe an attendant ( James Michael White ) . Harry sees Billy 's body and realizes that Ghislaine is acquiring it for a client . He confronts Ghislaine , accusing her of arranging Billy 's murder , and tells her he wants to quit and take Dean with him . Ghislaine agrees , if Harry and Dean perform one final scene . 
 The scene is a cop / prisoner scenario which begins with the cop beating the prisoner then the prisoner overpowering the cop , binding and beating and finally shooting him . Harry plays the cop and Dean the prisoner . Bound and gagged , Harry sees Ghislaine switching his gun ( loaded with blanks ) for another gun , but fails to convey the danger to Dean . As Ghislaine and the client watch and the client tapes the scene , Dean pulls the trigger and kills Harry . Harry meets " Lovely Girl , " who asks him how he feels being dead . 
 Six months later , Dean is living on the streets . Ghislaine finds him and convinces him to return to work . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Reviewers agree that Skin & Bone is as much about Los Angeles and the film industry as it is about prostitution or even homosexuality . Writing in Bright Lights Film Journal , critic Gary Morris suggests that the film is " inevitably set in Los Angeles , amid that city 's arid strip malls , newsstands , and endless dusty streets " and he points to the significance of Ghislaine 's constant movement through the city , " looking glamorous and inscrutable in her opaque sunglasses " . 
 For Anita Gates in the New York Times , " the film 's strongest message " is " a questioning of the actor 's trade . " For Gates , the film comes to sympathize with Harry 's notion that prostitutes are in fact actors , or perhaps vice versa : " Mr. Lewis 's point seems to be that it 's all the same . What 's the big difference , he asks , between acting out the fantasies of one rich old man or those of a few million ticket buyers ? " 
 Lewis himself seems to give some weight to these interpretations when he describes Skin & Bone as being about " giving your soul away and rationalizing the loss as a bonus , " and as a metaphor " for the experiences I suffered attempting to make a film at an evil film company . " 
 = = Production and style = = 
 Lewis became interested in making a film about hustlers because ( despite there being films about hustlers dating back more than three decades ) he had never seen such a film . In Lewis 's own words , " When I started , there were no hustler movies and now there 's a whole genre . " His original concept for Skin & Bone was that it would be a series of 70 one @-@ minute shots . Lewis changed his mind about the concept following some improvisation with actor B. Wyatt in creating the Harry character . Much of the film was improvised . After a year of filming improvisation sessions , Lewis wrote some scripted material to provide some story structure . Shooting took several years to complete because the film was almost entirely self @-@ financed . 
 The film alternates between color and black and white sequences . Black and white usually denotes that the scene involves one or more of the hustlers engaged with a client , and indicates that one or more of the characters ( not necessarily the client ) is fantasizing . But the scheme is not always consistent : for example , when Dean has sex with the paralyzed client the scene is in color ; and Harry also has an S / M scene that 's all in color ( although his client never appears on @-@ screen ) . Equally , Harry 's fantasies about " Lovely Girl " ( who is apparently dead ) are occasionally in color . In their final scene , Harry and Dean are in black and white , but when the client and Ghislaine are shown watching they 're in color , raising the question of exactly who is having the fantasy . According to Lewis , the convention grew out of the fact that the initial improvised sequences were shot in black and white ; he acknowledges that by the end the distinction had become " very confused . " 
 The film features a number of songs by the queercore band Pansy Division . David Arquette has a cameo appearance as " Buzz Head , " one of Ghislaine 's regular clients . Arquette himself played a hustler in the film johns , also released in 1996 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Reviews for Skin & Bone were decidedly mixed . The New York Times called it a " bleak , disjointed movie " that " often comes across as if it had been planned like a pornographic feature . " Director Lewis is praised , however , for " effectively mix [ ing ] us up as to what 's real and what isn 't . " Bright Lights Film Journal had stronger words of praise for the film , calling it " intense [ and ] sometimes unsettling " with a " conceptual richness and mocking wit , " while also noting the " element of genuine pathos [ that ] runs beneath the sardonic wit and brutal , sometimes lethal sex . " 
 The Village Voice was much more dismissive , panning the film as " fitfully comic , pitifully pretentious soap opera [ that ] runs out of promise so quickly that only the most tenacious ( or desperate ) viewers will hang on till the sorry end . " Echoing the Voice , TV Guide , while praising Lewis 's " icy style , " nonetheless suggests that the film is a half @-@ hour too long and " doesn 't really offer much to justify its existence beyond the obvious titillation . " 
 One near @-@ unanimous critical note concerns Nicole Dillenberg 's performance as Ghislaine . While the actors playing the three hustlers are variously described as " really quite competent " and " game , gesturally hip and highly empathic , " Dillenberg is judged " too callow for Ghislaine " and " stiffly plying monotonous attitude in lieu of creating a real character , rather like a female impersonation of female impersonator Jackie Beat . " 
 = Baker Street and Waterloo Railway = 
 The Baker Street and Waterloo Railway ( BS & WR ) , also known as the Bakerloo tube , was a railway company established in 1893 that built a deep @-@ level underground " tube " railway in London . The company struggled to fund the work , and construction did not begin until 1898 . In 1900 , work was hit by the financial collapse of its parent company , the London & Globe Finance Corporation , through the fraud of Whitaker Wright , its main shareholder . In 1902 , the BS & WR became a subsidiary of the Underground Electric Railways Company of London ( UERL ) controlled by American financier Charles Yerkes . The UERL quickly raised the funds , mainly from foreign investors . 
 When opened in 1906 , the BS & WR 's line served nine stations and ran completely underground in a pair of tunnels for 5 @.@ 81 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 61 mi ) between its northern terminus at Baker Street and its southern terminus at Elephant and Castle with a depot on a short spur nearby at London Road . Extensions between 1907 and 1913 took the northern end of the line to the terminus of the Great Western Railway ( GWR ) at Paddington . Between 1915 and 1917 , it was further extended to Queen 's Park , where it came to the surface and connected with the London and North Western Railway ( LNWR ) , and to Watford ; a total distance of 33 @.@ 34 kilometres ( 20 @.@ 72 mi ) . 
 Within the first year of opening it became apparent to the management and investors that the estimated passenger numbers for the BS & WR and the other UERL lines were over @-@ optimistic . Despite improved integration and cooperation with the other tube railways and the later extensions , the BS & WR struggled financially . In 1933 , the BS & WR was taken into public ownership along with the UERL . Today , the BS & WR 's tunnels and stations operate as the London Underground 's Bakerloo line . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 = = = Origin , 1891 – 93 = = = 
 The idea of building an underground railway along the approximate route of the BS & WR had been put forward well before it came to fruition at the turn of the century . As early as 1865 , a proposal was put forward for a Waterloo & Whitehall Railway , powered by pneumatic propulsion . Carriages would have been sucked or blown a distance of three @-@ quarters of a mile ( about 1 km ) from Great Scotland Yard to Waterloo Station , travelling through wrought @-@ iron tubes laid in a trench at the bottom of the Thames . The scheme was abandoned three years later after a financial panic caused its collapse . Carl Wilhelm Siemens of the eponymous German engineering company served as electrical engineer for a later abortive scheme , the Charing Cross & Waterloo Railway . It was incorporated by an Act of Parliament in 1882 and got as far as constructing a 60 feet ( 18 m ) stretch of tunnel under the Victoria Embankment before running out of money . 
 According to a pamphlet published by the BS & WR in 1906 , the idea of constructing the line " originally arose from the desire of a few business men in Westminster to get to and from Lord 's Cricket Ground as quickly as possible , " to enable them to see the last hour 's play without having to leave their offices too early . They realised that an underground railway line connecting the north and south of central London would provide " a long @-@ felt want of transport facilities " and " would therefore prove a great financial success . " They were inspired by the recent success of the City and South London Railway ( C & SLR ) , the world 's first deep @-@ tube railway , which proved the feasibility of such an endeavour . This opened in November 1890 and carried large numbers of passengers in its first year of operation . 
 In November 1891 , notice was given of a private bill that would be presented to Parliament for the construction of the BS & WR . The railway was planned to run entirely underground from the junction of New Street ( now Melcombe Street ) and Dorset Square west of Baker Street to James Street ( now Spur Road ) on the south side of Waterloo station . From Baker Street , the route was to run eastwards beneath Marylebone Road , then curve to the south under Park Crescent and follow Portland Place , Langham Place and Regent Street to Piccadilly Circus . It was then to run under Haymarket , Trafalgar Square and Northumberland Avenue before passing under the River Thames to Waterloo station . A decision had not been made between the use of cable haulage or electric traction as the means of pulling the trains . 
 Bills for three similarly inspired new underground railways were also submitted to Parliament for the 1892 parliamentary session , and , to ensure a consistent approach , a Joint Select Committee was established to review the proposals . The committee took evidence on various matters regarding the construction and operation of deep @-@ tube railways , and made recommendations on the diameter of tube tunnels , method of traction , and the granting of wayleaves . After rejecting the construction of stations on land owned by the Crown Estate and the Duke of Portland between Oxford Circus and Baker Street , the Committee allowed the BS & WR bill to proceed for normal parliamentary consideration . The route was approved and the bill received royal assent on 28 March 1893 as the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway Act , 1893 . Stations were permitted at Baker Street , Oxford Circus , Piccadilly Circus , Trafalgar Square , Embankment and Waterloo . The depot would have been at the south end of the line at James Street and Lower Marsh . 
 = = = Search for finance , 1893 – 1903 = = = 
 Although the company had permission to construct the railway , it still had to raise the capital for the construction works . The BS & WR was not alone ; four other new tube railway companies were looking for investors – the Waterloo and City Railway ( W & CR ) , the Charing Cross , Euston and Hampstead Railway ( CCE & HR ) and the Great Northern and City Railway ( GN & CR ) ( the three other companies that were put forward in bills in 1892 ) and the Central London Railway ( CLR , which received royal assent in 1891 ) . The original tube railway , the C & SLR , was also raising funds to construct extensions to its existing line . Only the W & CR , which was the shortest line and was backed by the London and South Western Railway with a guaranteed dividend , was able to raise its funds without difficulty . For the BS & WR and the rest , and others that came later , much of the remainder of the decade saw a struggle to find finance in an uninterested market . 
 Like most legislation of its kind , the act of 1893 imposed a time limit for the compulsory purchase of land and the raising of capital . To keep the powers alive , the BS & WR announced a new bill in November 1895 , which included an application for an extension of time . The additional time and permission to raise an extra £ 100 @,@ 000 of capital was granted when the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway Act , 1896 received royal assent on 7 August 1896 . 
 In November 1897 , the BS & WR did a deal with the London & Globe Finance Corporation ( L & GFC ) , a mining finance company operated by mining speculator Whitaker Wright and chaired by Lord Dufferin . The L & GFC was to fund and manage the construction , taking any profit from the process . The cost of construction was estimated to be £ 1 @,@ 615 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to approximately £ 164 million today ) . The L & GFC replaced the BS & WR 's directors with its own and let construction contracts . Wright made fortunes in America and Britain by promoting gold and silver mines and saw the BS & WR as a way of diversifying the L & GFC 's holdings . 
 In 1899 , Wright fraudulently concealed large losses by one of the corporation 's mines by manipulating the accounts of various L & GFC subsidiary companies . Expenditure for the BS & WR was also high , with the L & GFC having paid out approximately £ 650 @,@ 000 ( £ 63 @.@ 4 million today ) by November 1900 . In its prospectus of November 1900 , the company forecast that it would realise £ 260 @,@ 000 a year from passenger traffic , with working expenses of £ 100 @,@ 000 , leaving £ 138 @,@ 240 for dividends after the deduction of interest payments . Only a month later , however , Wright 's fraud was discovered and the L & GFC and many of its subsidiaries collapsed . Wright himself subsequently committed suicide by taking cyanide during his trial at the Royal Courts of Justice . 
 The BS & WR struggled on for a time , funding the construction work by making calls on the unpaid portion of its shares , but activity eventually came to a stop and the partly built tunnels were left derelict . Before its collapse , the L & GFC attempted to sell its interests in the BS & WR for £ 500 @,@ 000 to an American consortium headed by Albert L. Johnson , but was unsuccessful . However , it attracted the interest of another American consortium headed by financier Charles Yerkes . After some months of negotiations with the L & GFC 's liquidator , Yerkes purchased the company for £ 360 @,@ 000 plus interest ( £ 35 @.@ 3 million today ) . He was involved in the development of Chicago 's tramway system in the 1880s and 1890s . He came to London in 1900 and purchased a number of the struggling underground railway companies , The BS & WR became a subsidiary of the Underground Electric Railways Company of London ( UERL ) which Yerkes formed to raise funds to build the tube railways and to electrify the District Railway . The UERL was capitalised at £ 5 million with the majority of shares sold to overseas investors . Further share issues followed , which raised a total of £ 18 million by 1903 ( equivalent to approximately £ 1 @.@ 74 billion today ) for use across all of the UERL 's projects . 
 = = = Planning the route , 1893 – 1904 = = = 
 = = = = BS & WR bill , 1896 = = = = 
 While the BS & WR raised money , it continued to develop the plans for its route . The November 1895 bill sought powers to modify the planned route of the tunnels at the Baker Street end of the line and extend them approximately 200 metres ( 660 ft ) beyond their previous end point at the south @-@ eastern corner of Dorset Square to the south @-@ eastern corner of Harewood Square . This area was to be the site of Marylebone station , the new London terminus of the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway 's extension from the Midlands then under <unk> for the extension and a new station at Marylebone were included in the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway Act , 1896 . 
 = = = = New Cross & Waterloo Railway bill , 1898 = = = = 
 On 26 November 1897 , details of a bill proposed for the 1898 parliamentary session were published by the New Cross and Waterloo Railway ( NC & WR ) , an independent company promoted by James Heath MP , which planned two separate sections of tube line that would connect directly to the BS & WR , extending the line south @-@ east from Waterloo and east from around Marylebone Road . 
 The southern of the NC & WR 's two extensions was planned to connect with the BS & WR tunnels under Belvedere Road to the west of Waterloo station and head east under the mainline station to its own station under <unk> Street adjacent to Waterloo East station . The route was then planned to run under Waterloo Road , St George 's Circus and London Road to Elephant and Castle . The route then followed New Kent Road and Old Kent Road as far as the London , Brighton and South Coast Railway 's Old Kent Road station ( closed in 1917 ) . Intermediate stations were to be constructed at St George 's Circus , Elephant and Castle ( where the NC & WR station would interchange with the C & SLR 's station below ground and link to the London , Chatham and Dover Railway 's station above ground ) , in New Kent Road at <unk> Road , at the junction of New Kent Road and Old Kent Road , and on Old Kent Road at the junctions with Mina Road , Bowles Road and Commercial Road ( now Commercial Way ) . A power station was planned on the south side of Old Kent Road where it crossed the Grand Surrey Canal ( now filled @-@ in ) at the junction with St James 's Road . This would have provided a delivery route for fuel and a source of water . Tunnels were also planned to connect the BS & WR 's proposed depot at Waterloo to the NC & WR 's route enabling trains to enter and exit in two directions . 
 The NC & WR 's other planned extension was to branch from the BS & WR 's curve under Park Crescent . It was then to curve eastwards under Regent 's Park and then run under Longford Street and Drummond Street to end at a station on the west side of Seymour Street ( now Eversholt Street ) under Euston station . An intermediate station was planned for the junction of Drummond Street and Hampstead Road . 
 The bill was deposited in Parliament , but no progress was made in the 1898 session and it disappeared afterwards , although the BS & WR presented a modified version of the Euston branch in a bill for the 1899 session . 
 = = = = BS & WR bill , 1899 = = = = 
 Construction work began in August 1898 , although the BS & WR was continuing to develop new route plans . The bill for 1899 , published on 22 November 1898 , requested more time for the construction works and proposed two extensions to the railway and a modification to part of the previously approved route . The first extension , like the NC & WR 's plan from the year before , was to branch from the already @-@ approved route under Park Crescent , but then followed a more northerly route than the NC & WR , running under Regent 's Park to cross the park 's Outer Circle between Chester Road and Cumberland Gate where a station was to be constructed . The route then followed Cumberland Street West ( now Nash Street ) , Cumberland Market , Cumberland Street East and Edward Street ( both now <unk> Street ) , before ending at a station under Cardington Street on the west side of Euston station . 
 The second extension was to continue the line west from Marylebone , running under Great James Street and Bell Street ( now both Bell Street ) to Corlett Street , then turning south to reach the Grand Junction Canal 's Paddington Basin to the east of the GWR 's Paddington station . A station was to be located directly under the east @-@ west arm of the basin before the line turned north @-@ west , running between the mainline station and the basin , before the two tunnels merged into one . The single tunnel was then to turn north @-@ east , passing under the Regent 's Canal to the east of Little Venice , before coming to the surface where a depot was to be built on the north side of Blomfield Road . The BS & WR also planned a power station at Paddington . The final change to the route was a modification at Waterloo to move the last section of the line southwards to end under Addington Street . The aim of these plans was , as the company put it in 1906 , " to tap the large traffic of the South London Tramways , and to link up by a direct Line several of the most important Railway termini . " 
 The Metropolitan Railway ( MR ) , London 's first underground railway , which operated between Paddington and Euston over the northern section of the Inner Circle since 1863 , saw the BS & WR 's two northern extensions as competition for its own service and strongly objected . Parliament accepted the objections ; when the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway Act , 1899 received royal assent on 1 August 1899 , only the extension of time and the route change at Waterloo were approved 
 = = = = BS & WR bill , 1900 = = = = 
 In November 1899 , the BS & WR announced a bill for the 1900 session . Again , an extension was proposed from Marylebone to Paddington , this time terminating to the east of the mainline station at the junction of Bishop 's Road ( now Bishop 's Bridge Road ) and Gloucester Terrace . A station was planned under Bishop 's Road , linked to the mainline station by a subway under Eastbourne Terrace . From Waterloo , an extension was planned to run under Westminster Bridge Road and St George 's Road to terminate at Elephant and Castle . The BS & WR would connect there with the C & SLR 's station as the NC & WR planned two years earlier . A spur was to be provided to a depot and power station that were to be constructed on the site of the School for the <unk> Blind south of St George 's Circus . 
 The Paddington extension was aligned to allow a westward extension to continue to Royal Oak or Willesden , areas already served by the MR , which again opposed the plans . This time , the BS & WR was successful and royal assent for the extensions was granted in the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway Act , 1900 on 6 August 1900 . 
 = = = = Minor changes , 1902 – 04 = = = = 
 To make up for the time lost following the collapse of the L & GFC and to restore the BS & WR 's finances , the company published a bill in November 1901 , which sought another extension of time and permission to change its funding arrangements . The bill was approved as the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway Act , 1902 on 18 November 1902 . 
 For the 1903 parliamentary session , the UERL announced bills for the BS & WR and its other tube railways , seeking permission to merge the three companies by transferring the BS & WR 's and CCE & HR 's powers to the Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway ( GNP & BR ) . The BS & WR bill also included requests for a further extension of time and for powers to compulsorily purchase land for an electrical sub @-@ station at Lambeth . The merger was rejected by Parliament , but the land purchase and extension of time were permitted separately in the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway Act , 1903 and the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway ( Extension of Time ) Act , 1903 , both given royal assent on 11 August 1903 . 
 For the 1904 Parliamentary session , the BS & WR bill sought permission to add new stations at Lambeth , Regent 's Park and Edgware Road . The new stations were permitted by the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway Act , 1904 given royal assent on 22 July 1904 . 
 = = = Construction , 1898 – 1906 = = = 
 Construction commenced in the summer of 1898 under the direction of Sir Benjamin Baker ( who co @-@ designed the Forth Bridge ) , W.R. Galbraith and R.F. Church . The works were carried out by Perry & Company of <unk> Works , Bow . 
 The main construction site was located at a substantial temporary staging pier erected in the River Thames a short distance south of the Hungerford Bridge . It was described at the time as " a small village of workshops and offices and an electrical generating station to provide the power for driving the machinery and for lighting purposes during construction . " The 50 feet ( 15 m ) wide stage was located 370 feet ( 110 m ) from the Hungerford Bridge 's first pier , 150 feet ( 46 m ) from the north bank of the Thames . It was originally intended that the work should begin close to the south bank , with a bridge connecting the stage to College Street – a now @-@ vanished road on the site of the present @-@ day Jubilee Gardens . However , test borings showed that there was a deep depression in the gravel beneath the Thames , which it was speculated was the result of dredging carried out for the abortive Charing Cross & Waterloo Railway project . This led to the work site being relocated to the north side of the river . 
 Two caissons were sunk into the river bed below the stage . From there , the tunnels were constructed in each direction using Barlow @-@ Greathead tunnelling shields of a similar design to those used to construct the C & SLR . The north tunnel was constructed first , commencing in February 1899 , followed by the south tunnel from March 1900 . This was technically the most difficult stage of the project , as it necessitated tunnelling under the river . The tunnellers worked in an atmosphere of compressed air at up to 35 psi ( 240 kPa ) to prevent water leaking into the excavations . On several occasions , however , the tunnel was breached and escaping air caused " blowouts " , producing water spouts up to 2 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 76 m ) high above the surface of the river . One such blowout disrupted Doggett 's Coat and Badge race . By using the river as the centre of tunnelling operations , the company was able to remove excavated soil onto barges and bring in required material the same way , thus avoiding having to transport large amounts of material through the streets . Tunnelling also took place from station sites , notably at Piccadilly Circus . The tunnellers worked with a remarkable degree of accuracy given the technology of the time ; the tunnel being driven north from the Thames eventually reached the one being dug south from Piccadilly Circus , meeting under Haymarket , with a deviation of only three @-@ quarters of an inch ( 1 @.@ 9 cm ) . 
 The tunnel linings were formed from cast iron segments 7 ⁄ 8 inch ( 2 @.@ 22 cm ) thick , which locked together to form a ring with an internal diameter of 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 66 m ) . Once a ring was completed , grout was injected through holes in the segments to fill any voids between the outside edge of the ring and the excavated ground beyond , reducing subsidence . By November 1899 the northbound tunnel reached Trafalgar Square and work on some of the station sites was started , but the collapse of the L & GFC in 1900 led to works gradually coming to a halt . When the UERL was constituted in April 1902 , 50 per cent of the tunnelling and 25 per cent of the station work was completed . With funds in place , work restarted and proceeded at a rate of 73 feet ( 22 @.@ 25 m ) per week , so that by February 1904 virtually all of the tunnels and underground parts of the stations between Elephant & Castle and Marylebone were complete and works on the station buildings were under way . The additional stations were incorporated as work continued elsewhere and Oxford Circus station was altered below ground following a Board of Trade inspection ; at the end of 1905 , the first test trains began running . Although the BS & WR had permission to continue to Paddington , no work was undertaken beyond Edgware Road . 
 The BS & WR used a Westinghouse automatic signalling system operated through electric track circuits . This controlled signals based on the presence or absence of a train on the track ahead . Signals incorporated an arm that was raised when the signal was red . If a train failed to stop at a red signal , the arm activated a " <unk> " on the train , applying the brakes automatically . 
 Stations were provided with surface buildings designed by architect Leslie Green in the UERL house @-@ style . This consisted of two @-@ storey steel @-@ framed buildings faced with red glazed terracotta blocks , with wide semi @-@ circular windows on the upper floor . They were designed with flat roofs to enable additional storeys to be constructed for commercial occupants , maximising the air rights of the property . Except for Embankment , which had a sloping passageway down to the platforms , each station was provided with between two and four lifts and an emergency spiral staircase in a separate shaft . At platform level , the wall tiling featured the station name and an individual geometric pattern and colour scheme designed by Green . 
 It was originally intended that the electrical supply to the line and stations would be provided by a dedicated generating station at St George 's Road , Southwark . This idea was abandoned in 1902 and electricity was instead provided by Lots Road Power Station , operated by the UERL . Six ventilation fans were installed along the line to draw 18 @,@ 500 cubic feet per minute through the tunnels and out through exhausts placed on the roof of the stations . Fresh air was drawn back down from the surface via the lift and staircase shafts , thus replenishing the air in the tunnels . To reduce the risk of fire , the station platforms were built of concrete and iron and the sleepers were made from the fireproof Australian wood Eucalyptus marginata or jarrah . 
 The design of the permanent way was a departure from that of London 's previous tube railways , which used track laid on timber baulks across the tunnel with the bottom of the tube left open . This approach caused what the BS & WR 's management regarded as an unacceptable level of vibrations . They resolved this by mounting the sleepers on supports made of sand and cement grout , with the sleeper ends resting on comparatively soft broken stone ballast underneath the running rails . A drain ran parallel with the rails underneath the middle of the track . The rails themselves were unusually short – only 35 feet ( 11 m ) long – as this was the maximum length that could be brought in through the shafts and then turned horizontally to be carried into the tunnels . Power was supplied through third ( positive ) and fourth ( negative ) rails laid in the middle and outside of the track , as used on the District Railway . 
 = = Opening = = 
 The official opening of the BS & WR by Sir Edwin Cornwall , chairman of the London County Council , took place on 10 March 1906 . Shortly after the line 's opening , the London Evening News columnist " Quex " coined the abbreviated name " Baker @-@ loo " , which quickly caught on and began to be used officially from July 1906 , appearing on contemporary maps of the tube lines . The nickname was , however , deplored by The Railway Magazine , which complained : " Some latitude is allowable , perhaps , to halfpenny papers , in the use of nicknames , but for a railway itself to adopt its gutter title , is not what we expect from a railway company . English railway officers have more dignity than to act in this manner . " 
 The railway had stations at : 
 While construction was being finished , trains operated out of service beyond Baker Street , reversing at a crossover to the east of the station under construction at Marylebone . 
 = = = Rolling stock , fares and schedules = = = 
 The service was provided by a fleet of 108 carriages manufactured for the UERL in the United States by the American Car and Foundry Company and assembled in Manchester . They were transported to London by rail but because the BS & WR had no external railway connections , the carriages then had to be transported across the city on horse @-@ drawn wagons to their destination at London Road depot . 
 The carriages operated as electric multiple unit trains without separate locomotives . Passengers boarded and left the trains through folding lattice gates at each end of cars ; these gates were operated by gate @-@ men who rode on an outside platform and announced station names as trains arrived . The design was subsequently used for the GNP & BR and the CCE & HR , and became known on the Underground as the 1906 stock or Gate stock . Trains for the line were stabled at the London Road depot south of Kennington Road station . 
 The line operated from 5 : 30 am to 12 : 30 am on weekdays ( including Saturdays ) , and 7 : 30 am to 12 noon on Sundays . The standard one @-@ way fare following the line 's opening was 2d . ( " workmen 's tickets " at 2d. return were available up to 7 : 58 am ) and a book of 25 tickets was available at 4s . However , the original flat fares were abandoned in July 1906 and replaced with graded fares of between 1d. and 3d . In November 1906 , season tickets were introduced along with through tickets with the District Railway ( interchanging at Charing Cross ) . It was not until December 1907 that it was possible to buy a through ticket onto the Central London Railway ( via Oxford Circus ) . The BS & WR abolished its season tickets in October 1908 and replaced them with strip tickets , sold in sets of six , that could be used on the Bakerloo , Piccadilly and Hampstead tubes . 
 The service frequency as of mid @-@ 1906 was as follows : 
 Weekdays 
 From 5 : 30 am to 7 : 30 am : every 5 minutes 
 From 7 : 30 am to 11 : 30 pm : every 3 minutes 
 From 11 : 30 pm to 12 : 30 am : every 6 minutes 
 Sundays 
 From 7 : 30 am to 11 am : every 6 minutes 
 From 11 am to 12 noon : every 3 minutes 
 = = Co @-@ operation and consolidation , 1906 – 10 = = 
 Despite the UERL 's success in financing and constructing the railway , its opening did not bring the financial success that had been expected . In the Bakerloo Tube 's first twelve months of operation it carried 20 @.@ 5 million passengers , less than sixty per cent of the 35 million that had been predicted during the planning of the line . The UERL 's pre @-@ opening predictions of passenger numbers for its other new lines proved to be similarly over @-@ optimistic , as did the projected figures for the newly electrified DR – in each case , numbers achieved only around fifty per cent of their targets . 37 @,@ 000 people used the line on the first day , but in the months following the line 's opening only about 20 @,@ 000 – 30 @,@ 000 passengers a day used the service . The number of carriages used by the BS & WR was cut back to three per train at peak times and only two during off @-@ peak hours . The Daily Mail reported in April 1906 that the rush @-@ hour trains were carrying fewer than 100 people at a time . To add to the line 's misfortunes , it suffered its first fatality only two weeks after opening when conductor John Creagh was crushed between a train and a tunnel wall at Kennington Road station on 26 March . 
 The lower than expected passenger numbers were partly due to competition between the tube and sub @-@ surface railway companies , but the introduction of electric trams and motor buses , replacing slower , horse @-@ drawn road transport , took a large number of passengers away from the trains . The Daily Mirror noted at the end of April 1906 that the BS & WR offered poor value for money compared to the equivalent motor bus service , which cost only 1d. per journey , and that passengers disliked the distances that they had to walk between the trains and the lifts . Such problems were not limited to the UERL ; all of London 's seven tube lines and the sub @-@ surface DR and Metropolitan Railway were affected to some degree . The reduced revenue generated from the lower passenger numbers made it difficult for the UERL and the other railways to pay back the capital borrowed , or to pay dividends to shareholders . 
 From 1907 , in an effort to improve their finances , the UERL , the C & SLR , the CLR and the GN & CR began to introduce fare agreements . From 1908 , they began to present themselves through common branding as the Underground . The W & CR was the only tube railway that did not participate in the arrangement , as it was owned by the mainline L & SWR . 
 The UERL 's three tube railway companies were still legally separate entities , with their own management , shareholder and dividend structures . There was duplicated administration between the three companies and , to streamline the management and reduce expenditure , the UERL announced a bill in November 1909 that would merge the Bakerloo , the Hampstead and the Piccadilly Tubes into a single entity , the London Electric Railway ( LER ) , although the lines retained their own individual branding . The bill received Royal Assent on 26 July 1910 as the London Electric Railway Amalgamation Act , 1910 . 
 = = Extensions = = 
 = = = Paddington , 1906 – 13 = = = 
 Having planned a westward extension in 1900 to Willesden Junction , the company had been unable to decide on a route beyond Paddington and had postponed further construction while it considered options . In November 1905 , the BS & WR announced a bill for 1906 that replaced the route from Edgware Road to Paddington approved in 1900 with a new alignment . This had the tunnels crossing under the Paddington basin with the station under London Street . The tunnels were to continue south @-@ east beyond the station as sidings , to end under the junction of Grand Junction Road and Devonport Street ( now Sussex Gardens and Sussex Place ) . In a pamphlet published in 1906 to publicise the Paddington extension , the company proclaimed : 
 [ I ] t will thus be seen that the advantages which this line will afford for getting quickly and cheaply from one point of London to another are without parallel . It will link up many of the most important Railway termini , give a connection with twelve other Railway systems , and connect the vast tramway system of the South of London , thus bringing the Theatres and other places of amusement , as well as the chief shopping centres , within easy reach of outer London and the suburbs . 
 The changes were permitted by the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway Act , 1906 on 4 August 1906 , but the south @-@ east alignment did not represent a suitable direction to continue the railway and no effort was made to construct the extension . 
 In 1908 , the Bakerloo Tube attempted to make the hoped @-@ for extension into north @-@ west London using the existing powers of the North West London Railway ( NWLR ) , an unbuilt tube railway with permission to build a line from Cricklewood to Victoria station . The NWLR announced a bill in November 1908 seeking to construct a 757 @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 484 ft ) connection between its unbuilt route beneath the Edgware Road and the Bakerloo Tube 's Edgware Road station . The NWLR route to Victoria was to be abandoned south of the connection and the Bakerloo Tube 's planned route to Paddington was to be built as a shuttle line from Edgware Road , which was to be provided with two additional platforms for shuttle use . The Bakerloo Tube was to construct the extension and operate the service over the combined route , which was to have stations at St John 's Wood Road , Abercorn Place , Belsize Road ( close to the LNWR station ) , Brondesbury ( to interchange with the North London Railway 's station and close to the MR 's Kilburn station ) , Minster Road and Cricklewood . The Bakerloo Tube announced its own bill to make the necessary changes to its existing plans . 
 The GWR objected to the reduction of the Bakerloo Tube 's Paddington connection to a shuttle and the MR objected to the connection of the two lines , which would be in competition with its line through Kilburn . Parliament rejected the proposed connection and the changes to the NWLR 's route and the company 's permissions eventually expired without any construction work being carried out . The Bakerloo Tube bill was withdrawn . 
 In November 1910 , the LER ( of which the Bakerloo Tube was now part ) revived plans for the Paddington extension when it published a bill for the 1911 Parliamentary session . The new route ran 890 metres ( 2 @,@ 920 ft ) in a tight curve from Edgware Road station , initially heading south before turning to the north @-@ west , which provided a more practical direction for a future extension . The bill was supported by the GWR with funding of £ 18 @,@ 000 . The London Electric Railway Act , 1911 received royal assent on 2 June 1911 . Construction started in August 1911 , and was completed in a little over two years . The extension opened on 1 December 1913 , with the single new station at Paddington . Following their successful introduction at Earl 's Court in 1911 , the station was the first on the line to be designed to use escalators instead of lifts . 
 = = = Queen 's Park and Watford , 1911 – 17 = = = 
 In 1907 , the LNWR obtained parliamentary permission to improve its mainline services into London by the construction of a pair of new electrified tracks alongside its existing line between Watford Junction in Hertfordshire and Queen 's Park , Kilburn and a new tube section beneath its lines from there to its terminus at Euston . At Euston , the tube tunnel was to end with an underground station on a 1 @,@ 450 @-@ metre ( 4 @,@ 760 ft ) long loop beneath the mainline station . 
 The LNWR began construction work on the surface section of the new tracks in 1909 . By 1911 , it had modified the plans to omit the underground section and to split its proposed electrified services into three . The first section was to follow the existing surface route into Euston on newly electrified tracks , the second section was to connect with the North London Railway at Chalk Farm and continue on electrified tracks from there to Broad Street station in the City of London . The third section involved the extension of the Bakerloo Tube from Paddington to Queen 's Park . 
 With the extension to Paddington still under construction , the LER published a bill in November 1911 for the continuation to Queen 's Park . The extension was to continue north from Paddington , running past Little Venice to Maida Vale before curving north @-@ west to Kilburn and then west to parallel the LNWR main line , before coming to the surface a short distance to the east of Queen 's Park station . Three intermediate stations were to be provided : on Warwick Avenue at the junction with Warrington Avenue , Clifton Villas and Clifton Gardens ; at the junction of Elgin and Randolph Avenues ( named Maida Vale ) ; and on Cambridge Avenue ( named Kilburn Park ) . The LNWR gave a £ 1 million loan to the LER at 4 % interest in perpetuity to help finance the extension . The bill received royal assent on 7 August 1912 as the London Electric Railway Act , 1912 . 
 Progress on the section from Paddington to Queen 's Park was slowed by the start of World War I , so the line was not finished until early 1915 . As at Paddington , the three below @-@ ground stations were built to use escalators . Maida Vale and Kilburn Park were provided with buildings in the style of the earlier Leslie Green stations but without the upper storey , which was no longer required for housing lift gear . Warwick Avenue was accessed from a subway under the street . The LNWR rebuilt Queen 's Park station with additional platforms for the Bakerloo Tube 's and its own electric services and constructed two train sheds for rolling stock , one each side of the station . 
 Although the tracks were completed to Queen 's Park , delays to the completion of the stations caused the extension to open in stages : 
 Warwick Avenue , on 31 January 1915 
 Maida Vale , on 6 June 1915 
 Kilburn Park , on 31 January 1915 
 Queen 's Park , on 11 February 1915 
 North of Queen 's Park , the LNWR had opened its new lines between Willesden Junction and Watford during 1912 and 1913 , together with new stations at Harlesden , Stonebridge Park , North Wembley , Kenton and Headstone Lane . The new tracks between Queen 's Park and Willesden Junction opened on 10 May 1915 , when Bakerloo Tube services were extended there . On 16 April 1917 , the tube service was extended to Watford Junction . North of Queen 's Park , the Bakerloo Tube served the following stations : 
 Kensal Green 
 Willesden Junction 
 Harlesden 
 Stonebridge Park 
 Wembley for Sudbury ( now Wembley Central ) 
 North Wembley 
 Kenton 
 Harrow & Wealdstone 
 Headstone Lane 
 Pinner & Hatch End ( later Hatch End for Pinner , now Hatch End ) 
 <unk> Park , opened 5 May 1919 
 Bushey & <unk> ( now Bushey ) 
 Watford High Street 
 Watford Junction 
 For the extension to Queen 's Park , the LER supplemented the existing rolling stock with 14 new carriages ordered from Brush Traction and Leeds Forge Company plus spare Gate stock carriages from the GNP & BR . These carriages , the 1914 stock , were the first to have doors in the sides of the carriages as well as the ends . For the longer extension to Watford , the LER and the LNWR ordered 72 new carriages from the Metropolitan Railway Carriage and Wagon Company . Manufacture of this rolling stock was delayed by the war , and , while it was waiting for delivery , the Bakerloo Tube used spare 1915 stock carriages ordered for an unfinished extension of the CLR to Ealing Broadway and more spare Gate stock carriages from the GNP & BR . Delivery of the carriages for the Watford service , known as the Watford Joint stock because ownership was shared with the LNWR , began in 1920 ; they were painted in the LNWR 's livery to distinguish them from trains operating only on the Bakerloo Tube 's tracks . 
 = = = Camberwell and south @-@ east London = = = 
 The southern termination of the line at Elephant & Castle presented the opportunity for the line to be extended further , to serve Camberwell and other destinations in south @-@ east London . In 1913 , the Lord Mayor of London announced a proposal for the Bakerloo Tube to be extended to the Crystal Palace via Camberwell Green , Dulwich and Sydenham Hill , but nothing was done to implement the plan . In 1921 , the LER costed an extension to Camberwell , Dulwich and Sydenham and in 1922 plans for an extension to Orpington via Loughborough Junction and <unk> were considered . In 1928 , a route to <unk> Green via Dulwich was suggested . Again , no action was taken , although the London and Home Counties Traffic Advisory Committee approved an extension to Camberwell in 1926 . 
 In 1931 , an extension to Camberwell was approved as part of the London Electric Metropolitan District and Central London Railway Companies ( Works ) Act , 1931 . The route was to follow Walworth Road and Camberwell Road south from Elephant and Castle , with stations at Albany Road and under Denmark Hill road at Camberwell . Elephant & Castle station was to be reconstructed with a third platform , a new ticket hall and escalators . However , financial constraints prevented any work from being started . 
 = = Improvements , 1914 – 28 = = 
 Overcrowding was a major problem at many stations where interchanges were made with other Underground lines and efforts were made in a number of places to improve passenger movements . In 1914 , work was carried out to provide larger ticket halls and install escalators at Oxford Circus , Embankment and Baker Street . In 1923 , further work at Oxford Circus provided a combined Bakerloo and CLR ticket hall and added more escalators serving the CLR platforms . In 1926 , Trafalgar Square and Waterloo received escalators , the latter in conjunction with expansion of the station as part of the CCE & HR 's extension to Kennington . Between 1925 and 1928 , Piccadilly Circus station saw the greatest reconstruction . A large circular ticket hall was excavated below the road junction with multiple subway connections from points around the Circus and two flights of escalators down to the Bakerloo and Piccadilly platforms were installed . 
 = = Move to public ownership , 1923 – 33 = = 
 Despite closer co @-@ operation and improvements made to the Bakerloo stations and to other parts of the network , the Underground railways continued to struggle financially . The UERL 's ownership of the highly profitable London General Omnibus Company ( LGOC ) since 1912 had enabled the UERL group , through the pooling of revenue , to use profits from the bus company to subsidise the less profitable railways . However , competition from numerous small bus companies during the early 1920s eroded the profitability of the LGOC and had a negative impact on the profitability of the whole UERL group . 
 To protect the UERL group 's income , its chairman Lord Ashfield lobbied the government for regulation of transport services in the London area . Starting in 1923 , a series of legislative initiatives were made in this direction , with Ashfield and Labour London County Councillor ( later MP and Minister of Transport ) Herbert Morrison at the forefront of debates as to the level of regulation and public control under which transport services should be brought . Ashfield aimed for regulation that would give the UERL group protection from competition and allow it to take substantive control of the LCC 's tram system ; Morrison preferred full public ownership . After seven years of false starts , a bill was announced at the end of 1930 for the formation of the London Passenger Transport Board ( LPTB ) , a public corporation that would take control of the UERL , the Metropolitan Railway and all bus and tram operators within an area designated as the London Passenger Transport Area . The Board was a compromise – public ownership but not full nationalisation – and came into existence on 1 July 1933 . On this date , the LER and the other Underground companies were liquidated . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The plan for the extension to Camberwell was kept alive throughout the 1930s and , in 1940 , the permission was used to construct sidings beyond Elephant & Castle . After the Second World War , the plans were revised again , with stations located under Walworth Road and Camberwell Green , and the extension appeared on tube maps in 1949 . Rising construction costs caused by difficult ground conditions and restricted funds in the post @-@ war austerity period led the scheme to be cancelled again in 1950 . Various proposals have been evaluated since , including an extension to Peckham considered in the early 1970s , but the costs have always out @-@ weighed the benefits . 
 One of the LPTB 's first acts in charge of the Bakerloo line was the opening of a new station at South Kenton on 3 July 1933 . As part of the LPTB 's New Works Programme announced in 1935 , new tube tunnels were constructed from Baker Street to the former MR station at Finchley Road and the Bakerloo line took over the stopping service to Wembley Park and the MR 's Stanmore branch . The service opened in November 1939 and remained part of the Bakerloo line until 1979 when it transferred to the Jubilee line . 
 The Bakerloo line 's Watford service frequency was gradually reduced and from 1965 ran only during rush hours . In 1982 , the service beyond Stonebridge Park was ended as part of the fall @-@ out of the cancellation of the Greater London Council 's Fares Fair subsidies policy . A peak hours service was restored to Harrow & Wealdstone in 1984 and a full service was restored in 1989 . 
 = Osvetnik @-@ class submarine = 
 The Osvetnik @-@ class consisted of two submarines built by Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire , Nantes , France for the navy of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) . Launched in 1928 – 29 , the vessels were named Osvetnik ( Nemesis ) and Smeli ( Daring ) . They were built to a partial double hull Simonot design similar to the French Circé @-@ class . The Osvetnik @-@ class was the second class of submarines to serve in the Royal Yugoslav Navy , and joined the two larger British @-@ made Hrabri @-@ class submarines to make up the pre @-@ war Yugoslav submarine force . They were armed with six 550 mm ( 22 in ) torpedo tubes , one 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) gun , and one 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun , and could dive to 80 metres ( 260 ft ) . 
 Prior to World War II both submarines participated in cruises to Mediterranean ports . Both submarines were captured by Italian forces at the Bay of Kotor during the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 . After refit , they saw service as experimental and training vessels with the Regia Marina as Francesco Rismondo and Antonio Bajamonti respectively . They were both scuttled in September 1943 following the Italian surrender , Francesco Rismondo by the Germans following her capture , and Antonio Bajamonti by the Italians themselves . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 Yugoslav naval policy in the interwar period lacked direction until the mid @-@ 1920s , although it was generally accepted that the Adriatic coastline was effectively a sea frontier that the naval arm was responsible for securing with the limited resources made available to it . In 1926 , a modest ten @-@ year construction program was initiated to build up a force of submarines , coastal torpedo boats , torpedo bombers and conventional bomber aircraft to perform this role . The Osvetnik @-@ class submarines were one of the acquisitions aimed at developing a naval force capable of meeting this challenge . 
 The Osvetnik @-@ class was built for the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) by the Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire company at Nantes , France . Their design was based on a partial double hull Simonot design , similar to the French Circé class . Their Serbo @-@ Croatian names of Osvetnik and Smeli translate as " Avenger " and " Daring " respectively . They had an overall length of 66 @.@ 5 m ( 218 ft ) , a beam of 5 @.@ 4 m ( 18 ft ) , and a surfaced draught of 3 @.@ 8 m ( 12 ft ) . Their surfaced displacement was 630 long tons ( 640 t ) , or 809 long tons ( 822 t ) submerged , and their crews consisted of 43 officers and enlisted men . They had an operational depth of 80 m ( 260 ft ) . 
 They had two shafts driven by two MAN ( Maschinenfabrik ) diesel engines ( when surfaced ) or two Nancy electric motors ( when submerged ) . The diesel engines were rated at 1 @,@ 480 bhp ( 1 @,@ 100 kW ) and the electric motors at 1 @,@ 000 shp ( 750 kW ) , and they were designed to reach a top speed of 14 @.@ 5 knots ( 26 @.@ 9 km / h ) under diesel power while surfaced , and 9 @.@ 2 knots ( 17 @.@ 0 km / h ) on their electric motors when submerged . They were armed with six 550 mm ( 22 in ) torpedo tubes ( four bow @-@ mounted , two stern @-@ mounted ) , one 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) gun , and one 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . They had a surfaced radius action of 3 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 500 km ) at 9 knots ( 17 km / h ) , and 75 nautical miles ( 139 km ) at 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ) submerged . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Smeli was launched on 1 December 1928 , and Osvetnik on 14 January 1929 . They arrived in the Bay of Kotor on the southern Adriatic coast on 9 December 1929 . In 1932 , the British naval attaché reported that Yugoslav ships engaged in few exercises , maneuvers or gunnery training due to reduced budgets . 
 = = = Osvetnik = = = 
 First of the class , Osvetnik was involved in a series of visits to Mediterranean ports during the interwar period . She was captured in port by the Italians during the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia . She was refitted and modernised before being commissioned by the Italians as Francesco Rismondo , but was only used for training and experimentation . She was captured then scuttled by the Germans in September 1943 . 
 = = = Smeli = = = 
 Smeli was the second and last of her class . She participated in several cruises in the Mediterranean during the interwar period . After capture by the Italians , Smeli was refitted and modernised before being commissioned as Antonio Bajamonti , but was only used for training and experimentation . She was scuttled by the Italians in September 1943 after the Italian surrender . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = United States Numbered Highways = 
 The system of United States Numbered Highways ( often called U.S. Routes or U.S. Highways ) is an integrated network of roads and highways numbered within a nationwide grid in the contiguous United States . As the designation and numbering of these highways were coordinated among the states , they are sometimes called Federal Highways , but the roadways have always been maintained by state or local governments since their initial designation in 1926 . 
 The route numbers and locations are coordinated by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials ( AASHTO ) . The only federal involvement in AASHTO is a <unk> seat for the United States Department of Transportation . Generally , north @-@ to @-@ south highways are odd @-@ numbered , with lowest numbers in the east , the area of the founding thirteen states of the United States , and highest in the west . Similarly , east @-@ to @-@ west highways are typically even @-@ numbered , with the lowest numbers in the north , where roads were first improved most intensively , and highest in the south . Major north – south routes have numbers ending in " 1 " while major east – west routes have numbers ending in " 0 " . Three @-@ digit numbered highways are spur routes of parent highways but are not necessarily connected to their parents . Some divided routes exist to provide two alignments for one route , even though many splits have been eliminated . Special routes , usually posted with a banner , can provide various routes , such as an alternate , bypass or business route , for a U.S. Highway . 
 Before the U.S. Routes were designated , auto trails designated by auto trail associations were the main means of marking roads through the United States . In 1925 , the Joint Board on Interstate Highways , recommended by the American Association of State Highway Officials ( AASHO ) , worked to form a national numbering system to rationalize the roads . After several meetings , a final report was approved by the U.S. Department of Agriculture in November 1925 . They received complaints from across the country about the assignment of routes , so the Board made several modifications ; the U.S. Highway System was approved in November 1926 . As a result of compromises made to get the U.S. Highway System approved , many routes were divided , with alignments to serve different towns . In subsequent years , AASHTO called for such splits in U.S. Routes to be eliminated . 
 Expansion of the system continued until 1956 , when the Interstate Highway System was formed . After construction was completed , many U.S. Routes were replaced by Interstate Highways for through traffic . Despite the Interstate system , U.S. Highways still form many important regional connections , and new routes are still being added . 
 = = System details = = 
 In general , U.S. Routes do not have a minimum design standard , unlike the later Interstate Highways , and are not usually built to freeway standards . Some stretches of U.S. Routes do meet those standards . Many are designated using the main streets of the cities and towns through which they run . New additions to the system , however , must " substantially meet the current AASHTO design standards " . As of 1989 , the United States Numbered Highways system has a total length of 157 @,@ 724 miles ( 253 @,@ 832 km ) . 
 Except for toll bridges and tunnels , very few U.S. Routes are toll roads . AASHTO policy says that a toll road may only be included as a special route , and that " a toll @-@ free routing between the same termini shall continue to be retained and marked as a part of the U.S. Numbered System . " U.S. Route 3 ( US 3 ) meets this obligation ; in New Hampshire , it does not follow tolled portions of the Everett Turnpike . But US Routes in the system do use parts of four toll roads : 
 US 51 uses part of the Jane Addams Memorial Tollway in Illinois ; the old road is Illinois Route 251 . 
 US 278 uses the tolled Cross Island Parkway in South Carolina ; the old road is US 278 Business . 
 US 412 uses the Cimarron Turnpike in Oklahoma ; the old road is US 64 . 
 US 412 also uses the Cherokee Turnpike in Oklahoma ; the old road is Alternate US 412 . 
 = = = Numbering = = = 
 The two @-@ digit U.S. Routes follow a simple grid in the contiguous United States , in which odd @-@ numbered routes run generally north to south and even @-@ numbered routes run generally east to west . ( US 101 is considered a two @-@ digit route , its " first digit " being 10 . ) The numbering pattern for U.S. Routes was established first : U.S. Routes proceed from low even numbers in the north to high even numbers in the south , and from low odd numbers in the east to high odd numbers in the west . Numbers ending in 0 or 1 ( and US 2 ) , and to a lesser extent in 5 , were considered main routes in the early numbering , but extensions and truncations have made this distinction largely meaningless . For example , US 6 was until 1964 the longest route ( that distinction now belongs to US 20 ) . 
 In the 1950s , the numbering grid for the new Interstate Highway System was established as intentionally opposite from the US grid insofar as the direction the route numbers increase . Interstate Highway numbers increase from west @-@ to @-@ east and south @-@ to @-@ north , to keep identically numbered routes geographically apart in order to keep them from being confused with one another . Both highway systems still number the routes ending in odd numbers north – south and the even @-@ numbered highways run east – west . 
 In the US Highway system , three @-@ digit numbers are assigned to spurs of one or two @-@ digit routes . US 201 , for example , splits from US 1 at Brunswick , Maine , and runs north to Canada . Not all spurs travel in the same direction as their " parents " ; some are connected to their parents only by other spurs , or not at all , instead only traveling near their parents . As originally assigned , the first digit of the spurs increased from north to south and east to west along the parent ; for example , US 60 had spurs , running from east to west , designated as US 160 in Missouri , US 260 in Oklahoma , US 360 in Texas , and US 460 and US 560 in New Mexico . As with the two @-@ digit routes , three @-@ digit routes have been added , removed , extended and shortened ; the " parent @-@ child " relationship is not always present . For example , several spurs of the decommissioned US 66 still exist . US 191 travels from border to border although its parent , US 91 , has been largely replaced by Interstate 15 ( I @-@ 15 ) . 
 In addition , US 163 , designated in 1970 , is nowhere near US 63 . The short US 57 , approved c . 1970 , connects to Federal Highway 57 in Mexico , and lies west of former US 81 . 
 Several routes approved since 1980 do not follow the numbering pattern : 
 US 400 , approved in 1994 , has no " parent " since there is no US 0 or US 100 . 
 US 412 , approved c . 1982 , is nowhere near US 12 . 
 US 425 , approved in 1989 , is nowhere near US 25 . 
 While AASHTO guidelines specifically prohibit Interstate Highways and U.S. Routes from sharing a number within the same state ( which is why there are no Interstates 50 or 60 ) , the initial Interstate numbering approved in 1958 violated this with I @-@ 24 and US 24 in Illinois and I @-@ 40 , I @-@ 80 , US 40 and US 80 in California ( US 40 and US 80 were removed from California in its 1964 renumbering ) . 
 Some recent and proposed Interstates , some of them out of place in the grid , also violate this : I @-@ 41 and US 41 in Wisconsin ( which will run concurrently ) , I @-@ 49 and US 49 in Arkansas , I @-@ 69 and US 69 in Texas , and I @-@ 74 and US 74 in North Carolina ( which run concurrently ) . 
 Some two @-@ digit numbers have never been applied to any U.S. Route , including 39 , 47 , 86 and 88 . 
 = = = Divided and special routes = = = 
 Since 1926 , some divided routes were designated to serve related areas , and designate roughly @-@ equivalent splits of routes . For instance , US 11 splits into US 11E ( east ) and US 11W ( west ) in Bristol , Virginia , and the routes rejoin in Knoxville , Tennessee . Occasionally only one of the two routes is suffixed ; US 6N in Pennsylvania does not rejoin US 6 at its west end . AASHTO has been trying to eliminate these since 1934 ; its current policy is to deny approval of new split routes and to eliminate existing ones " as rapidly as the State Highway Department and the Standing Committee on Highways can reach agreement with reference thereto " . 
 Special routes — those with a banner such as alternate or bypass — are also managed by AASHTO . These are sometimes designated with lettered suffixes , like A for alternate or B for business . 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 The official route log , last published by AASHTO in 1989 , has been named United States Numbered Highways since its initial publication in 1926 . Within the route log , " U.S. Route " is used in the table of contents , while " United States Highway " appears as the heading for each route . All reports of the Special Committee on Route Numbering since 1989 use " U.S. Route " , and federal laws relating to highways use " United States Route " or " U.S. Route " more often than the " Highway " variants . The use of U.S. Route or U.S. Highway on a local level depends on the state , with some states such as Delaware using " route " and others such as Colorado using " highway " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early auto trails = = = 
 In 1903 , Horatio Nelson Jackson became the first documented person to drive an automobile from San Francisco to New York using only a connection of dirt roads , cow paths , and railroad beds . His journey , covered by the press , became a national sensation and called for a system of long distance roads . 
 In the early 1910s , auto trail organizations — most prominently the Lincoln Highway — began to spring up , marking and promoting routes for the new recreation of long @-@ distance automobile travel . While many of these organizations worked with towns and states along the route to improve the roadways , others simply chose a route based on towns that were willing to pay dues , put up signs , and did little else . 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 Wisconsin was the first state in the U.S. to number its highways , erecting signs in May 1918 . Other states soon followed . In 1922 the New England states got together to establish the six @-@ state New England Interstate Routes . 
 Behind the scenes , the federal aid program had begun with the passage of the Federal Aid Road Act of 1916 , providing 50 % monetary support from the federal government for improvement of major roads . The Federal Aid Highway Act of 1921 limited the routes to 7 % of each state 's roads , while 3 in every 7 roads had to be " interstate in character " . Identification of these main roads was completed in 1923 . 
 The American Association of State Highway Officials ( AASHO ) , formed in 1914 to help establish roadway standards , began to plan a system of marked and numbered " interstate highways " at its 1924 meeting . AASHO recommended that the Secretary of Agriculture work with the states to designate these routes . 
 Secretary Howard M. Gore appointed the Joint Board on Interstate Highways , as recommended by AASHO , on March 2 , 1925 . The Board was composed of 21 state highway officials and three federal Bureau of Public Roads officials . At the first meeting , on April 20 and 21 , the group chose the name " U.S. Highway " as the designation for the routes . They decided that the system would not be limited to the federal @-@ aid network ; if the best route did not receive federal funds , it would still be included . The tentative design for the U.S. Highway shield was also chosen , based on the shield found on the Great Seal of the United States . 
 The auto trail associations rejected the elimination of the highway names . Six regional meetings were held to hammer out the details — May 15 for the West , May 27 for the Mississippi Valley , June 3 for the Great Lakes , June 8 for the South , June 15 for the North Atlantic , and June 15 for New England . Representatives of the auto trail associations were not able to formally address the meetings . However , as a compromise , they talked with the Joint Board members . The associations finally settled on a general agreement with the numbering plans , as named trails would still be included . The tentative system added up to 81 @,@ 000 miles ( 130 @,@ 000 km ) , 2 @.@ 8 % of the public road mileage at the time . 
 The second full meeting was held August 3 and 4 , 1925 . At that meeting , discussion was held over the appropriate density of routes . William F. Williams of Massachusetts and Frederick S. Greene of New York favored a system of only major transcontinental highways , while many states recommended a large number of roads of only regional importance . Greene in particular intended New York 's system to have four major through routes as an example to the other states . Many states agreed in general with the scope of the system , but believed the Midwest to have added too many routes to the system . The group adopted the shield , with few modifications from the original sketch , at that meeting , as well as the decision to number rather than name the routes . A preliminary numbering system , with eight major east – west and ten major north – south routes , was deferred to a numbering committee " without instructions " . 
 After working with states to get their approval , the committee expanded the highway system to 75 @,@ 800 miles ( 122 @,@ 000 km ) , or 2 @.@ 6 % of total mileage , over 50 % more than the plan approved August 4 . The skeleton of the numbering plan was suggested on August 27 by Edwin Warley James of the BPR , who matched parity to direction , and laid out a rough grid . Major routes from the earlier map were assigned numbers ending in 0 , 1 or 5 ( 5 was soon relegated to less @-@ major status ) , and short connections received three @-@ digit numbers based on the main highway from which they spurred . The five @-@ man committee met September 25 , and submitted the final report to the Joint Board secretary on October 26 . The board sent the report to the Secretary of Agriculture of October 30 , and he approved it November 18 , 1925 . 
 = = = Disagreement and refinement , 1925 – 26 = = = 
 The new system was both praised and criticized by local newspapers , often depending on whether that city was connected to a major route . While the Lincoln Highway Association understood and supported the plan , partly because they were assured of getting the US 30 designation as much as possible , most other trail associations lamented their obsolescence . At their January 14 – 15 , 1926 meeting , AASHO was flooded with complaints . 
 In the Northeast , New York held out for fewer routes designated as US highways . The Pennsylvania representative , who had not attended the local meetings , convinced AASHO to add a dense network of routes , which had the effect of giving six routes termini along the state line . ( Only US 220 still ends near the state line , and now it ends at an intersection with future I @-@ 86 . ) Because US 20 seemed indirect , passing through Yellowstone National Park , Idaho and Oregon requested that US 30 be swapped with US 20 to the Pacific coast . 
 Many local disputes arose related to the committee 's choices between designation of two roughly equal parallel routes , which were often competing auto trails . At their January meeting , AASHO approved the first two of many split routes ( specifically US 40 between Manhattan , Kansas and Limon , Colorado and US 50 between Baldwin City , Kansas and Garden City , Kansas ) . In effect , each of the two routes received the same number , with a directional suffix indicating its relation to the other . These splits were initially shown in the log as — for instance — US 40 North and US 40 South , but were always posted as simply US 40N and US 40S . 
 The most heated argument , however , was the issue of US 60 . The Joint Board had assigned that number to the Chicago @-@ Los Angeles route , which ran more north – south than west – east in Illinois , and then angled sharply to the southwest to Oklahoma City , from where it ran west to Los Angeles . Kentucky strongly objected to this designated route , as it had been left off any of the major east @-@ west routes , instead receiving the US 62 designation . In January 1926 , the committee designated this , along with the part of US 52 east of Ashland , Kentucky , as US 60 . They assigned US 62 to the Chicago @-@ Los Angeles route , contingent on the approval of the states along the former US 60 . But Missouri and Oklahoma did object — Missouri had already printed maps , and Oklahoma had prepared signs . A compromise was proposed , in which US 60 would split at Springfield , Missouri , into US <unk> and US <unk> , but both sides objected . The final solution resulted in the assignment of US 66 to the Chicago @-@ Los Angeles portion of the US highway , which did not end in zero , but was still seen as a satisfyingly round number . Route 66 came to have a prominent place in popular culture , being featured in song and films . 
 With 32 states already marking their routes , the plan was approved by AASHO on November 11 , 1926 . This plan included a number of directionally split routes , several discontinuous routes ( including US 6 , US 19 and US 50 ) , and some termini at state lines . By the time the first route log was published in April 1927 , major numbering changes had been made in Pennsylvania in order to align the routes to the existing auto trails . In addition , U.S. Route 15 had been extended across Virginia . 
 Much of the early criticism of the U.S. Highway System focused on the choice of numbers to designate the highways , rather than names . Some thought a numbered highway system to be cold compared to the more colorful names and historic value of the auto trail systems . The New York Times wrote , " The traveler may shed tears as he drives the Lincoln Highway or dream dreams as he speeds over the Jefferson Highway , but how can he get a ' kick ' out of 46 , 55 or 33 or 21 ? " ( A popular song later promised , " Get your kicks on Route 66 ! " ) The writer Ernest <unk> was quoted as saying , " Logarithms will take the place of legends , and ' hokum ' for history . " 
 = = = Expansion and adjustment , 1926 – 56 = = = 
 When the U.S. numbered system was started in 1925 , a few optional routings were established which were designated with a suffixed letter after the number indicating " north " , " south " , " east " , or " west " . While a few roads in the system are still numbered in this manner , AASHO believes that they should be eliminated wherever possible , by the absorption of one of the optional routes into another route . 
 In 1934 , AASHO tried to eliminate many of the split routes by removing them from the log , and designating one of each pair as a three @-@ digit or alternate route , or in one case US 37 . AASHO described its renumbering concept in the October 1934 issue of American Highways : 
 " Wherever an alternate route is not suitable for its own unique two @-@ digit designation , standard procedure assigns the unqualified number to the older or shorter route , while the other route uses the same number marked by a standard strip above its shield carrying the word ' Alternate ' . " 
 Most states adhere to this approach . However , some maintain legacy routes that violate the rules in various ways . Examples can be found in California , Mississippi , Nebraska , Oregon , and Tennessee . In 1952 , AASHO permanently recognized the splits in US 11 , US 19 , US 25 , US 31 , US 45 , US 49 , US 73 , and US 99 . 
 For the most part , the U.S. Routes were the primary means of inter @-@ city vehicle travel ; the main exceptions were toll roads such as the Pennsylvania Turnpike and parkway routes such as the Merritt Parkway . Many of the first high @-@ speed roads were U.S. Highways : the Gulf Freeway carried US 75 , the Pasadena Freeway carried US 66 , and the Pulaski Skyway carried US 1 and US 9 . 
 = = = Interstate era , 1956 – present = = = 
 The Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 appropriated funding for the Interstate Highway System , to construct a vast network of freeways across the country . By 1957 , AASHO had decided to assign a new grid to the new routes , to be numbered in the opposite directions as the U.S. Highway grid . Though the Interstate numbers were to supplement , rather than replace , the U.S. Route numbers , in many cases ( especially in the west ) the US highways were rerouted along the new Interstates . Major decommissioning of former routes began with California 's highway renumbering in 1964 . The 1985 removal of US 66 is often seen as the end of an era of US highways . 
 A few major connections not served by Interstate Highways include US 6 from Hartford , Connecticut , to Providence , Rhode Island ; US 101 from Los Angeles to San Francisco ; and US 93 from Phoenix , Arizona to Las Vegas , Nevada . Three state capitals in the contiguous U.S. are served only by U.S. Routes : Dover , Delaware ; Jefferson City , Missouri ; and Pierre , South Dakota . 
 In 1995 the National Highway System was defined to include both the Interstate Highway System and other roads designated as important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 AASHTO is in the process of eliminating all intrastate U.S. Highways less than 300 miles ( 480 km ) in length " as rapidly as the State Highway Department and the Standing Committee on Highways of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials can reach agreement with reference thereto " . New additions to the system must serve more than one state and " substantially meet the current AASHTO design standards " . A version of this policy has been in place since 1937 . 
 = = The 1925 routes = = 
 The original major transcontinental routes in 1925 , along with the auto trails which they roughly replaced , were as follows : 
 US 10 , US 60 , and US 90 only ran about two thirds of the way across the country , while US 11 and US 60 ran significantly diagonally . US 60 's violation of two of the conventions would prove to be one of the major sticking points ; US 60 eventually was designated as US 66 in 1926 , and later it became popular in the culture . US 101 continues east and then south to end at Olympia , Washington . The western terminus of US 2 is now at Everett , Washington . 
 = Polar bear = 
 The polar bear ( Ursus maritimus ) is a carnivorous bear whose native range lies largely within the Arctic Circle , encompassing the Arctic Ocean , its surrounding seas and surrounding land masses . It is a large bear , approximately the same size as the omnivorous Kodiak bear ( Ursus arctos <unk> ) . A boar ( adult male ) weighs around 350 – 700 kg ( 772 – 1 @,@ 543 lb ) , while a sow ( adult female ) is about half that size . Although it is the sister species of the brown bear , it has evolved to occupy a narrower ecological niche , with many body characteristics adapted for cold temperatures , for moving across snow , ice , and open water , and for hunting seals , which make up most of its diet . Although most polar bears are born on land , they spend most of their time on the sea ice . Their scientific name means " maritime bear " , and derives from this fact . Polar bears hunt their preferred food of seals from the edge of sea ice , often living off fat reserves when no sea ice is present . Because of their dependence on the sea ice , polar bears are classified as marine mammals . 
 Because of expected habitat loss caused by climate change , the polar bear is classified as a vulnerable species , and at least three of the nineteen polar bear subpopulations are currently in decline . For decades , large @-@ scale hunting raised international concern for the future of the species , but populations rebounded after controls and quotas began to take effect . For thousands of years , the polar bear has been a key figure in the material , spiritual , and cultural life of circumpolar peoples , and polar bears remain important in their cultures . 
 = = Naming and etymology = = 
 Constantine John Phipps was the first to describe the polar bear as a distinct species in 1774 . He chose the scientific name Ursus maritimus , the Latin for ' maritime bear ' , due to the animal 's native habitat . The Inuit refer to the animal as <unk> ( transliterated as <unk> in the Inupiat language ) . The Yupik also refer to the bear as <unk> in Siberian Yupik . The bear is <unk> in the Chukchi language . In Russian , it is usually called <unk> ́ <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , the white bear ) , though an older word still in use is <unk> ́ й ( <unk> , which comes from the Komi <unk> , " bear " ) . In French , the polar bear is referred to as ours blanc ( " white bear " ) or ours <unk> ( " polar bear " ) . In the Norwegian @-@ administered Svalbard archipelago , the polar bear is referred to as Isbjørn ( " ice bear " ) . 
 The polar bear was previously considered to be in its own genus , <unk> . However , evidence of hybrids between polar bears and brown bears , and of the recent evolutionary divergence of the two species , does not support the establishment of this separate genus , and the accepted scientific name is now therefore Ursus maritimus , as Phipps originally proposed . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 The bear family , Ursidae , is thought to have split off from other carnivorans about 38 million years ago . The <unk> subfamily originated approximately 4 @.@ 2 million years ago . The oldest known polar bear fossil is a 130 @,@ 000 to 110 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old jaw bone , found on Prince Charles Foreland in 2004 . Fossils show that between 10 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 years ago , the polar bear 's molar teeth changed significantly from those of the brown bear . Polar bears are thought to have diverged from a population of brown bears that became isolated during a period of glaciation in the Pleistocene or from the eastern part of Siberia , ( from Kamchatka and the <unk> Peninsula ) . 
 The evidence from DNA analysis is more complex . The mitochondrial DNA ( mtDNA ) of the polar bear diverged from the brown bear , Ursus arctos , roughly 150 @,@ 000 years ago . Further , some clades of brown bear , as assessed by their mtDNA , are more closely related to polar bears than to other brown bears , meaning that the polar bear might not be considered a species under some species concepts . The mtDNA of extinct Irish brown bears is particularly close to polar bears . A comparison of the nuclear genome of polar bears with that of brown bears revealed a different pattern , the two forming genetically distinct clades that diverged approximately 603 @,@ 000 years ago , although the latest research is based on analysis of the complete genomes ( rather than just the mitochondria or partial nuclear genomes ) of polar and brown bears , and establishes the divergence of polar and brown bears at 400 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 However , the two species have mated intermittently for all that time , most likely coming into contact with each other during warming periods , when polar bears were driven onto land and brown bears migrated northward . Most brown bears have about 2 percent genetic material from polar bears , but one population , the ABC Islands bears has between 5 percent and 10 percent polar bear genes , indicating more frequent and recent mating . Polar bears can breed with brown bears to produce fertile grizzly – polar bear hybrids , rather than indicating that they have only recently diverged , the new evidence suggests more frequent mating has continued over a longer period of time , and thus the two bears remain genetically similar . However , because neither species can survive long in the other 's ecological niche , and because they have different morphology , metabolism , social and feeding behaviours , and other phenotypic characteristics , the two bears are generally classified as separate species . 
 When the polar bear was originally documented , two subspecies were identified : Ursus maritimus maritimus by Constantine J. Phipps in 1774 , and Ursus maritimus marinus by Peter Simon Pallas in 1776 . This distinction has since been invalidated . One alleged fossil subspecies has been identified : Ursus maritimus tyrannus became extinct during the Pleistocene . <unk> tyrannus was significantly larger than the living subspecies . However , recent reanalysis of the fossil suggests that it was actually a type of brown bear . 
 = = Population and distribution = = 
 The polar bear is found in the Arctic Circle and adjacent land masses as far south as Newfoundland . Due to the absence of human development in its remote habitat , it retains more of its original range than any other extant carnivore . While they are rare north of 88 ° , there is evidence that they range all the way across the Arctic , and as far south as James Bay in Canada . Their southernmost range is near the boundary between the subarctic and humid continental climate zones . They can occasionally drift widely with the sea ice , and there have been anecdotal sightings as far south as Berlevåg on the Norwegian mainland and the Kuril Islands in the Sea of Okhotsk . It is difficult to estimate a global population of polar bears as much of the range has been poorly studied ; however , biologists use a working estimate of about 20 – 25 @,@ 000 or 22 – 31 @,@ 000 polar bears worldwide . 
 There are 19 generally recognized , discrete subpopulations , though polar bears are thought to exist only in low densities in the area of the Arctic Basin . The subpopulations display seasonal fidelity to particular areas , but DNA studies show that they are not reproductively isolated . The thirteen North American subpopulations range from the Beaufort Sea south to Hudson Bay and east to Baffin Bay in western Greenland and account for about 54 % of the global population . The Eurasian population is broken up into the eastern Greenland , Barents Sea , Kara Sea , Laptev Sea , and Chukchi Sea subpopulations , though there is considerable uncertainty about the structure of these populations due to limited mark and recapture data . 
 The range includes the territory of five nations : Denmark ( Greenland ) , Norway ( Svalbard ) , Russia , the United States ( Alaska ) and Canada . These five nations are the signatories of the International Agreement on the Conservation of Polar Bears , which mandates cooperation on research and conservation efforts throughout the polar bear 's range . 
 Modern methods of tracking polar bear populations have been implemented only since the mid @-@ 1980s , and are expensive to perform consistently over a large area . The most accurate counts require flying a helicopter in the Arctic climate to find polar bears , shooting a tranquilizer dart at the bear to sedate it , and then tagging the bear . In Nunavut , some Inuit have reported increases in bear sightings around human settlements in recent years , leading to a belief that populations are increasing . Scientists have responded by noting that hungry bears may be congregating around human settlements , leading to the illusion that populations are higher than they actually are . The Polar Bear Specialist Group of the IUCN Species Survival Commission takes the position that " estimates of subpopulation size or sustainable harvest levels should not be made solely on the basis of traditional ecological knowledge without supporting scientific studies . " 
 Of the 19 recognized polar bear subpopulations , three are declining , six are stable , one is increasing , and nine have insufficient data , as of 2014 . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 The polar bear is a marine mammal because it spends many months of the year at sea . However , it is the only living marine mammal with powerful , large limbs and feet that allow them to cover miles on foot and run on land . Its preferred habitat is the annual sea ice covering the waters over the continental shelf and the Arctic inter @-@ island archipelagos . These areas , known as the " Arctic ring of life " , have high biological productivity in comparison to the deep waters of the high Arctic . The polar bear tends to frequent areas where sea ice meets water , such as <unk> and leads ( temporary stretches of open water in Arctic ice ) , to hunt the seals that make up most of its diet . Freshwater is limited in these environments because it is either locked up in snow or saline . Polar bears are able to produce water through the metabolism of fats found in seal blubber . Polar bears are therefore found primarily along the perimeter of the polar ice pack , rather than in the Polar Basin close to the North Pole where the density of seals is low . 
 Annual ice contains areas of water that appear and disappear throughout the year as the weather changes . Seals migrate in response to these changes , and polar bears must follow their prey . In Hudson Bay , James Bay , and some other areas , the ice melts completely each summer ( an event often referred to as " ice @-@ floe breakup " ) , forcing polar bears to go onto land and wait through the months until the next freeze @-@ up . In the Chukchi and Beaufort seas , polar bears retreat each summer to the ice further north that remains frozen year @-@ round . 
 = = Biology and behaviour = = 
 = = = Physical characteristics = = = 
 The only other bear of a similar size to the polar bear is the Kodiak bear , which is a subspecies of brown bear . Adult male polar bears weigh 350 – 700 kg ( 772 – 1 @,@ 543 lb ) and measure 2 @.@ 4 – 3 metres ( 7 ft 10 in – 9 ft 10 in ) in total length . The Guinness Book of World Records listed the average male as having a body mass of 385 to 410 kg ( 849 to 904 lb ) and a shoulder height of 133 cm ( 4 ft 4 in ) , slightly smaller than the average male Kodiak bears . Around the Beaufort Sea , however , mature males reportedly average 450 kg ( 992 lb ) . Adult females are roughly half the size of males and normally weigh 150 – 250 kg ( 331 – 551 lb ) , measuring 1 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 4 metres ( 5 ft 11 in – 7 ft 10 in ) in length . Elsewhere , a slightly larger estimated average weight of 260 kg ( 573 lb ) was claimed for adult females . When pregnant , however , females can weigh as much as 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 102 lb ) . The polar bear is among the most sexually dimorphic of mammals , surpassed only by the pinnipeds such as elephant seals . The largest polar bear on record , reportedly weighing 1 @,@ 002 kg ( 2 @,@ 209 lb ) , was a male shot at Kotzebue Sound in northwestern Alaska in 1960 . This specimen , when mounted , stood 3 @.@ 39 m ( 11 ft 1 in ) tall on its hindlegs . The shoulder height of an adult polar bear is 122 to 160 cm ( 4 ft 0 in to 5 ft 3 in ) . While all bears are short @-@ tailed , the polar bear 's tail is relatively the shortest amongst living bears , ranging from 7 to 13 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 to 5 @.@ 1 in ) in length . 
 Compared with its closest relative , the brown bear , the polar bear has a more elongated body build and a longer skull and nose . As predicted by Allen 's rule for a northerly animal , the legs are stocky and the ears and tail are small . However , the feet are very large to distribute load when walking on snow or thin ice and to provide propulsion when swimming ; they may measure 30 cm ( 12 in ) across in an adult . The pads of the paws are covered with small , soft papillae ( dermal bumps ) , which provide traction on the ice . The polar bear 's claws are short and stocky compared to those of the brown bear , perhaps to serve the former 's need to grip heavy prey and ice . The claws are deeply scooped on the underside to assist in digging in the ice of the natural habitat . Research of injury patterns in polar bear forelimbs found injuries to the right forelimb to be more frequent than those to the left , suggesting , perhaps , right @-@ handedness . Unlike the brown bear , polar bears in captivity are rarely overweight or particularly large , possibly as a reaction to the warm conditions of most zoos . 
 The 42 teeth of a polar bear reflect its highly carnivorous diet . The cheek teeth are smaller and more jagged than in the brown bear , and the canines are larger and sharper . The dental formula is 3 @.@ 1 @.@ 4 @.@ 23 @.@ 1 @.@ 4 @.@ 3 
 Polar bears are superbly insulated by up to 10 cm ( 4 in ) of adipose tissue , their hide and their fur ; they overheat at temperatures above 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) , and are nearly invisible under infrared photography . Polar bear fur consists of a layer of dense underfur and an outer layer of guard hairs , which appear white to tan but are actually transparent . The guard hair is 5 – 15 cm ( 2 – 6 in ) over most of the body . Polar bears gradually moult from May to August , but , unlike other Arctic mammals , they do not shed their coat for a darker shade to camouflage themselves in the summer conditions . The hollow guard hairs of a polar bear coat were once thought to act as fiber @-@ optic tubes to conduct light to its black skin , where it could be absorbed ; however , this hypothesis was disproved by a study in 1998 . 
 The white coat usually yellows with age . When kept in captivity in warm , humid conditions , the fur may turn a pale shade of green due to algae growing inside the guard hairs . Males have significantly longer hairs on their forelegs , which increase in length until the bear reaches 14 years of age . The male 's ornamental foreleg hair is thought to attract females , serving a similar function to the lion 's mane . 
 The polar bear has an extremely well developed sense of smell , being able to detect seals nearly 1 @.@ 6 km ( 1 mi ) away and buried under 1 m ( 3 ft ) of snow . Its hearing is about as acute as that of a human , and its vision is also good at long distances . 
 The polar bear is an excellent swimmer and often will swim for days . One bear swam continuously for 9 days in the frigid Bering Sea for 400 mi ( 687 km ) to reach ice far from land . She then travelled another 1 @,@ 100 mi ( 1 @,@ 800 km ) . During the swim , the bear lost 22 % of her body mass and her yearling cub died . With its body fat providing buoyancy , the bear swims in a dog paddle fashion using its large forepaws for propulsion . Polar bears can swim 10 km / h ( 6 mph ) . When walking , the polar bear tends to have a lumbering gait and maintains an average speed of around 5 @.@ 6 km / h ( 3 @.@ 5 mph ) . When sprinting , they can reach up to 40 km / h ( 25 mph ) . 
 = = = Hunting and diet = = = 
 The polar bear is the most carnivorous member of the bear family , and throughout most of its range , its diet primarily consists of ringed ( Pusa hispida ) and bearded seals ( Erignathus barbatus ) . The Arctic is home to millions of seals , which become prey when they surface in holes in the ice in order to breathe , or when they haul out on the ice to rest . Polar bears hunt primarily at the interface between ice , water , and air ; they only rarely catch seals on land or in open water . 
 The polar bear 's most common hunting method is called still @-@ hunting : The bear uses its excellent sense of smell to locate a seal breathing hole , and crouches nearby in silence for a seal to appear . The bear may lay in wait for several hours . When the seal exhales , the bear smells its breath , reaches into the hole with a forepaw , and drags it out onto the ice . The polar bear kills the seal by biting its head to crush its skull . The polar bear also hunts by stalking seals resting on the ice : Upon spotting a seal , it walks to within 90 m ( 100 yd ) , and then crouches . If the seal does not notice , the bear creeps to within 9 to 12 m ( 30 to 40 ft ) of the seal and then suddenly rushes forth to attack . A third hunting method is to raid the birth lairs that female seals create in the snow . 
 A widespread legend tells that polar bears cover their black noses with their paws when hunting . This behaviour , if it happens , is rare – although the story exists in the oral history of northern peoples and in accounts by early Arctic explorers , there is no record of an eyewitness account of the behaviour in recent decades . 
 Mature bears tend to eat only the calorie @-@ rich skin and blubber of the seal , which are highly digestible , whereas younger bears consume the protein @-@ rich red meat . Studies have also photographed polar bears scaling near @-@ vertical cliffs , to eat birds ' chicks and eggs . For subadult bears , which are independent of their mother but have not yet gained enough experience and body size to successfully hunt seals , scavenging the carcasses from other bears ' kills is an important source of nutrition . Subadults may also be forced to accept a half @-@ eaten carcass if they kill a seal but cannot defend it from larger polar bears . After feeding , polar bears wash themselves with water or snow . 
 Although polar bears are extraordinarily powerful , its primary prey species , the ringed seal , is much smaller than itself , and many of the seals hunted are pups rather than adults . Ringed seals are born weighing 5 @.@ 4 kg ( 12 lb ) and grown to an estimated average weight of only 60 kg ( 130 lb ) . They also in places prey heavily upon the harp seal ( Pusa <unk> ) or the harbor seal . The bearded seal , on the other hand , can be nearly the same size as the bear itself , averaging 270 kg ( 600 lb ) . Adult male bearded seals , at 350 to 500 kg ( 770 to 1 @,@ 100 lb ) are too large for a female bear to overtake , and so are potential prey only for mature male bears . Large males also occasionally attempt to hunt and kill even larger prey items . It can kill an adult walrus ( Odobenus rosmarus ) , although this is rarely attempted . At up to 2 @,@ 000 kg ( 4 @,@ 400 lb ) and a typical adult mass range of 600 to 1 @,@ 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 300 to 3 @,@ 300 lb ) , a walrus can be more than twice the bear 's weight , and has up to 1 @-@ metre ( 3 ft ) -long ivory tusks that can be used as formidable weapons . A polar bear may charge a group of walruses , with the goal of separating a young , infirm , or injured walrus from the pod . They will even attack adult walruses when their diving holes have frozen over or intercept them before they can get back to the diving hole in the ice . Yet , polar bears will very seldom attack full @-@ grown adult walruses , with the largest male walrus probably invulnerable unless otherwise injured or incapacitated . Since an attack on a walrus tends to be an extremely protracted and exhausting venture , bears have been known to back down from the attack after making the initial injury to the walrus . Polar bears have also been seen to prey on beluga whales ( <unk> leucas ) and narwhals ( Monodon monoceros ) , by swiping at them at breathing holes . The whales are of similar size to the walrus and nearly as difficult for the bear to subdue . Most terrestrial animals in the Arctic can outrun the polar bear on land as polar bears overheat quickly , and most marine animals the bear encounters can <unk> it . In some areas , the polar bear 's diet is supplemented by walrus calves and by the carcasses of dead adult walruses or whales , whose blubber is readily devoured even when rotten . Polar bears sometimes like to go fishing where they swim underwater to catch fish like the Arctic <unk> or the <unk> sculpin . 
 With the exception of pregnant females , polar bears are active year @-@ round , although they have a vestigial hibernation induction trigger in their blood . Unlike brown and black bears , polar bears are capable of fasting for up to several months during late summer and early fall , when they cannot hunt for seals because the sea is unfrozen . When sea ice is unavailable during summer and early autumn , some populations live off fat reserves for months at a time , as polar bears do not ' hibernate ' any time of the year . 
 Being both curious animals and scavengers , polar bears investigate and consume garbage where they come into contact with humans . Polar bears may attempt to consume almost anything they can find , including hazardous substances such as styrofoam , plastic , car batteries , ethylene glycol , hydraulic fluid , and motor oil . The dump in Churchill , Manitoba was closed in 2006 to protect bears , and waste is now recycled or transported to Thompson , Manitoba . 
 = = = Dietary flexibility = = = 
 Although seal predation is the primary and an indispensable way of life for most polar bears , when alternatives are present they are quite flexible . Polar bears will consume a wide variety of other wild foods , including muskox ( <unk> moschatus ) , reindeer ( <unk> <unk> ) , birds , eggs , rodents , crabs , other crustaceans and other polar bears . They may also eat plants , including berries , roots , and kelp ; however , none of these are a significant part of their diet , except that <unk> marine mammal carcasses are an exception . When stalking land animals , such as muskox , reindeer , and even willow ptarmigan ( Lagopus lagopus ) , polar bears appear to make use of vegetative cover and wind direction to bring them as close to their prey as possible before attacking . Polar bears have been observed to hunt the small Svalbard reindeer ( R. t. platyrhynchus ) , which weigh only 40 to 60 kg ( 90 to 130 lb ) as adults , as well as the barren @-@ ground caribou ( R. t. <unk> ) , which is about twice as heavy as that . Adult muskox , which can weigh 450 kg ( 1 @,@ 000 lb ) or more , are a more formidable quarry . Although ungulates are not typical prey , the killing of one during the summer months can greatly increase the odds of survival during that lean period . Like the brown bear , most ungulate prey of polar bears is likely to be young , sickly or injured specimens rather than healthy adults . The polar bear 's biology is specialized to require large amounts of fat from marine mammals , and it cannot derive sufficient caloric intake from terrestrial food . 
 In their southern range , especially near Hudson Bay and James Bay , Canadian polar bears endure all summer without sea ice to hunt from . Here , their food ecology shows their dietary flexibility . They still manage to consume some seals , but they are food @-@ deprived in summer as only marine mammal carcasses are an important alternative without sea ice , especially carcasses of the beluga whale . These alternatives may reduce the rate of weight loss of bears when on land . One scientist found that 71 % of the Hudson Bay bears had fed on seaweed ( marine algae ) and that about half were feeding on birds like sea ducks , especially the <unk> ( 53 % ) , common eider , long @-@ tailed duck or <unk> by swimming underwater to catch them . They were also diving to feed on blue mussels and other underwater food sources like the green sea urchin . 24 % had eaten moss recently , 19 % had consumed grass , 34 % had eaten black crowberry and about half had consumed willows . This study illustrates the polar bear 's dietary flexibility but it does not represent its life history elsewhere . Most polar bears elsewhere will never have access to these alternatives , except for the marine mammal carcasses that are important wherever they occur . 
 In Svalbard , polar bears were observed to kill white @-@ beaked dolphins during spring , when the dolphins were trapped in the sea ice . The bears then proceeded to cache the carcasses , which remained and were eaten during the ice @-@ free summer and autumn . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Unlike grizzly bears , polar bears are not territorial . Although stereotyped as being voraciously aggressive , they are normally cautious in confrontations , and often choose to escape rather than fight . <unk> polar bears rarely attack humans unless severely provoked . However , due to their lack of prior human interaction , hungry polar bears are extremely unpredictable , fearless towards people and are known to kill and sometimes eat humans . Many attacks by brown bears are the result of surprising the animal , which is not the case with the polar bear . Polar bears are stealth hunters , and the victim is often unaware of the bear 's presence until the attack is underway . Whereas brown bears often maul a person and then leave , polar bear attacks are more likely to be predatory and are almost always fatal . However , due to the very small human population around the Arctic , such attacks are rare . Michio Hoshino , a Japanese wildlife photographer , was once pursued briefly by a hungry male polar bear in northern Alaska . According to Hoshino , the bear started running but Hoshino made it to his truck . The bear was able to reach the truck and tore one of the doors off the truck before Hoshino was able to drive off . 
 In general , adult polar bears live solitary lives . Yet , they have often been seen playing together for hours at a time and even sleeping in an embrace , and polar bear zoologist Nikita <unk> has described adult males as having " well @-@ developed friendships . " Cubs are especially playful as well . Among young males in particular , play @-@ fighting may be a means of practicing for serious competition during mating seasons later in life . Polar bears have a wide range of vocalisations , including bellows , roars , growls , <unk> and purrs . 
 In 1992 , a photographer near Churchill took a now widely circulated set of photographs of a polar bear playing with a Canadian Eskimo Dog ( Canis lupus familiaris ) a tenth of its size . The pair wrestled harmlessly together each afternoon for ten days in a row for no apparent reason , although the bear may have been trying to demonstrate its friendliness in the hope of sharing the kennel 's food . This kind of social interaction is uncommon ; it is far more typical for polar bears to behave aggressively towards dogs . 
 = = = Reproduction and lifecycle = = = 
 Courtship and mating take place on the sea ice in April and May , when polar bears congregate in the best seal hunting areas . A male may follow the tracks of a breeding female for 100 km ( 60 mi ) or more , and after finding her engage in intense fighting with other males over mating rights , fights that often result in scars and broken teeth . Polar bears have a generally polygynous mating system ; recent genetic testing of mothers and cubs , however , has uncovered cases of litters in which cubs have different fathers . Partners stay together and mate repeatedly for an entire week ; the mating ritual induces ovulation in the female . 
 After mating , the fertilized egg remains in a suspended state until August or September . During these four months , the pregnant female eats prodigious amounts of food , gaining at least 200 kg ( 440 lb ) and often more than doubling her body weight . 
 = = = = Maternity denning and early life = = = = 
 When the ice floes break up in the fall , ending the possibility of hunting , each pregnant female digs a maternity den consisting of a narrow entrance tunnel leading to one to three chambers . Most maternity dens are in snowdrifts , but may also be made underground in permafrost if it is not sufficiently cold yet for snow . In most subpopulations , maternity dens are situated on land a few kilometers from the coast , and the individuals in a subpopulation tend to reuse the same denning areas each year . The polar bears that do not den on land make their dens on the sea ice . In the den , she enters a dormant state similar to hibernation . This hibernation @-@ like state does not consist of continuous sleeping ; however , the bear 's heart rate slows from 46 to 27 beats per minute . Her body temperature does not decrease during this period as it would for a typical mammal in hibernation . 
 Between November and February , cubs are born blind , covered with a light down fur , and weighing less than 0 @.@ 9 kg ( 2 @.@ 0 lb ) , but in captivity they might be delivered in the earlier months . The earliest recorded birth of polar bears in captivity was on 11 October 2011 in the Toronto Zoo . On average , each litter has two cubs . The family remains in the den until mid @-@ February to mid @-@ April , with the mother maintaining her fast while nursing her cubs on a fat @-@ rich milk . By the time the mother breaks open the entrance to the den , her cubs weigh about 10 to 15 kilograms ( 22 to 33 lb ) . For about 12 to 15 days , the family spends time outside the den while remaining in its vicinity , the mother grazing on vegetation while the cubs become used to walking and playing . Then they begin the long walk from the denning area to the sea ice , where the mother can once again catch seals . Depending on the timing of ice @-@ floe breakup in the fall , she may have fasted for up to eight months . During this time , cubs playfully imitate the mother 's hunting methods in preparation for later life . 
 Female polar bears are noted for both their affection towards their offspring , and their valor in protecting them . Multiple cases of adoption of wild cubs have been confirmed by genetic testing . Adult male bears occasionally kill and eat polar bear cubs . As of 2006 , in Alaska , 42 % of cubs were reaching 12 months of age , down from 65 % in 1991 . In most areas , cubs are weaned at two and a half years of age , when the mother chases them away or abandons them . The Western Hudson Bay subpopulation is unusual in that its female polar bears sometimes wean their cubs at only one and a half years . This was the case for 40 % of cubs there in the early 1980s ; however by the 1990s , fewer than 20 % of cubs were weaned this young . After the mother leaves , sibling cubs sometimes travel and share food together for weeks or months . 
 = = = = Later life = = = = 
 Females begin to breed at the age of four years in most areas , and five years in the Beaufort Sea area . Males usually reach sexual maturity at six years ; however , as competition for females is fierce , many do not breed until the age of eight or ten . A study in Hudson Bay indicated that both the reproductive success and the maternal weight of females peaked in their mid @-@ teens . 
 Polar bears appear to be less affected by infectious diseases and parasites than most terrestrial mammals . Polar bears are especially susceptible to Trichinella , a parasitic roundworm they contract through cannibalism , although infections are usually not fatal . Only one case of a polar bear with rabies has been documented , even though polar bears frequently interact with Arctic foxes , which often carry rabies . Bacterial leptospirosis and Morbillivirus have been recorded . Polar bears sometimes have problems with various skin diseases that may be caused by mites or other parasites . 
 = = = = Life expectancy = = = = 
 Polar bears rarely live beyond 25 years . The oldest wild bears on record died at age 32 , whereas the oldest captive was a female who died in 1991 , age 43 . The causes of death in wild adult polar bears are poorly understood , as carcasses are rarely found in the species 's frigid habitat . In the wild , old polar bears eventually become too weak to catch food , and gradually starve to death . Polar bears injured in fights or accidents may either die from their injuries or become unable to hunt effectively , leading to starvation . 
 = = = Ecological role = = = 
 The polar bear is the apex predator within its range , and is a keystone species for the Arctic . Several animal species , particularly Arctic foxes ( Vulpes lagopus ) and glaucous gulls ( Larus hyperboreus ) , routinely scavenge polar bear kills . 
 The relationship between ringed seals and polar bears is so close that the abundance of ringed seals in some areas appears to regulate the density of polar bears , while polar bear predation in turn regulates density and reproductive success of ringed seals . The evolutionary pressure of polar bear predation on seals probably accounts for some significant differences between Arctic and Antarctic seals . Compared to the Antarctic , where there is no major surface predator , Arctic seals use more breathing holes per individual , appear more restless when hauled out on the ice , and rarely defecate on the ice . The baby fur of most Arctic seal species is white , presumably to provide camouflage from predators , whereas Antarctic seals all have dark fur at birth . 
 Brown bears tend to dominate polar bears in disputes over carcasses , and dead polar bear cubs have been found in brown bear dens . Wolves are rarely encountered by polar bears , though there are two records of Arctic wolf ( Canis lupus arctos ) packs killing polar bear cubs . A rather unlikely killer of a grown polar bear has reportedly included a wolverine ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> reported to have suffocated a bear in a zoo with a bite to the throat during a conflict . Polar bears are sometimes the host of arctic mites such as <unk> antarcticus . 
 = = = Long @-@ distance swimming and diving = = = 
 Researchers tracked 52 sows in the southern Beaufort Sea off Alaska with GPS system collars ; no boars were involved in the study due to males ' necks being too thick for the GPS @-@ equipped collars . Fifty long @-@ distance swims were recorded ; the longest at 354 kilometres ( 220 mi ) , with an average of 155 kilometres ( 96 mi ) . The length of these swims ranged from most of a day to ten days . Ten of the sows had a cub swim with them and after a year , six cubs survived . The study did not determine if the others lost their cubs before , during , or some time after their long swims . Researchers do not know whether or not this is a new behaviour ; before polar ice shrinkage , they opined that there was probably neither the need nor opportunity to swim such long distances . 
 The polar bear may swim underwater for up to three minutes to approach seals on shore or on ice floes . 
 = = Hunting = = 
 = = = Indigenous people = = = 
 Polar bears have long provided important raw materials for Arctic peoples , including the Inuit , Yupik , Chukchi , Nenets , Russian Pomors and others . Hunters commonly used teams of dogs to distract the bear , allowing the hunter to spear the bear or shoot it with arrows at closer range . Almost all parts of captured animals had a use . The fur was used in particular to make trousers and , by the Nenets , to make galoshes @-@ like outer footwear called <unk> ; the meat is edible , despite some risk of trichinosis ; the fat was used in food and as a fuel for lighting homes , alongside seal and whale blubber ; sinews were used as thread for sewing clothes ; the gallbladder and sometimes heart were dried and powdered for medicinal purposes ; the large canine teeth were highly valued as talismans . Only the liver was not used , as its high concentration of vitamin A is poisonous . Hunters make sure to either toss the liver into the sea or bury it in order to spare their dogs from potential poisoning . Traditional subsistence hunting was on a small enough scale to not significantly affect polar bear populations , mostly because of the sparseness of the human population in polar bear habitat . 
 = = = History of commercial harvest = = = 
 In Russia , polar bear furs were already being commercially traded in the 14th century , though it was of low value compared to Arctic fox or even reindeer fur . The growth of the human population in the Eurasian Arctic in the 16th and 17th century , together with the advent of firearms and increasing trade , dramatically increased the harvest of polar bears . However , since polar bear fur has always played a marginal commercial role , data on the historical harvest is fragmentary . It is known , for example , that already in the winter of 1784 / 1785 Russian Pomors on Spitsbergen harvested 150 polar bears in <unk> . In the early 20th century , Norwegian hunters were harvesting 300 bears per year at the same location . Estimates of total historical harvest suggest that from the beginning of the 18th century , roughly 400 to 500 animals were being harvested annually in northern Eurasia , reaching a peak of 1 @,@ 300 to 1 @,@ 500 animals in the early 20th century , and falling off as the numbers began dwindling . 
 In the first half of the 20th century , mechanized and overpoweringly efficient methods of hunting and trapping came into use in North America as well . Polar bears were chased from snowmobiles , icebreakers , and airplanes , the latter practice described in a 1965 New York Times editorial as being " about as sporting as machine gunning a cow . " Norwegians used " self @-@ killing guns " , comprising a loaded rifle in a baited box that was placed at the level of a bear 's head , and which fired when the string attached to the bait was pulled . The numbers taken grew rapidly in the 1960s , peaking around 1968 with a global total of 1 @,@ 250 bears that year . 
 = = = Contemporary regulations = = = 
 Concerns over the future survival of the species led to the development of national regulations on polar bear hunting , beginning in the mid @-@ 1950s . The Soviet Union banned all hunting in 1956 . Canada began imposing hunting quotas in 1968 . Norway passed a series of increasingly strict regulations from 1965 to 1973 , and has completely banned hunting since then . The United States began regulating hunting in 1971 and adopted the Marine Mammal Protection Act in 1972 . In 1973 , the International Agreement on the Conservation of Polar Bears was signed by all five nations whose territory is inhabited by polar bears : Canada , Denmark , Norway , the Soviet Union , and the United States . Member countries agreed to place restrictions on recreational and commercial hunting , ban hunting from aircraft and icebreakers , and conduct further research . The treaty allows hunting " by local people using traditional methods " . Norway is the only country of the five in which all harvest of polar bears is banned . The agreement was a rare case of international cooperation during the Cold War . Biologist Ian Stirling commented , " For many years , the conservation of polar bears was the only subject in the entire Arctic that nations from both sides of the Iron Curtain could agree upon sufficiently to sign an agreement . Such was the intensity of human fascination with this magnificent predator , the only marine bear . " 
 Agreements have been made between countries to co @-@ manage their shared polar bear subpopulations . After several years of negotiations , Russia and the United States signed an agreement in October 2000 to jointly set quotas for indigenous subsistence hunting in Alaska and Chukotka . The treaty was ratified in October 2007 . In September 2015 , the polar bear range states agreed upon a " circumpolar action plan " describing their conservation strategy for polar bears . 
 Although the United States government has proposed that polar bears be transferred to Appendix I of CITES , which would ban all international trade in polar bear parts , polar bears currently remain listed under Appendix II . This decision was approved of by members of the IUCN and <unk> , who determined that such an <unk> was unlikely to confer a conservation benefit . 
 = = = = Canada = = = = 
 Polar bears were designated " Not at Risk " in April 1986 and uplisted to " Special Concern " in April 1991 . This status was re @-@ evaluated and confirmed in April 1999 , November 2002 , and April 2008 . Polar bears continue to be listed as a species of special concern in Canada because of their sensitivity to overharvest and because of an expected range contraction caused by loss of Arctic sea ice . 
 More than 600 bears are killed per year by humans across Canada , a rate calculated by scientists to be unsustainable for some areas , notably Baffin Bay . Canada has allowed sport hunters accompanied by local guides and dog @-@ sled teams since 1970 , but the practice was not common until the 1980s . The guiding of sport hunters provides meaningful employment and an important source of income for northern communities in which economic opportunities are few . Sport hunting can bring CDN $ 20 @,@ 000 to $ 35 @,@ 000 per bear into northern communities , which until recently has been mostly from American hunters . 
 The territory of Nunavut accounts for the location 80 % of annual kills in Canada . In 2005 , the government of Nunavut increased the quota from 400 to 518 bears , despite protests from the IUCN Polar Bear Specialist Group . In two areas where harvest levels have been increased based on increased sightings , science @-@ based studies have indicated declining populations , and a third area is considered data @-@ deficient . While most of that quota is hunted by the indigenous Inuit people , a growing share is sold to recreational hunters . ( 0 @.@ 8 % in the 1970s , 7 @.@ 1 % in the 1980s , and 14 @.@ 6 % in the 1990s ) Nunavut polar bear biologist , Mitchell Taylor , who was formerly responsible for polar bear conservation in the territory , has insisted that bear numbers are being sustained under current hunting limits . In 2010 , the 2005 increase was partially reversed . Government of Nunavut officials announced that the polar bear quota for the Baffin Bay region would be gradually reduced from 105 per year to 65 by the year 2013 . The Government of the Northwest Territories maintain their own quota of 72 to 103 bears within the <unk> communities of which some are set aside for sports hunters . Environment Canada also banned the export from Canada of fur , claws , skulls and other products from polar bears harvested in Baffin Bay as of 1 January 2010 . 
 Because of the way polar bear hunting quotas are managed in Canada , attempts to discourage sport hunting would actually increase the number of bears killed in the short term . Canada allocates a certain number of permits each year to sport and subsistence hunting , and those that are not used for sport hunting are re @-@ allocated to indigenous subsistence hunting . Whereas northern communities kill all the polar bears they are permitted to take each year , only half of sport hunters with permits actually manage to kill a polar bear . If a sport hunter does not kill a polar bear before his or her permit expires , the permit cannot be transferred to another hunter . 
 In August 2011 , Environment Canada published a national polar bear conservation strategy . 
 = = = = Greenland = = = = 
 In Greenland , hunting restrictions were first introduced in 1994 and expanded by executive order in 2005 . Until 2005 Greenland placed no limit on hunting by indigenous people . However , in 2006 it imposed a limit of 150 , while also allowed recreational hunting for the first time . Other provisions included year @-@ round protection of cubs and mothers , restrictions on weapons used , and various administrative requirements to catalogue kills . 
 = = = = Norway = = = = 
 = = = = Russia = = = = 
 The Soviet Union banned the harvest of polar bears in 1956 ; however , poaching continued and is estimated to pose a serious threat to the polar bear population . In recent years , polar bears have approached coastal villages in Chukotka more frequently due to the shrinking of the sea ice , endangering humans and raising concerns that illegal hunting would become even more prevalent . In 2007 , the Russian government made subsistence hunting legal for indigenous <unk> peoples only , a move supported by Russia 's most prominent bear researchers and the World Wide Fund for Nature as a means to curb poaching . 
 Polar bears are currently listed as " Rare " , of " Uncertain Status " , or " Rehabilitated and rehabilitating " in the Red Data Book of Russia , depending on population . In 2010 , the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment published a strategy for polar bear conservation in Russia . 
 = = = = United States = = = = 
 The Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 afforded polar bears some protection in the United States . It banned hunting ( except by indigenous subsistence hunters ) , banned importing of polar bear parts ( except polar bear pelts taken legally in Canada ) , and banned the harassment of polar bears . On 15 May 2008 , the United States Department of the Interior listed the polar bear as a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act , citing the melting of Arctic sea ice as the primary threat to the polar bear . It banned all importing of polar bear trophies . Importing products made from polar bears had been prohibited from 1972 to 1994 under the Marine Mammal Protection Act , and restricted between 1994 and 2008 . Under those restrictions , permits from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service were required to import sport @-@ hunted polar bear trophies taken in hunting expeditions in Canada . The permit process required that the bear be taken from an area with quotas based on sound management principles . Since 1994 , hundreds of sport @-@ hunted polar bear trophies have been imported into the U.S. In 2015 , the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service published a draft conservation management plan for polar bears to improve their status under the Endangered Species Act and the Marine Mammal Protection Act . 
 = = Conservation status , threats and controversies = = 
 Polar bear population sizes and trends are difficult to estimate accurately because they occupy remote home ranges and exist at low population densities . Polar bear fieldwork can also be hazardous to researchers . As of 2015 , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) reports that the global population of polar bears is 22 @,@ 000 to 31 @,@ 000 , and the current population trend is unknown . Nevertheless , polar bears are listed as " Vulnerable " under criterion <unk> , which indicates an expected population decrease of ≥ 30 % over the next three generations ( ~ 34 @.@ 5 years ) due to " decline in area of occupancy , extent of occurrence and / or quality of habitat " . Risks to the polar bear include climate change , pollution in the form of toxic contaminants , conflicts with shipping , oil and gas exploration and development , and human @-@ bear interactions including harvesting and possible stresses from recreational polar @-@ bear watching . 
 According to the World Wildlife Fund , the polar bear is important as an indicator of Arctic ecosystem health . Polar bears are studied to gain understanding of what is happening throughout the Arctic , because at @-@ risk polar bears are often a sign of something wrong with the Arctic marine ecosystem . 
 = = = Climate change = = = 
 The International Union for Conservation of Nature , Arctic Climate Impact Assessment , United States Geological Survey and many leading polar bear biologists have expressed grave concerns about the impact of climate change , including the belief that the current warming trend <unk> the survival of the polar bear . 
 The key danger posed by climate change is malnutrition or starvation due to habitat loss . Polar bears hunt seals from a platform of sea ice . Rising temperatures cause the sea ice to melt earlier in the year , driving the bears to shore before they have built sufficient fat reserves to survive the period of scarce food in the late summer and early fall . Reduction in sea @-@ ice cover also forces bears to swim longer distances , which further depletes their energy stores and occasionally leads to drowning . Thinner sea ice tends to deform more easily , which appears to make it more difficult for polar bears to access seals . Insufficient nourishment leads to lower reproductive rates in adult females and lower survival rates in cubs and juvenile bears , in addition to poorer body condition in bears of all ages . 
 In addition to creating nutritional stress , a warming climate is expected to affect various other aspects of polar bear life : Changes in sea ice affect the ability of pregnant females to build suitable maternity dens . As the distance increases between the pack ice and the coast , females must swim longer distances to reach favored denning areas on land . <unk> of permafrost would affect the bears who traditionally den underground , and warm winters could result in den roofs collapsing or having reduced insulative value . For the polar bears that currently den on multi @-@ year ice , increased ice mobility may result in longer distances for mothers and young cubs to walk when they return to seal @-@ hunting areas in the spring . Disease @-@ causing bacteria and parasites would flourish more readily in a warmer climate . 
 Problematic interactions between polar bears and humans , such as foraging by bears in garbage dumps , have historically been more prevalent in years when ice @-@ floe breakup occurred early and local polar bears were relatively thin . Increased human @-@ bear interactions , including fatal attacks on humans , are likely to increase as the sea ice shrinks and hungry bears try to find food on land . 
 The effects of climate change are most profound in the southern part of the polar bear 's range , and this is indeed where significant degradation of local populations has been observed . The Western Hudson Bay subpopulation , in a southern part of the range , also happens to be one of the best @-@ studied polar bear subpopulations . This subpopulation feeds heavily on ringed seals in late spring , when newly weaned and easily hunted seal pups are abundant . The late spring hunting season ends for polar bears when the ice begins to melt and break up , and they fast or eat little during the summer until the sea freezes again . 
 Due to warming air temperatures , ice @-@ floe breakup in western Hudson Bay is currently occurring three weeks earlier than it did 30 years ago , reducing the duration of the polar bear feeding season . The body condition of polar bears has declined during this period ; the average weight of lone ( and likely pregnant ) female polar bears was approximately 290 kg ( 640 lb ) in 1980 and 230 kg ( 510 lb ) in 2004 . Between 1987 and 2004 , the Western Hudson Bay population declined by 22 % , although the population is currently listed as " stable " . 
 In Alaska , the effects of sea ice shrinkage have contributed to higher mortality rates in polar bear cubs , and have led to changes in the denning locations of pregnant females . In recent years , polar bears in the Arctic have undertaken longer than usual swims to find prey , possibly resulting in four recorded drownings in the unusually large ice pack regression of 2005 . 
 A new development is that polar bears have begun ranging to new territory . While not unheard of but still uncommon , polar bears have been sighted increasingly in larger numbers ashore , staying on the mainland for longer periods of time during the summer months , particularly in North Canada , traveling farther inland . This may cause an increased reliance on terrestrial diets , such as goose eggs , waterfowl and caribou , as well as increased human – bear conflict . 
 = = = Pollution = = = 
 Polar bears accumulate high levels of persistent organic pollutants such as polychlorinated biphenyl ( PCBs ) and chlorinated pesticides . Due to their position at the top of the ecological pyramid , with a diet heavy in blubber in which <unk> concentrate , their bodies are among the most contaminated of Arctic mammals . <unk> are known to be toxic to other animals , because they mimic hormone chemistry , and biomarkers such as immunoglobulin G and retinol suggest similar effects on polar bears . PCBs have received the most study , and they have been associated with birth defects and immune system deficiency . 
 Many chemicals , such as PCBs and DDT , have been internationally banned due to the recognition of their harm on the environment . Their concentrations in polar bear tissues continued to rise for decades after being banned as these chemicals spread through the food chain . Since then , the trend seems to have discontinued , with tissue concentrations of PCBs declining between studies performed from 1989 to 1993 and studies performed from 1996 to 2002 . During the same time periods , DDT was notably lower in the Western Hudson Bay population only . 
 = = = Oil and gas development = = = 
 Oil and gas development in polar bear habitat can affect the bears in a variety of ways . An oil spill in the Arctic would most likely concentrate in the areas where polar bears and their prey are also concentrated , such as sea ice leads . Because polar bears rely partly on their fur for insulation and soiling of the fur by oil reduces its insulative value , oil spills put bears at risk of dying from hypothermia . Polar bears exposed to oil spill conditions have been observed to lick the oil from their fur , leading to fatal kidney failure . Maternity dens , used by pregnant females and by females with infants , can also be disturbed by nearby oil exploration and development . Disturbance of these sensitive sites may trigger the mother to abandon her den prematurely , or abandon her litter altogether . 
 = = = Predictions = = = 
 Steven <unk> and other U.S. Geological Survey scientists have predicted two @-@ thirds of the world 's polar bears may disappear by 2050 , based on moderate projections for the shrinking of summer sea ice caused by climate change , though the validity of this study has been debated . The bears could disappear from Europe , Asia , and Alaska , and be depleted from the Canadian Arctic Archipelago and areas off the northern Greenland coast . By 2080 , they could disappear from Greenland entirely and from the northern Canadian coast , leaving only dwindling numbers in the interior Arctic Archipelago . However , in the short term , some polar bear populations in historically colder regions of the Arctic may temporarily benefit from a milder climate , as multiyear ice that is too thick for seals to create breathing holes is replaced by thinner annual ice . 
 Polar bears diverged from brown bears 400 @,@ 000 – 600 @,@ 000 years ago and have survived past periods of climate fluctuation . It has been claimed that polar bears will be able to adapt to terrestrial food sources as the sea ice they use to hunt seals disappears . However , most polar bear biologists think that polar bears will be unable to completely offset the loss of calorie @-@ rich seal blubber with terrestrial foods , and that they will be outcompeted by brown bears in this terrestrial niche , ultimately leading to a population decline . 
 = = = Controversy over species protection = = = 
 Warnings about the future of the polar bear are often contrasted with the fact that worldwide population estimates have increased over the past 50 years and are relatively stable today . Some estimates of the global population are around 5 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 in the early 1970s ; other estimates were 20 @,@ 000 to 40 @,@ 000 during the 1980s . Current estimates put the global population at between 20 @,@ 000 and 25 @,@ 000 or 22 @,@ 000 and 31 @,@ 000 . 
 There are several reasons for the apparent discordance between past and projected population trends : estimates from the 1950s and 1960s were based on stories from explorers and hunters rather than on scientific surveys . Second , controls of harvesting were introduced that allowed this previously overhunted species to recover . Third , the recent effects of climate change have affected sea ice abundance in different areas to varying degrees . 
 Debate over the listing of the polar bear under endangered species legislation has put conservation groups and Canada 's Inuit at opposing positions ; the Nunavut government and many northern residents have condemned the U.S. initiative to list the polar bear under the Endangered Species Act . Many Inuit believe the polar bear population is increasing , and restrictions on commercial sport @-@ hunting are likely to lead to a loss of income to their communities . 
 = = In culture = = 
 = = = Indigenous folklore = = = 
 For the indigenous peoples of the Arctic , polar bears have long played an important cultural and material role . Polar bear remains have been found at hunting sites dating to 2 @,@ 500 to 3 @,@ 000 years ago and 1 @,@ 500 @-@ year @-@ old cave paintings of polar bears have been found in the Chukchi Peninsula . Indeed , it has been suggested that Arctic peoples ' skills in seal hunting and igloo construction has been in part acquired from the polar bears themselves . 
 The Inuit and Alaska Natives have many folk tales featuring the bears including legends in which bears are humans when inside their own houses and put on bear hides when going outside , and stories of how the constellation that is said to resemble a great bear surrounded by dogs came into being . These legends reveal a deep respect for the polar bear , which is portrayed as both spiritually powerful and closely akin to humans . The human @-@ like posture of bears when standing and sitting , and the resemblance of a skinned bear carcass to the human body , have probably contributed to the belief that the spirits of humans and bears were interchangeable . Eskimo legends tell of humans learning to hunt from the polar bear . 
 Among the Chukchi and Yupik of eastern Siberia , there was a longstanding shamanistic ritual of " thanksgiving " to the hunted polar bear . After killing the animal , its head and skin were removed and cleaned and brought into the home , a feast was held in the hunting camp in its honor . In order to appease the spirit of the bear , there were traditional song and drum music and the skull would be ceremonially fed and offered a pipe . Only once the spirit was appeased would the skull be separated from the skin , taken beyond the bounds of the homestead , and placed in the ground , facing north . Many of these traditions have faded somewhat in time , especially in light of the total hunting ban in the Soviet Union ( and now Russia ) since 1955 . 
 The Nenets of north @-@ central Siberia placed particular value on the talismanic power of the prominent canine teeth . They were traded in the villages of the lower Yenisei and <unk> rivers to the forest @-@ dwelling peoples further south , who would sew them into their hats as protection against brown bears . It was believed that the " little nephew " ( the brown bear ) would not dare to attack a man wearing the tooth of its powerful " big uncle " ( the polar bear ) . The skulls of killed polar bears were buried at specific sacred sites and altars , called <unk> , were constructed out of the skulls . Several such sites have been preserved on the Yamal Peninsula . 
 = = = Symbols and mascots = = = 
 Their distinctive appearance and their association with the Arctic have made polar bears popular icons , especially in those areas where they are native . The Canadian <unk> ( two @-@ dollar coin ) features the image of a polar bear and both the Northwest Territories and Nunavut license plates in Canada are in the shape of a polar bear . The polar bear is the mascot of Bowdoin College in Maine and the University of Alaska Fairbanks ( see also Alaska Nanooks ) and was chosen as mascot for the 1988 Winter Olympics held in Calgary . The <unk> Berlin professional hockey team , playing in the DEL top @-@ level pro hockey league of Germany uses a roaring polar bear ( seen head @-@ on ) as their team logo . 
 Companies such as Coca @-@ Cola , Polar Beverages , Nelvana , Bundaberg Rum , and Good Humor @-@ <unk> have used images of the polar bear in advertising , while Fox 's Glacier Mints have featured a polar bear named Peppy as the brand mascot since 1922 . This has supported the popularity of the polar bear , and it has since become one of a collection of creatures who are associated with Christmas , including penguins , reindeer and the European robin . 
 = = = Fiction = = = 
 Polar bears are also popular in fiction , particularly in books aimed at children or teenagers . For example , The Polar Bear Son is adapted from a traditional Inuit tale . The animated television series Noah 's Island features a polar bear named Noah as the protagonist . Polar bears feature prominently in East ( also released as North Child ) by Edith <unk> , The Bear by Raymond Briggs ( adapted into an animated short in 1998 ) , and Chris d <unk> 's The Fire Within series . The <unk> of Philip Pullman 's fantasy trilogy His Dark Materials are sapient , dignified polar bears who exhibit anthropomorphic qualities , and feature prominently in the 2007 film adaptation of The Golden Compass . The television series Lost features polar bears living on the tropical island setting . 
 = = Cited sources = = 
 Aars , Jon , ed . ( June 2005 ) . 14th Working Meeting of the IUCN / SSC Polar Bear Specialist Group ( PDF ) 32 . Nicholas J. Lunn and Andrew E. <unk> . Seattle , Washington , United States : IUCN . ISBN 2 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . Archived from the original ( PDF ) on 9 April 2008 . Retrieved 19 April 2008 . 
 <unk> , Fred ( 1989 ) . World of the Polar Bear . Toronto , Ontario , Canada : Key Porter Books . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 107 @-@ 9 . 
 <unk> , Annie ( 1999 ) . The Polar Bear . <unk> , MN : Capstone Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0031 @-@ X. 
 Lockwood , Sophie ( 2006 ) . Polar Bears . Chanhassen , MN : The Child 's World . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 501 @-@ 6 . 
 Matthews , Downs ( 1993 ) . Polar Bear . San Francisco , CA : Chronicle Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Rosing , Norbert ( 1996 ) . The World of the Polar Bear . Willowdale , ON : Firefly Books Ltd . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 068 @-@ X. 
 = Huntington 's disease = 
 Huntington 's disease ( HD ) , also known as Huntington 's chorea , is an inherited disorder that results in death of brain cells . The earliest symptoms are often subtle problems with mood or mental abilities . A general lack of coordination and an unsteady gait often follow . As the disease advances , uncoordinated , jerky body movements become more apparent . Physical abilities gradually worsen until coordinated movement becomes difficult and the person is unable to talk . Mental abilities generally decline into dementia . The specific symptoms vary somewhat between people . Symptoms usually begin between 30 and 50 years of age , but can start at any age . The disease may develop earlier in life in each successive generation . About 8 % of cases start before the age of 20 years and typically present with symptoms more similar to Parkinson 's disease . People with HD often have a poor understanding of the degree of their problems . 
 HD is typically inherited from a person 's parents with 10 % of cases due to a new mutation . The disease is caused by an autosomal dominant mutation in either of an individual 's two copies of a gene called Huntingtin . This means a child of an affected person typically has a 50 % chance of inheriting the disease . The Huntingtin gene provides the genetic information for a protein that is also called " huntingtin " . Expansion of CAG ( cytosine @-@ adenine @-@ guanine ) triplet repeats in the gene coding for the Huntingtin protein results in an abnormal protein , which gradually damages cells in the brain , through mechanisms that are not fully understood . Diagnosis is by genetic testing , which can occur at any point in time regardless of whether or not symptoms are present . This fact raises several ethical debates : the age at which an individual is considered mature enough to choose testing ; whether parents have the right to have their children tested ; and managing confidentiality and disclosure of test results . 
 There is no cure for HD . Full @-@ time care is required in the later stages of the disease . Treatments can relieve some symptoms and in some improving quality of life . The best evidence for treatment of the movement problems is with <unk> . HD affects about 4 to 15 in 100 @,@ 000 people of European descent . It is rare among Japanese and occurs at an unknown rate in Africa . The disease affect men and women equally . Complications such as pneumonia , heart disease , and physical injury from falls reduce life expectancy . Suicide is the cause of death in about 9 % . Death typically occurs fifteen to twenty years from when the disease was first detected . 
 The first likely description of the disease was in 1841 by Charles Oscar Waters . The condition was described in further detail in 1872 by George Huntington after whom it is named . The genetic basis was discovered in 1993 by an international collaborative effort lead by the Hereditary Disease Foundation . Research and support organizations began forming in the late 1960s to increase public awareness , to provide support for individuals and their families , and to promote research . Current research directions include determining the exact mechanism of the disease , improving animal models to aid with research , testing of medications to treat symptoms or slow the progression of the disease , and studying procedures such as stem cell therapy with the goal of repairing damage caused by the disease . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Symptoms of Huntington 's disease most commonly become noticeable between the ages of 35 and 44 years , but they can begin at any age from infancy to old age . In the early stages , there are subtle changes in personality , cognition , and physical skills . The physical symptoms are usually the first to be noticed , as cognitive and behavioral symptoms are generally not severe enough to be recognized on their own at the earlier stages . Almost everyone with Huntington 's disease eventually exhibits similar physical symptoms , but the onset , progression and extent of cognitive and behavioral symptoms vary significantly between individuals . 
 The most characteristic initial physical symptoms are jerky , random , and uncontrollable movements called chorea . Chorea may be initially exhibited as general restlessness , small unintentionally initiated or uncompleted motions , lack of coordination , or slowed <unk> eye movements . These minor motor abnormalities usually precede more obvious signs of motor dysfunction by at least three years . The clear appearance of symptoms such as rigidity , writhing motions or abnormal posturing appear as the disorder progresses . These are signs that the system in the brain that is responsible for movement has been affected . <unk> functions become increasingly impaired , such that any action that requires muscle control is affected . Common consequences are physical instability , abnormal facial expression , and difficulties chewing , swallowing , and speaking . Eating difficulties commonly cause weight loss and may lead to malnutrition . Sleep disturbances are also associated symptoms . Juvenile HD differs from these symptoms in that it generally progresses faster and chorea is exhibited briefly , if at all , with rigidity being the dominant symptom . Seizures are also a common symptom of this form of HD . 
 Cognitive abilities are progressively impaired . Especially affected are executive functions which include planning , cognitive flexibility , abstract thinking , rule acquisition , initiation of appropriate actions , and inhibition of inappropriate actions . As the disease progresses , memory deficits tend to appear . Reported impairments range from short @-@ term memory deficits to long @-@ term memory difficulties , including deficits in episodic ( memory of one 's life ) , procedural ( memory of the body of how to perform an activity ) and working memory . Cognitive problems tend to worsen over time , ultimately leading to dementia . This pattern of deficits has been called a subcortical dementia syndrome to distinguish it from the typical effects of cortical dementias e.g. Alzheimer 's disease . 
 Reported neuropsychiatric manifestations are anxiety , depression , a reduced display of emotions ( blunted affect ) , <unk> , aggression , and compulsive behavior , the latter of which can cause or worsen addictions , including alcoholism , gambling , and hypersexuality . Difficulties in recognizing other people 's negative expressions have also been observed . The prevalence of these symptoms is highly variable between studies , with estimated rates for lifetime prevalence of psychiatric disorders between 33 % and 76 % . For many sufferers and their families , these symptoms are among the most distressing aspects of the disease , often affecting daily functioning and constituting reason for institutionalization . Suicidal thoughts and suicide attempts are more common than in the general population . Often individuals have reduced awareness of chorea , cognitive and emotional impairments . 
 Mutant Huntingtin is expressed throughout the body and associated with abnormalities in peripheral tissues that are directly caused by such expression outside the brain . These abnormalities include muscle atrophy , cardiac failure , impaired glucose tolerance , weight loss , osteoporosis , and testicular atrophy . 
 = = Genetics = = 
 All humans have two copies of the Huntingtin gene ( HTT ) , which codes for the protein Huntingtin ( HTT ) . The gene is also called HD and <unk> , which stands for ' interesting transcript 15 ' . Part of this gene is a repeated section called a trinucleotide repeat , which varies in length between individuals and may change length between generations . If the repeat is present in a healthy gene , a dynamic mutation may increase the repeat count and result in a defective gene . When the length of this repeated section reaches a certain threshold , it produces an altered form of the protein , called mutant Huntingtin protein ( mHTT ) . The differing functions of these proteins are the cause of pathological changes which in turn cause the disease symptoms . The Huntington 's disease mutation is genetically dominant and almost fully penetrant : mutation of either of a person 's HTT alleles causes the disease . It is not inherited according to sex , but the length of the repeated section of the gene and hence its severity can be influenced by the sex of the affected parent . 
 = = = Genetic mutation = = = 
 HD is one of several trinucleotide repeat disorders which are caused by the length of a repeated section of a gene exceeding a normal range . The HTT gene is located on the short arm of chromosome 4 at <unk> HTT contains a sequence of three DNA bases — cytosine @-@ adenine @-@ guanine ( CAG ) — repeated multiple times ( i.e. ... <unk> ... ) , known as a trinucleotide repeat . CAG is the 3 @-@ letter genetic code ( codon ) for the amino acid glutamine , so a series of them results in the production of a chain of glutamine known as a polyglutamine tract ( or <unk> tract ) , and the repeated part of the gene , the <unk> region . 
 Generally , people have fewer than 36 repeated glutamines in the <unk> region which results in production of the cytoplasmic protein Huntingtin . However , a sequence of 36 or more glutamines results in the production of a protein which has different characteristics . This altered form , called mutant huntingtin ( mHTT ) , increases the decay rate of certain types of neurons . Regions of the brain have differing amounts and reliance on these types of neurons , and are affected accordingly . Generally , the number of CAG repeats is related to how much this process is affected , and accounts for about 60 % of the variation of the age of the onset of symptoms . The remaining variation is attributed to environment and other genes that modify the mechanism of HD . 36 – 39 repeats result in a reduced @-@ penetrance form of the disease , with a much later onset and slower progression of symptoms . In some cases the onset may be so late that symptoms are never noticed . With very large repeat counts , HD has full penetrance and can occur under the age of 20 , when it is then referred to as juvenile HD , <unk> @-@ rigid , or Westphal variant HD . This accounts for about 7 % of HD carriers . 
 = = = Inheritance = = = 
 Huntington 's disease has autosomal dominant inheritance , meaning that an affected individual typically inherits one copy of the gene with an expanded trinucleotide repeat ( the mutant allele ) from an affected parent . Since penetrance of the mutation is very high , those who have a mutated copy of the gene will have the disease . In this type of inheritance pattern , each offspring of an affected individual has a 50 % risk of inheriting the mutant allele and therefore being affected with the disorder ( see figure ) . This probability is sex @-@ independent . 
 <unk> CAG repeats over 28 are unstable during replication and this instability increases with the number of repeats present . This usually leads to new expansions as generations pass ( dynamic mutations ) instead of reproducing an exact copy of the trinucleotide repeat . This causes the number of repeats to change in successive generations , such that an unaffected parent with an " intermediate " number of repeats ( 28 – 35 ) , or " reduced penetrance " ( 36 – 40 ) , may pass on a copy of the gene with an increase in the number of repeats that produces fully penetrant HD . Such increases in the number of repeats ( and hence earlier age of onset and severity of disease ) in successive generations is known as genetic anticipation . Instability is greater in spermatogenesis than <unk> ; maternally inherited alleles are usually of a similar repeat length , whereas paternally inherited ones have a higher chance of increasing in length . It is rare for Huntington 's disease to be caused by a new mutation , where neither parent has over 36 CAG repeats . 
 In the rare situations where both parents have an expanded HD gene , the risk increases to 75 % , and when either parent has two expanded copies , the risk is 100 % ( all children will be affected ) . Individuals with both genes affected are rare . For some time HD was thought to be the only disease for which possession of a second mutated gene did not affect symptoms and progression , but it has since been found that it can affect the phenotype and the rate of progression . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 The huntingtin protein interacts with over 100 other proteins , and appears to have multiple biological functions . The behavior of this mutated protein is not completely understood , but it is toxic to certain cell types , particularly in the brain . Early damage is most evident in the striatum , but as the disease progresses , other areas of the brain are also more conspicuously affected . Early symptoms are attributable to functions of the striatum and its cortical connections — namely control over movement , mood and higher cognitive function . 
 = = = Huntingtin function = = = 
 HTT is expressed in all mammalian cells . The highest concentrations are found in the brain and testes , with moderate amounts in the liver , heart , and lungs . The function of HTT in humans is unclear . It interacts with proteins which are involved in transcription , cell signaling and intracellular transporting . In animals genetically modified to exhibit HD , several functions of HTT have been found . In these animals , HTT is important for embryonic development , as its absence is related to embryonic death . <unk> , an enzyme which plays a role in catalyzing apoptosis , is thought to be activated by the mutated gene through damaging the ubiquitin @-@ protease system . It also acts as an anti @-@ apoptotic agent preventing programmed cell death and controls the production of brain @-@ derived neurotrophic factor , a protein which protects neurons and regulates their creation during neurogenesis . HTT also facilitates vesicular transport and synaptic transmission and controls neuronal gene transcription . If the expression of HTT is increased and more HTT produced , brain cell survival is improved and the effects of mHTT are reduced , whereas when the expression of HTT is reduced , the resulting characteristics are more typical of the presence of mHTT . In humans the disruption of the normal gene does not cause the disease . It is thought that the disease is not caused by inadequate production of HTT , but by a gain of toxic function of mHTT . 
 = = = Cellular changes due to mHTT = = = 
 There are multiple cellular changes through which the toxic function of mHTT may manifest and produce the HD pathology . During the biological process of posttranslational modification of mHTT , cleavage of the protein can leave behind shorter fragments constituted of parts of the polyglutamine expansion . The polar nature of glutamine causes interactions with other proteins when it is overabundant in unmodified HTT proteins or the HTT fragments created from HTT cleavage . Thus , the mHTT molecule strands will form hydrogen bonds with one another , forming a protein aggregate rather than folding into functional proteins . Over time , the aggregates accumulate , ultimately interfering with neuron function because these fragments can then misfold and coalesce , in a process called protein aggregation , to form inclusion bodies within cells . Neuronal inclusions run indirect interference . Inclusion bodies have been found in both the cell nucleus and cytoplasm . Inclusion bodies in cells of the brain are one of the earliest pathological changes , and some experiments have found that they can be toxic for the cell , but other experiments have shown that they may form as part of the body 's defense mechanism and help protect cells . 
 Several pathways by which mHTT may cause cell death have been identified . These include : effects on chaperone proteins , which help fold proteins and remove misfolded ones ; interactions with caspases , which play a role in the process of removing cells ; the toxic effects of glutamine on nerve cells ; impairment of energy production within cells ; and effects on the expression of genes . 
 An additional theory that explains another way cell function may be disrupted by HD proposes that damage to mitochondria in striatal cells ( numerous accounts of mitochondrial metabolism deficiency have been found ) and the interactions of the altered huntingtin protein with numerous proteins in neurons leads to an increased vulnerability of glutamine , which , in large amounts , has been found to be an <unk> . <unk> may cause damage to numerous cellular structures . Although glutamine is not found in excessively high amounts , it has been postulated that because of the increased vulnerability , even normal amounts glutamine can cause <unk> to be expressed . 
 = = = Macroscopic changes due to mHTT = = = 
 HD affects the whole brain , but certain areas are more vulnerable than others . The most prominent early effects are in a part of the basal ganglia called the <unk> , which is composed of the caudate nucleus and <unk> . Other areas affected include the substantia nigra , layers 3 , 5 and 6 of the cerebral cortex , the hippocampus , <unk> cells in the cerebellum , lateral <unk> nuclei of the hypothalamus and parts of the thalamus . These areas are affected according to their structure and the types of neurons they contain , reducing in size as they lose cells . <unk> spiny neurons are the most vulnerable , particularly ones with projections towards the external globus pallidus , with interneurons and spiny cells projecting to the internal pallidum being less affected . HD also causes an abnormal increase in astrocytes and activation of the brain 's immune cells , microglia . 
 The basal ganglia — the part of the brain most prominently affected in early HD — play a key role in movement and behavior control . Their functions are not fully understood , but current theories propose that they are part of the cognitive executive system and the motor circuit . The basal ganglia ordinarily inhibit a large number of circuits that generate specific movements . To initiate a particular movement , the cerebral cortex sends a signal to the basal ganglia that causes the inhibition to be released . Damage to the basal ganglia can cause the release or reinstatement of the inhibitions to be erratic and uncontrolled , which results in an awkward start to motion or motions to be unintentionally initiated , or a motion to be halted before , or beyond , its intended completion . The accumulating damage to this area causes the characteristic erratic movements associated with HD . The spontaneous and erratic physical movements associated with HD are classified as a type of hyperkinetic dysarthria . Because of the basal ganglia 's inability to inhibit movements , individuals affected by it will inevitably experience a reduced ability to produce speech and swallow foods and liquids ( dysphagia ) . 
 = = = <unk> dysregulation = = = 
 CREB @-@ binding protein ( CBP ) , a transcriptional <unk> , is essential for cell function because as a coactivator at a significant number of promoters , it activates the transcription of genes for survival pathways . Furthermore , the amino acids that form CBP include a strip of 18 glutamines . Thus , the glutamines on CBP interact directly with the increased numbers of glutamine on the HTT chain and CBP gets pulled away from its typical location next to the nucleus . Specifically , CBP contains an <unk> domain to which HTT binds through its polyglutamine @-@ containing domain . <unk> brains of those who had Huntington 's disease also have been found to have incredibly reduced amounts of CBP . In addition , when CBP is overexpressed , polyglutamine @-@ induced death is diminished , further demonstrating that CBP plays an important role in Huntington 's disease and neurons in general . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Medical diagnosis of the onset of HD can be made following the appearance of physical symptoms specific to the disease . Genetic testing can be used to confirm a physical diagnosis if there is no family history of HD . Even before the onset of symptoms , genetic testing can confirm if an individual or embryo carries an expanded copy of the trinucleotide repeat in the HTT gene that causes the disease . Genetic counseling is available to provide advice and guidance throughout the testing procedure , and on the implications of a confirmed diagnosis . These implications include the impact on an individual 's psychology , career , family planning decisions , relatives and relationships . Despite the availability of pre @-@ symptomatic testing , only 5 % of those at risk of inheriting HD choose to do so . 
 = = = Clinical = = = 
 A physical examination , sometimes combined with a psychological examination , can determine whether the onset of the disease has begun . Excessive unintentional movements of any part of the body are often the reason for seeking medical consultation . If these are abrupt and have random timing and distribution , they suggest a diagnosis of HD . Cognitive or behavioral symptoms are rarely the first symptoms diagnosed ; they are usually only recognized in hindsight or when they develop further . How far the disease has progressed can be measured using the unified Huntington 's disease rating scale , which provides an overall rating system based on motor , behavioral , cognitive , and functional assessments . Medical imaging , such as computerized tomography ( CT ) and magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) , can show atrophy of the caudate nuclei early in the disease , as seen in the illustration to the right , but these changes are not , by themselves , diagnostic of HD . Cerebral atrophy can be seen in the advanced stages of the disease . Functional neuroimaging techniques , such as functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) and positron emission tomography ( PET ) , can show changes in brain activity before the onset of physical symptoms , but they are experimental tools , and are not used clinically . 
 = = = Predictive genetic testing = = = 
 Because HD follows an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance , there is a strong motivation for individuals who are at risk of inheriting it to seek a diagnosis . The genetic test for HD consists of a blood test which counts the numbers of CAG repeats in each of the HTT alleles . <unk> are given as follows : 
 40 or more CAG repeats : full penetrance allele ( FPA ) . A " positive test " or " positive result " generally refers to this case . A positive result is not considered a diagnosis , since it may be obtained decades before the symptoms begin . However , a negative test means that the individual does not carry the expanded copy of the gene and will not develop HD . The test will tell a person who originally had a 50 percent chance of inheriting the disease if their risk goes up to 100 percent or is eliminated . A person who tests positive for the disease will develop HD sometime within their lifetime , provided he or she lives long enough for the disease to appear . 
 36 to 39 repeats : incomplete or reduced penetrance allele ( RPA ) . It may cause symptoms , usually later in the adult life . There is a maximum risk of 60 % that a person with an RPA will be symptomatic at the age of 65 years , and a 70 % risk of being symptomatic at the age of 75 years . 
 27 to 35 repeats : intermediate allele ( IA ) , or large normal allele . It is not associated with symptomatic disease in the tested individual , but may expand upon further inheritance to give symptoms in offspring . 
 26 or fewer repeats : Not associated with HD . 
 A pre @-@ symptomatic test is a life @-@ changing event and a very personal decision . The main reason given for choosing testing for HD is to aid in career and family decisions . Before 1993 there was not an available test for individuals to learn if they carried the Huntington 's gene . At that time surveys indicated that 50 – 70 % of at @-@ risk individuals would have been interested in receiving testing , but since predictive testing has been offered far fewer choose to be tested . Over 95 % of individuals at risk of inheriting HD do not proceed with testing , mostly because there is no treatment . A key issue is the anxiety an individual experiences about not knowing whether they will eventually develop HD , compared to the impact of a positive result . Irrespective of the result , stress levels have been found to be lower two years after being tested , but the risk of suicide is increased after a positive test result . Individuals found to have not inherited the disorder may experience survivor guilt with regard to family members who are affected . Other factors taken into account when considering testing include the possibility of discrimination and the implications of a positive result , which usually means a parent has an affected gene and that the individual 's siblings will be at risk of inheriting it . In one study genetic discrimination was found in 46 % of individuals at risk for Huntington 's disease . It occurred at higher rates within personal relationships than health insurance or employment relations . Genetic counseling in HD can provide information , advice and support for initial decision @-@ making , and then , if chosen , throughout all stages of the testing process . Because of the implications of this test , patients who wish to undergo testing must complete three counseling sessions which provide information about Huntington 's . 
 Counseling and guidelines on the use of genetic testing for HD have become models for other genetic disorders , such as autosomal dominant cerebellar <unk> . <unk> testing for HD has also influenced testing for other illnesses with genetic variants such as polycystic kidney disease , familial Alzheimer 's disease and breast cancer . The European Molecular Genetics Quality Network have published yearly external quality assessment scheme for molecular genetic testing for this disease and have developed best practice guidelines for genetic testing for HD to assist in testing and reporting of results . 
 = = = <unk> genetic diagnosis = = = 
 Embryos produced using in vitro fertilization may be genetically tested for HD using preimplantation genetic diagnosis ( <unk> ) . This technique , where one or two cells are extracted from a typically 4 to 8 cell embryo and then tested for the genetic abnormality , can then be used to ensure embryos affected with HD genes are not implanted , and therefore any offspring will not inherit the disease . Some forms of preimplantation genetic diagnosis — non @-@ disclosure or exclusion testing — allow at @-@ risk people to have HD @-@ free offspring without revealing their own parental genotype , giving no information about whether they themselves are destined to develop HD . In exclusion testing , the embryos ' DNA is compared with that of the parents and grandparents to avoid inheritance of the chromosomal region containing the HD gene from the affected grandparent . In non @-@ disclosure testing , only disease @-@ free embryos are replaced in the uterus while the parental genotype and hence parental risk for HD are never disclosed . 
 = = = Prenatal testing = = = 
 It is also possible to obtain a prenatal diagnosis for an embryo or fetus in the womb , using fetal genetic material acquired through chorionic <unk> sampling . An amniocentesis can be performed if the pregnancy is further along , within 14 – 18 weeks . This procedure looks at the amniotic fluid surrounding the baby for indicators of the HD mutation . This , too , can be paired with exclusion testing to avoid disclosure of parental genotype . Prenatal testing can be done when a parent has been diagnosed with HD , when they have had genetic testing showing the expansion of the HTT gene , or when they have a 50 % chance of inheriting the disease . The parents can be counseled on their options , which include termination of pregnancy , and on the difficulties of a child with the identified gene . 
 In addition , in at @-@ risk pregnancies due to an affected male partner , non @-@ invasive prenatal diagnosis can be performed by analyzing cell @-@ free fetal DNA in a blood sample taken from the mother ( via <unk> ) between six and twelve weeks of pregnancy . It has no procedure @-@ related risk of miscarriage ( excepting via needle contamination ) . 
 = = = Differential diagnosis = = = 
 About 99 % of HD diagnoses based on the typical symptoms and a family history of the disease are confirmed by genetic testing to have the expanded trinucleotide repeat that causes HD . Most of the remaining are called HD @-@ like ( HDL ) syndromes . The cause of most HDL diseases is unknown , but those with known causes are due to mutations in the prion protein gene ( <unk> ) , the <unk> 3 gene ( <unk> ) , a recessively inherited unknown gene ( <unk> — only found in two families and poorly understood ) , and the gene encoding the <unk> box @-@ binding protein ( <unk> , sometimes called <unk> ) . Other autosomal dominant diseases that can be misdiagnosed as HD are <unk> @-@ <unk> atrophy and <unk> . There are also autosomal recessive disorders that resemble sporadic cases of HD . These include chorea acanthocytosis and <unk> kinase @-@ associated neurodegeneration . One X @-@ linked disorder of this type is McLeod syndrome . 
 = = Management = = 
 There is no cure for HD , but there are treatments available to reduce the severity of some of its symptoms . For many of these treatments , evidence to confirm their effectiveness in treating symptoms of HD specifically are incomplete . As the disease progresses the ability to care for oneself declines and carefully managed multidisciplinary caregiving becomes increasingly necessary . Although there have been relatively few studies of exercises and therapies that help rehabilitate cognitive symptoms of HD , there is some evidence for the usefulness of physical therapy , occupational therapy , and speech therapy . An association between caffeine intake and earlier age of onset in Huntington 's disease has been found but , since this finding was based on retrospective questionnaire data rather than a blinded , randomized trial or case @-@ control study , this work is a poor basis for guiding lifestyle decisions . 
 = = = Physical therapy = = = 
 Weight loss and eating difficulties due to dysphagia and other muscle <unk> are common , making nutrition management increasingly important as the disease advances . Thickening agents can be added to liquids as thicker fluids are easier and safer to swallow . Reminding the affected person to eat slowly and to take smaller pieces of food into the mouth may also be of use to prevent choking . If eating becomes too hazardous or uncomfortable , the option of using a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy is available . This is a feeding tube , permanently attached through the abdomen into the stomach , which reduces the risk of aspirating food and provides better nutritional management . Assessment and management by speech and language therapists with experience in Huntington 's disease is recommended . 
 People with Huntington 's disease may see a physical therapist for non @-@ invasive and non @-@ medication @-@ based ways of managing the physical symptoms . Physical therapists may implement fall risk assessment and prevention , as well as strengthening , stretching , and cardiovascular exercises . Walking aids may be prescribed as appropriate . Physical therapists also prescribe breathing exercises and airway clearance techniques with the development of respiratory problems . Consensus guidelines on physiotherapy in Huntington 's disease have been produced by the European HD Network . Goals of early rehabilitation interventions are prevention of loss of function . Participation in rehabilitation programs during early to middle stage of the disease may be beneficial as it translates into long term maintenance of motor and functional performance . Rehabilitation during the late stage aims to compensate for motor and functional losses . For long @-@ term independent management , the therapist may develop home exercise programs for appropriate people . 
 = = = Medications = = = 
 <unk> was approved in 2008 for treatment of chorea in Huntington 's disease in the US . Other drugs that help to reduce chorea include neuroleptics and benzodiazepines . Compounds such as amantadine or <unk> are still under investigation but have shown preliminary positive results . <unk> and rigidity , especially in juvenile cases , can be treated with <unk> drugs , and myoclonic <unk> can be treated with valproic acid . 
 Psychiatric symptoms can be treated with medications similar to those used in the general population . Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and mirtazapine have been recommended for depression , while atypical antipsychotic drugs are recommended for psychosis and behavioral problems . Specialist neuropsychiatric input is recommended as people may require long @-@ term treatment with multiple medications in combination . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 The families of individuals who have inherited or are at risk of inheriting HD , have generations of experience of HD which may be outdated and lack knowledge of recent breakthroughs and improvements in genetic testing , family planning choices , care management , and other considerations . Genetic counseling benefits these individuals by updating their knowledge , dispelling any myths they may have and helping them consider their future options and plans . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 The length of the trinucleotide repeat accounts for 60 % of the variation in the age symptoms appear and the rate they progress . A longer repeat results in an earlier age of onset and a faster progression of symptoms . Individuals with more than sixty repeats often develop the disease before age 20 , while those with fewer than 40 repeats may not ever develop noticeable symptoms . The remaining variation is due to environmental factors and other genes that influence the mechanism of the disease . 
 Life expectancy in HD is generally around 20 years following the onset of visible symptoms . Most life @-@ threatening complications result from muscle coordination and , to a lesser extent , behavioral changes induced by declining cognitive function . The largest risk is pneumonia , which causes death in one third of those with HD . As the ability to synchronize movements deteriorates , difficulty clearing the lungs and an increased risk of aspirating food or drink both increase the risk of contracting pneumonia . The second greatest risk is heart disease , which causes almost a quarter of fatalities of those with HD . Suicide is the third greatest cause of fatalities , with 7 @.@ 3 % of those with HD taking their own lives and up to 27 % attempting to do so . It is unclear to what extent suicidal thoughts are influenced by behavioral symptoms , as they signify sufferers ' desires to avoid the later stages of the disease . Other associated risks include choking , physical injury from falls , and malnutrition . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 The late onset of Huntington 's disease means it does not usually affect reproduction . The worldwide prevalence of HD is 5 – 10 cases per 100 @,@ 000 persons , but varies greatly geographically as a result of ethnicity , local migration and past immigration patterns . Prevalence is similar for men and women . The rate of occurrence is highest in peoples of Western European descent , averaging around 7 per 100 @,@ 000 people , and is lower in the rest of the world ; e.g. , one per million people of Asian and African descent . A 2013 epidemiological study of the prevalence of Huntington 's disease in the U.K. between 1990 and 2010 found that the average prevalence for the U.K. was 12 @.@ 3 per 100 @,@ 000 . Additionally , some localized areas have a much higher prevalence than their regional average . One of the highest incidences is in the isolated populations of the Lake Maracaibo region of Venezuela , where HD affects up to 700 per 100 @,@ 000 persons . Other areas of high localization have been found in Tasmania and specific regions of Scotland , Wales and Sweden . Increased prevalence in some cases occurs due to a local founder effect , a historical migration of carriers into an area of geographic isolation . Some of these carriers have been traced back hundreds of years using genealogical studies . Genetic haplotypes can also give clues for the geographic variations of prevalence . Iceland , on the contrary , has a rather low prevalence of 1 per 100 @,@ 000 , despite the fact that Icelanders as a people are descended of the early Germanic tribes of Scandinavia which also gave rise to the Swedes ; all cases with the exception of one going back nearly two centuries having derived from the offspring of a couple living early in the 19th century . Finland , as well , has a low incidence of only 2 @.@ 2 per 100 @,@ 000 people . 
 Until the discovery of a genetic test , statistics could only include clinical diagnosis based on physical symptoms and a family history of HD , excluding those who died of other causes before diagnosis . These cases can now be included in statistics ; and , as the test becomes more widely available , estimates of the prevalence and incidence of the disorder are likely to increase . 
 = = History = = 
 Although Huntington 's has been recognized as a disorder since at least the Middle Ages , the cause has been unknown until fairly recently . Huntington 's was given different names throughout this history as understanding of the disease changed . Originally called simply ' chorea ' for the jerky <unk> movements associated with the disease , HD has also been called " hereditary chorea " and " chronic progressive chorea " . The first definite mention of HD was in a letter by Charles Oscar Waters , published in the first edition of Robley Dunglison 's Practice of Medicine in 1842 . Waters described " a form of chorea , vulgarly called <unk> " , including accurate descriptions of the chorea , its progression , and the strong heredity of the disease . In 1846 Charles Gorman observed how higher prevalence seemed to occur in localized regions . Independently of Gorman and Waters , both students of Dunglison at Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia , Johan Christian Lund also produced an early description in 1860 . He specifically noted that in <unk> , a secluded mountain valley in Norway , there was a high prevalence of dementia associated with a pattern of jerking movement disorders that ran in families . 
 The first thorough description of the disease was by George Huntington in 1872 . Examining the combined medical history of several generations of a family exhibiting similar symptoms , he realized their conditions must be linked ; he presented his detailed and accurate definition of the disease as his first paper . Huntington described the exact pattern of inheritance of autosomal dominant disease years before the rediscovery by scientists of Mendelian inheritance . 
 " Of its hereditary nature . When either or both the parents have shown manifestations of the disease ... , one or more of the offspring almost invariably suffer from the disease ... But if by any chance these children go through life without it , the thread is broken and the grandchildren and great @-@ grandchildren of the original shakers may rest assured that they are free from the disease . " . 
 Sir William Osler was interested in the disorder and chorea in general , and was impressed with Huntington 's paper , stating that " In the history of medicine , there are few instances in which a disease has been more accurately , more graphically or more briefly described . " Osler 's continued interest in HD , combined with his influence in the field of medicine , helped to rapidly spread awareness and knowledge of the disorder throughout the medical community . Great interest was shown by scientists in Europe , including Louis Théophile Joseph <unk> , Désiré @-@ <unk> <unk> , Camillo Golgi , and Joseph Jules <unk> , and until the end of the century , much of the research into HD was European in origin . By the end of the 19th century , research and reports on HD had been published in many countries and the disease was recognized as a worldwide condition . 
 During the rediscovery of Mendelian inheritance at the turn of the 20th century , HD was used tentatively as an example of autosomal dominant inheritance . The English biologist William Bateson used the pedigrees of affected families to establish that HD had an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern . The strong inheritance pattern prompted several researchers , including Smith Ely Jelliffe , to attempt to trace and connect family members of previous studies . Jelliffe collected information from across New York and published several articles regarding the genealogy of HD in New England . Jelliffe 's research roused the interest of his college friend , Charles Davenport , who commissioned Elizabeth Muncey to produce the first field study on the East Coast of the United States of families with HD and to construct their pedigrees . Davenport used this information to document the variable age of onset and range of symptoms of HD ; he claimed that most cases of HD in the USA could be traced back to a handful of individuals . This research was further embellished in 1932 by P. R. <unk> , who popularized the idea that three brothers who left England in 1630 bound for Boston were the progenitors of HD in the USA . The claim that the earliest progenitors had been established and eugenic bias of Muncey 's , Davenport 's , and <unk> 's work contributed to misunderstandings and prejudice about HD . Muncey and Davenport also popularized the idea that in the past some HD sufferers may have been thought to be possessed by spirits or victims of witchcraft , and were sometimes shunned or exiled by society . This idea has not been proven . Researchers have found contrary evidence ; for instance , the community of the family studied by George Huntington openly accommodated those who exhibited symptoms of HD . 
 The search for the cause of this condition was enhanced considerably in 1968 when the Hereditary Disease Foundation ( HDF ) was created by Milton Wexler , a psychoanalyst based in Los Angeles , California whose wife Leonore Sabin had been diagnosed earlier that year with Huntington 's disease . The three brothers of Wexler 's wife also suffered from this disease . The foundation was involved in the recruitment of over 100 scientists in the Huntington 's Disease Collaborative Research Project who over a 10 @-@ year period worked to locate the responsible gene . 
 Thanks to the HDF , the ongoing US @-@ Venezuela Huntington 's Disease Collaborative Research Project was started in 1979 , and reported a major breakthrough in 1983 with the discovery of the approximate location of a causal gene . This was the result of an extensive study focusing on the populations of two isolated Venezuelan villages , Barranquitas and <unk> , where there was an unusually high prevalence of the disease . It involved over 18 @,@ 000 people — mostly from a single extended family . 
 Among other innovations , the project developed DNA @-@ marking methods which were an important step in making the Human Genome Project possible . In 1993 , the research group isolated the precise causal gene at <unk> , making this the first autosomal disease locus found using genetic linkage analysis . 
 In the same time frame , key discoveries concerning the mechanisms of the disorder were being made , including the findings by Anita Harding 's research group on the effects of the gene 's length . 
 Modelling the disease in various types of animals , such as the transgenic mouse developed in 1996 , enabled larger scale experiments . As these animals have faster metabolisms and much shorter lifespans than humans , results from experiments are received sooner , speeding research . The 1997 discovery that mHTT fragments misfold led to the discovery of the nuclear inclusions they cause . These advances have led to increasingly extensive research into the proteins involved with the disease , potential drug treatments , care methods , and the gene itself . 
 The condition was formerly called ' Huntington 's chorea ' but this term has been replaced by ' Huntington 's disease ' because not all patients develop chorea and due to the importance of cognitive and behavioral problems . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 = = = Ethics = = = 
 Huntington 's disease , particularly the application of the genetic test for the disease , has raised several ethical issues . The issues for genetic testing include defining how mature an individual should be before being considered eligible for testing , ensuring the confidentiality of results , and whether companies should be allowed to use test results for decisions on employment , life insurance or other financial matters . There was controversy when Charles Davenport proposed in 1910 that compulsory sterilization and immigration control be used for people with certain diseases , including HD , as part of the eugenics movement . In vitro fertilization has some issues regarding its use of embryos . Some HD research has ethical issues due to its use of animal testing and embryonic stem cells . 
 The development of an accurate diagnostic test for Huntington 's disease has caused social , legal , and ethical concerns over access to and use of a person 's results . Many guidelines and testing procedures have strict procedures for disclosure and confidentiality to allow individuals to decide when and how to receive their results and also to whom the results are made available . Financial institutions and businesses are faced with the question of whether to use genetic test results when assessing an individual , such as for life insurance or employment . The United Kingdom 's insurance companies have agreed that until 2017 they will not use genetic information when writing insurance policies under GB £ 500 @,@ 000 , but Huntington 's is explicitly excluded from this agreement . As with other untreatable genetic conditions with a later onset , it is ethically questionable to perform pre @-@ symptomatic testing on a child or adolescent , as there would be no medical benefit for that individual . There is consensus for testing only individuals who are considered cognitively mature , although there is a counter @-@ argument that parents have a right to make the decision on their child 's behalf . With the lack of an effective treatment , testing a person under legal age who is not judged to be competent is considered unethical in most cases . 
 There are ethical concerns related to prenatal genetic testing or preimplantation genetic diagnosis to ensure a child is not born with a given disease . For example , prenatal testing raises the issue of selective abortion , a choice considered unacceptable by some . As it is a dominant disease , there are difficulties in situations in which a parent does not want to know his or her own diagnosis . This would require parts of the process to be kept secret from the parent . 
 = = = Support organizations = = = 
 In 1968 , after experiencing HD in his wife 's family , Dr. Milton Wexler was inspired to start the Hereditary Disease Foundation ( HDF ) , with the aim of curing genetic illnesses by coordinating and supporting research . The foundation and Dr. Wexler 's daughter , Nancy Wexler , were key parts of the research team in Venezuela which discovered the HD gene . 
 At roughly the same time as the HDF formed , Marjorie Guthrie helped to found the Committee to Combat Huntington 's Disease ( now the Huntington 's Disease Society of America ) , after her husband Woody Guthrie died from complications of HD . 
 Since then , support and research organizations have formed in many countries around the world and have helped to increase public awareness of HD . A number of these collaborate in umbrella organizations , like the International Huntington Association and the European HD network . Many support organizations hold an annual HD awareness event , some of which have been endorsed by their respective governments . For example , 6 June is designated " National Huntington 's Disease Awareness Day " by the US Senate . 
 The largest funder of Huntington 's disease research globally , in terms of financial expenditure , is the CHDI Foundation , a US non @-@ profit biomedical foundation that aims to " rapidly discover and develop drugs that delay or slow Huntington 's disease " . CHDI was formerly known as the High Q Foundation . In 2006 , it spent $ 50 million on Huntington 's disease research . CHDI collaborates with many academic and commercial laboratories globally and engages in oversight and management of research projects as well as funding . Many organizations exist to support and inform those affected by HD . 
 = = Research directions = = 
 Research into the mechanism of HD has focused on identifying the functioning of HTT , how mHTT differs or interferes with it , and the brain pathology that the disease produces . Research is conducted using in vitro methods , animal models and human volunteers . Animal models are critical for understanding the fundamental mechanisms causing the disease and for supporting the early stages of drug development . Animals with chemically induced brain injury exhibit HD @-@ like symptoms and were initially used , but they did not mimic the progressive features of the disease . The identification of the causative gene has enabled the development of many transgenic animal models including nematode worms , Drosophila fruit flies , mice , rats , sheep , pigs and monkeys that express mutant huntingtin and develop progressive neurodegeneration and HD @-@ like symptoms . 
 Research is being conducted on many different approaches to prevent Huntington 's disease or slow its progression . Disease @-@ modifying strategies can be broadly grouped into three categories : reducing the level of the mutant huntingtin protein ( including gene silencing ) ; approaches aimed at improving neuronal survival by reducing the harm caused by the protein to specific cellular pathways and mechanisms ( including protein homeostasis and histone deacetylase inhibition ) ; and strategies to replace lost neurons . In addition , novel therapies to improve brain functioning are under development ; these seek to produce symptomatic rather than disease @-@ modifying therapies , and include phosphodiesterase inhibitors . 
 = = = Reducing huntingtin production = = = 
 Gene silencing aims to reduce the production of the mutant protein , since HD is caused by a single dominant gene encoding a toxic protein . Gene silencing experiments in mouse models have shown that when the expression of mHTT is reduced , symptoms improve . Safety of non @-@ allele specific RNAi and ASO gene silencing has now been demonstrated in mice and the large , human @-@ like brains of primates . <unk> @-@ specific silencing attempts to silence mutant HTT while leaving wild @-@ type HTT untouched . One way of accomplishing this is to identify polymorphisms present on only one allele and produce gene silencing drugs that target polymorphisms in only the mutant allele . The first ' gene silencing ' trial involving human HD patients began in 2015 , testing the safety of <unk> @-@ <unk> , produced by <unk> Pharmaceuticals and led by UCL Institute of Neurology . Mutant huntingtin was detected and quantified for the first time in cerebrospinal fluid from Huntington 's disease mutation @-@ carriers in 2015 using a novel ' single @-@ molecule counting ' immunoassay , providing a direct way to assess whether huntingtin @-@ lowering treatments are achieving the desired effect . 
 = = = Improving cell survival = = = 
 Among the approaches aimed at improving cell survival in the presence of mutant huntingtin are correction of transcriptional regulation using histone deacetylase inhibitors , modulating aggregation of huntingtin , improving metabolism and mitochondrial function and restoring function of synapses . 
 = = = Neuronal replacement = = = 
 Stem cell therapy is the replacement of damaged neurons by transplantation of stem cells into affected regions of the brain . Experiments have yielded mixed results using this technique in animal models and preliminary human clinical trials . Whatever their future therapeutic potential , stem cells are already a valuable tool for studying Huntington 's disease in the laboratory . 
 = = = Clinical trials = = = 
 Several clinical trials of new experimental treatments are underway and planned in Huntington 's disease . 
 Compounds that have failed to prevent or slow progression of Huntington 's disease in human trials include <unk> , coenzyme Q10 , <unk> , creatine , minocycline , ethyl @-@ EPA , <unk> and dimebon . 
 = Coenred of Mercia = 
 Coenred ( also spelled Cenred or <unk> fl . 675 – 709 ) was king of Mercia from 704 to 709 . Mercia was an Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom in the English Midlands . He was a son of the Mercian king Wulfhere , whose brother Æthelred succeeded to the throne in 675 on Wulfhere 's death . In 704 , Æthelred abdicated in favour of Coenred to become a monk . 
 Coenred 's reign is poorly documented , but a contemporary source records that he faced attacks from the Welsh . Coenred is not known to have married or had children , although later chronicles describe him as an ancestor of Wigstan , a 9th @-@ century Mercian king . In 709 , Coenred abdicated and went on pilgrimage to Rome , where he remained as a monk until his death . In the view of his contemporary , Bede , Coenred " who had ruled the kingdom of Mercia for some time and very nobly , with still greater nobility renounced the throne of his kingdom " . Æthelred 's son Ceolred succeeded Coenred as king of Mercia . 
 = = Mercia in the 7th century = = 
 By the 7th century , England was almost entirely divided into kingdoms ruled by the Anglo @-@ Saxons , who had come to Britain two hundred years earlier . The kingdom of Mercia occupied what is now the English Midlands . Neighbouring kingdoms included Northumbria to the north , East Anglia to the east , and Wessex , the kingdom of the West Saxons , to the south . Essex , the kingdom of the East Saxons , included London and lay between East Anglia and the kingdom of Kent . The earliest Mercian king for whom there is definite historical information is Penda of Mercia , Coenred 's paternal grandfather . 
 The main source for this period is Bede 's Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum ( Ecclesiastical History of the English People ) , completed in about 731 . Despite its focus on the history of the church , this work provides valuable information about the early Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms . Charters , which recorded royal grants of land to individuals and to religious houses , provide further information on Coenred 's reign , as does the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , compiled in Wessex at the end of the 9th century . The Chronicle 's anonymous scribe appears to have incorporated much information recorded in earlier periods . Coenred is also mentioned in two 8th @-@ century hagiographies , those of Saint Wilfrid and Saint Guthlac . 
 = = Ancestry and reign = = 
 In 658 , Coenred 's father Wulfhere came to the throne of Mercia as the result of a coup , ending a three @-@ year period of Northumbrian control . Wulfhere was succeeded on his death ( in 675 ) by his brother Æthelred , Coenred 's uncle , possibly because Coenred was too young to rule . Coenred 's mother Ermenilda became a nun sometime after Wulfhere 's death . Æthelred 's decisive victory over the Northumbrians at the Battle of the Trent in 679 , followed by the Picts ' destruction of the Northumbrian army at the Battle of Dun Nechtain in 685 , reduced Northumbrian power and influence . There is evidence of Mercian activity in the south @-@ east as well . Æthelred invaded Kent in 676 , and charters survive in which he confirmed land grants made by Swæfheard and Oswine , kings of west and east Kent . Another charter of Æthelred 's , dated between 693 and 704 , grants land to Waldhere , the bishop of London . However , Æthelred does not appear to have sought expansion further south . The growing strength of the West Saxons under Cædwalla and Ine would have limited Mercian opportunities in that direction . 
 The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle records that in 702 Coenred succeeded to the kingdom of the <unk> and that in 704 he became king of Mercia . As the " <unk> " were those who lived south of the Humber , Mercia 's northern boundary , the two annals have proved difficult to interpret : Coenred and Æthelred may have ruled jointly for two years before Æthelred abdicated , or the chroniclers may have recorded the same event twice , once from a source that was two years in error . According to the 8th @-@ century life of St Guthlac , Æthelred appointed Coenred as his heir despite having at least one son of his own , Ceolred . Æthelred appears to have retained influence during his nephew 's reign : the Life of St Wilfrid relates how he summoned Coenred and made him swear to support Wilfrid in his conflict with the church hierarchy . 
 Coenred 's sparsely documented reign is mentioned in the Life of Guthlac . The author , Felix , reports conflicts with the Britons : " in the days of Coenred King of the Mercians , [ ... ] the Britons the implacable enemies of the Saxon race , were troubling the English with their attacks , their pillaging , and their devastations of the people [ ... ] " To counter such attacks , Æthelbald , who came to the throne in 716 , was once thought to have built Wat 's Dyke , an earthwork barrier in northern Wales ; but this now seems unlikely , since an excavation of the Dyke in 1997 found charcoal from a hearth which was radiocarbon @-@ dated to some time between 411 and 561 . 
 Some surviving charters from Coenred 's reign reveal him to have been the overlord of the East Saxon rulers . Offa , an East Saxon king , made a grant in the territory of the Hwicce ( to which he may have been connected by a marriage of his father , <unk> ) which was later confirmed by Coenred . In the charter , Coenred refers to Offa as his underking . Coenred and his successor also confirmed grants to Waldhere , the Bishop of London , evidence that London was firmly under Mercian overlordship . Later Mercian kings treated London as their direct possession , rather than as a province ruled by an underking , but Coenred did not go that far . A grant of land in Herefordshire to a nun named <unk> has survived , as have forged charters in Coenred 's name granting privileges to St Paul 's Cathedral , and to the Abbey of Evesham . 
 Mercia 's influence in Kent was limited both before and during Coenred 's reign . In a surviving letter ( written in 704 or 705 ) , Waldhere , Bishop of London , tells Berhtwald , Archbishop of Canterbury , that Coenred had invited him to a council to be held " about the reconciliation of Ælfthryth " . Waldhere refused the invitation as he did not know Berhtwald 's opinion on the matter , which was evidently important , although no other reference to it has survived . The letter describes a council to be held at Brentford to mediate between the kings of the East and West Saxons . In the view of the historian Frank Stenton , the letter illuminates the " confused relations of the southern English at a moment when they had no common overlord " . The reduced prestige of both Coenred and his successor , Ceolred , may have stirred unrest among the Mercian nobility : Æthelbald was in exile during Ceolred 's reign , and the survival of a hostile account of Ceolred may indicate a more general dissatisfaction with the ruling line . 
 = = Abdication and succession = = 
 Coenred appears to have been a very religious king . Bede tells a story of a companion of Coenred 's whose sins led him to damnation despite Coenred 's pleas that he should repent and reform . In 709 Coenred abdicated in favour of his cousin Ceolred , son of Æthelred , in order to become a monk in Rome ; Bede 's story is cited by the medieval chronicler William of Malmesbury as the reason for Coenred 's decision , though this is probably guesswork . Coenred was accompanied by the East Saxon king Offa on his journey to Rome , and was made a monk there by Pope Constantine . The Liber Pontificalis , an early record of the lives of Popes , records the arrival of their party : " in his time , two kings of the Saxons came with many others to pray to the apostles ; just as they were hoping , their lives quickly came to an end . " A later source , the 11th @-@ century Vita <unk> , claims that <unk> accompanied Coenred and Offa to Rome , but historians have treated this with scepticism . 
 Historians have generally accepted Bede 's report of Coenred 's and Offa 's abdications , but Barbara Yorke has suggested that they may not have relinquished their thrones voluntarily . There are instances of kings being forcibly removed and placed in holy orders to make them ineligible for kingship ; one such was King Osred II of Northumbria , who was forced into a monastery . On the other hand , if Coenred went willingly , as Bede relates , then the apparently friendly relationship between Offa and Coenred , his overlord , makes it clear that the relationship between an overlord and his underking was not hostile in every case . 
 Coenred was tonsured in Rome , whence he was accompanied by Offa , son of <unk> , king of the East Saxons , and became a monk " at the threshold of the apostles " as Bede had it ; he stayed in Rome until his death , the date of which is unknown . He is not recorded as having a wife or children . The Evesham Chronicle kept at Evesham Abbey , however , claim that he was an ancestor of Wigstan . They do not say whether this was through Wigstan 's father , Wigmund , son of Wiglaf of Mercia , or through his mother , Ælfflæd , daughter of Ceolwulf I of Mercia . 
 = Mochitsura Hashimoto = 
 Mochitsura Hashimoto ( <unk> <unk> , Hashimoto Mochitsura , 1909 – 25 October 2000 ) was an officer and a submarine commander in the Imperial Japanese Navy during World War II . He is best known as the captain of Japanese submarine I @-@ 58 , which sank the USS Indianapolis in 1945 . 
 Born in Kyoto and educated at the Imperial Japanese Naval Academy , Hashimoto volunteered for service in submarines and was later aboard submarine I @-@ 24 during the attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 . Hashimoto commanded coastal patrol and training submarines off Japan for much of the war , and in 1944 took command of I @-@ 58 , a ship which was equipped to carry <unk> , or manned torpedoes . After a number of unsuccessful operations , I @-@ 58 sank the Indianapolis on 30 July while on a midnight patrol . Hashimoto 's submarine then returned to Japan , one of the few such ships to survive the war . Hashimoto was then called to testify at the court @-@ martial of Charles B. McVay III , the Indianapolis commander , a move which was controversial at the time . He was later part of an effort to exonerate McVay . Hashimoto later became a Shinto priest . He died in 2000 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Mochitsura Hashimoto was born in 1909 in Kyoto , Japan , the eighth of nine children and fifth son of a <unk> ( Shinto priest ) . He attended Kyoto Third High School , a prestigious school , where he performed well . In his youth he was described as self @-@ possessed and respectful . At the behest of his father , he applied for the Imperial Japanese Naval Academy . The family did not have a naval background , but Hashimoto 's father struggled financially on a priest 's government subsidy and he felt entering his son into the military would help to provide for them . One of Hashimoto 's older brothers subsequently attended the Imperial Japanese Army Academy and was commissioned into the Imperial Japanese Army . Hashimoto graduated from high school in 1927 and was accepted into the Naval Academy . Leaving home for the first time , Hashimoto then attended the naval academy at Eta Jima for four years , studying Japanese history , engineering , and naval tactics , as well as judo and other military athletics . He graduated and commissioned in 1931 . 
 In 1937 , Hashimoto married Nobuko Miki , the daughter of a successful Osaka businessman . The couple had three sons ; <unk> , born in 1940 , Nobutake , born in 1942 , and Tomoyuki , born in <unk> <unk> , a daughter born in 1947 . 
 = = = Military career = = = 
 In 1934 , Hashimoto volunteered for the submarine service , and in 1937 he served aboard destroyers and submarine chasers off the shores of the Republic of China . On 15 November , as a sub @-@ lieutenant , Hashimoto was assigned to the crew of the gunboat <unk> , and was promoted to lieutenant on 1 December . During that time , his brother was killed in action fighting on the Chinese mainland . 
 In 1938 he was assigned to the destroyer <unk> on 15 December . Selected for submarine school the following year , Hashimoto was assigned to the Yokosuka Naval District on 20 May 1939 and enrolled in a six @-@ month torpedo course on 1 June , subsequently entering the naval submarine school as a Class B student on 1 December . Upon completion of this training , he was assigned to the submarine I @-@ 123 on 20 March 1940 as torpedo officer , transferring to the I @-@ 155 on 15 October in the same role . 
 On 15 July 1941 , he was assigned to the submarine I @-@ 24 , becoming its torpedo officer on 31 October , under Lieutenant Commander Hiroshi Hanabusa ; the ship was based out of Kure . Throughout the year , the submarine conducted training maneuvers with a group of midget submarines . On 18 November , I @-@ 24 and her group sailed from Kure with a midget submarine attached to her <unk> . Steaming eastward , she surfaced 10 miles ( 16 km ) off Waikiki on 6 December . The sub was a part of a large group of submarines which would support the Attack on Pearl Harbor . Hashimoto witnessed the final ritual of Kazuo <unk> and Kyoji Inagaki , who would man the midget submarine , which cast off at 05 : 30 . I @-@ 24 remained at a rendezvous point to wait for the midget sub , which never came . On 9 December , I @-@ 24 steamed for Kure . 
 Upon the submarine 's return to Kure , Hashimoto was detached and assigned to the advanced course at Submarine School on 1 February 1942 , to prepare him for command of a submarine . Graduating from this course on 30 June , Hashimoto was given command of submarine Ro @-@ 31 , a coastal defense vessel . For the remainder of 1942 , Hashimoto operated his ship in home waters off Yokosuka training crews and trying new equipment and doing research for the development of Japanese submarine doctrine . He was promoted to lieutenant commander on 1 November . In 1943 , he was given command of submarine I @-@ 158 for coastal defense , and later in the year was given command of submarine Ro @-@ 44 for the same duties . 
 = = = Commanding I @-@ 58 = = = 
 In May 1944 , Lieutenant Commander Hashimoto was given command of submarine I @-@ 58 which was still under construction in Sasebo . Hashimoto oversaw much of the construction of I @-@ 58 . The submarine was later overhauled mid @-@ construction to carry <unk> manned torpedoes , which was considered a great honor by Hashimoto 's crew . I @-@ 58 was commissioned on 13 September 1944 and Hashimoto commanded her during her shakedown cruises , commanding his men on repeated drills without shore leave . He completed training on the submarine in December 1944 . The ship traversed Shimonoseki Strait into the Inland Sea and to Kure for supplies . She then moved to Hirao where she loaded six kaitens . 
 On 29 December she left on her first war patrol , steaming for the Mariana Islands . She arrived off the coast of Guam at 03 : 00 on 11 January 1945 and Hashimoto ordered four kaitens launched . The kaitens tentatively claimed a tanker sunk , though it was unable to verify if the ship had actually been struck . The strike had been unsuccessful . She then sped back to Kure and arrived there on 20 January . She remained in port there until March , likely due to supply shortages . On 1 March , she was ordered to Iwo Jima to support the battle taking place there . Once there , I @-@ 58 was ordered to launch all of its kaitens without their pilots and immediately return home . She was ordered out again on 2 April sailing to support Japanese forces at the Battle of Okinawa . While there , she was attacked by aircraft 50 times . She never surfaced for more than a few hours . She limped to Kure on 29 April 1945 , the only Japanese submarine to withdraw from the operation . She remained in port because of continued mining conducted by U.S. Army Air Forces , and departed on 16 July on another war patrol . At the time , she was one of only four large submarines left in the Japanese Navy , and her mission was to harass Allied lines of communications . 
 Passing through the Inland Sea around minefields , I @-@ 58 headed for the east coast of The Philippines intending to attack ships there . Passing east of Okinawa and spotting no ships , she cruised south arriving at the Guam @-@ Leyte shipping lane on 27 July . She spotted a tanker escorted by a destroyer and Hashimoto ordered her to launch two kaitens at 14 : 31 and 14 : 43 . She heard explosions at 15 : 21 and 15 : 31 but her crew was unable to determine if the kaitens had struck their targets . Hashimoto reported a tanker assumed sunk . 
 = = = Sinking of the Indianapolis = = = 
 On 29 July he ordered the submarine to make for an area where he believed shipping lanes between Guam , Leyte , Peleliu and Okinawa intersected . At 23 : 35 that evening , Hashimoto spotted the heavy cruiser Indianapolis at 10 @,@ 000 metres ( 33 @,@ 000 ft ) cruising for his position at medium speed . Believing the ship to be an Idaho @-@ class battleship , he ordered I @-@ 58 to dive and once Indianapolis closed to 1 @,@ 500 metres ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) he ordered six regular torpedoes fired at 00 : 02 on 30 July . Spotting three explosions strike the Indianapolis , Hashimoto ordered the submarine on a deep dive fearing detection . After an hour at a deep dive to reload , she surfaced and did not spot Indianapolis . After searching unsuccessfully for flotsam or any sign of the ship , he ordered the I @-@ 58 to retire at 02 : 30 . He transmitted a short wave radio message to the 6th Fleet headquarters in Kure at about 03 : 00 noting the destruction of the ship . He later wrote of the incident : 
 We had the moon behind us and the enemy ship was now clearly visible . She had two turrets aft and a large tower mast . I took her to be an Idaho @-@ class battleship . The crew were all agog , awaiting the order to fire the torpedoes . All was dead quiet ... the favorable moment for firing was approaching . ... At last in a loud voice , I gave the order ' Stand by — fire ! ' The torpedo @-@ release switch pressed at intervals of two seconds and then the report came from the torpedo room , " All tubes fired and correct . " Six torpedoes were speeding , <unk> , toward the enemy ship . ... Bringing the boat on to a course parallel with the enemy , we waited anxiously . Every minute seemed an age . Then on the starboard side of the enemy by the forward turret , and then the after turret there rose columns of water to be followed immediately by flashes of bright red flame . Then another column of water arose from alongside the Number 2 turret and seemed to envelop the whole ship — " A hit , a hit ! " I shouted as each torpedo struck home , and the crew danced for joy . 
 Hashimoto ordered I @-@ 58 northward looking for additional ships to attack . She picked up reports of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima in intercepted radio transmissions on 7 August but Hashimoto continued to hunt for Allied ships south of Bungo Strait . On 9 August she launched two kaitens against a convoy , and Hashimoto claimed a destroyer probably sunk . On 12 August he launched his remaining kaitens and claimed a merchant ship probably sunk . I @-@ 58 surfaced in Bungo Strait on 15 August , where Hashimoto learned of the <unk> @-@ hōsō signaling the Japanese surrender and end of the war . She traveled up the Inland Sea and arrived at Hirao where Hashimoto emotionally informed his crew of the end of the war . After the war , it was confirmed Indianapolis was the only ship I @-@ 58 had sunk . It was the last Japanese naval success of World War II . 
 = = = McVay court @-@ martial = = = 
 Three days after Japan 's formal surrender in Tokyo Bay , Hashimoto was promoted to his final rank of commander . On 20 November , he was given command of the destroyer Yukikaze , among the few Imperial Navy ships to survive the war , and assigned to repatriation duties , returning troops to Japan from overseas . Before Hashimoto could begin his new duties , however , he was summoned by the United States military to be a witness for the prosecution in the court @-@ martial against Indianapolis commander Captain Charles B. McVay III , who was on trial on charges of negligence leading to the ship 's sinking . On 9 December 1945 he was transported from Tokyo to Oakland , California aboard an aircraft of the Naval Air Transport Service . Hashimoto was assured he would be treated as a naval officer instead of a prisoner of war or war criminal , but he remained under guard during his time in the United States and was not allowed to leave his hotel , as his appearance had been front page news that day in the New York Times and in other newspapers . The next day he arrived in Washington , D.C. where hearings were taking place . For the duration of his time in the United States , he spoke through translator Francis Earl Eastlake from the Office of Naval Intelligence . 
 Hashimoto spoke first with judge advocate Captain Thomas J. Ryan for four hours on 11 December . He spoke the next day with Captain John P. Cady , McVay 's chief defense counsel , for several hours , as both officers sought to determine his credibility and competence to take the stand in the trial . He told them the visibility was good on the night of the attack and he had been able to easily spot the Indianapolis . Hashimoto testified in the court on 13 December in a crowded courtroom . It was the first time that an officer of a nation at war with the United States had testified against an officer of the U.S. Navy in a court martial . At the behest of Cady , Hashimoto took both a Japanese civil oath and an U.S. Navy oath so he could be charged for perjury in both nations if he lied . Hashimoto 's 50 minutes of testimony focused on whether or not Indianapolis was " <unk> " and he noted the ship did not deviate from its course . However , he also noted that , due to his position , such evasive maneuvers would not have diminished his ability to attack the ship . Still , his testimony is considered integral in McVay 's eventual conviction that he had been negligent . Charles Butler McVay III was exonerated in 2001 . Following his appearance at the trial , Hashimoto remained in U.S. custody under guard until early 1946 , when he was returned to Japan aboard USS Effingham . 
 With the Nuremberg Trials underway and Japanese war crimes during the war coming to light , the announcement of Hashimoto 's appearance in testimony against an American officer caused considerable controversy in the American news media . Though Hashimoto was himself known to be innocent of any war crimes and was generally treated well by his guards , he spoke little English and was subject to derision in the press . Among the public responses , socialite Evalyn Walsh McLean sent an angry telegram to Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal to complain , and U.S. Representative Robert L. Doughton publicly stated , " It is the most contemptible thing I ever heard of to summon a Jap officer to testify against one of our own officers . I made my living practicing law before Navy courts and boards for 25 years , and this reaches an all @-@ time low in courts , board or congressional investigation . " Columnist Robert Ruark accused the Navy of using Hashimoto to " hype up " the court martial . Even after his departure his testimony remained controversial , and the Chicago Sun criticized his trip , which it estimated to have cost $ 1 @,@ 820 . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 After his return to Japan , Hashimoto worked as a demobilization officer with the naval section of the Ministry of Demobilization , responsible for <unk> veterans and dismantling what remained of the Japanese Navy . He completed his final assignment in June 1946 , after which he became a civilian , opting to retire from the military . Towards the end of his life , he became a Shinto priest at a shrine in Kyoto . He was later interviewed by author Dan Kurzman for his 1990 book Fatal Voyage , in which Kurzman stated , " Commander Hashimoto was amazed by the Americans . While penned up in his dormitory during the trial , he was treated more like an honored guest than an enemy officer who had caused the deaths of so many American boys . " Hashimoto later authored a book Sunk : The Story of the Japanese Submarine Fleet , 1941 – 1945 in which he detailed Japanese submarine operations in the war , including an account of the sinking of Indianapolis . 
 In December 1990 , Hashimoto met with some of the survivors of the Indianapolis at Pearl Harbor where he stated ( through a translator ) : " I came here to pray with you for your shipmates whose deaths I caused , " to which survivor Giles McCoy simply responded : " I forgive you . " 
 In 1999 , he assisted the surviving crew of the Indianapolis in attempting to exonerate McVay of blame for the ship 's sinking , writing a letter to the Senate Armed Services Committee in which he stated , just as he had more than five decades earlier , that even if the Indianapolis had been <unk> , it would have made no difference : " I would have been able to launch a successful torpedo attack against his ship whether it had been zigzagging or not . " Regarding McVay 's conviction , Hashimoto wrote : 
 Our peoples have forgiven each other for that terrible war and its consequences . Perhaps it is time your peoples forgave Captain McVay for the humiliation of his unjust conviction . 
 Hashimoto died at age 91 on 25 October 2000 . Five days after his death , the reputation of Captain McVay was restored . 
 = Hard suction hose = 
 Hard suction hose ( alternatively , suction hose ) is a specific type of fire hose used in drafting operations , when a fire engine uses a vacuum to draw water from a portable water tank , pool , or other static water source . It is built to withstand vacuum , rather than pressure , abrasion , and heat . In the United States , it is standard equipment according to the National Fire Protection Association standards for fire engines . It is used in both structural and wildland firefighting throughout the world , and is made in various diameters and connection types . 
 = = Usage = = 
 Hard suction hose , also known as a suction hose , is a specific type of rigid fire hose used in drafting operations . When using this technique , the fire engine draws water for fire fighting from an unpressurized supply , such as a portable water tank , pool , or other static water source , instead of drawing water from a pressurized water supply , such as a fire hydrant . Under complete vacuum conditions , a pump would lift water 33 @.@ 9 feet ( 10 @.@ 3 m ) , however pumps on fire apparatus are not capable of producing a high vacuum . Due to this limitation and friction loss , fire services do not recommend attempting to lift water more than 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . 
 Hard suction hose may also be used to connect a fire engine to a hydrant . This practice is common in Australia , but woven jacket fire hose is normally used for this purpose in the United States . Using hard suction hose in this manner requires that the fire engine be positioned carefully for the limited flexibility of the hose , and may require multiple firefighters due to the weight and bulk of the hose section . In certain circumstances , it may be possible to use hard suction hose to draft from a hydrant with adequate water supply but a low flow rate . 
 These hoses are built to withstand vacuum , rather than water pressure , abrasion , and heat . They are , therefore , constructed differently from the standard fire hose and have different end fittings . In the United States , they are standard equipment according to the National Fire Protection Association standards for fire engines . Since hard suction hose cannot be folded , it is typically mounted on the side of a fire engine , often opposite ground ladders . Such hose is used in both structural and wildland firefighting throughout the world . 
 Hard suction hose can also be used to extend the range of a water tender 's dumping capability , if the fittings of the hard suction hose match those of the tender dumping water . This could be used to fill a portable dump tank not immediately adjacent to the water tender , from which another fire engine can draft . Since water movement during dumping relies on gravity , rather than mechanical pressurization , hard suction hose is useful for this task . 
 = = Characteristics and construction = = 
 Hard suction hose differs from standard fire hose in both its construction and usage : 
 It is rigid and generally scalloped . Often , such hose is manufactured using molded synthetic material ( such as PVC ) shaped into a series of rings . This shape allows the hose to be somewhat flexible , without allowing it to collapse in on itself under suction , as a normal , woven @-@ jacket fire hose would . 
 It uses suction gaskets . <unk> in standard fire hose ( " pressure gaskets " ) are designed to minimize the water leaking out between couplings . The gaskets connecting hard suction hose sections , pump , and strainer must instead prevent air from entering at the coupling , since that would spoil the vacuum and allow air into the pump intake . Large diameter ( 4 @-@ inch ( 10 cm ) or greater ) hard suction hose will typically use Storz fittings , which are genderless . 3 @-@ inch ( 7 @.@ 6 cm ) or smaller hard suction hose will typically use threaded fittings . In each case , the hard suction hose connection will match the fittings of the pump intake and supply hose , so that hard suction hose can be used in place of supply hose as appropriate . 
 It is short . Typically , hard suction hose comes in 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) lengths , while fire hose comes in 50 and 100 feet ( 15 and 30 m ) lengths . Since a fire engine 's pump only produces a partial vacuum , it is only recommended for lifting water 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) or less . For this reason , and because each junction is an opportunity for a crack or imperfect seal to spoil the vacuum , it is rare to see many sections of hard suction hose connected together . 
 It is not designed for use in fire streams . The airtight nature of hard suction hose , necessary for drafting , renders the hose unsuitable for the high pressure water flow needed to spray a pressurized stream of water on a fire . Thus , hard suction hose is tested for the ability to " prevent collapse under vacuum conditions " rather than its ability to function as an attack <unk> . 
 Hard suction hose predates steam or gas powered fire engines and has been available since at least 1888 , sometimes referred to as " spiral suction hose " . 
 = = Diameter = = 
 Hard suction hose comes in multiple sizes , from 2 to 6 inches ( 5 @.@ 1 to 15 @.@ 2 cm ) in diameter . Large diameter hose are carried on full @-@ size fire engines , but smaller diameters of hard suction hose can be carried on apparatus with smaller fire pump ratings , such as wildland fire engines . In the United States , NFPA 1901 requires engines to have hard suction hose that matches the engine 's pump rating . For example , an engine with a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 3 @,@ 800 l ) per minute pump is required to carry 5 @-@ inch ( 13 cm ) or larger hose , while a wildland fire engine will typically carry 2 @-@ to @-@ 2 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 5 @.@ 1 to 6 @.@ 4 cm ) hard suction hose . 
 The United Kingdom , has a standardised range of metric hose diameters : 7 , 9 , 12 @.@ 5 and 15 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 , 3 @.@ 5 , 4 @.@ 9 and 5 @.@ 9 in ) , with the two smallest diameters sometimes used twined to provide adequate flow rates . Within this range , the 7 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) hoses are fitted with " Instantaneous <unk> " ; the 12 @.@ 5 and 15 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 9 and 5 @.@ 9 in ) hoses have Storz couplings ; and the 9 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) hose comes in two types , one with " Instantaneous <unk> " and one with Storz fittings . Fire Service Manuals provide tables of maximum volumetric flow rates for a given pump pressure , hose diameter and total hose length . The use of these tables , is to facilitate the selection of suitable hoses , taking into account the frictional losses caused by transporting water through the strainer , hoses , pump and fire fighting nozzles , to draft water from source to the <unk> . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 When being used in a drafting operation from a pool , portable water tank , or other uncovered water source , the length of hard suction hose farthest from the pump is usually attached to a strainer , to keep foreign objects in the water from being pulled into and damaging the pump . If used in a pond , stream , or other body of water , an appropriate flotation device must be used to keep the strainer below the surface and above the bottom , so that neither mud nor air are sucked into the fire engine 's pump . When drafting from a solid @-@ bottomed tank or pool , a strainer can safely rest on the bottom without <unk> mud into the fire engine 's pump . 
