 The United Kingdom official guidance is to : 
 use ropes to take to the weight of the hose and the strainer , in order to avoid putting sideways loadings on the couplings ; 
 ensure that the strainer is a minimum of three strainer @-@ diameters below the water surface to prevent air cavitation ; 
 to support the hose with packing , where necessary , when it crosses a wall or other obstruction to prevent an air pocket being formed . 
 = HMS Adamant ( 1780 ) = 
 HMS Adamant was a 50 @-@ gun Portland @-@ class fourth rate warship of the British Royal Navy . She served during the American War of Independence , the French Revolutionary Wars , and the Napoleonic Wars in a career that spanned thirty years . 
 Built during the American War of Independence she spent the last three years of the war off the American coast , and saw action at the Battle of Cape Henry and at the Battle of the Chesapeake . The years of peace were spent either in the Caribbean or off Nova Scotia , before the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars saw her commissioned for service in the Leeward Islands and off the British coast . It was while serving in British waters that she became caught up in the mutiny at the Nore . As one of only two two @-@ decker ships to remain in action during the mutiny she had to maintain the Dutch blockade by creating the illusion of being part of a larger fleet , which she managed successfully . Adamant then went on to fight at the Battle of Camperdown , after which she moved to the English Channel , and then the Indian Ocean via the Cape of Good Hope . Here she took part in the destruction of the French commerce raider Preneuse , and in her later years captured a number of privateers . She became a receiving ship and flagship of a port admiral during the last years of the Napoleonic Wars , until being broken up in June 1814 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Adamant was one of eleven ships built to a 1767 design by John Williams , and one of five ordered between 1775 @-@ 6 . She was ordered from Peter Baker , of Liverpool , on 13 November 1776 , and laid down on 6 September 1777 . The ship was launched on 24 January 1780 , and completed between 13 June and 12 August 1780 at Plymouth . Her initial cost was £ <unk> , rising to £ <unk> when the cost of fitting her out was included . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = North America = = = 
 Adamant was commissioned in November 1779 under the command of Captain Gideon Johnstone , and sailed for North America on 13 August 1780 . She was with Vice @-@ Admiral Mariot Arbuthnot 's squadron at the Battle of Cape Henry on 16 March 1781 , and then at the Battle of the Chesapeake on 5 September 1781 . Johnstone was succeeded by Captain David Graves in February 1782 , while Adamant was still in North America , after which she returned to Britain as a convoy escort in December 1782 . The ship was then paid off in April 1783 and refitted for foreign service between May and September that year . Adamant recommissioned in June 1783 under Captain William Kelly , and on the completion of her refit , sailed to the Leeward Islands in November , where she spent the next three years as the flagship of Admiral Sir Richard Hughes . She was paid off again in September 1786 and underwent a great repair , followed by being fitted out as the flagship at Sheerness from August 1787 to May 1789 . Adamant was recommissioned in February 1789 by Captain David Knox , after which Admiral Hughes again hoisted his flag in her and sailed her to Nova Scotia in June . From January 1792 the ship was under Captain Charles Hope , until returning to Britain in June that year and being paid off . 
 = = = French Revolutionary Wars = = = 
 Adamant was at first fitted for reserve duty in July 1792 , but with the outbreak of war with Revolutionary France in April 1793 she was hurriedly recommissioned , at first under Captain William Bentinck and at some point in 1794 William Mitchell was her acting @-@ captain . From June 1794 she was under Captain Henry D 'Esterre Darby . Darby took Adamant back to the Leeward Islands in September 1794 , and by April 1796 Adamant was serving with George <unk> 's squadron . Captain Henry Warre took command in November 1796 , and was succeeded by Captain William Hotham on 11 January 1797 . 
 = = = Mutiny at the Nore , and Camperdown = = = 
 Adamant was based at the Nore , operating in the North Sea and blockading the Dutch fleet at the Texel with Admiral Adam Duncan 's fleet . In May 1797 mutiny broke out among the ships at the Nore , following on from one at Spithead earlier in the year . Of the two @-@ decker ships of the fleet , only the crews of Duncan 's flagship HMS Venerable , and Hotham 's crew aboard Adamant remained loyal . With only two ships available to blockade the Dutch , Duncan and Hotham took their ships out to sea , remaining in sight of the Dutch coast and for several weeks implied by false signals and manoeuvres , that the rest of the fleet was just over the horizon . Convinced by the impersonation that the blockade was still in force , the Dutch remained in port . Duncan and Hotham were later reinforced by the Russian squadron based at Harwich , and then by ships deserting the mutiny one by one . 
 Adamant then fought as part of Duncan 's fleet at the Battle of Camperdown on 11 October 1797 . The battle was a decisive victory for the British over the Dutch , led by Admiral Jan Willem de Winter , with Adamant escaping sustaining any casualties . Adamant was then attached to Sir Richard Strachan 's squadron patrolling off Le Havre , after which she and Hotham were sent with a convoy to the Cape of Good Hope in October 1798 . While operating in the Indian Ocean Adamant and the 74 @-@ gun HMS Tremendous , under Captain John Osborn , encountered the French commerce raider Preneuse , under Captain Jean @-@ Marthe @-@ Adrien l 'Hermite off Port Louis , Île de France on 11 December 1799 . In the ensuing Battle of Port Louis they chased her , forcing her to run ashore three miles from Port Louis , under the cover of French shore batteries . Hotham took Adamant in close , and tried to work up to the grounded frigate , coming under heavy fire from the batteries and the Preneuse as he did so . After a period of exchanging fire , the Adamant forced the French frigate to strike , and that evening three boats carrying men from Adamant and Tremendous approached with orders to destroy the French vessel . Despite coming under heavy fire from the batteries , they boarded the ship , captured the remaining French crew , including Captain l 'Hermite , and removed as much of their captives ' private property as they could . They then set fire to the Preneuse and returned to their ships without the loss of a single man . 
 In July 1800 , Curtis sent Adamant , Lancaster , Rattlesnake , and Euphrosyne to blockade Isle de France and Bourbon . They remained until October and during this period shared in the proceeds of several captures . 
 Spanish ship Edouard ( August ) . This vessel may actually have been a French ship of 300 tons ( bm ) , carrying naval stores , wine , brandy , and the like from Bordeaux to Isle de France . 
 French brig <unk> ( August ) . She had been sailing from Isle de France to Bourbon with a cargo of wine and goods from India . 
 Spanish brig Numero Sete ( August ) . Numero <unk> had been sailing from Montevideo to Isle de France with a cargo of soap , tallow , candles , and provisions . 
 French brig Mouche and part of the cargo and materials from the wreck of the brig Uranie ( September ) . 
 Hotham remained off South Africa and in the Indian Ocean until being recalled to Britain . Adamant escorted a convoy in September 1801 , arriving in Britain on 14 December 1801 . 
 = = Napoleonic Wars = = 
 Adamant spent between May 1803 and August 1804 under repair at Chatham Dockyard , before recommissioning in June under Captain George <unk> . On 13 April 1805 Adamant and HMS Inflexible captured the 4 @-@ gun privateer Alert , and in October 1805 command passed to Captain John Stiles . Stiles escorted a convoy of East Indiamen in 1806 , and on 6 May captured the Spanish 26 @-@ gun privateer Nuestra Señora de los Dolores off the Cape of Good Hope . On 17 June 1807 he added another prize to his total , capturing the 1 @-@ gun privateer Bueno Union while serving on the Jamaica station . Stiles was succeeded by Captain Micaiah <unk> in October 1807 , and Adamant returned to the Jamaica station the following year . By early 1809 she was back in Britain , and spent the period between April and July 1809 being fitted at Chatham for service as a receiving ship at Leith . She was recommissioned in May 1809 under Captain John Sykes and in August took part in the Scheldt operations . Captain Matthew Buckle took command in August 1810 , and remained Adamant 's captain for the next three years , which she spent as flagship of Rear @-@ Admiral Robert Otway , and as a receiving ship at Leith . As the Napoleonic Wars drew to a close the ship was laid up in ordinary at Sheerness in 1814 , and then broken up there in June 1814 . 
 = The Boy Who Knew Too Much ( The Simpsons ) = 
 " The Boy Who Knew Too Much " is the twentieth episode of The Simpsons ' fifth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 5 , 1994 . In the episode , Bart runs away from a pursuing Principal Skinner after attempting to skip school . During part of his escape , he witnesses an event in which Freddy Quimby , the spoiled nephew of Mayor Quimby , is accused of beating up a French waiter . Though the entire town believes that Freddy is guilty , Bart witnessed something else . At the trial , Bart testifies for Freddy , claiming that the waiter simply hurt himself because he was clumsy . Though attempting to deny the allegations , the waiter proves the truth in Bart 's words by falling out the window . 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Jeffrey Lynch . The new character Freddy , voiced by Dan Castellaneta , was given the same type of cheekbones and nose as Quimby to make them resemble each other . The episode features cultural references to films such as Westworld , Last Action Hero , and Free Willy , and the fictional characters Huckleberry Finn , Eddie , and Darwin . Actor Arnold Schwarzenegger and his wife Maria Shriver are also referenced in the episode . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 1 , and was the fifth @-@ highest rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On a sunny day in Springfield , Bart is not excited about going to school ; in part because he has to travel there on a prison bus , sit in new chairs that are very uncomfortable ; and even more so when Ms. Krabappel informs the class that they will spend two hours longer than usual at school that day ( due to Bart tampering with the clock ) . When arriving at school , Bart forges a note claiming a dentist appointment so that he can skip school , but Principal Skinner is not convinced . Skinner chases Bart through Springfield , and as he finally corners him , Bart jumps into a passing car . The car is driven by Freddy Quimby , nephew of Mayor Quimby , who is going to his birthday party at the Quimby Compound , which Bart crashes , claiming to be Mayor <unk> nephew " Bart @-@ Bart " . At lunch , Freddy is served chowder , but he ridicules the waiter for mispronouncing it in a French accent , even though Freddy himself mispronounces it with a Boston accent . He then follows the waiter into the kitchen , and apparently roughs him up . Bart , hiding under a table , secretly witnesses the true turn of events . Freddy is charged with the crime , presumably assault and battery , and is put on trial . 
 During the trial , despite Quimby 's attempts to rig the trial , the whole town seems to believe that Freddy is guilty due to his demeaning behavior and intolerance of how every person around him says " chowder " ; he even threatens to kill his own lawyer and the jury for it . Only Bart knows otherwise , and he confesses to Lisa that he 's the only one who knows that Freddy didn 't actually assault the waiter . He doesn 't want to testify , however , because the only way Bart can confirm that Freddy is innocent is by admitting that he skipped school , and thus would face punishment from Skinner . At the trial , the jury consists of Homer , Skinner , Hans Moleman , Ned Flanders , Helen Lovejoy , Jasper , Patty , Apu , and Akira . 
 Homer votes against the others because he wants to create a deadlock so that the jury is sequestered at a hotel with free room service and cable television . In court , Lisa convinces Bart to testify , and Bart tells everyone that Freddy did not assault the waiter ( he insulted him but after the waiter snarled back at him , Freddy seized an expensive bottle of champagne and left the kitchen without any violence ) but that the waiter injured himself in a series of clumsy actions . The offended waiter attempts to deny that he is clumsy , but in the process , he trips over a chair which causes him to fall out of the window into an open @-@ roof truck filled with rat traps , thus proving the point . Freddy is cleared of all charges , and Skinner , although praising Bart for being honest and coming forward , reminds him that this does not change the fact that he skipped school . 
 Despite Bart 's logical argument that his act of selflessness nullifies his misbehavior and that leaving him in peace would be the fairest thing to do , Skinner decides to follow through on his main instinct of being rule @-@ bound and inflexible , and gives Bart three months ' detention after school . At night Marge tries to talk to Homer about the things he missed at home but he continuously tries to fool her with his fake eyeglasses . However , Marge sees past this and Homer finally admits to missing being at home with her . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Boy Who Knew Too Much " was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Jeffrey Lynch . Executive producer David Mirkin " loved " that the whole situation of Bart seeing the waiter injure himself and not telling the truth ties together with the Homer plot in that it causes Homer to get jury duty and then only caring about going to the hotel . Mirkin thought it " worked really well " . The new character Freddy was voiced by The Simpsons cast member Dan Castellaneta , who also provides the voice of Mayor Quimby . Freddy was given the same type of cheekbones and nose as Quimby to make them resemble each other . When Bart is fleeing from Skinner , a shot of Bart running down a hill from the season four episode " Kamp Krusty " was re @-@ used . At the release of season five on DVD , a review described the image as possibly the " best the series has ever looked on DVD " . However , " The Boy Who Knew Too Much " was one of the few episodes in which technical issues still remained ; for example , Bart and Lisa 's image was fuzzy toward the beginning , and the episode featured for the last time " some of the hand drawn dimensions that would be eliminated once the show switched over to digital compositing and desktop cartoon creation " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 While riding on the prison bus , Bart looks out the window and has a dream that features him , Huckleberry Finn , and Abraham Lincoln on a raft going down a river in Springfield . Mirkin said Swartzwelder had always enjoyed putting presidents into his jokes , and this was only one of his many references to Lincoln . The scene of Skinner chasing Bart borrows heavily from the film Westworld , especially the scene with Skinner walking across the river . The Simpsons director David Silverman said Lynch and his fellow director Brad Bird took " a long , hard look " at Westworld to make sure the animation in the scenes resembled the film as much as possible . Mirkin said of the Westworld parody : " Again , to show you what a collaboration this is , we had the animators looking at Westworld and making sure of the animation , and then we made sure that [ The Simpsons composer ] Alf Clausen got the brilliant soundtrack from the film . He put in a lot of touches that really made the soundtracks identical . " Bart 's claim to film star and recurring character on The Simpsons Rainier Wolfcastle ( a parody of Arnold Schwarzenegger ) that his " last movie really sucked " and Chief Wiggum 's subsequent claim of " magic ticket , my ass " are in reference to Last Action Hero , a Schwarzenegger film featuring magic tickets that was panned by critics . Additionally , Wolfcastle 's wife is named Maria ; Schwarzenegger 's wife at the time was Maria Shriver . 
 The Simpsons creator Matt Groening appears in a cameo as the court illustrator in the Quimby trial . He can be seen signing his name on his sketch . During the trial , Bart quips " the system works . Just ask Claus von Bulow " . This is a reference to the British socialite who was accused of attempted murder , but was acquitted after two trials . Of the twelve jury members , Homer is the only one to vote " innocent " , angering the other eleven jurors ; the trial ends with Freddy being found innocent . This is a reference to the film 12 Angry Men . During the trial , Homer sings the jingle of the cat food company Meow Mix in his head . Jasper , a member of the jury , wants the trial to be over so that he can go home and watch television . He says that tonight on the science fiction series seaQuest DSV , Eddie , pet dog of Martin Crane on Frasier , will ride Darwin , the talking dolphin character from seaQuest DSV . Both series aired on NBC , which was the highest @-@ rated network in the United States for most of the 1990s . The new " director 's cut " of the 1993 film Free Willy that Homer watches at the deadlock hotel features Jesse being crushed by the whale Willy . Homer is later saddened by this , and says , " Oh , I don 't like this new director 's cut ! " Homer stays with Skinner at the hotel , and in a reference to the television series The Odd Couple , Skinner picks up a cigar butt from the floor with his umbrella while cleaning the room , just as Tony Randall does in the opening credits of that series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " The Boy Who Knew Too Much " finished fiftieth in the ratings for the week of May 2 – 8 , 1994 , with a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 1 , equivalent to approximately 9 @.@ 5 million viewing households . It was the fifth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Married ... with Children , Living Single , Melrose Place and Beverly Hills , 90210 . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , praised the episode for containing " a memorable guest character in the French waiter Monsieur <unk> , two great slapstick sequences involving the same , and displays Principal Skinner — pursuing Bart across the mountains like ' a non @-@ giving @-@ up school guy ' , and confessing that in some ways he 's " a small man ; a petty , small man " — in particularly fine form . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson thought Freddy Quimby " may well be the most unpleasant character to grace the series — in an amusing way , though Freddy ’ s edginess makes him less amusing than his uncle . It ’ s rather startling to see Skinner so rapidly resume his dislike of Bart after the last episode , though . It ’ s fun to see his superhuman powers in the pursuit of Bart , and the mystery aspects of the show help make it a very good one . Add to that Homer on jury duty for even more entertainment . " Patrick Bromley of DVD Verdict gave the episode a grade of A for its " excellent bits thrown together to make this one , joke for joke , one of the season 's funniest " . In 2007 , Patrick Enright of MSNBC called it his tenth favorite episode of the show . He said it was a perfect example of the show 's " hilarious randomness " because of jokes such as Homer singing the Meow Mix cat food jingle , and the scene in which Homer discovers that if the jury ’ s deadlocked , they will be sequestered in a luxury hotel . Homer justifies his decision to be the lone dissenting voice by saying , " I ’ m only doing what I think is right . I believe Freddy Quimby should walk out of here a free hotel ( when he should have said a ' free man ' ) . " 
 = The Music Machine = 
 The Music Machine was an American garage rock band formed in Los Angeles , California in 1966 . Fronted by chief songwriter and lead vocalist Sean Bonniwell , the band cultivated a characteristically dark and rebellious image reflected in an untamed musical approach . Sometimes it made use of distorted guitar lines and hallucinogenic organ parts , punctuated by Bonniwell 's distinctively throaty vocals . Although they only briefly managed to attain national chart success with two singles , the Music Machine is today considered by many critics to be a one of the groundbreaking acts of the 1960s . Their style is now recognized as a pioneering force in proto @-@ punk ; yet within a relatively short period of time , they began to employ more complex lyrical and instrumental arrangements that went beyond the typical garage band format . 
 In 1965 , the band came together as a folk rock trio known as the Raggamuffins , before expanding to the quintet that was later rechristened the Music Machine . The group was known for their style of dress , clothing themselves in all @-@ black attire . In 1966 , the Music Machine was signed to Original Sound , and released its first single " Talk Talk " in the latter half of the year , with it reaching the Top 20 of the Billboard Hot 100 . Their debut album ( Turn On ) The Music Machine and the moderate hit " The People In Me " followed . The band 's original lineup fragmented in late 1967 after managerial and financial disputes . Bonniwell reassembled the group under the name The Bonniwell Music Machine . In 1968 , a second album , The Bonniwell Music Machine appeared , but the group disbanded in early 1969 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Beginnings ( 1965 – 1966 ) = = = 
 The nucleus of the band was formed when Sean Bonniwell ( lead vocals , rhythm guitar ) took part in a jam session with Keith Olsen ( bass guitar ) and Ron Edgar ( drums ) – both of whom he met in the folk music circuit . Bonniwell , already a practiced " folky , " possessed prior experience as a vocalist with the Wayfarers . The traditional folk combo had already enjoyed some regional success : releasing three albums , and building on the experience of Bonniwell who insisted on the importance of rehearsal . As Bonniwell traveled and recorded with the group , he began penning some material that would later surface with the Music Machine . However , still influenced by acts now considered passé , the Wayfarers ' musical conservatism became stifling to Bonniwell who wanted to explore the type of harder , cutting @-@ edge stylistic possibilities that he eventually would find in rock . Prior to meeting , Olsen had previously performed in Gale Garnett 's backing band , and Edgar was a member of a bohemian folk quintet called the <unk> . With the <unk> , Edgar contributed to their unreleased third album that was originally intended for distribution on Epic Records , but the group disbanded before it could be released . 
 In 1965 , the three formed their own folk rock group , the Raggamuffins , and began performing in Los Angeles with a repertoire that saw the band embrace a more unorthodox style , and depart from their traditional roots . The group also recorded four songs that went unreleased until the 2000 album , Ignition , which represented the transitional phase before the band developed into the Music Machine . Bonniwell and Olsen were enthusiastically experimenting with musical textures while the band arranged strict rehearsal regimens in Bonniwell 's garage . The Raggamuffins purchased hardware for a homemade fuzz @-@ tone switch . From the onset Bonniwell ensured the group resonated like no other by instructing his bandmates to lower their instruments from the standard E note to D @-@ flat . As a result of the adjustment , the Raggamuffins were given a bottom @-@ heavy and ominous sound . In addition , the group began dressing noire , while sporting dyed @-@ black hair , and the trademark single leather glove that presented an eye @-@ catching and unified band image , which would later become influential with certain 1970s punk acts . 
 Auditions were held in early 1966 to expand the group , resulting in the recruitment of Mark Landon ( lead guitar ) and Doug Rhodes ( organ ) , previously a session musician for the Association . To reflect on the revamped line @-@ up , Bonniwell changed the band 's name to the Music Machine . Another purpose for coining the name , Bonniwell explained , was " I <unk> [ sic ] all the original material with musical <unk> [ sic ] . So we would be on stage for like an hour and ten minutes , wall @-@ to @-@ wall music just nonstop , which is why I called us the Music Machine " . The band built a name for itself with its performances in local clubs in Los Angeles . With Bonniwell as the de facto leader and creative force of the band , the Music Machine began to develop a blend of gritty 60s punk and psychedelia , and a repertoire encompassing Bonniwell 's self @-@ penned material along with some cover songs . The band 's sound was highlighted by the authoritative and versatile vocals provided by Bonniwell , with an energized technique that juxtaposed the styles of Mick Jagger and Sky Saxon . Unlike these two contemporaries , Bonniwell possessed unusually good intonation in long @-@ sustained passages , and the ability to breakdown phrases into a series of slow pulsations . The Music Machine 's artistic stance was also highlighted by Landon 's wiry guitar playing , Olsen 's reverberant bass , and Edgar 's cymbal @-@ punctuated drumming , which gave the band a harder @-@ edged sound than many of their contemporaries . 
 = = = Commercial success ( 1966 – 1967 ) = = = 
 Record producer Brian Ross just happened upon the Music Machine at Hollywood Legion Lanes , a bowling alley that was an early stomping ground for the group , and signed them to a recording contract with Original Sound . On July 30 , 1966 , the band entered RCA Studios in Los Angeles to record the Bonniwell originals " Talk Talk " and " Come on In " , which was initially going to be the A @-@ side for the group 's debut single . Bonniwell had composed " Talk Talk " a year prior to forming the band , and the studio time was marked by the Music Machine 's collective input aimed toward tightening the structure of its arrangements , including the two @-@ note fuzz guitar riffs and Edgar 's precise drumming technique . By virtue of the group 's dedication to rehearsal , recording sessions concluded with the Music Machine requiring only three takes to complete the two songs . Though the band was satisfied with the acetate to " Come on In " , the members were convinced " Talk Talk " would propel them into the national charts . 
 " Talk Talk " was released on September 10 , 1966 on Original Sound , and propelled to number 15 on the Billboard Hot 100 . It also peaked at number 21 on Cashbox and number 18 on Record World . The song 's relatively short time @-@ length — a mere one minute and 56 seconds — made " Talk Talk " a favorable stable on Top 40 radio and its competing underground FM stations . The Music Machine 's hit was arguably the most radical single to appear on mainstream broadcasting in 1966 , the phenomenon described by music historian Richie Unterberger as a " rally cry to social alienation with a mixture of sarcasm , rebellion , self @-@ pity , and paranoia " . Indeed , Bonniwell 's progressive lyrics and arrangements have been attributed to influencing the Doors and Iron Butterfly , as well as future punk bands . After the single 's release , the Music Machine embarked on a grueling three @-@ month tour across the U.S. , packaged with the Beach Boys , Question Mark and the Mysterians , and Clyde McPhatter . It concluded with the group receiving a poor response from the more conservative southern crowds , who criticized the band 's black outfits . Nonetheless , for the most part , their unified image served well for the Music Machine 's national recognition , especially as the group made numerous appearances on the television programs Where the Action Is , American Bandstand , and Shindig ! . 
 After their long national tour , the Music Machine returned to the studio to record their debut album ( Turn On ) The Music Machine . Much to the disapproval of Bonniwell , his original material had to compete with dispensable cover versions of " Cherry , Cherry " , " Taxman " , " See See Rider " , and " 96 Tears " , all chosen by their record label with an expectation that the well @-@ known songs would increase record sales . One interpretation voluntarily selected by the band was a slow , moody , fuzz @-@ laden arrangement of " Hey Joe " which bears a strong resemblance to Jimi Hendrix 's later version . Bonniwell first heard the folk standard in 1962 at a club in Hermosa Beach , and was convinced the tune 's tempo was too fast , as he unsuccessfully attempted to persuade the Wayfarers to record a slower version . He revisited the concept with altered lyrics after hearing Tim Rose 's regionally successful rendition in early 1966 . The throaty vocals , most evidently on " Hey Joe " , Bonniwell blames on recording " the Turn On album after a 30 @-@ day tour . Mark 's fingers were literally bleeding . I could hardly even speak , much less sing " . Despite the album 's shortcomings , ( Turn On ) The Music Machine managed to reach number 75 on the Billboard 200 . On January 21 , 1967 , a song taken from the album , " The People In Me " , was issued as the group 's second single but stalled at number 66 nationally after the band 's management angered radio executives for initially making the song exclusively available to a rival station . 
 = = = The Bonniwell Music Machine ( 1967 – 1969 ) = = = 
 Immediately after ( Turn On ) The Music Machine was released , the band left for another U.S. tour , despite pleas by the group to arrange an appearance at the Monterey Pop Festival . In the small off @-@ periods in their hard @-@ pressed schedule , the Music Machine demoed a new batch of Bonniwell originals at RCA Studios in New York City and Cosimo Matassa 's facility in New Orleans , before polishing the tunes back in Los Angeles . From the sessions emerged the group 's third single " Double Yellow Line " , which was released in April 1967 , and bubbled under the Billboard Hot 100 at number 111 . The subsequent release , " Eagle Never Hunts the Fly " failed to chart , but is often described as Bonniwell 's tour de force — a tune Ross praised as " sonically compelling works and a lot to listen to , for the time . It was the kind of thing you just didn ’ t hear , you almost worried about getting those sounds onto a 45 " . 
 In May 1967 , the original lineup recorded together for the final time , completing " Astrologically Incompatible " , " Talk Me Down " , and " The Day Today " . One problem that lead to the band 's first breakup was the Music Machine name was actually owned by Ross , as a part of their production deal , awarding the group with little to no royalties . Leaving Bonniwell to carry on the project , Olsen , Edgar , and Rhodes went on to join the Millennium , a sunshine pop group conceived by singer @-@ songwriter Curt Boettcher and Olsen . The Millennium recorded the album Begin in 1968 before disbanding . The three former members also took part in Boettcher 's next production , the studio group Sagittarius , releasing Present Tense , coupled with the moderately successful single " My World Fell Down " , before Edgar and Rhodes departed . Olsen stayed on board to record Sagittarius ' second album , The Blue Marble , and subsequently forged a successful career as a record producer in the 1970s . 
 Undeterred , Bonniwell successfully negotiated his recording contract with Original Sound be transferred to Warner Bros. Records , in hopes of finding a greater degree of independence . The Music Machine 's spell with Original Sound was drawing to a conclusion , though the company did release " Hey Joe " as a single in 1968 in an attempt to cash @-@ in on Hendrix 's success with the song . There was also the Bonniwell solo project in association with producer Paul Buff that resulted in the rare " Nothing Is Too Good for My Car " single being put out under the name the Friendly Torpedoes . Writer Greg Russo , who composed the liner notes for the single 's remastered release , explains the side @-@ project was initiated during a confusing transitional phase for Bonniwell that also generated the tune " Citizen Fear " , which did not receive distribution until the Ignition album in 2000 . Free from company pressure , Bonniwell formed a new band , rechristened The Bonniwell Music Machine , with session musicians Ed Jones on bass guitar , Harry Garfield on organ , Alan Wisdom on lead guitar , and Jerry Harris on drums . 
 In March 1967 , Bonniwell and Ross ushered in the new lineup at United Western Recorders to record the second album The Bonniwell Music Machine . The recording and mixing process was painstakingly masterminded almost solely by Bonniwell , who was appreciative of his new bandmates ' efforts to develop the album 's concept , but disillusioned by the project 's lack of cohesion . He further explains that the " Warner Brothers album has such an eclectic approach ; each track is ( was ) a singular , studio invention . Not only was my songwriting divergent , but my approach to recording was exploratory as well " . Six of the album 's tracks were holdovers from the first lineup 's sessions at Cosimo Matassa 's studio and RCA Studios . This resulted in a hodgepodge of musical styles , including exploratory approaches toward psychedelia and soft rock . On February 10 , 1968 , The Bonniwell Music Machine was released with little commercial success . <unk> , the Bonniwell Music Machine was largely forgotten by the general public and the second lineup fragmented in July 1968 . 
 = = = Disbandment and aftermath = = = 
 One final version of the Bonniwell Music Machine was assembled with a revolving door of musicians . Two more singles were released on the Warner Bros. label with little notice , before " Advice and Consent " , the group 's final single , was distributed on Bell Records in March 1969 . Disenchanted by the music industry and having to tour against imitation Music Machine groups , Bonniwell gave up the rights to the band 's name and signed on to Capitol Records as a solo artist . Under the name T.S. Bonniwell , he recorded the album Close , which saw a poetically @-@ inclined Bonniwell explore string and orchestral arrangements . Following the album 's release , Bonniwell departed on what he called his " westernized guru era " — studying eastern mysticism and practicing meditation and vegetarianism . 
 The band was all but forgotten after their dissolution , but the Music Machine and their music experienced a revival of interest in the late @-@ 1980s . It began with Rhino Records featuring tracks on the Nuggets compilation albums Nuggets Volume 1 : The Hits and Nuggets , Volume 2 : Punk , before releasing the album The Best of the Music Machine in 1984 . Other compilations such as Beyond the Garage , The Very Best of the Music Machine , and Ignition have added to the Music Machine 's return to the public 's interest . In addition , " Talk Talk " and " Double Yellow Line " appear on the 1998 expanded box @-@ set of Nuggets : Original Artyfacts from the First Psychedelic Era , 1965 – 1968 . 
 In 2000 , Bonniwell published his autobiography Beyond the Garage , which recalled his experiences with the Music Machine and his life after the group 's disbandment . Aside from a few live performances with the <unk> and a guest appearance on their 2006 album , Bonniwell never returned to an active music career , though he claimed to have penned over 300 songs after his tenure with the Music Machine . On December 20 , 2011 , Bonniwell died of lung cancer at a medical center in Visalia , California ; he was 71 years @-@ old . Drummer Ronald " Ron " Edgar died on February 23 , 2015 at the age of 68 . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 ( Turn On ) The Music Machine ( 1966 ) 
 The Bonniwell Music Machine ( 1968 ) 
 Extended plays 
 Talk Talk ( 1967 ) 
 Compilation albums 
 The Best of the Music Machine ( 1984 ) 
 The Music Machine ( 1994 ) 
 Beyond the Garage ( 1995 ) 
 Rock ' N ' Roll Hits ( 1997 ) 
 Turn On : The Best of the Music Machine ( 1999 ) 
 Ignition ( 2000 ) 
 The Ultimate Turn On ( 2006 ) 
 Rarities , Vol . 1 : Last Singles & Demos ( 2014 ) 
 Rarities , Vol . 2 : Early Mixes & Rehearsals ( 2014 ) 
 Re @-@ Ignition ( 2015 ) 
 Singles 
 " Talk Talk " b / w " Come on In " ( 1966 ) 
 " The People In Me " b / w " Masculine Intuition " ( 1967 ) 
 " Double Yellow Line " b / w " Absolutely Positively " ( 1967 ) 
 " The Eagle Never Hunts the Fly " b / w " I 've Loved You " ( 1967 ) 
 " Hey Joe " b / w " Taxman " ( 1967 ) 
 " <unk> and Consent " b / w " Mother Nature , Father Earth " ( 1969 ) 
 As The Bonniwell Music Machine 
 " Bottom of the Soul " b / w " Astrologically Incompatible " ( 1967 ) 
 " Me , Myself and I " b / w " Soul Love " ( 1968 ) 
 " Tin Can Beach " b / w " Time Out for a Daydream " ( 1968 ) 
 " You 'll Love Me Again " b / w " To the Light " ( 1968 ) 
 " Point of No Return " b / w " King Mixer " ( 1997 ) 
 Other 
 " Nothing 's Too Good for My Car " b / w " So Long Ago " ( 1968 , as the Friendly <unk> ) 
 = CSS Missouri = 
 CSS Missouri was a Confederate States Navy casemate ironclad paddle steamer deployed on the Red River during the American Civil War . For most of the war she was trapped in the Shreveport , Louisiana area by low water on the Red River . The ship was surrendered in June 1865 to the United States Navy and sold in November . 
 = = Description = = 
 Missouri was 183 feet ( 55 @.@ 8 m ) long overall , had a beam of 53 feet 8 inches ( 16 @.@ 4 m ) and a draft of 8 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 6 m ) . Her casemate extended for most of the length of the ship and was 130 feet 6 inches ( 39 @.@ 8 m ) long . It partially enclosed her 22 @-@ foot @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 6 @.@ 9 m ) diameter center paddle wheel in a recess at the aft end of the casemate ; the upper 8 feet 4 inches ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) of the paddle wheel protruded above the casemate and was totally unprotected . The stern wheel was powered by two steam engines taken from the steamboat Grand Era ; four boilers provided steam to the engines and were connected to a single funnel . The ship had a maximum speed of 6 miles per hour ( 5 @.@ 2 kn ) . 
 Missouri 's armor consisted of railroad " T @-@ rails " , laid alternately with the crowns up and down . They were spiked to the backing of 23 @-@ inch ( 580 mm ) of yellow pine , but not closely together enough to give them a solid surface . On the sides of the ship , they were laid diagonally , but were vertical on the bow and stern faces of the casemate . The armor extended approximately 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) below the waterline . The casemate was sloped at an angle of 30 ° . The deck fore and aft of the casemate was also protected by " T @-@ rails " . At the forward end of the casemate was a pilothouse that was raised 19 inches ( 480 mm ) above the deck . She was built of green timber , caulked with cotton and leaked like a sieve . Despite her three rudders , her stern wheel made her difficult to steer . 
 The casemate had eight gun ports , two in the bow face and three on each side , although only three guns were mounted in the ship . A smoothbore 11 @-@ inch ( 279 mm ) Dahlgren pivot gun was mounted in the starboard forward position . It could fire out of the starboard bow port or the forward starboard broadside port . It weighed approximately 16 @,@ 000 pounds ( 7 @,@ 300 kg ) and could fire a 136 @-@ pound ( 61 @.@ 7 kg ) shell up to a range of 3 @,@ 650 yards ( 3 @,@ 340 m ) at an elevation of 15 ° . An old 32 @-@ pounder ( 14 @.@ 5 kg ) siege gun was in the equivalent position on the port side of the ship . The characteristics of this gun cannot be reliably determined because the United States produced a multitude of 32 @-@ pounder guns before the Civil War , but none of them were designated as siege guns . The third gun was a smoothbore 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) Dahlgren pivot gun that could fire out of either of the two aft broadside gun ports . It weighed approximately 9 @,@ 200 pounds ( 4 @,@ 200 kg ) and could fire a 72 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 32 @.@ 9 kg ) shell up to a range of 3 @,@ 357 yards ( 3 @,@ 070 m ) at an elevation of 15 ° . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 The Confederate Navy Department authorized the construction of one or more ironclad warships at Shreveport on 3 October 1862 and Lieutenant Jonathan H. Carter signed a contract for two ships on 1 November . The keel of the first ship was laid the following month and she was launched on 14 April 1863 . The ship was commissioned on 12 September 1863 with the name of Missouri , after the high water season on the Red River had ended . Lieutenant Commander Charles Fauntleroy was appointed as her captain , although he told Lieutenant Carter that " he hoped the damned boat would sink " and that he " never intended to serve on her if he could help it " . The low water prevented Missouri from playing any part in the Red River Campaign of early 1864 . In September , Lieutenant Carter commanded an unsuccessful attempt to seize the gunboat USS Rattler using men from the crews of Missouri and CSS Webb . 
 In March 1865 , the river began to rise and Missouri was able to leave the Shreveport area for the first time . She reached Alexandria , Louisiana on 8 April and anchored where she could defend the town . Lieutenant Carter surrendered the ship to Union forces on 3 June , the last Confederate ironclad to surrender . After her armor was removed , Missouri was sold at public auction on 29 November . 
 = Letters of Transit = 
 " Letters of Transit " is the nineteenth episode of the fourth season of the Fox science @-@ fiction drama television series , Fringe , and the series ' 84th episode overall . It is set in the future , where the Observers have taken control of human society . In 2036 , two FBI agents fight to free their world of the Observers by finding the amber @-@ encased bodies of the original Fringe team . The episode 's premise is subsequently built upon as the key setting of the show 's fifth and final season . 
 The episode was co @-@ written by showrunners J.H. Wyman and Jeff Pinkner , and consulting producer Akiva Goldsman . Executive producer Joe Chappelle served as director . While some critics wondered how the episode related to the overall series , actor John Noble has explained that " Letters of Transit " established the template for the fifth season . It featured guest appearances by actress Georgina Haig and Lost veteran Henry Ian Cusick . 
 The episode first aired on April 20 , 2012 in the United States , and was watched by an estimated 3 @.@ 03 million viewers . Television critics praised the riskiness of the episode premise and the actors ' performances while also expressing doubt about its place during the season . The episode has been nominated for the 2013 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation ( Short Form ) 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins with on @-@ screen text describing how , in 2015 , the Observers , no longer content with observing history , took over human society . They killed many in an event called " The Purge " , and transformed the remaining into a totalitarian culture ; though members of the Fringe division attempted to fight the takeover , they were easily defeated , and the remaining Fringe division were allowed to remain to police the human " Natives " . The Observers are aided by the ability to read most human minds , able to sense motives before they can be acted on . 
 In 2036 , FBI Agents Simon Foster ( Henry Ian Cusick ) and Henrietta ' Etta ' Bishop ( Georgina Haig ) recover the body of Walter Bishop ( John Noble ) , Walter having purposefully encased himself and his team in amber shortly after the Observer takeover . Though they are able to release him from the amber , they find that he has suffered memory damage and lacks the mental capacity to build a strange device of his own design . Simon and Etta talk to Nina Sharp ( Blair Brown ) , learning that Walter had William Bell remove a piece of his brain some time in the past , which she postulates could be used to heal Walter 's brain now . However , the piece is still in storage in the old Massive Dynamic facility on the main island of New York City , tightly controlled by Observers who can read their thoughts , making its recovery difficult . They are able to make it to the vault in Massive Dynamic , in part due to the inability of the Observers to read Etta 's mind , and successfully restore Walter 's memories . They are , however , unaware that they have alerted Fringe division — still led by Agent Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) — and the Observers to their presence ; a coordinated team , instructed to shoot on sight , is dispatched . 
 A more coherent Walter explains that , according to the Observer September , the Observers made the Earth uninhabitable by <unk> , and so traveled back in time to take over the planet themselves . As forces corner the three , Walter sets up an antimatter device to wipe out the Massive Dynamic building and their pursuers . Walter is able to lead Simon and Etta to where Peter Bishop ( Joshua Jackson ) , Astrid Farnsworth ( Jasika Nicole ) and William Bell have been encased in amber . They are able to free Astrid , but as Fringe forces approach they find the equipment to free the others has malfunctioned . Simon sacrifices himself to the amber in order to push Peter free , while Walter severs Bell 's hand for an unknown purpose . They escape the area as Broyles and his team arrive , though Broyles finds a piece of licorice , a telltale sign of Walter 's presence . As the group travels away from the city , Walter , in an ominous manner , reminds Astrid of what Bell did to Olivia ( Anna Torv ) . Peter then comes to recognize Etta as his daughter , Henrietta , wearing a fired bullet as a necklace . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Letters of Transit " was co @-@ written by consulting producer Akiva Goldsman and executive producers / co @-@ showrunners Jeff Pinkner and J.H. Wyman . Although it was previously reported Goldsman would be directing , executive producer Joe Chappelle ultimately directed the installment . The Observers are prominently featured in the episode , a mythos that has been visible since the pilot . Previously a mysterious background presence , according to Noble , they have now become " incredibly centrally important " to the series ' storyline . " Letters of Transit " was written and shot before the series ' renewal for a fifth season , but it was always envisioned as a genesis of the season . During this time , Wyman confirmed that a majority of the fifth season would be set in 2036 , following the events of this episode , a time period depicting the Observers as oppressors rather than as passive witnesses . 
 Leading up to its broadcast , journalists noted that the nineteenth episode of each season of Fringe has generally been its " craziest hour " , and anticipated that " Letters of Transit " would be similarly strange . The Fox network promoted the episode with a series of four teaser videos , each containing a clue to a fifth video revealing the special opening credits for this episode . The episode contained a new opening credit sequence that helped set the tone , with " fringe " terms including community , joy , imagination , and free will . 
 Actor Henry Ian Cusick and actress Georgina Haig guest starred in the episode as a pair of Federal agents . Cusick had worked with co @-@ creator J.J. Abrams and executive producer Pinkner on the ABC series , Lost . Cusick stated that most of his scenes were filmed with Haig and John Noble ( Walter Bishop ) , and that the story leaves a possibility for the return of their characters in the future . Noble found it unusual to film an episode that did not involve the lead actors . He explained , " That was Walter with two really big , important guest stars , Henry Ian Cusick and Georgina Haig . It felt , to me , like it was a really strong episode . The two guest actors did a fantastic job , which is not easy to do , to step into an established company . It is out of the box and is somewhere else completely . I think that the fans will love it . Some fans of this type of material will like it anyway because Henry Ian Cusick was such a big star in Lost , but also , this new girl is just full of wonderful energy , too . " 
 According to Noble , " Letters of Transit " features his ninth version of Walter Bishop at that point in the series . He remarked , " It ’ s a lot of fun as an actor because it keeps me trying to refine and to finish small parts [ of Walter ] . " In a June 2012 interview with Entertainment Weekly , Noble called " Letters of Transit " one of his favorites of the series , explaining that he " thought that was really a beautiful looking episode , beautifully told . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Given guest star Henry Ian Cusick 's prominence in Lost , " Letters of Transit " refers to both " The Purge " and " natives " , two key elements of that show . The episode also contains references to The Prisoner , where Walter exclaims " I am not a number ! I am a free man ! " The episode also references Star Wars when Walter states " these are not the droids you ’ re looking for " and " Move along " . Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly believed these helped set the tone of the episode : " Fringe in 2036 was The Village writ global and under Imperial rule . " Matt Roush of TV Guide noted that the episode title , " Letters of Transit " , alludes to a key element of the film Casablanca . The episode opens with scrolling text that has been compared to the start of the film Blade Runner . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Letters of Transit " first aired in the United States on April 20 , 2012 . An estimated 3 @.@ 03 million viewers watched the episode . It earned a 1 @.@ 0 ratings share among adults 18 – 49 , a 10 percent increase from the series low of the previous week . Fringe finished third in its timeslot behind NBC 's Grimm and ABC 's Primetime : What Would You Do ? . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 IGN 's Ramsey Isler gave the episode a mixed review , noting that " its concept is intriguing , bold , and extremely risky . I 'm just not sure if it works . It 's such a drastic change of scenery and tone it 's hard to say whether this is genius or madness . " Isler observed that he would have " absolutely loved " the episode if he had been " given appropriate context through a suitable setup ... But the approach we got feels an awful lot like a gimmick , and this show does not need to gamble with gimmicks at this point . " Isler did find positive elements of the episode however , and rated it 8 out of 10 , an indication of a " great " episode . He praised Walter 's return " to a much more confident , focused man who 's a bit scary in his determination and resolve , " as well as the events that followed . Isler concluded that " the core ideas are really good , but the way the new concepts were introduced seems haphazard , and a huge gamble that could turn off all but the most hardcore viewers . " 
 Like Isler , Entertainment Weekly columnist Ken Tucker enjoyed Walter 's transition " from happy , babbling , ' I love LSD ! ' licorice @-@ licking Walter to a Walter who yelled at the others when escaping " , calling it " one of the night 's great pleasures . " Tucker 's Entertainment Weekly colleague Jeff Jensen commented that he was able to " roll " with some of the less plausible plot details ( such as a still existing Massive Dynamic ) out of praise for guest stars Cusick and Haig , believing they " worked well in this world . " Jensen also reserved attention for Noble 's scenes , calling them variously " frisky and poignant " , " hilarious " , and " touching . " Lastly , Jensen was happy to find more details about the Observers , but wondered at the lack of the parallel universe 's mention . MTV 's Alex Zalben was more critical . He wondered how the episode fit into the rest of the season , and wrote " It ’ s a curious step , and could likely drive even more viewers away from a show that can ’ t afford to lose them . " While disliking the " clunky , <unk> " dialogue , Zalben still commented that , " for a die hard <unk> fan like myself , this episode was crack . Huge emotion , crazy science , and epic set pieces . The end of the episode had me dying to watch the next one , even if it isn ’ t a direct continuation . That ’ s good television right there . " 
 Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly named " Letters of Transit " the seventeenth best episode of the series , stating " What at first seemed to be one of Fringe 's nutty number 19s turned out to be the episode that helped earn the series a fifth and final year . Of course , some may now question the merits of ringing out the series with a season @-@ long story set entirely in this future dystopia ruled by oppressive Observers . But the single episode that introduced this premise was a cool jolt that opened a new front of Fringe mythology and gave us a character that would have a lasting impact , Etta . " The episode has been nominated for the 2013 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation ( Short Form ) . 
 = = Olivia Dunham = = 
 Of the 100 episodes in the five seasons , this is the only one where Olivia Dunham does not appear . 
 = Finnhorse = 
 The Finnhorse or Finnish Horse ( Finnish : <unk> , literally " horse of Finland " ; nickname : <unk> , or Swedish : <unk> <unk> , literally " <unk> cold @-@ blood " ) is a horse breed with both riding horse and draught horse influences and characteristics , and is the only breed developed fully in Finland . In English it is sometimes called the Finnish Universal , as the Finns consider the breed capable of fulfilling all of Finland 's horse needs , including agricultural and forestry work , harness racing , and riding . In 2007 , the breed was declared the official national horse breed of Finland . 
 The Finnhorse is claimed to be among the fastest and most versatile " coldblood " breeds in the world . In Finland , the term " universal horse " is used to describe the Finnhorse and breeds such as the Fjord horse that are relatively small with a body type that is heavy for a riding horse but light for a draught . There are four separate sections within the Finnhorse stud book , each with different goals : to develop a heavier working horse , a lighter trotter type , a versatile riding horse , and a proportionally smaller pony @-@ sized animal . The combined breed standard for all four sections defines the breed as a strong , versatile horse with pleasant disposition . The average height of the breed is 15 @.@ 1 hands ( 61 inches , 155 cm ) , and the most typical colour is chestnut , often with white markings and a flaxen mane and tail . 
 The exact origins of the early Finnish horse are currently not known . Because the Finnhorse breed and its progenitors were the only horses in Finland for centuries , the history of horses in Finland parallels the history of the Finnhorse itself . The documented history of the distinct breed begins at the turn of the 13th century . Outside influences by many light and warmblood breeds were recorded beginning in the 16th century , making the breed larger and more usable . An official Finnhorse studbook was founded in 1907 , producing purebred animals in significant numbers for many years . Due to mechanisation of agriculture and the dismantling of Finnish horse cavalry in the later half of the 20th century , the Finnhorse population plummeted from a high of just over 400 @,@ 000 animals in the 1950s to a low of 14 @,@ 100 in 1987 . However , the breed managed to survive thanks to its popularity for harness racing and its versatility as a mount . 
 = = Breed characteristics = = 
 The breed standard defines the Finnhorse as a multi @-@ purpose horse of average height , and sturdy conformation . The ideal Finnhorse is easy @-@ to @-@ handle , versatile , and combines strength , agility , speed and endurance . Finnhorses are lively , with both a reliable and alert temperament . The breed standard encourages a horse that is " honest and sincere " ; eager to cooperate with humans , obedient , and willing to work . They are hardy with good endurance , robust health , and are generally long @-@ lived . The breed standard describes the head of a Finnhorse as dry and the profile straight , not long or convex , with well @-@ spaced , short ears . The neck should be well @-@ shaped and not underslung or ewe @-@ necked ; the body should be on the long side , but rounded and proportionate ; and the croup should neither be level nor with a too @-@ high connection to the tail . Finnhorses are strongly muscled , with good bone , sturdy " dry " legs , and strong hooves . 
 Finnhorses typically have thick manes and tails , and the legs have light feathering . The average height is 15 @.@ 1 hands ( 61 inches , 155 cm ) . Pony @-@ sized Finnhorses — under 14 @.@ 2 hands ( 58 inches , 147 cm ) — exist as well , and are licensed for breeding in a separate section of the official stud book . Finnhorses have good gaits that are regular with elasticity , and relatively low , steady action . They are fast for a <unk> breed , known as good trotting horses and used for harness racing . 
 In addition to these general traits , there are four separate breed sections in the Finnhorse studbook , and a Finnhorse 's overall conformation should be typical of the section in which it is recorded , though some horses are registered in multiple sections . 
 = = = Colours = = = 
 Over 90 percent of Finnhorses today are chestnut . <unk> manes and tails as well as white markings on the face and legs are common in the breed . As of 2007 , only a minority of Finnhorses are any color other than chestnut : 6 percent are bay and 1 @.@ 2 percent black . <unk> , <unk> , buckskins and silver <unk> exist in smaller numbers . The genes for other cream dilutions and rabicano are present in the gene pool . A distinctive sabino , non @-@ SB1 pattern is moderately common , but is usually minimally expressed due to the selective colour breeding of the 20th century . A single white horse , registered as pinto and deemed " sabino @-@ white , " has been recorded in the modern history of the breed . The number of non @-@ chestnuts is increasing due to dedicated breeding for other colours , and as of 2009 , a few dozen black and grey Finnhorses exist . SW1 , one of the genes responsible for the splashed white markings , has been found in a number of individuals by genetic testing . 
 Through the 18th and 19th centuries , chestnut in various shades was the prevailing colour of Finnish horses , making up about 40 @-@ 50 percent of the breed , and bays , blacks and greys existed in much greater numbers than today : 34 percent were bay , 16 percent black , and the remaining 3 percent were grey , palomino or spotted . Wide blazes and high leg markings were rare , unlike today ; bold markings became common only in the 20th century . 
 The change came about through selective breeding . At the turn of the 20th century , when a nationalistic spirit was high , the Finnhorse began to be considered a symbol of Finland , and purebreeding became very popular . In addition , chestnut colour was officially chosen as an official aim for breeding as the " utmost original " colour of the Finnhorse , and named the " Hippos colour " after <unk> Hippos , the name of the recently founded Finnish national horse breeding association that is now Suomen Hippos . Any colours other than chestnut were considered evidence of " foreign " blood , and the goal was to make the Finnhorse an all @-@ chestnut breed . The breeding regulation of 1909 stated that no stallion " with coat of white , grey , palomino or spotted " could be accepted into the stud book . The popularity of bay and black Finnhorses dropped as well , and at least one mare was removed from the stud book solely because of her bay colour . Selective breeding combined with the export of horses in colours popular in neighbouring countries , especially bays into Sweden , and made chestnut the prevailing colour . In the earliest section of the first Finnhorse studbook , 105 of the stallions listed were chestnut and only 8 were bay . There were stallions of other colours as well , but they were not included in the first book . At one point , chestnuts made up more than 96 percent of the breed . 
 Because of the vigorous colour breeding for chestnut in the early 20th century , combined with a genetic bottleneck resulting from the low number of Finnhorses that existed in the 1980s , colours such as grey and cream dilutions were preserved only by a few minor breeders . In the 1980s there were fewer than ten grey and palomino Finnhorses combined . All Finnhorse carriers of the cream gene today descend from a single maternal line , founded by the palomino mare <unk> ( literally , " Palomino " ) who lived in the 1920s . While both cream dilution and black are rare , there are some known smoky blacks in the breed , the first of which was a filly foaled in 2009 , identified as smoky black and confirmed as such by a DNA test in 2010 . The filly is considered " if not the first ever , at least the first in a long long time . " In April 2010 , a filly appearing to be a double cream dilute was born , sired by a buckskin and out of a palomino . She was blue @-@ eyed and had " pink skin and very pale coat " , and was later officially recognised as a double cream dilute . 
 The roan colour is rare , and today is passed on via a single dam line that descends from the strawberry roan mare Sonja , foaled in 1936 . As of 2010 , only six confirmed roan Finnhorses exist , all descendants of a 1987 mare , Taika @-@ <unk> , great @-@ great @-@ granddaughter of Sonja . The second @-@ to @-@ last roan line died out with the passing of the 1981 stallion Jesper Jr , who had no offspring . Grey exists in one dam line , descending from mare <unk> , especially through her maternal grandson E.V. <unk> 1726 @-@ <unk> , an award @-@ winning working section stallion . The second last grey line died in 2010 with the 1988 mare <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> , who had no grey offspring . 
 The silver dapple gene survived for two reasons . First , it only affects black colour and therefore is " masked " in chestnuts . Second , when it does act on black and bay base coat colors , it produces a chestnut @-@ like phenotype . Silver dapple bays were long registered as " cinnamon chestnuts " , and silver dapple blacks as " flaxen @-@ maned dark chestnuts " . 
 = = Breed sections = = 
 The Finnhorse stud book was created in 1907 . Today it has four sections : the Working section ( T ; draught type ) , Trotter section ( J ) , Riding section ( R ) and Pony @-@ sized section ( P ) In 1924 , the first split in the stud book was created , with the working or draught type ( Finnish : <unk> ) horses in one section , and the " all @-@ around " or " universal " lighter trotting horses in another . In 1965 , this all @-@ around section was renamed the trotter section . Then , in 1971 , this lighter horse section was divided into three parts : the trotter ( Finnish : <unk> ) , riding ( Finnish : <unk> ) and pony @-@ sized ( Finnish : <unk> ) types . Today , the majority of Finnhorses are of trotter type . 
 = = = Draught type = = = 
 The working or draught type is the oldest of the Finnhorse types , and has had its own separate breeding section since the studbook was first split in 1924 . Though the oldest of the Finnhorse types , it is rare today , with a total of only about 1 @,@ 000 horses registered in the working section as of 2004 . Draught @-@ type Finnhorses are heavier and have a longer body than horses of the trotter and riding types . Though relatively small compared to other draught breeds , Finnhorses have considerable pulling power and can pull very heavy loads because of the breed 's good pulling technique , with powerful take @-@ off and a low , efficient body stature during the actual pulling . The Finnish Draught type is , pound for pound , stronger than many larger draught breeds . An average horse in draught work is capable of pulling about 80 percent of its own weight , while a Finnhorse can pull as much as 110 percent . In work horse competitions , the best Finnhorses can achieve even higher results , pulling more than 200 percent of their own body weight . 
 A draught @-@ type horse must pass two tests in the studbook evaluation : a walking test and either a pulling or a general drivability test . The points given for the horse 's performance in these tests are added to those given for its temperament and gaits , resulting in the final workability score . The horse is also given a score for its conformation . In addition to achieving the minimum scores for both workability and conformation , stallions accepted for the working @-@ horse section of the stud book are required to trot 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 1 @,@ 100 yd ) in less than 2 minutes and 30 seconds . 
 = = = Trotter type = = = 
 The trotter type is the lightest Finnhorse . A trotter section horse should be of light conformation yet muscular , with a relatively long body and long legs . At the studbook evaluation , a trotter @-@ type horse must meet the standards in racing results and / or in breeding value index as decreed by Suomen Hippos . A trotter 's disposition is evaluated during the drivability test . However , type is not part of the studbook evaluation standard for trotters . 
 The trotter type has existed as a separate breeding section since 1965 , when the " universal horse " section of the Finnhorse studbook was renamed and replaced by the trotter section . While the total number of Finnhorses dropped during the 20th century , the popularity of harness racing turned Finnhorse <unk> around from the historical lows of the 1970s and 1980s . Today , approximately 2 000 Finnhorses are in training and 3 000 compete in harness racing . The official Finnhorse racing championship <unk> began in 1924 and has been held annually ever since , attracting tens of thousands of spectators . 
 The Finnhorse is slower to mature than lighter breeds , and thus usually enters harness racing competition at the age of four . However , its build withstands competition better than light trotters , and the breed 's effective competition career can be very long . The Finnish harness racing bylaws allow Finnhorses to be raced from ages 3 to 16 . 
 For a " coldblood " breed , the Finnhorse is quite fast . The official Finnish coldblood record from 2010 is <unk> , was long held by the quintuple Finnhorse racing champion stallion <unk> . , but was finally broken by <unk> <unk> in 2015 ( <unk> ) The coldblood horse world record in harness racing was long held by Finnhorses , until in 2005 the record was broken by <unk> , a Scandinavian coldblood trotter from Sweden . As of 2010 , the official Finnish record for mares , and the world record for coldblood mares , is <unk> , held by the double Finnhorse racing female champion I.P. <unk> . The absolute Finnhorse speed record is <unk> , held by the stallion <unk> . As the result was not achieved from a win , the time is not an official Finnish record . Finnhorses have been so successful against other coldblood trotter breeds of Scandinavia , that by the 21st century , they have been admitted to Swedish and Norwegian races only by invitation . 
 Some conformation flaws common in the breed that may hinder a trotter 's success include a heavy forehand and <unk> hind legs . Another problem that affects some Finnhorses is a tendency to trot with the front and hind legs directly in line with other , which creates a high probability of forging , where the hind hooves hit the front pasterns , which can cause breaking gait . This can be helped to a degree with careful shoeing . There is also a tendency toward ossification of the hoof cartilages of the front feet , which tends to increase with age , and appears to be heritable . This condition , called <unk> when it affects the lateral and medial cartilages of the foot , is common in draught breeds . However , a study of affected Finnhorses also noted that horses with long toes and low heels were common and ossification correlated with the length of the heels . 
 = = = Riding horse type = = = 
 The riding horse section Finnhorse is a capable and reliable mount . It lacks some traits required for competing at the highest levels of international riding sports , but its combination of size and good temperament makes it suitable for both adults and children . To qualify for the riding section , a horse must carry itself well , and have a long neck , small head , sloping shoulder and well @-@ defined withers . The body must not be too long . The universal <unk> breeding goals have made the breed of a lighter build , with longer neck , better gaits and fewer faults in conformation , allowing modern riding @-@ type Finnhorses to work more easily on the bit . Even the temperament of the riding section animals appears to have become more lively . To pass the studbook evaluation , a riding type horse must either have placed in a Grade IV dressage or combined driving competition , or pass a dressage test ; must pass a jumping evaluation and a ridability test , and possess clean gaits . Mares may be qualified solely on grounds of a ridability test and a movement evaluation . 
 Despite the Finnhorse 's image as a working farm horse , the breed was used as a cavalry mount from the 17th century until the end of World War II . After the mechanisation of Finnish agriculture in the 1960s and the 1970s , however , it was not clear if the Finnhorse would make the transition into a riding horse , even though the long use of the breed by the Finnish cavalry had proven it well @-@ suited for the job . The Finnhorse had a strong image as a harnessed working horse , associated with rural life and old times . When riding as a hobby emerged and became more established in Finnish cities during the 1960s , imported horses and ponies were preferred as mounts ; <unk> horses represented modern times , leisure time and wealth , while the Finnhorse was viewed as rugged and unsophisticated . The riding section studbook , created in 1971 , grew slowly and gained only a few dozen horses during its first decade , as the idea of a Finnhorse used for riding was considered near @-@ ridiculous at the time . 
 The <unk> ry ( SuoRa , or " <unk> " ) organisation was founded in 1974 to promote the use of the Finnhorse under saddle , and with the growing popularity of riding and the support of SuoRa , Finnhorses of riding type gained a foothold , though by the late 1970s , even SuoRa estimated that only about 300 Finnhorses were being used for riding . However , the popularity of harness racing and the breeding of trotter type Finnhorses made the breed lighter and faster overall , which also benefitted the riding section . In addition , the Finnish state horse breeding institute of Ypäjä was founded in the 1970s , and was the first stud farm to breed and train Finnhorses for riding on a larger scale . Well @-@ trained Finnhorse mounts from Ypäjä , seen in growing numbers in competition , added to the popularity and credibility of the breed for under @-@ saddle use . After the slow beginning , the Finnhorse was increasingly appreciated as a riding horse . Today , over 5 @,@ 000 are used for riding . Riding section horses currently are sought after while the trotting section suffers from oversupply . 
 = = = Pony @-@ sized type = = = 
 A pony @-@ sized Finnhorse must measure no more than 148 cm ( 14 @.@ 2 @-@ 1 / 2 hands , 58 @-@ 1 / 2 inches ) at the withers or the croup . Both sexes are also required to pass either a drivability or a ridability test . The horse 's pedigree is also evaluated , and uncharacteristically small individuals descending from larger @-@ sized lines are not accepted . The horse should be proportionately small all over , and express all the qualities of a full @-@ size Finnhorse . Especially thorough attention is paid to the pony @-@ sized horse 's character , obedience and cooperation . The pony @-@ sized Finnhorse is suited to practically any use the larger Finnhorse is , with the exception of heavy draught work because of its smaller size and proportionally reduced strength . However , some individuals have been able to compete with and even win against full @-@ size Finnhorses in work horse competitions . Many pony @-@ sized individuals are cross @-@ registered for trotter section breeding , as small Finnhorses can be equal competitors in harness against larger ones . In combined driving , the pony @-@ sized Finnhorse 's size is an advantage , allowing for greater agility . The section is popular for therapy and riding school use . 
 Although its breeding section was created at the same time as the trotter and riding types , the pony @-@ sized Finnhorse is technically the newest of the sections , as trotters and riding horses were bred as " universal horses " in a combined section beginning in 1924 . The Finnhorse had been bred for larger size for centuries , and when the pony @-@ sized breeding section was established , few pony @-@ sized lines existed . The section remains the rarest type of Finnhorse , with only about 80 stallions and 420 mares accepted in the studbook as of 2010 . 
 = = Studbook evaluation = = 
 To be registered as a Finnhorse , a horse must either have parents registered as Finnhorses , or be verified to be descended from at least three generations of Finnhorses . To qualify for the Finnhorse stud book as a breeding animal , a horse must prove itself by meeting or exceeding the breed standard set for various qualities : performance ability , conformation , disposition , and in some cases , quality of offspring . Any horse offered for the Finnhorse studbook must be at least 4 years old , a stallion or a mare , and registered a Finnhorse . The stud book evaluation board considers the performance of horses in their desired discipline : riding , driving , harness racing , or workhorse events . Horses to be registered in the stud book are tested for performance at the stud book registration inspection . With the exception of the trotter section , they are also evaluated on " type " ; the suitability of the horse 's overall build for the section for which it is offered . Individuals that do not qualify for the studbook on their own merits during the stud book evaluation process may be accepted later , based on the quality and accomplishments of their offspring . For this to occur , a horse 's offspring are evaluated by their competitive history or their stud book evaluation , and if of high enough quality , their parent then is also granted acceptance into the stud book . Conversely , a horse may be removed from the studbook if its offspring are found to have any inherited flaw or condition . A stallion may also be removed if his offspring are clearly below the average level in competitive success or stud book evaluations . 
 = = = Walking test = = = 
 The walking test is given only to draught type Finnhorses and measures the horse 's endurance while pulling a load . The horse tested pulls a 500 kilograms ( 79 st ; 1 @,@ 100 lb ) load for 500 metres ( 550 yd ) , walking . The calculated time per kilometre must be no more than ten minutes to qualify as accepted . A horse qualifying with this time will be given four points . Extra points are given for faster times at the interval of 30 seconds , and the maximum points given is 10 , for a time no longer than eight minutes and 30 seconds . 
 = = = Pulling test = = = 
 The pulling , or tensile resistance , test is also a test only for the draught type horses , and it measures pulling capacity in relation to size . The test is performed in several progressive stages , called " steps " , with the load increased each time . The horse tested will pull a weighed sled on semi @-@ rough sand . The friction between the sled and the sand is taken into account and is measured before the test . The sled is loaded according to the horse 's weight ; on the first attempt , the load equals 36 percent of the estimated weight of the horse ; with each subsequent stage of the test , the load is increased by 6 percent of the horse 's weight . The horse must pull the sled for 10 metres ( 33 ft ) at each weight . If the horse stops during a test and does not resume within one minute , or stops four times before reaching the required distance , the test is discontinued . Two points are awarded for every testing stage completed successfully , with a maximum total score of 20 . The pulling style is also evaluated , and given 4 to 10 points . To pass the test , the horse must successfully complete pulls for at least five " steps " . This corresponds to a pulling capacity of 60 percent of the horse 's weight . An award of 20 points corresponds to 90 percent of the horse 's weight being pulled . 
 = = = <unk> test = = = 
 The general drivability test is performed by trotter stallions . It is optional for draught type horses in lieu of the pulling test , and for pony @-@ sized horses in lieu of the <unk> test . The horse is driven by two different members of the studbook evaluation committee during this test , and asked to perform at a walk and trot . Its cooperation and disposition are evaluated on a scale of 4 to 10 points . 
 The draught section drivability test , which evaluates disposition : adaptability , reliability , and calmness , consists of four parts , and 0 – 5 points are given for each . To pass the test , the horse must score at least one point for each part of the test , and its combined score for the test must be at least 10 points . The first part examines the behaviour of the horse while it is being harnessed and loaded , then unloaded and unharnessed , and the remaining three parts evaluate the way the horse behaves when being driven . These parts often include regulation of the speed of the horse 's walk , halts , turns around obstacles , and backing with a load around a corner . 
 = = = <unk> test = = = 
 In the <unk> test , the horse is evaluated by a member of the studbook evaluation committee by being ridden at a walk , trot and canter . The horse 's movement , balance and disposition are evaluated and given 4 to 10 points . The horse should express cooperation , gentleness , attentiveness , sensitivity to cues , and active effort . This test is required for riding @-@ type horses , and optional for pony @-@ sized horses in lieu of the driveability test . 
 = = History = = 
 The ancestors of the modern Finnhorse were important throughout Finnish history , used as work horses and beasts of burden in every aspect of life from antiquity well into the 20th century . The modern breed 's precise line of descent is unclear , but numerous outside influences have been recorded throughout the history of Finland . The earliest hard archaeological evidence of horses existing in what today is Finland dates to the Finnish Middle Iron Age ( 400 @-@ 800 CE ) . The Finnhorse and its progenitors later became an indispensable asset for military forces from the region of Finland during the times of Swedish and Russian rule , and since independence as well . In addition to functionality as military and working horses , the Finnhorse has also been bred for speed in harness racing , and it can be argued that this sport was the main factor in the survival of the breed after its numbers crashed during the later half of the 20th century , from approximately 400 @,@ 000 animals in the 1950s to 14 @,@ 000 in the 1980s . In the 21st century , the numbers of the breed have stabilised at approximately 20 @,@ 000 animals . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Although multiple hypotheses exist on the origins of the horse in Finland , an indigenous wild horse origin is thought improbable , as significant numbers of domesticated horses were imported from earliest times . The Finnhorse is most likely descended from a northern European domestic horse . One theory suggests that horses arrived from the west , brought to what today is western Finland by the Vikings during the Viking Age , circa 800 – 1050 CE . These Viking horses would have been of northern European ancestry . The other main theory suggests that non @-@ Viking peoples , who migrated into Finland from the southeast and south , brought with them horses of Mongolian origin that had been further developed in the Urals and Volga River regions . Both theories have merit , as there were two distinct horse types in the eastern and western regions of Finland that remained distinct from one another until at least the middle of the 19th century . 
 The eastern origin of the breed was first proposed by archaeologist Johannes Reinhold Aspelin , who published <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " On the Nativity of the Finnish horse " ) in 1886 – 1887 . Aspelin proposed that Finnish horses descended from an animal that had accompanied the Finno @-@ Ugric peoples ' migration from the Volga region and middle Russia to the shores of the Gulf of Finland . A similar idea was suggested over a hundred years earlier by natural historian Pehr Adrian Gadd , and this theory has continued to receive some support into modern times . The veterinarian Ludvig Fabritius considered the proposed prototype a side branch of a " <unk> " breed , and considered it possible that the same prototype also influenced Estonian , Swedish and Norwegian horse populations . 
 Later , agronomist Axel <unk> ( 1862 – 1934 ) and veterinarian <unk> <unk> ( 1840 – 1898 ) expanded Aspelin 's hypothesis , proposing that the horse population later diverged into Eastern Finnish and Mid @-@ Finnish types , which had remained distinguishable as late as the turn of the 20th century . Photographs support these claims : the small Karelian horse was blocky and stout , with pronounced withers , a short neck and large head . The small horse from central Finland , on the other hand , was " more noble " , with a longer body , lighter neck and more refined head . The Swedish professor Eric <unk> even suggested that the Finnish horse spread along river valleys to Troms , Norway , and was the ancestor of the Nordlandshest / <unk> , found around the <unk> . The Norwegians continue to utilise Finnhorse bloodlines , having purchased the Finnish pony @-@ type stallion <unk> 632 @-@ <unk> for stud use in 1980 . However , <unk> dismissed the possibility that the eastern Finnhorse came from same prototype as the western pony breeds . 
 In 1927 , veterinarian and professor Veikko Rislakki ( then <unk> ) proposed a different theory in his doctoral thesis . He argued that three types of wild horses existed in Europe , one of which he believed to be the Przewalski 's Horse . Rislakki believed this unrefined and notably large @-@ headed type was the horse the early Finns encountered about 1000 BCE . He suggested that the Finns later encountered other peoples and horses south of the Gulf of Finland , and that these peoples had better proportioned horses with a shorter muzzle and wider forehead , descended from the Tarpan . In addition , Rislakki suggested that the Finns came across European horses of Spanish and French origin during the first few centuries CE , larger in size and with narrow foreheads . Rislakki believed that his <unk> examinations , carried out in the 1920s , proved the influence of all these three horse types . Almost 20 years later , during the Continuation War , Rislakki also measured Karelian horses , and proposed they also came from an original Northern European animal descended from the Tarpan . Modern studies have discredited theories suggesting modern domesticated horse breeds descending from the Tarpan or the Przewalski 's horse . The modern Konik horse resembles the extinct Tarpan however . 
 In the early 20th century , English J. C. Edward and Norwegian S. Petersen , proposed that Finland and the other countries surrounding the Gulf of Finland were the home region for the so @-@ called " yellow pony " . A later ethnologist , Kustaa Vilkuna ( 1902 – 1980 ) supported this view , proposing that an " Estonian @-@ Finno @-@ Karelian pony " descended from a small forest horse previously widespread in the lands surrounding the Gulf of Finland . 
 Earliest horse equipment ( bits ) found in Finnish graves date from the Finnish Middle Iron Age , beginning from circa 400 CE . Breeds considered to descend from the same early types as the Finnhorse include the Estonian Native horse , the Norwegian Nordlandshest / <unk> , the Swedish Gotland Russ , the Mezen horse from the region of Archangelsk , Russia , and the Lithuanian <unk> . 
 At some point in their history , not clearly documented , horses bred in the western regions crossbred with horses that originated south of the Gulf of Finland . This made the western Finnish horse type larger and better suited to farming and forestry work . The characteristics of the original western Finnish type prevailed , however , even though influenced by outside blood and traces of outside influence could be detected for a long time . Later , this mixed type was further crossbred with larger horses from Central Europe during the Middle Ages . Foreign horses were also brought to Finland during military campaigns , and additional animals were imported to manor houses for driving . The crossbreed offspring of Central European and Finnish horses were larger than their Finnish parents , and even more suited for agricultural work . 
 The earliest known documentation of Finnish trade in horses , both as imports and exports , dates to 1299 , when Pope Gregory IX sent a letter of reprimand to the merchants of Gotland , who were selling horses to the non @-@ Christianized Finns . Apparently the Finns succeeded in improving their horse population , as the predominant form of Finnish trade in horses eventually shifted from imports to exports . A Russian chronicle from 1338 mentions " <unk> @-@ Karjala " ( " Karelia of the Mares " ) , presumably denoting a place of good horse breeding . As early as in 1347 , King Magnus IV saw it necessary to put limits to the horse exports from Karelia to Russia . 
 Later , the 16th century writer Olaus Magnus mentioned the high quality of the horses used by the early Finns ; in the 1520s , Gustav Vasa found the Finns exporting horses by the shipload to Lübeck , and strictly prohibited such trading , banning the sale of horses under the age of 7 years . 
 = = = Organised breeding = = = 
 The earliest document noting the importation of outside horses to Finland is a papal letter in 1229 . During the Swedish rule of Finland that followed , foreign horses obtained by the Finnish cavalry , whether purchased for replenishment or seized as spoils of war , probably influenced the Finnish horse population . The first significant , planned efforts to improve the quality of horses through selective breeding in Finland occurred in the 16th century , when Gustav Vasa , known for his interest in horse breeding , founded mare manors ( Finnish : <unk> ) , stud farms , on his properties in Western Finland . He ordered the importation of larger horses from Central Europe , mainly from the region of Friesland . These horse were brought to Sweden and probably into Finland as well . The imports were kept at regional royal farms ( Swedish : kungsgård , literally , " King 's estate " ) to service local mares . In a letter from 1556 , Gustav Vasa mentions that there were 231 breeding horses of this kind in Finland . It is not known whether these horses were imported directly from Central Europe to Finland , or descended from imports brought first to Sweden . Friesian stallions were used in Finland early in the 16th century to increase the size of the Finnish horse , and were employed for breeding in the royal farms up until the 1650s . 
 Gustav Vasa also carried out major reforms of his cavalry . After the decline of heavy cavalry in the Late Middle Ages , light cavalry was gaining importance , and with it a new approach to horse breeding . In 1550 , he gave orders that " stud manors " ( Finnish : <unk> ) be founded on royal farms ( <unk> : kungsgård ) , not only in Sweden but also in every municipality of Finland . These studs were to each hold 20 mares and a smaller number of stallions , both Finnish horses and horses imported from Sweden . Gustav Vasa also imported mares from the lands bordering the North Sea ; most likely of a Friesian type . His goal was to increase the size and weight of the Finnish horse population . His successor , Eric XIV prohibited the exporting of Finnish horses , which demonstrated the success of these efforts as well as the importance of the horses of the region of Finland . The horse breeding farms lasted only for about 100 years under later rulers of the Vasa line before the programs deteriorated . The last of the stud manors , that of Pori , was closed in 1651 , and the crown @-@ owned stallions and mares of the Pori stud were transported to Gotland . 
 Outside of these breeding efforts , Finnish horses were widely kept in semi @-@ feral conditions through the mid @-@ 19th century . Ethnologist Kustaa Vilkuna describes how all horses regardless or sex and age were let out on forest pastures for the summer after the spring fieldwork was finished . The pasture was scarce and the terrain challenging , with both rocky ground and wetlands . Vilkuna considers this practice an important factor in making the Finnhorse an easy @-@ keeping , hardy breed . 
 = = = Military use = = = 
 The goal of Gustav Vasa and others had been to increase the height of the Finnish horse . However , the Finnish cavalry survey records ( <unk> ) from the 1620s indicate this goal was not achieved . The heights of horses surveyed in 1623 , measured not at the withers but at the highest point of the croup , which provides a height measurement significantly different from standard measures , ranged between 105 to 130 centimetres ( 41 to 51 in ) , the taller animals being the horses of officers . Only the horses owned by Colonel Herman Fleming were taller , with a croup measurement of 135 to 140 centimetres ( 53 to 55 in ) . It is not known if these horses were domestic crossbreeds or imported . The average height of the horses of the troops of <unk> , Pori and <unk> was only 115 centimetres ( 45 in ) one year , but those in the next year 's survey were 125 centimetres ( 49 in ) . Overall , there were no pony @-@ sized horses below a croup measurement of 110 centimetres ( 43 in ) , and the all @-@ around average height of the horses used by the cavalry was about 120 centimetres ( 47 in ) . 
 During the Thirty Years ' War in 1618 – 1648 , the horses used by Finnish cavalry were small and unrepresentative , considered inferior even to the cargo horses used by the Swedish Royal Army . However , these animals had great stamina , a crucial quality during long , exhausting campaigns . The humble @-@ looking Finnish horses were presumably exchanged when possible for other horses obtained as spoils of war . It was probably rare for a cavalryman to return with the same horse with which he left , and it is likely that the horses brought back to Finland were crossbreeds or of purely Central European lines . Reinforcements to replace the considerable horse casualties were obtained from the Baltic States , but during the reign of Charles XI almost all of the cavalry horses were imported from south of the Gulf of Finland , due to their larger size . 
 Before World War II , the Finnhorse was the breed that made up almost all of the horses that were part of the Finnish army and mounted police forces . While officers mostly rode various foreign light horse breeds , the so @-@ called " light type " of Finnhorse was used for the enlisted members of the cavalry . Many of the most talented Finnhorses had competitive success during their service . After the war , the Finnish cavalry was converted to infantry , and the use of the Finnhorse for riding purposes nearly ended . 
 = = = Crossbreeding = = = 
 The Finnish horse had been intentionally crossbred from as early as the 16th century . <unk> and <unk> were among the first known influences in the breed , having been used in the early 17th century to add size . Friesian horses were used systematically until the 1650s . During the 18th century , new warmblood breeds were created throughout Europe by crossing local native horse populations with light , hotblooded riding horses . Finnish military officers developed an interest in similar breeding while on study secondments ( assignments ) in foreign military forces . In 1781 , Colonel Yrjö <unk> <unk> founded a state stud farm in conjunction with the Haapaniemi military school . The stud had a few stallions described as " Arabian " and " Andalusian " . For about 30 years , these stallions influenced the local horse population outside the military school as well , and a number of writings from the 19th century mention a " Haapaniemi breed " . Similar if smaller crossbreeding programs developed elsewhere ; at <unk> <unk> , the royal estate ( kungsgård ) of <unk> , at least one of the mares had been imported from Sweden . 
 Russian Orlov trotters and Don horses also influenced the Finnhorse population in the first half the 19th century , improving its size , ridability and refinement . The horse type originating in Northern Savonia known as the " Fürstenbergian breed , " bred by the engineer Fürstenberg at the beginning of the 19th century , was a crossbreed between the Finnish horses and Orlov trotters . The influence of Don horses was seen as late as in the 1920s and 1930s among the black and bay horses used by the Finnish cavalry – the dragoons of Nyland had two full squadrons of these colours . 
 In addition to the needs of the military , crossbreeding was used to improve the common working horse ; improved roads and advances in agriculture had replaced the previously predominant oxen with the horse , and more horses of better quality were needed for transport and agricultural work . Attempts to create better working horses used many breeds , including Percherons and a heavy Norwegian breed ; Ardennes horses were favoured in Southern Ostrobothnia and Southern Finland . In Southern Savonia a multitude of breeds were used . The amount and diversity of crossbreeding led to difficulties in creating a consistent type up until the beginning of the 20th century and the creation of the Finnhorse studbook ; some of the first stallions accepted in the studbook were criticised for having a " Norwegian " look . 
 Other intentional crossbreeding experiments included the bloodstock of Sarkkila and Hali in Northern Karelia , descended from crosses with Russian military horses . The breeding programme of Sarkkila stated one of the stallions to be of " Fürstenbergian breed " , and one of the mares of " oriental " descent . The " Hali breed " , descending from the stallions of Sarkkila , was an important influence in the pedigree of a few notable Finnhorse trotter sires such as Eino 680 and his son Eino @-@ <unk> 25 . 
 Some estates , especially in southern regions of Finland , were known to have used stallions of several light and hot @-@ blooded breeds ; for example , an officer in <unk> bred Arabians . These crossbreeds were probably an attempt to create showy driving horses . A notable failing of a crossbreeding attempt happened in 1875 , when a stud was founded in Porvoo to import and export Norfolk Trotters , a breed that has had important influence in several driving horse breeds , including the Standardbred . The crossbred offspring were praised for their looks , but turned out to have poor temperaments and no talent for speed . Due to a combination of the large population of horses in Finland ( over 200 000 animals ) and the later enthusiasm for purebreeding , these estate @-@ based crossbreeding attempts never had significant influence on the modern Finnish horse . 
 An especially detailed description of the best Finnish horses of the mid @-@ 19th century is available due to the development of the Tori horse in Estonia . Three experts were consulted about the Finnish horse in order to ascertain its value for the project . According to the stud farm inspector of the Russian Empire , <unk> , Finnish horses were found in four types : the " Haapaniemi type " , the " Fürstenbergian type " , an " Orlov type " , and a " Karelian type " . A Finnish academic master , A. <unk> , considered Finnish horses most purebred in Karelia , and mixed elsewhere , especially in Southwest Finland , where Swedish , North @-@ German and even English horses had been crossed with Finnish ones , while in Karelia and Savonia the outside influence had been mainly Russian . Swedish count Carl Gustav Wrangler , a respected <unk> of the time , mentioned in his report that Finns were then importing Norfolk Trotters for crossbreeding purposes . 
 Documents created some years after a number of Finnish horses had been imported to the Tori stud describe the Finnish mares obtained . Their average height was 14 hands ( 56 inches , 142 cm ) , and the colour was typically dark with a star . Their heads were large and necks short but well @-@ carried ; their bodies sturdy and proportionate with muscular withers , deep chest and muscular back ; the loins were on the long side , and the haunches muscular if sloping . The leg joints were well @-@ defined , the pasterns short and the feet tough . However , records also noted that the legs had " serious faults of position , " not further defined . The Finnish horses also were considered calm and good workers , and swift walkers and runners . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 In the 18th century , the horse population of Finland vastly diminished in both numbers and quality . At the beginning of the century , during the Great Northern War campaigns of Charles XII , the Finnish cavalry was larger than at any other time in history , and almost every usable horse of Finland was needed . Horses were used by the cavalry , infantry , and for transporting supplies . Horses serving in the Swedish military never returned to Finland ; even the animals provided to the last remaining Swedish reinforcement regiments were taken to Sweden in 1714 , and to Norway in 1718 . 
 The Russian invasion and occupation caused additional hardships . By the end of Russian occupation in 1721 , a third of the Finnish human populace as well as large numbers of horses were lost to war and epidemic diseases . Furthermore , a great number of horses were exported to Russia during the invasion at the command of Peter I. Horses removed from Finland ended up mainly in the area of Vyatka government , and some Russian researchers such as <unk> and Moerder have suggested that the Vyatka horse was developed mainly from Estonian and Finnish bloodlines . In addition to the hardships of war and occupation , the treaties of Nystad in 1721 and Åbo in 1743 ceded Finnish territory to Russia , which resulted in much of the Finnish horse population being left behind the new borders . The Finnish horses in these now @-@ Russian areas were crossbred with the Russian horses in significant numbers . 
 With the Russians having taken the best animals , combined with the old custom of pastures shared by municipalities or larger areas , rebuilding the horse population took decades . To increase numbers , horses were often bred too young , and inbreeding also occurred . By 1761 , one of the first researchers in the agricultural chemistry in Finland described the Finnish horse population of the time : 
 The <unk> @-@ Karelian horse is its own breed , descended from [ the horses of ] Tartary . It is rarely taller than 9 <unk> [ 133 centimetres ( 52 in ) ] , and it is of good conformation , and a good puller , chestnut or bay of coat . [ The same breed is also found in Western Finland , where it is ] mixed and bigger by the influence of Scanian horses . 
 According to ethnologist Kustaa Vilkuna 's estimations , calculated from measurements of horse collars used in Finland in the early 18th century , the average peasant 's horse was about 12 @.@ 3 hands ( 51 inches , 130 cm ) tall , while some horses employed by manors were larger , sometimes more than 13 @.@ 3 hands ( 55 inches , 140 cm ) tall . Vilkuna also discovered that the horses of the southern and western regions of Finland were larger than those of the northern and eastern regions . This was probably due to the influence of imported horses . By the mid @-@ 18th century , a typical Finnish horse was probably about 13 @.@ 2 hands ( 54 inches , 137 cm ) , about the same size as a small contemporary Finnhorse yearling , and weighed about 300 kilograms ( 660 lb ) , roughly half the weight of a contemporary 15 @.@ 2 hands ( 62 inches , 157 cm ) working section horse . A civilian horse of good quality had good action and was swift . However , leg faults were common . 
 In response to the decline of the Finnish horse population and especially the great loss of good quality breeding animals experienced during the great famine of 1866 – 1868 , the Senate of Finland gave orders for three provinces to obtain quality stallions for public use . The scope of the programme was later expanded to include eight provinces , and Finland was divided into breeding districts , which were all to have a state @-@ owned stallion available to service local mares . The horses in this programme became known as " crown stallions " ( Finnish : <unk> , <unk> ) . Official guidelines for the selection of stallions were never given , but one common aim throughout Finland was to increase the size and bulk of the horse population to create a type better suited for agricultural work . 
 = = = <unk> and revival = = = 
 By the end of the 18th century , crossbreeding of Finnish horses began to be described , especially by military leaders , as " detrimental crossbreeding " — damaging to the quality of the Finnish horse , particularly for military use . In the beginning of the 19th century , German historian Friedrich <unk> especially blamed the west coast estates for damaging the Finnish horse by crossbreeding . Nonetheless , outside stallions were still imported to Finland . At the end of the century , stallions " of oriental , Arabian blood " still served at state farms . The influence of the Russian @-@ imported " oriental " Turkish and Caucasian horses , as well as " Fürstenbergian " horses was also noted . Orlov Trotters were used in Savonia and Karelia , and Norwegian stallions were brought to northern Ostrobothnia . Light riding horses were imported from Russian and Central Europe . Conversely , heavier horses such as the Norfolk Trotter and Ardennes were imported to southern Finland as late as 1870 . 
 As Finnish nationalism arose and increased in the late 19th and early 20th centuries , crossbreeding of the Finnish horse essentially ended and a new direction was taken by Finnish horse breeders . The breed was considered a symbol of the nation , and thus it was desired that it be as purebred as possible . On 20 November 1894 , Finland 's first horse breeding association <unk> Hippos ( now Suomen Hippos ) was founded to breed and improve the Finnish horse by the means of purebreeding , and in 1905 , a governmental decree was issued for horse breeding associations to be founded throughout the country , leading to the establishment of the Finnhorse stud book in 1907 . 
 At first the only notable objectives of the Finnhorse breeding programme concerned appearance , especially the colour , of the breed . The aim was to remove " foreign " characteristics . Later , in the 1920s , trials of performance were introduced , and since then , the main objectives of the Finnhorse breeding programme have continued to encourage improvements in the capacity , movement , conformation and character of the breed . 
 Since the establishment of the Finnhorse stud book it has been closed and the breed has been bred pure . While accidental and even intentional Finnhorse crossbreds exist , they are not accepted for the Finnhorse registry and have not been used to develop new breeds within Finland . The Finnhorse stud book remains in the control of Suomen Hippos . 
 = = = Impact of World War II = = = 
 Horses were a central asset to Finnish military forces during the Winter War ( 1939 – 40 ) and Continuation War ( 1941 – 1944 ) , when tens of thousands of horses were the main locomotive power of the army due to the shortage of automobiles . Animals were procured from private owners in a systematic procedure , but to ensure the continuity of Finnhorse breeding , neither stallions nor any nursing , pregnant or studbook @-@ approved mares were enrolled to be eligible for military procurement . All procured horses officially remained their private owners ' property , were marked for identification and as necessary , were returned or reported dead . The program was successful in preserving the breed , as the horse population rebounded to its pre @-@ war count of over 380 000 animals as soon as 1945 . 
 The great number of Russian horses captured as matériel during wartime became a threat to the Finnhorse 's purebreeding : many Russian animals were stallions , and there was no way to ensure new owners would not crossbreed them with Finnhorses . For practical and political reasons , Soviet Russia would not accept these horses back as a part of Finland 's massive war indemnity . Finnhorses however , were accepted as payment , and a total of 18 000 animals were sold to Soviet Russia at low rates in 1947 and 1948 . The best Finnhorses were not offered to the Soviets , however , and according to <unk> witnesses , many showy but otherwise useless horses ended up in Russia . 
 = = = Post @-@ war decline = = = 
 Approximately 300 @,@ 000 horses existed in Finland when the Finnhorse studbook was established in the beginning of the 20th century . The horse population , consisting almost entirely of Finnhorses , remained stable for 50 years . The rebuilding of the country after two wars had increased demand for horse power , and by the 1950s , the breed reached its all @-@ time peak , with an estimated 409 @,@ 000 animals , with a great majority of the horses being of the draught type . However , with the increased mechanisation of agriculture and forestry in the 1960s , the number of Finnhorses dropped precipitously . Horses , having been bred in large numbers only a few years earlier , were taken to slaughter by the thousands ; a change in forestry tax policy made previously state @-@ supported horse @-@ powered forestry unprofitable and further discouraged keeping horses . Many working horse bloodlines ended , while lines more suitable for sports and recreation survived . By the 1970s , the breed 's numbers had declined to 90 @,@ 000 animals , and 10 years later as few as 20 @,@ 000 Finnhorses existed . The breed 's all @-@ time lowest point was 1987 , with only 14 @,@ 100 horses . By this time , however , the overall horse population in Finland had been increasing for almost a decade , with lighter harness racing horse breeds establishing their position , counting 12 @,@ 800 animals the same year . 
 Although other breeds were being increasingly imported and bred , the numbers of the Finnhorse population also slowly began to recover ; in 1997 , 19 @,@ 000 Finnhorses existed . Harness racing and associated parimutuel betting , and to some degree also the relatively new hobby of riding , became the most important factors ensuring the survival of the breed . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 Nearly all Finnish horses foaled since 1971 have been registered . During the first decade of the 21st century , the breed 's numbers in Finland stabilised at roughly 20 @,@ 000 animals , and approximately 1 @,@ 000 foals are born annually . The breed makes up roughly one third of Finland 's total horse population . The objective for ensuring the breed 's continuity is to have at least 200 stallions and 2 @,@ 000 mares used for breeding every year , 3 @,@ 000 horses used for harness racing , and 6 @,@ 000 horses for riding and other uses . In the 21st century , most Finnhorses are bred to be trotters , but the breed is also popular at riding schools and for recreational riding . 
 The Finnhorse is a relatively unknown horse breed outside of Finland , with no organised efforts to promote it internationally . The very word " Finnhorse " was only recently coined , and only became the standard name after 1990 . However , a few Finnhorses exist outside Finland , having been exported in small numbers to nations such as Germany and Sweden . As part of an equestrian exchange project carried out in the 1980s , a number of Finnhorses were sold to Austria and Germany in 1985 and 1987 . In Germany , the horses were used as foundation bloodstock for the Freund stud , which went on to breed dozens of Finnhorses , selling them in Germany and Austria . A number of horses were also exported to the Netherlands . The German Finnhorse population remains the most notable one outside Finland , with 150 animals . 
 Apart from the exchange project of the late 1980s , activity to export the Finnhorse has been minimal . However , a 2008 study stated that increased international interest and demand for the Finnhorse was advisable to ensure the survival of the breed . To this end , the objectives of the national breeding program , as of 2008 , include increasing international recognition of the Finnhorse and generating demand for the breed for recreational and educational uses such as in Pony Club ; to make it the standard breed used in Finland for equestrian tourism ; and to improve the opportunities for Finnhorse trotters to participate in Swedish and Norwegian heats . 
 Within Finland , the Finnhorse is considered to have value as the national horse breed with cultural ties and strong support from a variety of Finnhorse organisations . On the other hand , progress in popularizing the breed internationally is complicated by the its low population and lack of international recognition . The strengths of the breed in international disciplines are considered to be its good health and working qualities , its versatility , and its novelty value outside of Finland . The versatility of the breed 's " universal " horse type , a Finnish concept , has <unk> and minuses : It creates a challenge in marketing because of its vague status to buyers who currently tend to seek conventional horse types , and as a result it lacks a strong advantage over specialized breeds . Yet , the versatility of the Finnhorse can also be an advantage ; more specialised breeds may be limited to a smaller range of activities . 
 = = Influence on other horse breeds = = 
 From the 14th to the 16th century , Finnish horses were exported to Russian and Germany in such quantities that eventually restrictions on the number of exports were set . The Finnish horses exported to Russia in early 19th century influenced the development of the Vyatka horse . In the 19th century and early 20th century , horses of Finnish origin were used in creating many Baltic and Russian agricultural draught breeds , such as the Tori Horse and the Lithuanian Draught . In most cases , these breeds were developed by crossbreeding Finnish horses on small local horses , thus increasing size . In the 1920s and 1930s , the Finnhorse was also used in the breeding of the Estonian horse . The heavy Mezen horse was bred with both the Finnhorse and the Estonian Horse , until its stud book was closed in the 1950s . Traces of Finnhorse influence is found in other Soviet and Russian work horse breeds , in the mid @-@ 20th century , Finland exported 15 @,@ 000 horses to Soviet Russia as part of its war indemnity . In the 1960s and 1970s , pony @-@ sized Finnhorses were also used to improve quality and broaden the gene pool of the Norwegian Nordlandshest , which had become highly inbred by the 1960s . 
 = = = Tori horse = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 19th century , manor owners in Estonia found the native Estonian Horse too small for their agricultural needs , and came to the conclusion that the population would benefit from crossbreeding . Finnish horses were among the good quality breeds considered for the job . The state stud farm of Tori was founded as the central base for the new Estonian breed in 1856 , and ten Finnish mares and three stallions were bought for its needs . Though some purebred Finnish horses were produced , they were used mainly for crossbreeding ; the later offspring of part @-@ Finnish crossbreds , however , did not prove as good as expected , and the Tori stud gradually stopped using Finnish horses . One Finnish @-@ Arabian stallion , <unk> , has had noteworthy influence on the modern @-@ day Tori horse , through his widely used great @-@ grandson Harun 42 T. 
 = = Uses = = 
 In the 21st century , approximately 75 percent of Finnhorses are used at some point in their lives for harness racing , with riding being the second most popular use . Many Finnhorses have multiple uses , such as starting their career in harness racing and later moving on to riding . Finnhorses perform both at their own competitions and in open , all @-@ breed classes in dressage , show jumping , and eventing . They are also used for endurance riding , western riding and combined driving . Approximately 1 @,@ 000 Finnhorses are used in riding schools and in riding therapy . They are also popular as pleasure horses . 
 = = = Draft work = = = 
 Agricultural and forestry work were the traditional uses of the Finnhorse . The Finnhorse was never bred to be a particularly large or heavy draught horse , as it was the only horse breed of the country , and versatility was desired as the Finnhorse was also used as the primary steed of the cavalry . The climate and conditions of Finland necessitated that the breed be durable and hardy . As a result , the Finnhorse remained small but tough , and could pull heavy loads in difficult terrain and even in chest @-@ deep snow . Relative to its size , the Finnhorse is among the most powerful workhorses in the world with the best animals able to pull as much as 200 percent of their own weight . 
 There are few draft @-@ type Finnhorse family lines left , and only an estimated two or three hundred animals are known to be used as actual workhorses in the 21st century . However , interest in traditional uses and methods has been increasing , and workhorse competitions are regularly held which usually include horse pulling or ploughing contests . 
 = = = Harness = = = 
 Finnhorses have historically been used for harness racing , with organised harness races having been held since 1817 . Prior to that , racing from church back home had been a traditional recreation among farmers , and harness racing remained a farmer 's hobby up to the end of the 1950s . By that time , the number of horses kept in Finland was plummeting and racing lost popularity . After 1959 the Finnhorse was no longer the only horse breed that was allowed to race in Finland ; the importing of faster , light trotter breeds and the introduction of <unk> betting brought professionalism and new life to the harness racing sport . Increased interest in betting led to growth in racing , which in turn helped establish harness racing as the main use for the Finnhorse during the next decades . 
 Finnhorses also successfully compete in combined driving , and are the breed most often used for the sport in Finland , especially at regional and national levels ; the Finnhorse <unk> <unk> , driven by Heidi Sinda , was a member of the Finnish singles driving team that finished 2nd at the 2002 World Singles Championships in <unk> , France . According to Sinda , the Finnhorse is ideally suited for combined driving , being well @-@ mannered , focused , hard working , obedient , and possessing " cool nerves . " 
 = = = Riding = = = 
 Finnhorses are popular as recreational riding horses , and well @-@ suited for use at riding schools , trekking , and riding therapy . Of the ten horses currently employed by the mounted police of Helsinki , two are Finnhorses , though they are considered a bit small for the job . They are also competitive in many disciplines , and in the 1970s separate competition classes for Finnhorses were established at horse shows , which also helped to increase the popularity of the breed . While in eventing and horse racing , Finnhorses are too slow to compete directly against Thoroughbreds and the sport horse breeds , they are a highly reliable mount for cross @-@ country riding , particularly over difficult terrain ; during the Continuation War , the breed successfully crossed any wetland with which it was confronted . In endurance riding . Uusi @-@ <unk> , ridden by <unk> <unk> , successfully finished the endurance riding world championship competition in Stockholm , Sweden in 1990 , finishing 28th . 
 The Finnhorse is considered a reliable and fairly good jumper , and is regularly seen in 130 centimetres ( 51 in ) show jumping classes . Finnhorses have been quite successful at lower levels because they are clean and efficient jumpers , but their shorter stride at the canter and gallop keeps them from competing at more advanced levels . In his 1952 book <unk> , Olympic rider Werner <unk> described the Finnhorse as enduring and resilient , mentally focused , and an easy keeper . He considered jumping to be the breed 's best asset as a riding animal , but noted that its scope does not reach the level required for modern international competition . 
 In dressage , the Finnhorse is able to compete with warmbloods up to national levels , and in lower levels it has the upper hand because it can easily perform the required movements , and has smoother gaits that allow for ease of riding . In 2010 , a Finnhorse medaled in international <unk> dressage competition . In higher level dressage , the breed however it is hindered by its less @-@ flashy movement , restricted by a somewhat upright shoulder . Despite this there are successful dressage horses , and a number of Finnhorses even earn their keep with their dressage winnings , a notable achievement as competing in Finland is expensive and prize money low . Most Finnhorses used in dressage compete at the national 4th level ( US ) or Grade IV ( GB ) , though some individuals have competed at the Prix de St. Georges level . 
 The Finnhorse is also well @-@ suited to riding therapy , being calm and steady , hard @-@ working , obedient , healthy and enduring . They are small enough to allow the patient to be assisted easily , yet large enough to have gaits that stimulate the muscles , senses , and balance of the rider . Many Finnhorses have also been trained for driving , and therefore are familiar with unusual noises and can be controlled from behind , and ex @-@ trotters are inexpensive . Many Finns also find the appearance of the Finnhorse comforting . 
 = Badami cave temples = 
 The Badami cave temples are a complex of four Hindu , Jain and possibly Buddhist cave temples located in Badami , a town in the Bagalkot district in northern part of Karnataka , India . The caves are considered an example of Indian rock @-@ cut architecture , especially Badami Chalukya architecture , which dates from the 6th century . Badami was previously known as <unk> Badami , the capital of the early Chalukya dynasty , which ruled much of Karnataka from the 6th to the 8th century . Badami is situated on the west bank of an artificial lake ringed by an earthen wall with stone steps ; it is surrounded on the north and south by forts built in later times . 
 The Badami cave temples represent some of the earliest known examples of Hindu temples . UNESCO has described the designs of the Badami cave temples , and those in Aihole , as having transformed the Malaprabha River valley into a cradle of temple architecture that defined the components of later Hindu temples elsewhere in India . 
 Caves 1 to 4 are in the escarpment of the hill in soft Badami sandstone formation , to the south @-@ east of the town . In Cave 1 , among various sculptures of Hindu divinities and themes , a prominent carving is of the Tandava @-@ dancing Shiva as Nataraja . Cave 2 is mostly similar to Cave 1 in terms of its layout and dimensions , featuring Hindu subjects of which the relief of Vishnu as Trivikrama is the largest . The largest cave is Cave 3 , featuring Vishnu @-@ related mythology , and it is also the most intricately carved cave in the complex . Cave 4 is dedicated to revered figures of Jainism . Cave 5 may be a Buddhist cave . Another cave was discovered in 2015 , about 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) from the four main caves , with 27 Hindu carvings . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The Badami cave temples are located in the town of Badami in the north @-@ central part of Karnataka , India . The temples are about 70 miles ( 110 km ) north @-@ east of Hubli @-@ Dharwad , the second @-@ largest metropolitan area of the state . The Malaprabha River is 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) away . Badami , also referred to as Vatapi , <unk> and <unk> in historical texts , the capital of Chalukya dynasty in the 6th century , is at the exit point of a ravine between two steep mountain cliffs . Four cave temples in the escarpment of the hill to the south @-@ east of the town have been excavated . The escarpment is above an artificial lake called Agastya Lake that is created by an earthen dam faced with stone steps . To the west end of this cliff , at its lowest point , is the first cave temple . The largest cave is Cave 3 , which is further to the east on the northern face of the hill . The fourth cave , Cave 4 , is a short distance away . 
 = = History = = 
 The cave temples , numbered 1 to 4 in the order of their creation , in the town of Badami – the capital city of the Chalukya kingdom ( also known as Early Chalukyas ) – are dated from the late 6th century onwards . The exact dating is known only for Cave 3 , which is a temple dedicated to Vishnu . An inscription found here records the creation of the shrine by Mangalesha in Saka 500 ( lunar calendar , 578 / 579 CE ) . The inscription , written in the Kannada language , has enabled the dating of these rock cave temples to the 6th century . 
 The Badami caves complex is part of a UNESCO @-@ designated World Heritage Site candidate under the title " Evolution of Temple Architecture – Aihole @-@ Badami @-@ Pattadakal " in the Malaprabha river valley , considered a cradle of temple architecture that formed the model for later Hindu temples in the region . The artwork in Caves 1 and 2 exhibit the northern Deccan style of the 6th and 7th centuries , while those in Cave 3 simultaneously represent two ancient Indian artistic traditions ; the northern Nagara and the southern Dravida styles . Cave 3 also shows icons and reliefs in the Vesara style , a creative fusion of ideas from the two styles , as well as some of the earliest surviving historical examples in Karnataka of yantra @-@ chakra motifs ( geometric symbolism ) and colored fresco paintings . The first three caves feature sculptures of Hindu icons and legends focusing on Shiva and Vishnu , while Cave 4 features Jain icons and themes . 
 = = Temple caves = = 
 The Badami cave temples are man @-@ made , all carved out of soft Badami sandstone on a hill cliff . The plan of each of the four caves ( 1 to 4 ) includes an entrance with a verandah ( mukha mandapa ) supported by stone columns and brackets , a distinctive feature of these caves , leading to a columned mandapa , or main hall ( also maha mandapa ) , and then to the small , square shrine ( sanctum sanctorum , <unk> ) cut deep inside the cave . The cave temples are linked by a stepped path with intermediate terraces overlooking the town and lake . The cave temples are labelled 1 – 4 in their ascending series ; this numbering does not reflect the sequence of excavation . 
 The architecture includes structures built in the Nagara and Dravidian styles , which is the first and most persistent architectural idiom to be adopted by the early <unk> . There is also a fifth natural cave temple in Badami , a Buddhist temple , a natural cave that can only be entered by crouching on all fours . 
 = = = Cave 1 = = = 
 Cave 1 is about 59 feet ( 18 m ) above ground level on the north @-@ west part of the hill . Access is through a series of steps that depict carvings of dwarfish ganas ( with bovine and equine heads ) in different postures . The verandah , with an inner measurement of 70 feet ( 21 m ) by 65 feet ( 20 m ) , has four columns sculpted with reliefs of the god Shiva shown in dancing positions and incarnations . The guardian <unk> ( door keepers ) at the entrance to the cave measure 6 @.@ 166 feet ( 1 @.@ 879 m ) . 
 The cave portrays the Tandava @-@ dancing Shiva as Nataraja . The image , 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) tall , has 18 arms in a form that expresses the dance positions arranged in a geometric pattern , which Alice Boner – a Swiss art historian and Indologist , says is a time division symbolizing the cosmic wheel . While most of the arms express mudras ( symbolic hand gestures ) , some of the arms hold objects such as drums , a trident and an axe ; some also have serpents coiled around them . Shiva has his son Ganesha and the bull Nandi by his side . Adjoining the Nataraja , one wall depicts the goddess Durga , who is depicted slaying the buffalo @-@ demon Mahishasura . Elsewhere , the sons of Shiva , Ganesha and Kartikkeya , the god of war and family deity of the Chalukya dynasty , are seen in one of the carved sculptures on the walls of the cave , with Kartikkeya riding a peacock . 
 The cave also has carved sculptures of the goddesses Lakshmi and Parvati flanking Harihara , a 7 @.@ 75 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 36 m ) high sculpture of a fused image that is half @-@ Shiva and half @-@ Vishnu . To the right , toward the end of the wall , is a relief sculpture of Ardhanarishvara , a composite androgynous form of Shiva and his consort Parvati along with a female decorated goddess holding a flat object in her left hand ; Nandi , the bull and Bhringi , a devotee of Shiva . 
 All the figures are adorned with carved ornaments and surrounded by borders with reliefs of animals and birds . The lotus design is a common theme . On the ceiling are images of the <unk> couples . Through a cleft in the back wall of the cave is a square sanctuary with more carved images . 
 The roof of the cave has five carved panels with the central panel depicting the serpent Shesha . The head and bust are well formed and project boldly from the centre of the coil . In another compartment a bas @-@ relief 2 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 76 m ) in diameter has carvings of a male and female ; the male is Yaksha carrying a sword and the female is Apsara with a flying veil . The succeeding panel has carvings of two small figures and the panel at the end is carved with lotuses . 
 = = = Cave 2 = = = 
 Cave 2 , lying to the west of Cave 3 and facing north , was created in late 6th century . It is almost same as Cave 1 in terms of its layout and dimensions , but it is dedicated primarily to Vishnu . Cave 2 is reached by climbing 64 steps from the first cave . The cave entrance is a verandah divided by four square pillars , which has carvings from its middle section to the top where there are yali brackets with sculptures within them . The cave is adorned with reliefs of guardians . Like Cave 1 , the carved cave art is a pantheon of Hindu divinities . 
 The largest relief in Cave 2 shows Vishnu as Trivikrama ( Vamana ) , with one foot on Earth and another directed to the north . Other representations of Vishnu in this cave include Varaha ( a boar ) shown rescuing Bhudevi ( a symbol of the earth ) from the depths of the ocean ; and Krishna avatars , legends found in Hindu Puranas texts such as the Bhagavata Purana . Like other major murti ( forms ) in this and other Badami caves , the Varaha sculpture is set in a circle ; according to Alice Boner , the panel is an upright rectangle whose " height is equal to the <unk> directing circle and sides are aligned to essential geometric ratios , in this case to the second vertical chord of the circle " . 
 The doorway is framed by pilasters carrying an entablature with three blocks embellished with <unk> ornament . The entrance of the cave also has two armed guardians holding flowers rather than weapons . The end walls of the outer verandah are adorned with sculpted panels : to the right , Trivikrama and to the left , Varaha rescuing Bhudevi , with a penitent multi @-@ headed snake ( Nāga ) below . The adjacent side walls and ceiling have traces of colored paint , suggesting the cave used to have fresco paintings . The columns show gods and battle scenes ; the churning of the cosmic ocean ( Samudra Manthan ) ; <unk> and figures ; Brahma ; Vishnu asleep on Shesha ; illustrations of the birth of Krishna ; Krishna 's youth ; Krishna with gopis ; and cows . 
 The ceiling of Cave 2 shows a wheel with sixteen fish spokes in a square frame along with swastikas and flying couples . The end bays have a flying couple and Vishnu on Garuda . The main hall in the cave is 33 @.@ 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 16 m ) wide , 23 @.@ 583 feet ( 7 @.@ 188 m ) deep , and 11 @.@ 33 feet ( 3 @.@ 45 m ) high and is supported by eight square pillars in two rows . The roof of this hall has panels filled with bas @-@ relief carvings . At the upper reaches of the wall , a frieze runs all along the wall with engravings of episodes from the Krishna or Vishnu legends . 
 The sculptures of Cave 2 , like Cave 1 , are of the northern Deccan style of the 6th and 7th century similar to that found in Ellora caves . 
 = = = Cave 3 = = = 
 Cave 3 is dedicated to Vishnu ; it is the largest and most intricately carved cave in the complex . It has well carved , giant figures of Trivikrama , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ( Varaha ) , Harihara and Narasimha . Cave 3 's primary theme is Vaishnavite , though it also shows Harihara on its southern wall – half Vishnu and half Shiva shown fused as one , making the cave important to Shaivism studies . 
 Cave 3 , also facing north , is 60 steps away from Cave 2 . Cave 3 's temple 's verandah is 70 feet ( 21 m ) in length with an interior width of 65 feet ( 20 m ) ; it has been sculpted 48 feet ( 15 m ) deep into the mountain ; an added square shrine at the end extends the cave 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) further inside . The verandah itself is 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) wide and has four free @-@ standing , carved pillars separating it from the hall . The cave is 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) high ; it is supported by six pillars , each measuring 2 @.@ 5 square feet ( 0 @.@ 23 m2 ) . Each column and pilaster is carved with wide , deep bases crowned with capitals that are partly hidden by brackets on three sides . Each bracket , except for one , has carvings of human figures standing under foliage in different postures , of male and female mythological characters , and an attendant figure of a dwarf . A moulded cornice in the facia , with a dado of blocks below it ( generally 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) long ) , has about thirty compartments carved with series of two fat dwarves called ganas . The cave shows a Kama scene on one pillar , where a woman and a man are in <unk> ( erotic ) embrace beneath a tree . 
 Cave 3 also shows fresco paintings on the ceiling , some of which are faded , broken and unclear . These are among the earliest known surviving evidence of fresco painting in Indian art . The Hindu god Brahma is seen in one of the murals ; the wedding of Shiva and Parvati , attended by various Hindu deities , is the theme of another . There is a lotus medallion on the floor underneath the mural of the four @-@ armed Brahma . The sculpture is well preserved , and a large number of Vishnu 's reliefs including standing Vishnu with eight arms ; Vishnu seated on the hooded serpent Shesha on the eastern side of the <unk> ; Vishnu as Narasimha ( half human , half lion ) ; Varaha fully armed in the back wall of the cave ; Harihara ( a syncretic sculpture of Vishnu and Shiva ) ; and Trivikrama avatars . The back wall also has carvings of <unk> holding offerings to Varaha ; adjoining this is an inscription dated 579 AD with the name <unk> inscribed on it . 
 At one end of the pilaster is a sculpture of Vamana shown with eight arms ( <unk> ) ; this is decorated with various types of weapons . A crescent moon is crafted above his face and the crown of Vishnu decorates his head . He is flanked by Varaha and two other figures ; below on his right is his attendant Garuda . The images in front of Vamana are three figures of Bali and his wife with Shukra , his councillor . Reliefs stand 4 metres ( 13 ft ) tall . Some aspects of the culture and clothing in the 6th century is visible in the art sculpted in this cave . The roof of the verandah has seven panels created by cross beams ; each is painted in circular compartments with images of deities including Shiva , Vishnu , Indra , Brahma and Kama , with smaller images of Dikpalas ( cardinal guardians ) with geometric mosaics filling the gaps at the corners . 
 The roof of the front aisle has panels with murals in the centre of male and female figurines flying in the clouds ; the male figure is yaksha holding a sword and a shield . Decoration of lotus blooms are also seen on the panels . The roof of the hall is divided into nine panels slightly above the level of the ceiling . The central panel here depicts a deva mounted on a ram – conjectured to be Agni . Images of Brahma and Varuna are also painted on the central panels ; the floating figures are seen in the remaining panels . 
 = = = Cave 4 = = = 
 Located to the east of Cave 3 , Cave 4 is situated higher than the other caves . It is dedicated to revered figures of Jainism and is the most @-@ recently constructed of the caves . Like the other caves , it features detailed carvings and a diverse range of motifs . The cave has a five @-@ bayed entrance with four square columns – each with brackets and capitals . To the back of this verandah is a hall with two standalone and two joined pillars . The first aisle is a verandah 31 feet ( 9 @.@ 4 m ) long by 6 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 @.@ 0 m ) wide , extending to 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) deep . From the hall , steps lead to the sanctum sanctorum , which is 25 @.@ 5 feet ( 7 @.@ 8 m ) wide extends to a depth of 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) . 
 On the back part of this , Mahavira is represented sitting on a lion throne ; this figure is flanked by bas @-@ reliefs of attendants with <unk> ( fans ) , <unk> and makara 's heads . The end walls have Parshvanath about 7 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) tall with his head decorated with a multi @-@ headed cobra representing protection and reverence . Carvings include <unk> Gautama covered by four snakes , and Bahubali seen to the left of Gautama with his lower legs surrounded by snakes , together with his daughters Brahmi and Sundari . In the sanctum is an image of Mahavira resting on a pedestal containing a 12th @-@ century Kannada inscription marking the death of one <unk> . Many Jaina Tirthankara images have been engraved on the inner pillars and walls . In addition there are idols of Yakshas , <unk> , Padmavati and other Tirthankaras . Most scholars believe Cave 4 was created in the mid @-@ 7th century , but some place its creation in the 8th century . 
 = = = Cave 5 = = = 
 Cave 5 is an as @-@ yet @-@ undated , natural cave of small dimensions that is approached by crawling due to its narrow opening . Inside , there is a carved statue seated over a sculpted throne with reliefs showing people holding <unk> ( fans ) , a tree , elephants , and lions in an attacking pose . The face of this statue was reasonably intact until about 1995 , it is now damaged and missing parts . 
 There are several theories as to who the statue represents . One theory holds that it is a relief of the Buddha in a sitting posture . According to this theory , those holding the <unk> are Bodhisattvas flanking the Buddha . In the intervening centuries , the cave was converted to a Hindu shrine of Vishnu , as is seen from the white , religious markings painted on the face of the Buddha as the ninth incarnation of Vishnu . According to B.V. <unk> – archaeologist and curator of Prince of Wales Museum of Western India , the cave was not converted but from the start represented a tribute to <unk> of the Hindu Puranas , or <unk> Vishnu , its style suggesting it was likely carved in or before the 8th century . 
 A second theory , found in colonial @-@ era texts such as one by John Murray – a missionary in British India and Jainism scholar , say the main image carved in Cave 5 is that of a Jaina figure . According to a third theory , by Henry Cousens and A. Sundara – archaeologists , and supported by local legends , the statue is of an ancient king ; in a photograph of the statue taken before its face was damaged , the figure lacked the <unk> lump that typically goes with Buddha 's image . The statue has several unusual , non @-@ Buddha ornaments such as rings for fingers , a necklace and a chest @-@ band ; it wears a Hindu Yajnopavita thread and its head is stylistically closer to a Jina head than a Buddha head . These features suggest the statue may be of a king represented with features of various traditions . According to Carol Radcliffe Bolon – Assistant Curator at the Smithsonian Freer Gallery of Art , the date and identity of the main statue in Cave 5 remains enigmatic . 
 = = = Other caves = = = 
 In 2013 , <unk> <unk> – Assistant Director of Bagalkot district working for the state government of Karnataka , reported the discovery of another cave with 27 rock carvings , about 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) from the four main caves . Water gushes from this newly discovered cave year round . It depicts Vishnu and other Hindu deities , and features an inscription in the Devanagari script . The dating of these carvings is unknown . 
 = Geilo Airport , Dagali = 
 Geilo Airport , Dagali ( Norwegian : Geilo flyplass , Dagali ; formerly Geilo lufthavn , Dagali ; IATA : DLD , ICAO : <unk> ) is a private airport located at Dagali in Hol , Norway . It was previously a public airport that was both a regional airport and served international tourist charter airlines serving the nearby ski resorts centered on Geilo . The airport opened in 1985 , but failed commercially and was eventually closed in 2003 . 
 Originally featuring a 1 @,@ 300 @-@ meter ( 4 @,@ 300 ft ) runway , it was extended to 1 @,@ 800 meters ( 5 @,@ 900 ft ) in 1988 . Now it is limited to 850 meters ( 2 @,@ 790 ft ) which can still be used for private aircraft . The airport has been converted to a go cart track , though there is still some general aviation at the airport . The commercial services have been moved to Fagernes Airport , Leirin , which opened in 1987 . The airport is owned and operated by a company owned by the municipalities of Hol and Nore og Uvdal . 
 = = History = = 
 Geilo Airport was opened in 1985 as a regional airport . On 20 June 1986 , Coast Aero Center was awarded the concession for flying from Stavanger to Geilo Airport , Dagali until 1991 . The airline used a Beechcraft 200 Super King Air on the service . At the same time , Norving started operations to Oslo . The ridership from Geilo turned out to be insufficient to make a profit , and both Coast Aero Center and Norving terminated their routes . Widerøe and Norsk Air said there was not enough ridership for them to be interested . In 1989 , Coast Air received a one @-@ year concession to operate from Geilo to Oslo and Stavanger . The company used de Havilland Canada DHC @-@ 6 Twin Otter aircraft . The service was soon limited to two round trips each week . 
 Construction of a runway expansion from 1 @,@ 300 to 1 @,@ 800 metres ( 4 @,@ 300 to 5 @,@ 900 ft ) was started in 1988 , allowing the airport to be served by jet aircraft in international charter traffic . The 15 @.@ 3 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) investment was financed through a municipal and county @-@ guaranteed loan . Since 1984 , the owners had hoped that the airport would become part of a state financing scheme that secured both guarantees for the operation of the airport , as well as subsidies to scheduled traffic . Geilo never received such status , unlike the nearby Fagernes Airport , Leirin which opened in 1987 . By 1992 , the mayors of Hol and Nore og Uvdal , the municipalities who owned the airport , admitted that it had been a mistake to build the airport . There were less than 1 @,@ 000 passengers annually , and the scheduled traffic with Coast Air cost the municipalities NOK 1 million per year . In addition came the operating deficit of the airport itself . The company <unk> had been created by Hol and Nore og Uvdal , along with private investors , but it failed to increase ridership , despite spending NOK 8 million on marketing the region and the airport . 
 Twenty @-@ six municipally @-@ owned airports were taken over by the Norwegian Civil Aviation Administration ( now Avinor ) on 1 January 1996 . Geilo Airport was not among these , but received a NOK 1 @.@ 5 million annual grant from the state . Following Norway 's entry into the Schengen Agreement in 2000 , more money had to be invested in the airport to rebuilt it to meet immigration requirements . The airport set a new record with 8 @,@ 870 passengers in 2002 . From 1 June 2003 , a new company , Geilo Lufthavn Drift A / S , made an agreement to take over operations of the airport . But the airport was temporally closed from April to September , and the new company chose to not reopen the airport afterward . The airport has since been turned into a go cart track , but private aircraft can use 850 by 20 meters ( 2 @,@ 789 by 66 ft ) of the runway . 
 = = Incidents and accidents = = 
 On 25 April 1992 , the pilot and passenger of a Cessna 172 , en route from Molde Airport , Årø to Geilo , were killed when the aircraft crashed two kilometers east of Dagali . 
 On 18 October 1992 , a Piper PA @-@ 24 Comanche crashed after losing motor power at 2 @,@ 300 metres ( 7 @,@ 500 ft ) altitude . The plane became a total wreck , but the pilot managed to get out after the emergency landing with only a few scratches . 
 On 19 March 1993 , a Beechcraft Super King Air from Trønderfly crashed 4 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 7 mi ) from the airport while attempting to land . Three people were killed in the accident . 
 = Battle of Kalavrye = 
 The Battle of Kalavrye ( also <unk> or Kalavryta ) was fought in 1078 between the Byzantine imperial forces of general ( and future emperor ) Alexios Komnenos and the rebellious governor of Dyrrhachium , Nikephoros Bryennios the Elder . Bryennios had rebelled against Michael VII Doukas ( r . 1071 – 78 ) and had won over the allegiance of the Byzantine army 's regular regiments in the Balkans . Even after Doukas 's overthrow by Nikephoros III Botaneiates ( r . 1078 – 81 ) , Bryennios continued his revolt , and threatened Constantinople . After failed negotiations , Botaneiates sent the young general Alexios Komnenos with whatever forces he could gather to confront him . 
 The two armies clashed at Kalavrye on the Halmyros river in what is now European Turkey . Alexios Komnenos , whose army was considerably smaller and far less experienced , tried to ambush Bryennios 's army . The ambush failed , and the wings of his own army were driven back by the rebels . Alexios barely managed to break through with his personal retinue , but succeeded in regrouping his scattered men . At the same time , and despite having seemingly won the battle , Bryennios 's army fell into disorder after its own Pecheneg allies attacked its camp . Reinforced by Turkish mercenaries , Alexios lured the troops of Bryennios into another ambush through a feigned retreat . The rebel army broke and Bryennios was captured . 
 The battle is known through two detailed accounts , Anna Komnene 's Alexiad , and her husband Nikephoros Bryennios the Younger 's Material for History , on which Anna 's own account relies to a large degree . It is one of the few Byzantine battles described in detail , and hence a valuable source for studying the tactics of the Byzantine army of the late 11th century . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the defeat at the Battle of Manzikert in 1071 against the Seljuk Turks and the overthrow of Romanos IV Diogenes ( r . 1068 – 71 ) , the Byzantine Empire experienced a decade of near @-@ continuous internal turmoil and rebellions . The constant warfare depleted the Empire 's armies , devastated Asia Minor and left it defenceless against the increasing encroachment of the Turks . In the Balkans , invasions by the Pechenegs and the Cumans devastated Bulgaria , and the Serbian princes renounced their allegiance to the Empire . 
 The government of Michael VII Doukas ( r . 1071 – 78 ) failed to deal with the situation effectively , and rapidly lost support among the military aristocracy . In late 1077 , two of the Empire 's leading generals , Nikephoros Bryennios the Elder , the doux of Dyrrhachium in the western Balkans , and Nikephoros Botaneiates , the strategos of the Anatolic Theme in central Asia Minor , were proclaimed emperors by their troops . Bryennios set out from Dyrrhachium towards the imperial capital Constantinople , winning widespread support along the way and the loyalty of most of the Empire 's Balkan field army . He preferred to negotiate at first , but his offers were rebuffed by Michael VII . Bryennios then sent his brother John to lay siege to Constantinople . Unable to overcome its fortifications , the rebel forces soon retired . This failure led the capital 's nobility to turn to Botaneiates instead : in March 1078 Michael VII was forced to abdicate and retire as a monk , and Nikephoros Botaneiates was accepted into the city as emperor . 
 At first , Botaneiates lacked enough troops to oppose Bryennios , who in the meantime had consolidated his control over his native Thrace , effectively isolating the capital from the remaining imperial territory in the Balkans . Botaneiates sent an embassy under the <unk> Constantine Choirosphaktes , a veteran diplomat , to conduct negotiations with Bryennios . At the same time he appointed the young Alexios Komnenos as his Domestic of the Schools ( commander @-@ in @-@ chief ) , and sought aid from the Seljuk Sultan Suleyman , who sent 2 @,@ 000 warriors and promised even more . In his message to Bryennios , the aged Botaneiates ( 76 years old at his accession ) offered him the rank of Caesar and his nomination as heir to the throne . Bryennios agreed in principle , but added a few conditions of his own , and sent the ambassadors back to Constantinople for confirmation . Botaneiates , who likely had initiated negotiations only to gain time , rejected Bryennios 's conditions , and ordered Alexios Komnenos to campaign against the rebel . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Bryennios had camped at the plain of <unk> ( a name deriving from the Latin <unk> ) on the road to Constantinople . His army comprised 12 @,@ 000 mostly seasoned men from the regiments ( tagmata ) of Thessaly , Macedonia and Thrace , as well as Frankish mercenaries and the elite tagma of the Hetaireia . Alexios 's forces included 2 @,@ 000 Turkish horse @-@ archers , 2 @,@ 000 Chomatenoi from Asia Minor , a few hundred Frankish knights from Italy , and the newly raised regiment of the Immortals , which had been created by Michael VII 's chief minister <unk> and was intended to form the nucleus of a new army . Estimates of Alexios 's total force vary from 5 @,@ 500 – 6 @,@ 500 ( Haldon ) to some 8 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 ( Birkenmeier ) , but it is clear that he was at a considerable disadvantage against Bryennios ; not only was his force considerably smaller , but also far less experienced than Bryennios 's veterans . 
 Alexios 's forces set forth from Constantinople and camped on the shore of the river Halmyros — a small stream between Herakleia ( modern Marmara <unk> ) and Selymbria ( modern Silivri ) , modern <unk> Dere — near the fort of Kalavrye ( Greek : <unk> , modern <unk> ) . Curiously , and against established practice , he did not fortify his camp , perhaps so as not to fatigue or dishearten his men with an implicit admission of weakness . He then sent his Turkish allies to scout out Bryennios 's disposition , strength and intentions . Alexios 's spies easily accomplished their tasks , but on the eve of the battle some were captured and Bryennios too was informed of Alexios 's strength . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Initial dispositions and plans = = = 
 Bryennios arranged his army in the typical three divisions , each in two lines , as prescribed by the Byzantine military manuals . The right wing , under his brother John , was 5 @,@ 000 strong and comprised his Frankish mercenaries , Thessalian cavalry , the Hetaireia , and the <unk> regiment ( descendants of the veterans of George Maniakes 's campaign in Sicily and Italy ) . His left wing , 3 @,@ 000 men from Thrace and Macedonia , was placed under Katakalon Tarchaneiotes , and the centre , under Bryennios himself , comprised 3 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 000 men from Thessaly , Thrace and Macedonia . Again , according to standard doctrine , on his far left , about half a kilometer ( " two stadia " ) from the main force , he had stationed an outflanking detachment ( <unk> ) of Pechenegs . 
 Alexios deployed his smaller army in waiting near Bryennios 's camp , and divided it in two commands . The left , which confronted Bryennios 's strongest division , was commanded by himself and contained the Frankish knights to the right and the Immortals to the Franks ' left . The right command was under Constantine Katakalon , and comprised the Chomatenoi and the Turks . The latter , according to the Alexiad , were given the role of flank guard ( <unk> ) and tasked with observing and countering the Pechenegs . Conversely , on the extreme left Alexios formed his own flanking detachment ( apparently drawn from among the Immortals ) , concealed from enemy view inside a hollow . Given his inferiority , Alexios was forced to remain on the defensive . His only chance at success was that his out @-@ flankers , concealed by the broken terrain , would surprise and create enough confusion among Bryennios 's men for him and his strong left wing to break through their lines . 
 = = = Alexios 's army collapses = = = 
 As the rebel forces advanced towards his enemy 's line , Alexios 's flankers sprung their ambush . Their attack did indeed cause some initial confusion , but Bryennios ( or , according to the Alexiad , his brother John , who commanded the right wing ) rallied his men and led forth the second line . This counter @-@ attack broke Alexios 's flankers ; as they retreated in panic , they fell upon the Immortals , who also panicked and fled , abandoning their posts . Although they suffered some casualties from Bryennios 's pursuing men , most managed to escape well to the rear of Alexios 's army . 
 Alexios , who was fighting with his retinue alongside the Franks , did not immediately realize that his left wing had collapsed . In the meantime , on his right wing , the Chomatenoi , engaged with Tarchaneiotes 's men , were outflanked and attacked in the rear by the Pechenegs , who had somehow evaded Alexios 's Turkish flank @-@ guards . The Chomatenoi too broke and fled , and Alexios 's fate seemed sealed . At this point the Pechenegs failed to follow up their success , and instead turned back and began looting Bryennios 's own camp . After gathering what plunder they could , they left the battle and made for their homes . 
 Nevertheless , Bryennios 's victory seemed certain , for his wings began to envelop Alexios 's Franks in the centre . Realizing his position and despairing in the face of defeat ( and , as Bryennios the Younger records , because he had disobeyed imperial orders to wait for more Turkish reinforcements and feared punishment from Botaneiates ) , Alexios at first resolved to attempt an all @-@ or @-@ nothing attack on Bryennios himself to decapitate the enemy army , but was dissuaded by his servant . With only six of his men around him , he then managed to break through the surrounding enemy soldiers . Confusion reigned behind their lines as a result of the Pecheneg attack on the rebel camp , and in this tumult Alexios saw Bryennios 's imperial parade horse , with his two swords of state , being driven away to safety . Alexios and his men charged the escort , seized the horse , and rode away with it from the battlefield . 
 Having reached a hill behind his army 's original position , Alexios began to regroup his army from the units that had broken . He sent out messengers to rally his scattered men with news that Bryennios had been killed , showing his parade horse as evidence . At the same time , the promised Turkish reinforcements began arriving at the scene , lifting his men 's morale . All the while , on the battlefield , Bryennios 's army had closed around Alexios 's Franks , who dismounted and offered to surrender . In the process the rebel army had become totally disordered , with units mixed and their formations disordered . Bryennios 's reserves had been thrown in confusion by the Pecheneg attack , while his front lines relaxed , thinking that the battle was over . 
 = = = Alexios 's counter @-@ attack = = = 
 Having restored his surviving forces to order , and aware of the confusion in Bryennios 's forces , Alexios decided to counter @-@ attack . The plan he laid out made far greater use of the particular skills of his Turkish horse @-@ archers . He divided his force into three commands , of which two were left behind in ambush . The other , formed from the Immortals and the Chomatenoi under Alexios 's own command , was not arrayed in one continuous line , but broken up in small groups , intermingled with other groups of Turkish horse @-@ archers . This command would advance on the rebels , attack them , then feign retreat and draw them into the ambush . 
 The attack of Alexios 's division initially caught Bryennios 's men off guard , but , being veteran troops , they soon recovered and once again began to push it back . Retreating , Alexios 's troops , and especially the Turks , employed skirmishing tactics , attacking the enemy line and then withdrawing swiftly , thus keeping their opponents at bay and weakening the coherence of their line . Some among Alexios 's men chose to attack Bryennios , and the rebel general had to defend against several attacks himself . 
 When the battle reached the place of the ambush , Alexios 's wings , likened in the Alexiad to a " swarm of wasps " , attacked the rebel army on the flanks firing arrows and shouting loudly , spreading panic and confusion among Bryennios 's men . Despite the attempts of Bryennios and his brother John to rally them , their army broke and fled , and other units , which were following behind , did likewise . The two brothers tried to put up a rear @-@ guard defence , but they were overcome and captured . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The battle marked the end of Bryennios 's revolt , although Nikephoros Basilakes gathered up much of Bryennios 's defeated army and attempted to claim the throne for himself . He too was defeated by Alexios Komnenos , who then proceeded to expel the Pechenegs from Thrace . The elder Bryennios was blinded on Botaneiates 's orders , but the emperor later took pity on him and restored him his titles and his fortune . After Alexios Komnenos seized the throne himself in 1081 , Bryennios was further honoured with high dignities . He even held command during Alexios 's campaigns against the Pechenegs , and defended Adrianople from a rebel attack in 1095 . His son or grandson , Nikephoros Bryennios the Younger , was married to Alexios 's daughter Anna Komnene . He became a prominent general of Alexios 's reign , eventually raised to the rank of Caesar , and a historian . 
 = John Sigismund Zápolya = 
 John Sigismund Zápolya or Szapolyai ( Hungarian : Szapolyai János Zsigmond ; 7 July 1540 – 14 March 1571 ) was King of Hungary as John II from 1540 to 1551 , and from 1556 to 1570 , and the first Prince of Transylvania from 1570 to his death . He was the only son of John I , King of Hungary , and Isabella of Poland . John I ruled parts of the Kingdom of Hungary , with the support of the Ottoman Sultan Suleiman ; the remaining areas were ruled by Ferdinand I , who also claimed Hungary . The two kings concluded a peace treaty in 1538 acknowledging Ferdinand 's right to reunite Hungary after John I 's death , but shortly after John Sigismund 's birth , and on his deathbed , John I bequeathed his realm to his son . The late king 's staunchest supporters elected the infant John Sigismund king , but he was not crowned with the Holy Crown of Hungary . 
 Suleiman invaded Hungary under the pretext of protecting John Sigismund against Ferdinand . The capital of Hungary , Buda , fell to the Ottomans without opposition in 1541 , but Suleiman allowed the dowager queen , Isabella , to retain the territory east of the river Tisza on John Sigismund 's behalf . Isabella and John Sigismund moved to Lippa ( now Lipova in Romania ) . Before long , they took up residence in Gyulafehérvár in Transylvania ( now Alba Iulia in Romania ) . John Sigismund 's realm was administered by his father 's treasurer , George Martinuzzi , who wanted to reunite Hungary under the rule of Ferdinand . Martinuzzi forced Isabella to renounce her son 's realm in exchange for two Silesian duchies and 140 @,@ 000 florins in 1551 . John Sigismund and his mother settled in Poland , but she continued to negotiate for John Sigismund 's restoration with Ferdinand 's enemies . 
 Ferdinand could not protect eastern Hungary against the Ottomans . Urged by Suleiman , the Transylvanian Diet in 1556 persuaded John Sigismund and his mother to return to Transylvania . She ruled her son 's realm until her death in 1559 . A wealthy lord , Melchior Balassa , rebelled against John Sigismund in late 1561 , which contributed to the loss to Ferdinand of most counties outside Transylvania . The Székely people , whose liberties had been restricted in the 1550s , also rose up against John Sigismund , but he crushed the rebellion . During the ensuing war against the Habsburgs , the Ottomans supported John Sigismund , and he paid homage to Suleiman in Zemun in 1566 . The 1568 Treaty of Adrianople concluded the war , confirming John Sigismund in the eastern territories of the medieval Kingdom of Hungary ( Transylvania and " Partium " ) . 
 John Sigismund initiated a series of theological debates among the representatives of the concurring theological schools of the Reformation in the 1560s . He converted from Catholicism to Lutheranism in 1562 and from Lutheranism to Calvinism in 1564 . Around five years later , accepting the Anti @-@ Trinitarian views of his physician , Giorgio Biandrata and court preacher Ferenc Dávid , he became the only Unitarian monarch in history . In 1568 , the Diet passed the Edict of Torda ( now Turda in Romania ) , which emphasized that " faith is a gift of God " and prohibited the persecution of people for religious reasons . The edict expanded the limits of freedom of religion beyond the standards of late 16th @-@ century Europe . John Sigismund abandoned the title " elected king of Hungary " in the Treaty of Speyer in 1570 . Thereafter , he styled himself " Prince of Transylvania and Lord of Parts of the Kingdom of Hungary " . He died childless . The Catholic Stephen Báthory succeeded him . 
 = = Family = = 
 John Sigismund 's father , John Zápolya , was the wealthiest Hungarian lord in the early 16th century . After the Ottoman Sultan , Suleiman the Magnificent , inflicted a crushing defeat on the Hungarian army in the Battle of Mohács , the majority of the noblemen elected John Zápolya king in 1526 . However , a group of influential lords proclaimed Ferdinand of Habsburg , Archduke of Austria , king in the same year . Hungary fell into a civil war that lasted for decades . 
 John paid homage to Suleiman at Mohács in 1529 to secure Ottoman support against Ferdinand . However , neither John nor Ferdinand could win control of the whole country during the next years . To conclude the civil war , the two kings ' envoys signed the Treaty of Várad on 24 February 1538 , which confirmed both kings ' right to retain the lands that they held . John , who was childless , also acknowledged Ferdinand 's right to take control of his realm ( the central and eastern part of the Kingdom of Hungary ) after his death . John also stipulated , if he fathered a son , his son would inherit his ancestral domains . Ferdinand , however , proved unable to protect John 's realm against an Ottoman invasion . At age 52 John married Isabella Jagiellon , the 22 @-@ year @-@ old daughter of Sigismund I the Old , King of Poland , on 2 March 1539 . The humanist scholars Paolo Giovio and Antun <unk> emphasized that Isabella was one of the most educated women of their age . 
 John Sigismund was born in Buda on 7 July 1540 . On learning of his birth , his father , who was on campaign in Transylvania , rode to his soldiers ' camp to inform them of the good news . The following day John fell ill , and he died on 21 or 22 July . Before his death he persuaded those present at his death bed to take an oath that they would prevent the transfer of his realm to Ferdinand . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 = = = Accession = = = 
 Soon after John Zápolya died , his treasurer , George Martinuzzi , hurried to Buda to secure John Sigismund 's inheritance . On Martinuzzi 's proposal , the Diet of Hungary elected John Sigismund king on 13 September 1540 , but he was not crowned with the Holy Crown of Hungary . The Diet proclaimed Queen Isabella and George Martinuzzi , along with two powerful lords , Péter Petrovics and Bálint Török , the guardians of the infant monarch . 
 In August , Ferdinand 's envoys had demanded the transfer of the late John Zápolya 's realm to Ferdinand in accordance with the Treaty of Várad . Peter <unk> , who had been the commander of Zápolya 's troops in Upper Hungary , and Franjo Frankopan , Archbishop of Kalocsa , soon deserted to Ferdinand . The wealthy Stephen Majláth expelled most of John Sigismund 's supporters from Transylvania in an attempt to seize the province for himself . Ferdinand 's envoy , Hieronymus Łaski , informed Suleiman of the Treaty of Várad , asking the sultan to consent to the unification of Hungary under Ferdinand 's rule . Instead , the sultan stated that he supported John Sigismund and had Łaski arrested . 
 Ferdinand 's army seized Visegrád , Vác , Pest , Tata and Székesfehérvár in October , but could not capture Buda . His military commander , Wilhelm von <unk> , again laid siege to Buda on 4 May 1541 . Suleiman left Istanbul at the head of a large army in June to take advantage of the new civil war in Hungary . On his command , Petru <unk> , Prince of Moldavia , captured Stephen Majláth and forced the Transylvanian Diet to swear fealty to John Sigismund in late July . <unk> lifted the siege of Buda before Suleiman reached the town on 26 August . 
 Suleiman said that he had come to protect John Sigismund 's interests , but also announced that he wanted to see the infant king , because he had heard rumours about Isabella 's having actually given birth to a daughter . Six Hungarian lords ( including George Martinuzzi and Bálint Török ) accompanied John Sigismund to the sultan 's camp on 29 August . During the meeting , janissaries entered Buda , saying that they wanted to see the town . This turned out to be a trick that enabled them to seize the capital of Hungary without opposition . Bálint Török was captured in the sultan 's camp . Suleiman declared that John Sigismund could retain the territories to the east of the river Tisza in exchange for a yearly tribute of 10 @,@ 000 florins . 
 = = = First rule = = = 
 Isabella and Martinuzzi left Buda on 5 September 1541 , taking John Sigismund and the Holy Crown with them . She and her son settled in Lippa , which was the center of an old domain of the Zápolya family . The delegates of the counties of John Sigismund 's realm met in Debrecen on 18 October . They swore fealty to him and acknowledged the sultan 's suzerainty . Martinuzzi signed a treaty with Ferdinand I 's representative , Caspar <unk> , in Gyalu ( now Gilău in Romania ) on 29 December . According to the Treaty of Gyalu , Hungary was to be reunited under the rule of Ferdinand , but John Sigismund 's right to the <unk> ' domains in Upper Hungary was confirmed . 
 On 29 March 1542 , the " Three Nations of Transylvania " urged Isabella to move from Lippa ( which was located near the Ottoman Empire ) to Transylvania . After John <unk> , Bishop of Transylvania , died in April , the Diet granted the domains of the bishopric to the royal family . Isabella and John Sigismund moved to Gyulafehérvár in June , taking up residence in the bishops ' castle . 
 The Transylvanian Diet confirmed the Treaty of Gyalu in August . The representatives of the noblemen of the Partium ( the counties between the Tisza and Transylvania ) also consented to a war against the Ottoman Empire in November . However , the Habsburgs ' army was unable to recapture Pest or defeat the Ottomans . Caspar <unk> came to Gyalu to take possession of John Sigismund 's realm on Ferdinand 's behalf , but Isabella refused him on 17 December . Three days later , the Diet declared the Treaty of Gyalu null and void , over the objections of the delegates of the Transylvanian Saxons . 
 The relationship between Isabella and Martinuzzi was tense . Martinuzzi continued to control state administration and finance even after the Diet confirmed Isabella 's superior position in February 1543 . The first tribute from John Sigismund 's realm was sent to the Ottoman Sultan in June . In the same month , Saxon clergymen from Kronstadt ( now Brașov in Romania ) , who had adopted Lutheranism , participated in a debate with Catholic priests in the presence of the queen and Martinuzzi in Gyulafehérvár . The Saxons were allowed to leave , although Martinuzzi , who was bishop of Várad , wanted to bring them before court on charges of heresy . In April 1544 , the Diet of Torda prescribed that travellers should respect the religious customs of the settlements they visited , showing that the ideas of the Reformation had spread to the whole province . 
 The first Transylvanian Diet at which delegates from the Partium were present met in August 1544 . At the Diet , Martinuzzi was made chief justice . Five counties that had previously accepted Ferdinand 's rule – Bereg , Szabolcs , Szatmár , Ung and <unk> – swore allegiance to John Sigismund before the end of 1555 . 
 The Ottomans laid claim to two fortresses , <unk> and <unk> ( now Novi Bečej and Zrenjanin in Serbia ) , in early 1546 . The sultan refused to include John Sigismund 's realm in the peace treaty that he concluded with Ferdinand 's brother , Emperor Charles V , in 1547 . Both actions suggested that Suleiman intended to seize part of John Sigismund 's kingdom , prompting Isabella and Martinuzzi to reopen negotiations with Ferdinand on the reunification of Hungary in 1548 . Martinuzzi and Ferdinand 's envoy , Nicolaus of Salm , signed a treaty in <unk> on 8 September 1549 . According to their agreement , Isabella and John Sigismund were to abdicate in exchange for the Silesian duchies of Opole and Racibórz and 100 @,@ 000 florins in compensation . Isabella refused to execute the treaty and remained in Gyulafehérvár . Martinuzzi laid siege to the town , forcing her to give up resistance in October 1550 . 
 Isabella and her supporters Péter Petrovics and Ferenc <unk> made a new attempt to prevent the execution of the Treaty of <unk> in May 1551 , but Martinuzzi defeated them . Under duress , Isabella abdicated in favor of Ferdinand on John Sigismund 's behalf , in return for the two Silesian duchies and 140 @,@ 000 florins on 19 July . Two days later , she surrendered the Holy Crown to Ferdinand 's representative , Giovanni Battista Castaldo . The Diet acknowledged their abdication and swore fealty to Ferdinand on 26 July . 
 = = = In exile = = = 
 Isabella and John Sigismund left Transylvania on 6 August 1551 , accompanied by Péter Petrovics . They settled in Kassa ( now Košice in Slovakia ) , and moved to Opole in March 1552 . Realizing that the Silesian duchies were poor , they left for Poland before the end of April . During the following years they lived in Kraków , Warsaw , Sanok , and other Polish towns . John Sigismund often went hunting for bison and regularly visited his uncle , Sigismund II Augustus , King of Poland . However , his health was delicate because he suffered from epilepsy and chronic intestinal disorders . 
 The contemporaneous historian Ferenc Forgách , who was Isabella 's implacable enemy , accused her of bringing her son up " shamefully " , allowing him to keep bad company and drink . John Sigismund 's tutors were actually humanist scholars : the Hungarian Mihály Csáky and the Polish Wojciech <unk> . <unk> aroused John Sigismund 's interest in theological debates . 
 Ferdinand 's rule remained fragile in the eastern territories of the Kingdom of Hungary because he did not send enough mercenaries to defend them . Suspecting that Martinuzzi was conspiring with the Ottomans , Castaldo had Martinuzzi murdered in late 1551 . The Ottomans occupied the lowlands of Banat in the summer of 1552 . 
 In March 1553 Suleiman urged Isabella to return to Hungary . Péter Petrovics rose against Ferdinand , and an assembly of the Székely people declared their loyalty to John Sigismund . However , both uprisings were crushed before the end of September . Deciding in April 1554 that Hungary should be restored to John Sigismund , Suleiman allowed Péter Petrovics to take control of two fortresses in Banat . Henry II of France , engaged in war against the Habsburgs , also urged Isabella to return to Hungary , promising one of his daughters in marriage to John Sigismund . 
 Suleiman sent messages to the Transylvanian lords in 1555 , demanding they obey John Sigismund without resistance . Before the end of the year , the representatives of the Three Nations petitioned Ferdinand either to send reinforcements or to absolve them from their oath of fealty . Petrovics stormed into Transylvania in early 1556 . The Diet swore an oath of fealty to John Sigismund on 12 March 1556 , referring to him as " the son of King John " . The envoys of the Diet departed for Poland on 1 June to persuade Isabella and her son to return . Two weeks later , Ferdinand informed Suleiman that he was ready to withdraw his troops from John Sigismund 's former realm . 
 = = = Return = = = 
 The representatives of the Three Nations received Isabella and John Sigismund with much pomp and ceremony in Kolozsvár ( now Cluj @-@ Napoca in Romania ) on 22 October 1556 . The Diet confirmed her right to administer state affairs in the name of her son , who was still a minor . In the following months several counties outside Transylvania ( including <unk> , Bihar , and <unk> ) also acknowledged John Sigismund 's rule . 
 Isabella adopted a tolerant religious policy , enabling the spread of Calvinism , especially in Partium and Kolozsvár . In 1559 she started new negotiations with Ferdinand , proposing to renounce her son 's title of king if Ferdinand would agree to marry one of his daughters to John Sigismund and to confirm John Sigismund 's rule in the lands to the east of the Tisza . However , the dowager queen died at the age of 40 on 18 September 1559 . 
 = = King @-@ elect = = 
 = = = Start of personal rule = = = 
 John Sigismund 's rule began with his mother 's death . Rather than adopting a new title , he continued to style himself rex electus ( king @-@ elect ) . Mihály Csáky , Christopher and Stephen Báthory , and his mother 's other advisors continued to participate in state administration . John Sigismund sent envoys to Ferdinand to propose marriage with one of Ferdinand 's daughters , but also to announce his claim to the parts of Hungary under Ferdinand 's rule . His demands were rejected , but peace was preserved . 
 John Sigismund showed a particular interest in religious matters and initiated several debates among the representatives of diverse theological schools . The first debate was held between Lutheran and Calvinist priests in <unk> ( now Mediaș in Romania ) in January 1560 . A year and a half later , John Sigismund sent letters to the University of Wittenberg and other theological centers in Germany to seek advice on the main points of the two Protestant schools of thought . 
 Melchior Balassa , one of the wealthiest lords in John Sigismund 's realm , deserted to Ferdinand in December 1561 . John Sigismund moved to seize Balassa 's domains , but his army was routed at Hadad ( now <unk> in Romania ) on 4 March 1562 . Stirred up by Balassa , the Székely commoners rose to restore their ancient liberties ( including exemption from taxes ) , which had been restricted in the 1550s . John Sigismund 's army routed them in May , and their leaders were impaled or mutilated . The Diet adopted new laws to restrict the privileges of the Székelys , including a ban on the employment of commoners as jurors . Two new royal castles named <unk> ( " Székely @-@ assault " ) and <unk> ( " Székely @-@ regret " ) were erected in the Székely Land . After Balassa 's revolt , most counties outside Transylvania changed allegiance from John Sigismund to Ferdinand . To persuade Ferdinand to renounce the counties , John Sigismund even offered not to style himself king , but this was rejected in July 1562 . 
 John Sigismund , originally Roman Catholic , converted to Lutheranism before the end of 1562 . However , debates between Lutheran and Calvinist theologians continued . John Sigismund appointed his court physician , Giorgio Biandrata ( who as an Anti @-@ Trinitarian did not share either the Lutheran or the Calvinist view ) to head a synod to reconcile the Lutheran and the Calvinist clergymen , but their differences proved insuperable in April 1564 . The Diet acknowledged the existence of a separate Calvinist denomination in June . John Sigismund also adopted Calvinism and made Ferenc Dávid his court preacher . 
 = = = Wars and debates = = = 
 Ferdinand died on 25 July 1564 , and his son Maximilian succeeded him . The Transylvanian Diet declared war to reoccupy the counties that had been lost to the Habsburgs in 1562 . John Sigismund 's army seized Szatmár ( now Satu Mare in Romania ) , Hadad and Nagybánya ( now Baia Mare in Romania ) before the end of 1562 , but a counter @-@ invasion by Lazarus von <unk> reached the river Szamos in March 1565 . The envoys of John Sigismund and Maximilian concluded a treaty in Szatmár on 13 March 1565 in which John Sigismund renounced his title of king in return for the recognition of his hereditary rule in Transylvania John Sigismund was also to marry Maximilian 's sister , Joanna . 
 However , the Ottomans forced John Sigismund to declare the treaty null and void on 21 April . John Sigismund and Hasan , Pasha of Temesvár , joined forces and recaptured <unk> ( now <unk> in Romania ) , Nagybánya and Szatmár . He intended to see the sultan in Istanbul to give an explanation for the Treaty of Szatmár , but Suleiman informed him that he would personally come to Hungary . 
 Ferenc Dávid began to include Anti @-@ Trinitarian ideas in his sermons , which infuriated the Calvinist bishop of Debrecen , Péter Melius Juhász . John Sigismund organized an open debate about the doctrine of Trinity , which was held in Gyulafehérvár in April 1566 . After the debate John Sigismund granted funds to the Calvinist publishing house in Debrecen . He also sponsored the establishment of Protestant colleges in Kolozsvár , <unk> ( present @-@ day Târgu Mureș in Romania ) and Nagyvárad . His letters to Petrus Ramus and other leading scholars of the Reformation show that he wanted to develop the royal college in Gyulafehérvár into an academy . An anthology of Italian poems , published in Venice in the 1560s , hailed John Sigismund as " patron of the Renaissance " . 
 Sultan Suleiman came to Zemun on the Danube in preparation for his campaign against Habsburg territories in the summer of 1566 . John Sigismund hurried to the sultan 's camp , accompanied by 400 Transylvanian lords . After John Sigismund and his principal advisors prostrated themselves before the sultan in his tent , Suleiman confirmed John Sigismund 's position as hereditary ruler . According to the eyewitness Mustafa <unk> , the sultan addressed John Sigismund as his " beloved son " . 
 John Sigismund invaded Upper Hungary on the sultan 's order on 28 July . However , when Suleiman died during the Siege of Szigetvár on 6 September , Sokollu Mehmed Pasha ordered John Sigismund to return to Transylvania . In a letter written about this time to Cosimo I , Duke of Florence , the mercenary <unk> <unk> described John Sigismund as " extremely benevolent , gracious , subtle in thought , wise , level @-@ headed , industrious [ and ] brave " . <unk> mentioned that John Sigismund spoke Latin , Italian , German , Polish , Hungarian and Romanian well , and could also speak Greek and Turkish . 
 [ John Sigismund ] is of medium height and slender , with blond , silky hair and extremely fine , white skin . ... [ H ] is blue eyes gaze mildly and with benevolence ... His arms and hands are long and finely articulated , but powerful ... [ H ] e heartily enjoys every kind of hunting , both for large game ... and for hare and fowl . ... He enjoys training horses . ... He is very strong in battle with the lance ... [ I ] n archery few are his equal ... He runs and jumps better than average ; he loves wrestling , even if many are superior to him ... [ H ] e loves music very much ... He plays the lute surpassing all but very few . ... [ H ] e tends more to cheerfulness than to melancholy ... He is opposed to suffering and only with great difficulty does he bring himself to mete out punishment ... Among his recognized fine qualities is his abstinent mode of life ... 
 John Sigismund appointed a Calvinist bishop as the only religious leader of the Romanians in his realm in November 1566 . The Diet also ordered that all Romanian priests who refused to convert to Calvinism were to be expelled , but this decision was not carried out . Influenced by Dávid and Biandrata , John Sigismund became receptive to Anti @-@ Trinitarian ideas from early 1567 . With John Sigismund 's support , Dávid published five books to promote his views , reproving for idolatry those who accepted the dogma of the Trinity . 
 John Sigismund and Hasan Pasha stormed into Upper Hungary in March 1567 . However , John Sigismund was taken seriously ill in summer . The Transylvanian lords pledged to respect his last will when electing his successor . The Ottoman Sultan Selim II granted the Transylvanian lords the right to freely elect their monarch , only preserving the right to approve their decision . Before long , John Sigismund recovered . 
 = = = Freedom of religion = = = 
 The Diet met again in Torda in early 1568 and authorized preachers to " teach the Gospel " according to their own understanding . The Diet also declared that nobody should " suffer at the hands of others for religious reasons " , stating that " faith is a gift of God " . The Edict of Torda expanded the limits of religious freedom far beyond the standard of 16th @-@ century Europe . The decree did not put a complete end to discrimination , because official status was granted only to the Catholic , Lutheran , and Calvinist clergymen , but Unitarian , Orthodox , Armenian , Jewish , and Muslim believers could also freely practise their religions . 
 The Treaty of Adrianople , signed in February 1568 , concluded the first war between the Ottoman Empire and the Habsburgs . According to the treaty , John Sigismund retained all territories that he had conquered from Maximilian in the previous years . The envoy of the Ottoman Sultan Selim II in Paris suggested that John Sigismund should marry Margaret of Valois , but his proposal was ignored . 
 Many theological discussions on the Trinity were organized in 1568 , the first of them taking place in his presence in Gyulafehérvár from 8 to 17 March . The growing influence of the Anti @-@ <unk> on John Sigismund became obvious in 1569 . After Péter Károlyi , a Calvinist cleric , complained about John Sigismund 's bias , John Sigismund accused the Calvinist bishop , Melius , of having persecuted non @-@ Calvinist priests , stating that Melius " should not play the pope " . The largest debate between the Calvinist and Anti @-@ Trinitarian , or Unitarian , theologians took place in Nagyvárad from 20 to 25 October 1569 . Although neither side was declared winner , after the debate John Sigismund accepted Anti @-@ Trinitarian ideas , which made him the only Unitarian monarch in history . 
 We wish that in our country ... freedom shall reign . We know furthermore that faith is a gift from God and that conscience cannot be constrained . And if [ Peter Melius Juhász ] does not abide by this , he may go to the other side of the Tisza . | John Sigismund 's words to Péter Károlyi 
 After John Sigismund 's conversion , most of his courtiers also adhered to Unitarianism . According to historian Gábor Barta , political factors also contributed to John Sigismund 's conversion , because he " found in [ Anti @-@ Trinitarianism ] the means through which he could express both his adherence to the Christian world and the distance from it " . István <unk> says that the simplicity of the idea that " There is but one God ! " also contributed to the spread of Unitarianism , especially among the Székely villagers and the townspeople of Kolozsvár . A religious enthusiast , György <unk> , stirred up many peasants in Partium to wage holy war against the Ottomans in 1569 . They marched against Debrecen , but the neighboring noblemen routed them near the town in early 1570 . 
 = = Prince of Transylvania = = 
 Negotiations between John Sigismund and Maximilian concluded with the Treaty of Speyer , signed on 16 August 1570 . John Sigismund acknowledged Maximilian as the sole king of Hungary and abandoned his own royal title . Instead , he adopted the new title " Prince of Transylvania and Lord of Parts of the Kingdom of Hungary " , also confirming that his realm was part of the Kingdom of Hungary and would revert to Maximilian or Maximilian 's heir after John Sigismund 's death . 
 John Sigismund , now gravely ill , ratified the treaty on 1 December . The last Diet to meet during his reign confirmed the decrees of previous Diets enhancing religious freedom . He died in Gyulafehérvár on 14 March 1571 , a few days after Maximilian had ratified the Treaty of Speyer . The Transylvanian lords kept his death secret for days . He was buried in St. Michael 's Cathedral in Gyulafehérvár , in accordance with Unitarian rite . 
 John Sigismund had made his last testament and will in the presence of Chancellor Mihály Csáky and Treasurer Gáspár Bekes during his earlier illness in the summer of 1567 . Despite his recovery , he did not alter the text in the following years . He willed most of his wealth to his uncle , Sigismund August of Poland , and his three aunts , Sophia , Anna and Catherine . He bequeathed his library to the Protestant school of Gyulafehérvár . 
 John Sigismund , who never married and left no heir , was the last member of the Zápolya family . In his will , he assured the Diet of its right to choose the new monarch . The representatives of the Three Nations elected the Roman Catholic Stephen Báthory , who adopted the title Voivode of Transylvania . Gáspár Bekes , supported by Maximilian , contested the election , but Báthory emerged victorious in the resulting civil war and consolidated his rule . 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = Operation Whirlwind = 
 Operation Whirlwind ( Croatian : Operacija Vihor ) was a failed Croatian Army ( HV ) offensive in the Banovina region of Croatia , fought from 11 – 13 December 1991 , during the early stages of the Croatian War of Independence . The offensive employed a single infantry brigade as the main attacking force , supported by a bridging unit and a handful of tanks and armoured personnel carriers . Although the offensive met hardly any resistance in its initial stage , achieving tactical surprise , the operation was poorly planned , supported and executed as a result of limited training and combat experience . The offensive established a short @-@ lived bridgehead , evacuated in panic two days after the operation commenced , under tank and mortar fire from the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) deployed north of Glina . 
 The operation was criticised for its poor planning and execution , insufficient preparation , reconnaissance and training , and inappropriate command and control methods applied by the Sisak Operational Group in charge of the offensive . It also lacked clear objectives . Afterwards , Croatian military authorities investigated the offensive , but found that there was very little written documentation , including written unit @-@ level orders , pertaining to the operation . That led Admiral Davor Domazet @-@ Lošo to conclude that the offensive was not formally authorised . The formal investigation did not specifically charge anyone with the failures , simply specifying the problems observed instead . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , following the electoral defeat of the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia , ethnic tensions worsened . The Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) confiscated Croatia 's Territorial Defence ( Teritorijalna obrana - TO ) weapons to minimize resistance . On 17 August , the tensions escalated into an open revolt by Croatian Serbs , centred on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around Knin , parts of the Lika , Kordun , Banovina and eastern Croatia . This was followed by two unsuccessful attempts by Serbia , supported by Montenegro and Serbia 's provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo to obtain the Yugoslav Presidency 's approval for a JNA operation to disarm Croatian security forces in January 1991 . 
 After a bloodless skirmish between Serb insurgents and Croatian special police in March , the JNA itself , supported by Serbia and its allies , asked the Federal Presidency to give it wartime authorities and declare a state of emergency . The request was denied on 15 March , and the JNA came under the control of Serbian President Slobodan Milošević . Milošević , preferring a campaign to expand Serbia rather than to preserve Yugoslavia , publicly threatened to replace the JNA with a Serbian army and declared that he no longer recognized the authority of the Federal Presidency . By the end of the month , the conflict had escalated into the Croatian War of Independence . The JNA stepped in , increasingly supporting the Croatian Serb insurgents , and preventing Croatian police from intervening . In early April , the leaders of the Croatian Serb revolt declared their intention to integrate the area under their control , known as SAO Krajina , with Serbia . The Government of Croatia viewed this declaration as an attempt to secede . 
 In May , the Croatian government responded by forming the Croatian National Guard ( Zbor narodne garde - ZNG ) , but its development was hampered by a United Nations ( UN ) arms embargo introduced in September . On 8 October , Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia , and a month later the ZNG was renamed the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska - HV ) . Late 1991 saw the fiercest fighting of the war , as the 1991 Yugoslav campaign in Croatia culminated in the Siege of Dubrovnik , and the Battle of Vukovar . In western Slavonia , the HV managed to push back the JNA at several points , and secure Papuk Mountain in early December in Operation Otkos 10 . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 The principal force committed to the offensive , planned by the HV Sisak Operational Group ( OG ) , was the 102nd Infantry Brigade , attached to the Sisak OG by the Zagreb Operational Zone command , as the single combat unit deployed as a reserve in the Sisak OG area of responsibility ( AOR ) . 
 Besides the 102nd Brigade , commanded by Captain Franc <unk> , the Zagreb Operational Zone deployed an armoured @-@ mechanised unit , attached directly to the Zagreb Operational Zone , into the Sisak OG AOR . The unit consisted of eight tanks and two armoured personnel carriers . 
 The Sisak OG assigned the 10th Brigade of the Croatian TO to support the right flank of the 102nd Infantry Brigade . Protection of the left flank was assigned to the 2nd Battalion of the 2nd Guards Brigade , supported by the 2nd Battalion of the 144th Infantry Brigade . 
 To reinforce the 102nd Infantry <unk> and the independent armoured @-@ mechanised unit , ten soldiers from the Glina Battalion were attached to each battalion of the 10th and 102nd brigades ; two soldiers were assigned to serve as guides for each tank . In addition , the Glina Battalion was tasked with reconnaissance , harassment of JNA 's rear and securing captured infrastructure . 
 Sisak special police were assigned to support the Glina Battalion , and indirectly the main offensive force . The 36th Engineering @-@ Pontoon Battalion was tasked with the Kupa River crossing by the 102nd Infantry Brigade . The Sisak OG was commanded by Major General Božo <unk> . 
 The Croatian Serb TO and JNA defences immediately west of the city of Sisak and north of Glina were positioned along the right ( southern ) bank of the Kupa River , largely consisting of the JNA 592nd and the 622nd Mechanised Brigades . On the opposite bank , the HV 100th Infantry Brigade held positions west of Sisak , flanked by the 145th Infantry Brigade to its right , and the 10th brigade of the Croatian TO further to the west . The planned main axis of the Operation Whirlwind extended across the 592nd Mechanised Brigade AOR , commanded by Colonel Boško <unk> . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 The HV 102nd Infantry Brigade arrived at the Sisak OG AOR on 11 December 1992 , and was ordered to undertake the offensive on the same evening , at about 20 : 00 , leaving no time for any preparation or reconnaissance . A reconnaissance – sabotage detachment of the HV Glina Battalion and the special police force were ferried across the Kupa River on the night of 11 / 12 December , capturing the village of Stankovac and preparing to support the 102nd Infantry Brigade at the river crossing . The 36th Engineering @-@ Pontoon Battalion completed a crossing point in the village of Šišinec by 4 : 00 and the lead elements of the 102nd Infantry Brigade crossed the Kupa River a half @-@ hour later . 
 The river crossing was unopposed until 08 : 00 , when the defending force launched a mortar attack against the crossing point . Nonetheless , the 1st Battalion of the 102nd Infantry Brigade cleared the river by 09 : 00 that morning and reached Stankovac . 
 After spending three hours crossing the Kupa River , by 13 : 00 the independent armoured @-@ mechanised unit was headed for Mala Solina , 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 miles ) to the south . However , the unit was intercepted by JNA armour and forced to turn back to Stankovac . To further complicate the situation for the HV , the 10th Brigade did not even start to move south , while the 2nd Battalion of the 102nd Independent Brigade would not cross Kupa before its commander joined the unit at 16 : 00 . 
 The 3rd Battalion of the 102nd Infantry Brigade reached the village of <unk> on the right ( southern ) bank of the Kupa River , but was unable to join the force south of Kupa . A bridge separating the battalion from the rest of the brigade remained out of HV 's control . 
 By the evening , the 2nd Battalion was ordered to separate from the main axis of the offensive and protect the right flank of the 1st Battalion of the 102nd Brigade — performing the task originally assigned to the 10th Brigade of the Croatian TO . At the same time , the 10th Brigade commanding officer was relieved of duty for failure to advance . Regardless , the unit remained inactive . The HV units that managed to cross the river on 12 December surprised the JNA and reported inflicting considerable casualties . 
 On the night of 12 / 13 December , the air temperature dropped to − 15 ° C ( 5 ° F ) , and HV troops sought shelter in Stankovac until the morning — shrinking the bridgehead held by the 102nd Infantry Brigade . In addition , the 36th Engineering @-@ Platoon Battalion removed engineering equipment from the Kupa crossing , leaving behind only four to six boats . The command post of the 102nd Infantry Brigade remained in Farkašić , detached from the main offensive force in Stankovac . 
 On 13 December , at approximately 07 : 00 , the independent HV armoured @-@ mechanised unit advanced northwest along the Kupa , towards Gračanica . During the advance , one of the tanks was captured and its crew killed after the capture . Nearly simultaneously , the JNA commenced a tank and mortar attack against Stankovac and the river crossing at Šišinec . The HV armoured @-@ mechanised unit and the 1st Battalion of the 102nd Infantry Brigade panicked , believing the crossing point was lost , and started to fall back to Šišinec in disarray , sustaining considerable casualties . Since there was no way to transport the remaining HV armour across the Kupa River , the tanks were destroyed by one of the force 's own tanks . That tank was then destroyed with explosives to prevent its capture . As there were too few boats at the river crossing to allow a quick retreat , some of the troops swam across the river , causing several to drown in very cold water . The command post of the brigade fell back to Galdovo , while the troops started to retreat to Zagreb . The entire brigade was back in Zagreb by 15 December . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 While the JNA 's casualties are not known , the HV sustained a loss of 18 killed and 18 wounded , as well as a loss of eight tanks , two armoured personnel carriers and seven boats . The 2 @,@ 011 @-@ strong 102nd Infantry Brigade alone suffered 13 dead . Their names were later inscribed on a memorial plaque in Šišinec , at the Kupa River crossing point . In the aftermath of the offensive , there were speculations in Croatia that the casualties were much higher , possibly as many as 60 killed and 200 wounded . 
 A Croatian Serb paramilitary unit , " <unk> " , based in Glina , is suspected of killing HV troops taken as prisoners of war during the retreat . In addition , Croatian Serb forces killed 21 civilians in the <unk> massacre as retribution for the HV offensive . The killing was investigated by SAO Krajina authorities , which concluded that the killings were in revenge for the deaths of 21 Serb paramilitaries in the village of <unk> in Operation Whirlwind . In 2010 , Croatian authorities charged six individuals with war crimes committed in the village of <unk> . 
 The failed offensive was investigated by the HV in 1991 and researched later by retired HV Brigadier Vlado Hodalj . He concluded that the offensive failed because of overall poor planning and preparation , specifically citing the lack of reconnaissance and reserves . Furthermore , Hodalj cited inadequate leadership by the Sisak OG as a cause of the failure , pointing to inaction in respect of the 10th Brigade 's failure to advance and improper employment of the 2nd Guards Brigade in an auxiliary role , protecting the flank of an inexperienced brigade that was committed to the offensive with little , if any , training . Finally , the offensive itself had no clear goal . Croatian Admiral Davor Domazet @-@ Lošo also criticised the offensive as an unnecessary , purely tactical and politically counterproductive move , likely unauthorised by appropriate authorities . 
 Hodalj praised the Sisak OG command for managing to keep the operation a secret until it was launched , making sure it would surprise the JNA . The secrecy was reflected in the apparent last @-@ minute rerouting of the 102nd Infantry Brigade to the offensive , although the Zagreb Operational Zone deployed it to Sunja , to the east of Sisak . Still , the Sisak OG failed to prepare detailed river crossing plans , or even issue maps and written brigade @-@ level commands for the crossings — relying on oral commands instead . Likewise , the troops were not equipped to endure the cold weather in the open , limiting their effectiveness . Hodalj concluded that the offensive exceeded needs and capabilities of the Sisak OG . Even though the 1991 HV investigation concluded that the offensive was prepared for ten days and was approved by Zagreb Operational Zone command , there are no documents pertaining to the preparations other than those issued by the Sisak OG itself . Regardless of the poor preparation of the offensive , the 102nd Infantry Brigade was subject to public criticism in Croatia for fleeing the battlefield in the aftermath of Operation Whirlwind . 
 = Burnt Norton = 
 Burnt Norton is the first poem of T. S. Eliot 's Four Quartets . He created it while working on his play Murder in the Cathedral and it was first published in his Collected Poems 1909 – 1935 ( 1936 ) . The poem 's title refers to a Cotswolds manor house Eliot visited . The manor 's garden served as an important image within the poem . Structurally , the poem is based on Eliot 's The Waste Land with passages of the poem related to those excised from Murder in the Cathedral . 
 The central discussion within the poem is on the nature of time and salvation . Eliot emphasises the need of the individual to focus on the present moment and to know that there is a universal order . By understanding the nature of time and the order of the universe , mankind is able to recognise God and seek redemption . Many reviewers of Burnt Norton focused on the uniqueness and beauty of the poem . However , others complained that the poem does not reflect Eliot 's earlier greatness and that the use of Christian themes harmed the poem . 
 = = Background = = 
 The concept of Burnt Norton is connected to Eliot 's Murder in the Cathedral ; he worked on the poem while the play was being produced during 1935 . The connection between the poem and the play is deep ; many of the lines for the poem come from lines originally created for the play that were , on E. Martin Brown 's advice , removed from the script . Years later , Eliot recollected : 
 There were lines and fragments that were discarded in the course of the production of Murder in the Cathedral . ' Can 't get them over on the stage , ' said the producer , and I humbly bowed to his judgment . However , these fragments stayed in my mind , and gradually I saw a poem shaping itself round them : in the end it came out as ' Burnt <unk> 
 Like many of Eliot 's works , the poem was compiled from various fragments that were reworked over many years . To structure the poem , Eliot turned to the organisation of The Waste Land . 
 In 1936 , the poem was included in Collected Poems 1909 – 1935 , of which 11 @,@ 000 copies were published ; the collection symbolically represented the completion of his former poems and his moving onto later works . " Burnt Norton " was Eliot 's only major poem to be completed during a six @-@ year period as he turned to writing plays and continued with his work on essays . The poem was re @-@ published as an independent work in 1941 , the same year " East Coker " and " The Dry Salvages " , two later poems of the Four Quartets , were published . 
 The actual Burnt Norton is a manor located near the village of Aston <unk> in Gloucestershire that Eliot visited with Emily Hale during 1934 . The original Norton House was a mansion burned down in 1741 by its owner , Sir William <unk> , who died in the fire . Even though Eliot was married , he spent a lot of time with Hale and might possibly have become involved with her had he not been married . Even after their time at Burnt Norton , Eliot stayed in close correspondence with her and sent her many of his poems . The actual manor does not serve as an important location within the poem . Instead , it is the garden surrounding the manor that became the focus . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The poem begins with two epigraphs taken from the fragments of Heraclitus : 
 τοῦ <unk> δὲ <unk> <unk> <unk> οἱ <unk> 
 ὡς <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 I. p . 77 . Fr . 2 . 
 <unk> ἄνω <unk> <unk> καὶ <unk> 
 I. p . 89 Fr . 60 . 
 The first may be translated , " Though wisdom is common , the many live as if they have wisdom of their own " ; the second , " the way upward and the way downward is one and the same . " 
 = = Poem = = 
 The poem was the first of Eliot 's that relied on speech , with a narrator who speaks to the audience directly . Described as a poem of early summer , air , and grace , it begins with a narrator recalling a moment in a garden . The scene provokes a discussion on time and how the present , not the future or past , really matters to individuals . Memories connect the individual to the past , but the past cannot change . The poem then transitions from memory to how life works and the point of existence . In particular , the universe is described as orderly and that consciousness is not found within time even though humanity is bound by time . The scene of the poem moves from a garden to the London underground where technology dominates . Those who cling to technology and reason are unable to understand the universe or the Logos ( " the Word " , or Christ ) . The underworld is replaced by a churchyard and a discussion of death . This , in turn , becomes a discussion of timelessness and eternity , which ends the poem . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Eliot believed that Burnt Norton could benefit society . The poem 's narration reflects on how humankind is affected by Original Sin , that they can follow the paths of either good or evil , and that they can atone for their sins . To help the individual , the poem explains that people must leave the time @-@ bound world and look into their selves , and that poets must seek out a perfection , not bound by time in their images , to escape from the problems of language . 
 Peter Ackroyd believes that it is impossible to paraphrase the content of the poem ; the poem is too abstract to describe the events and the action that make up the poem 's narrative structure . However , the philosophical basis for the poem can be explained since the discourse on time is connected to the ideas within St. Augustine 's Confessions . As such , there is an emphasis on the present moment as being the only time period that really matters , because the past cannot be changed and the future is unknown . The poem emphasizes that memory must be abandoned to understand the current world , and humans must realize that the universe is based on order . The poem also describes that although consciousness cannot be bound within time , humans cannot actually escape from time on their own . The scene beneath London is filled with the time @-@ bound people who are similar to the spiritually empty populace of The Hollow Men ; they are empty because they do not understand the Logos or the order of the universe . The conclusion of the poem emphasizes that God is the only one that is truly able to exist out of time and have knowledge of all times and places , but humankind is still capable of redemption through belief in Him and His ability to save them from the bounds of the material universe . 
 Imaginative space also serves an important function within the poem . Part one contains a rose garden that allegorically represents potential within human existence . Although the garden does not exist , it is described in realistic manner and is portrayed as an imagined reality . Also , the narrator 's statement that words exist in the mind allows this imagined reality to be shared between the narrator and the reader . This is then destroyed by the narrator claiming that such a place has no purpose . The garden image has other uses within the poem beyond creating a shared imaginative space ; it serves to invoke memories within the poem , and it functions in a similar manner in other works by Eliot , including The Family Reunion . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 An early critic , D. W. Harding , viewed the poem as being part of a new concept within poetry . Similarly , Edwin Muir saw that the poem had new aspects to it and felt that there was beauty in the poem similar to that in The Hollow Men . Peter Quennell agreed and described the poem as " a new and remarkably accomplished poem " and " uncommon rhythmic virtuosity " . Marianne Moore stated that it was " a new poem which is concerned with the thought of control [ ... ] embodied in Deity and in human <unk> " . She argued that its " best quality " was " in its reminders of how severe , strenuous , and practical was the poet 's approach toward the present enlargement of his philosophical vision . " Rolfe Humphries declared , " How beautifully [ ... ] Eliot winds the theme , from the simple statement that perhaps any dialectical materialist would accept [ ... ] to the conclusion that any revolutionist might find difficulty in understanding [ ... ] How beautifully it is done ! " 
 However , George Orwell disapproved of Burnt Norton and stated that the religious nature of the poem coincided with Eliot 's poems no longer having what made his earlier works great . The later critic Russell Kirk agreed with Orwell in part , but felt that Orwell 's attacks on Eliot 's religiosity within the poems fell flat . In particular , he argued that " Over the past quarter of a century , most serious critics — whether or not they find Christian faith impossible — have found in the Quartets the greatest twentieth @-@ century achievements in the poetry of philosophy and religion . " Likewise , the 12 April 1941 Times Literary Supplement said that the poem was hard to understand . This was followed by another review on 4 September that attacked Eliot 's understanding of history . 
 Later critics varied in opinions . Bergonzi emphasised the " beautifully controlled and <unk> opening " and claimed that " It contains some of Eliot 's finest poetry , a true <unk> of thought " . According to Peter Ackroyd , " ' Burnt Norton ' , in fact , gains its power and its effects from the modification , withdrawal or suspension of meaning and the only ' truth ' to be discovered is the formal unity of the poem itself . " 
 = Malala Yousafzai = 
 Malala Yousafzai <unk> ( <unk> <unk> : Urdu : <unk> <unk> ; Pashto : <unk> <unk> [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; born 12 July 1997 ) is a Pakistani activist for female education and the youngest @-@ ever Nobel Prize laureate . She is known mainly for human rights advocacy for education and for women in her native Swat Valley in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province of northwest Pakistan , where the local Taliban had at times banned girls from attending school . Yousafzai 's advocacy has since grown into an international movement . 
 Her family runs a chain of schools in the region . In early 2009 , when she was 11 – 12 , Yousafzai wrote a blog under a pseudonym for the BBC Urdu detailing her life under Taliban occupation , their attempts to take control of the valley , and her views on promoting education for girls in the Swat Valley . The following summer , journalist Adam B. <unk> made a New York Times documentary about her life as the Pakistani military intervened in the region . Yousafzai rose in prominence , giving interviews in print and on television , and she was nominated for the International Children 's Peace Prize by South African activist Desmond Tutu . 
 On the afternoon of 9 October 2012 , Yousafzai boarded her school bus in the northwest Pakistani district of Swat . A gunman asked for her by name , then pointed a pistol at her and fired three shots . One bullet hit the left side of Yousafzai 's forehead , travelled under her skin through the length of her face , and then went into her shoulder . In the days immediately following the attack , she remained unconscious and in critical condition , but later her condition improved enough for her to be sent to the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Birmingham , England , for intensive rehabilitation . On 12 October , a group of 50 Muslim clerics in Pakistan issued a fatwā against those who tried to kill her , but the Taliban reiterated their intent to kill Yousafzai and her father , Ziauddin Yousafzai . The assassination attempt sparked a national and international outpouring of support for Yousafzai . Deutsche Welle wrote in January 2013 that Yousafzai may have become " the most famous teenager in the world . " United Nations Special Envoy for Global Education Gordon Brown launched a UN petition in Yousafzai 's name , demanding that all children worldwide be in school by the end of 2015 ; it helped lead to the ratification of Pakistan 's first Right to Education Bill . 
 The 2013 , 2014 and 2015 issues of Time magazine featured Yousafzai as one of " The 100 Most Influential People in the World " . She was the winner of Pakistan 's first National Youth Peace Prize , and the recipient of the 2013 Sakharov Prize . In July that year , she spoke at the headquarters of the United Nations to call for worldwide access to education , and in October the Government of Canada announced its intention that its parliament confer Honorary Canadian citizenship upon Yousafzai . In February 2014 , she was nominated for the World Children 's Prize in Sweden . Even though she was fighting for women 's rights as well as children 's rights , she did not describe herself as feminist when asked on Forbes Under 30 Summit in 2014 . In 2015 , however , Yousafzai told Emma Watson she decided to call herself a feminist after hearing Watson 's speech at the UN launching the HeForShe campaign . In May 2014 , Yousafzai was granted an honorary doctorate by the University of King 's College in Halifax , Nova Scotia . Later in 2014 , Yousafzai was announced as the co @-@ recipient of the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize , along with Kailash Satyarthi , for her struggle against the suppression of children and young people and for the right of all children to education . Aged 17 at the time , Yousafzai became the youngest @-@ ever Nobel Prize laureate . She was the subject of Oscar @-@ shortlisted 2015 documentary He Named Me Malala . 
 Since March 2013 , she has been a pupil at the all @-@ girls ' Edgbaston High School in Birmingham . On 20 August 2015 , she achieved a string of A 's and A * s in her GCSE exams . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Yousafzai was born on 12 July 1997 in the Swat District of Pakistan 's northwestern Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province , into a Sunni Muslim family of Pashtun ethnicity . She was given her first name Malala ( meaning " grief @-@ stricken " ) after <unk> of Maiwand , a famous <unk> poetess and warrior woman from southern Afghanistan . Her last name , Yousafzai , is that of a large Pashtun tribal confederation that is predominant in Pakistan 's Swat Valley , where she grew up . At her house in Mingora , she lived with her two younger brothers , <unk> and Atal , her parents , Ziauddin and Tor <unk> , and two pet chickens . 
 Fluent in Pashto , English , and Urdu , Yousafzai was educated in large by her father , Ziauddin Yousafzai , who is a poet , school owner , and an educational activist himself , running a chain of private schools known as the <unk> Public School . She once stated to an interviewer that she would like to become a doctor , though later her father encouraged her to become a politician instead . Ziauddin referred to his daughter as something entirely special , permitting her to stay up at night and talk about politics after her two brothers had been sent to bed . 
 Yousafzai started speaking about education rights as early as September 2008 , when her father took her to Peshawar to speak at the local press club . " How dare the Taliban take away my basic right to education ? " Yousafzai asked her audience in a speech covered by newspapers and television channels throughout the region . 
 In 2009 , Yousafzai began as a trainee and then a peer educator in the Institute for War and Peace Reporting 's Open Minds Pakistan youth programme , which worked in schools in the region to help young people engage in constructive discussion on social issues through the tools of journalism , public debate and dialogue . 
 = = = As a BBC blogger = = = 
 In late 2008 , Aamer Ahmed Khan of the BBC Urdu website and his colleagues came up with a novel way of covering the Taliban 's growing influence in Swat . They decided to ask a schoolgirl to blog anonymously about her life there . Their correspondent in Peshawar , Abdul Hai Kakar , had been in touch with a local school teacher , Ziauddin Yousafzai , but couldn 't find any students willing to do so , as it was considered too dangerous by their families . Finally , Yousafzai suggested his own daughter , 11 @-@ year @-@ old Malala . At the time , Taliban militants led by Maulana <unk> were taking over the Swat Valley , banning television , music , girls ' education , and women from going shopping . Bodies of beheaded policemen were being hung in town squares . At first , a girl named Aisha from her father 's school agreed to write a diary , but then the girl 's parents stopped her from doing it because they feared Taliban reprisals . The only alternative was Yousafzai , four years younger than the original volunteer , and in seventh grade at the time . Editors at the BBC unanimously agreed . 
 " We had been covering the violence and politics in Swat in detail but we didn 't know much about how ordinary people lived under the Taliban , " Mirza Waheed , the former editor of BBC Urdu , said . Because they were concerned about Yousafzai 's safety , BBC editors insisted that she use a pseudonym . Her blog was published under the byline " Gul Makai " ( " cornflower " in Urdu ) , a name taken from a character in a Pashtun folktale . 
 On 3 January 2009 , Yousafzai 's first entry was posted to the BBC Urdu blog . She would hand @-@ write notes and then pass them on to a reporter who would scan and e @-@ mail them . The blog records Yousafzai 's thoughts during the First Battle of Swat , as military operations take place , fewer girls show up to school , and finally , her school shuts down . 
 In Mingora , the Taliban had set an edict that no girls could attend school after 15 January 2009 . The group had already blown up more than a hundred girls ' schools . The night before the ban took effect was filled with the noise of artillery fire , waking Yousafzai several times . The following day , Yousafzai also read for the first time excerpts from her blog that had been published in a local newspaper . 
 = = = = Banned from school = = = = 
 After the ban , the Taliban continued to destroy schools in the area . Five days later in her blog , Yousafzai wrote that she was still studying for her exams : " Our annual exams are due after the vacations but this will only be possible if the Taliban allow girls to go to school . We were told to prepare certain chapters for the exam but I do not feel like studying . " 
 In February 2009 , girls ' schools were still closed . In solidarity , private schools for boys had decided not to open until 9 February , and notices appeared saying so . On 7 February , Yousafzai and a brother returned to their hometown of Mingora , where the streets were deserted , and there was an " eerie silence " . " We went to the supermarket to buy a gift for our mother but it was closed , whereas earlier it used to remain open till late . Many other shops were also closed " , she wrote in her blog . Their home had been robbed and their television was stolen . 
 After boys ' schools reopened , the Taliban lifted restrictions on girls ' primary education , where there was co @-@ education . Girls @-@ only schools were still closed . Yousafzai wrote that only 70 pupils attended , out of 700 pupils who were enrolled . 
 On 15 February , gunshots could be heard in the streets of Mingora , but Yousafzai 's father reassured her , saying " don 't be scared – this is firing for peace " . Her father had read in the newspaper that the government and the militants were going to sign a peace deal the next day . Later that night , when the Taliban announced the peace deal on their FM Radio studio , another round of stronger firing started outside . Yousafzai spoke out against the Taliban on the national current affairs show Capital Talk on 18 February . Three days later , local Taliban leader Maulana <unk> announced on his FM radio station that he was lifting the ban on women 's education , and girls would be allowed to attend school until exams were held on 17 March , but they had to wear burqas . 
 = = = = Girls ' schools reopen = = = = 
 On 25 February , Yousafzai wrote on her blog that she and her classmates " played a lot in class and enjoyed ourselves like we used to before " . Attendance at Yousafzai 's class was up to 19 of 27 pupils by 1 March , but the Taliban were still active in the area . Shelling continued , and relief goods meant for displaced people were looted . Only two days later , Yousafzai wrote that there was a skirmish between the military and Taliban , and the sounds of mortar shells could be heard : " People are again scared that the peace may not last for long . Some people are saying that the peace agreement is not permanent , it is just a break in fighting " . 
 On 9 March , Yousafzai wrote about a science paper that she performed well on , and added that the Taliban were no longer searching vehicles as they once did . Her blog ended on 12 March 2009 . 
 = = = As a displaced person = = = 
 After the BBC diary ended , Yousafzai and her father were approached by New York Times reporter Adam B. <unk> about filming a documentary . In May , the Pakistani Army moved into the region to regain control during the Second Battle of Swat . Mingora was evacuated and Yousafzai 's family was displaced and separated . Her father went to Peshawar to protest and lobby for support , while she was sent into the countryside to live with relatives . " I 'm really bored because I have no books to read , " Yousafzai is filmed saying in the documentary . 
 That month , after criticising militants at a press conference , Yousafzai 's father received a death threat over the radio by a Taliban commander . Yousafzai was deeply inspired in her activism by her father . That summer , for the first time , she committed to becoming a politician and not a doctor , as she had once aspired to be . 
 By early July , refugee camps were filled to capacity . The prime minister made a long @-@ awaited announcement saying that it was safe to return to the Swat Valley . The Pakistani military had pushed the Taliban out of the cities and into the countryside . Yousafzai 's family reunited , and on 24 July 2009 they headed home . They made one stop first – to meet with a group of other grassroots activists that had been invited to see United States President Barack Obama 's special representative to Afghanistan and Pakistan , Richard Holbrooke . Yousafzai pleaded with Holbrooke to intervene in the situation , saying , " Respected ambassador , if you can help us in our education , so please help us . " When her family finally did return home , they found it had not been damaged , and her school had sustained only light damage . 
 = = = Early activism = = = 
 Following the documentary , Yousafzai was interviewed on the national Pashto @-@ language station AVT Khyber , the Urdu @-@ language Daily Aaj , and Canada 's Toronto Star . She made a second appearance on Capital Talk on 19 August 2009 . Her BBC blogging identity was being revealed in articles by December 2009 . She also began appearing on television to publicly advocate for female education . 
 In October 2011 , Archbishop Desmond Tutu , a South African activist , nominated Yousafzai for the International Children 's Peace Prize of the Dutch international children 's advocacy group <unk> Foundation . She was the first Pakistani girl to be nominated for the award . The announcement said , " Malala dared to stand up for herself and other girls and used national and international media to let the world know girls should also have the right to go to school " . The award was won by Michaela Mycroft of South Africa . 
 Her public profile rose even further when she was awarded Pakistan 's first National Youth Peace Prize two months later in December . On 19 December 2011 , Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gillani awarded her the National Peace Award for Youth . At the proceedings in her honour , Yousafzai stated that she was not a member of any political party , but hoped to found a national party of her own to promote education . The prime minister directed the authorities to set up an IT campus in the Swat Degree College for Women at Yousafzai 's request , and a secondary school was renamed in her honour . By 2012 , Yousafzai was planning to organise the Malala Education Foundation , which would help poor girls go to school . 
 = = Assassination attempt = = 
 As Yousafzai became more recognised , the dangers facing her increased . Death threats against her were published in newspapers and slipped under her door . On Facebook , where she was an active user , she began to receive threats and fake profiles were created under her name . When none of this worked , a Taliban spokesman says they were " forced " to act . In a meeting held in the summer of 2012 , Taliban leaders unanimously agreed to kill her . 
 On 9 October 2012 , a Taliban gunman shot Yousafzai as she rode home on a bus after taking an exam in Pakistan 's Swat Valley . The masked gunman shouted " Which one of you is Malala ? Speak up , otherwise I will shoot you all " , and , on her being identified , shot at her . She was hit with one bullet , which went through her head , neck , and ended in her shoulder . Two other girls were also wounded in the shooting : <unk> Riaz and <unk> Ramzan , both of whom were stable enough to speak to reporters and provide details of the attack . 
 = = = Medical treatment = = = 
 After the shooting , Yousafzai was airlifted to a military hospital in Peshawar , where doctors were forced to begin operating after swelling developed in the left portion of her brain , which had been damaged by the bullet when it passed through her head . After a five @-@ hour operation , doctors successfully removed the bullet , which had lodged in her shoulder near her spinal cord . The day following the attack , doctors performed a <unk> craniectomy , in which part of the skull is removed to allow room for the brain to swell . 
 On 11 October 2012 , a panel of Pakistani and British doctors decided to move Yousafzai to the Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology in Rawalpindi . Mumtaz Khan , a doctor , said that she had a 70 % chance of survival . Interior Minister Rehman Malik said that Yousafzai would be moved to Germany , where she could receive the best medical treatment , as soon as she was stable enough to travel . A team of doctors would travel with her , and the government would bear the expenditures of her treatment . Doctors reduced Yousafzai 's sedation on 13 October , and she moved all four limbs . 
 Offers to treat Yousafzai came from around the world . On 15 October , Yousafzai travelled to the United Kingdom for further treatment , approved by both her doctors and family . Her plane landed in Abu Dhabi for refuelling and then continued to Birmingham , England where she was treated at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital , one of the specialties of this hospital being the treatment of military personnel injured in conflict . According to the UK Government " The Pakistani government is paying all transport , migration , medical , accommodation and subsistence costs for Malala and her party " . 
 Yousafzai had come out of her coma by 17 October 2012 , was responding well to treatment , and was said to have a good chance of fully recovering without any brain damage . Later updates on 20 and 21 October stated that she was stable , but was still battling an infection . By 8 November , she was photographed sitting up in bed . 
 On 3 January 2013 , Yousafzai was discharged from the hospital to continue her rehabilitation at her family 's temporary home in the West Midlands . She had a five @-@ hour operation on 2 February to reconstruct her skull and to receive a cochlear implant to restore her hearing , and was reported in stable condition . 
 = = = Reaction = = = 
 The assassination attempt received worldwide media coverage and produced an outpouring of sympathy and anger . Protests against the shooting were held in several Pakistani cities the day after the attack , and over 2 million people signed the Right to Education campaign 's petition , which led to ratification of the first Right to Education Bill in Pakistan . Pakistani officials offered a 10 million rupee ( US $ 105 @,@ 000 ) reward for information leading to the arrest of the attackers . Responding to concerns about his safety , Yousafzai 's father said , " We wouldn 't leave our country if my daughter survives or not . We have an ideology that advocates peace . The Taliban cannot stop all independent voices through the force of bullets . " 
 Pakistan 's president Asif Ali Zardari described the shooting as an attack on " civilized people " . UN Secretary @-@ General Ban Ki @-@ moon called it a " heinous and cowardly act " . United States President Barack Obama found the attack " reprehensible , disgusting and tragic " , while Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said Yousafzai had been " very brave in standing up for the rights of girls " and that the attackers had been " threatened by that kind of empowerment " . British Foreign Secretary William Hague called the shooting " barbaric " and that it had " shocked Pakistan and the world " . 
 American singer Madonna dedicated her song " Human Nature " to Yousafzai at a concert in Los Angeles the day of the attack , as well had a temporary Malala tattoo on her back . American actress Angelina Jolie wrote an article about explaining the event to her children and answering questions like " Why did those men think they needed to kill Malala ? " Jolie later donated $ 200 @,@ 000 to The Malala Fund for girls education . Former First Lady of the United States Laura Bush wrote an op @-@ ed piece in The Washington Post in which she compared Yousafzai to Holocaust diarist Anne Frank . Indian director Amjad Khan announced that he would be making a biographical film based on Yousafzai . 
 <unk> Ehsan , chief spokesman for the Pakistani Taliban , claimed responsibility for the attack , saying that Yousafzai " is the symbol of the infidels and obscenity , " adding that if she survived , the group would target her again . In the days following the attack , the Taliban reiterated its justification , saying Yousafzai had been brainwashed by her father : " We warned him several times to stop his daughter from using dirty language against us , but he didn 't listen and forced us to take this extreme step " . The Taliban also justified its attack as part of religious scripture , stating that the Quran says that " people propagating against Islam and Islamic forces would be killed " , going on to say that " Sharia says that even a child can be killed if he is propagating against Islam " . 
 On 12 October 2012 , a group of 50 Islamic clerics in Pakistan issued a fatwā – a ruling of Islamic law – against the Taliban gunmen who tried to kill Yousafzai . Islamic scholars from the Sunni Ittehad Council publicly denounced attempts by the Pakistani Taliban to mount religious justifications for the shooting of Yousafzai and two of her classmates . 
 Although the attack was roundly condemned in Pakistan , " some fringe Pakistani political parties and extremist outfits " have aired conspiracy theories , such as the shooting being staged by the American Central Intelligence Agency to provide an excuse for continuing drone attacks . The Tehrik @-@ i @-@ Taliban Pakistan and some other pro @-@ Taliban elements branded Yousafzai as an " American spy " . 
 = = = United Nations petition = = = 
 On 15 October 2012 , UN Special Envoy for Global Education Gordon Brown , a former British Prime Minister , visited Yousafzai while she was in the hospital , and launched a petition in her name and " in support of what Malala fought for " . Using the slogan " I am Malala " , the petition 's main demand was that there be no child left out of school by 2015 , with the hope that " girls like Malala everywhere will soon be going to school " . Brown said he would hand the petition to President Zardari in Islamabad in November . 
 The petition contains three demands : 
 We call on Pakistan to agree to a plan to deliver education for every child . 
 We call on all countries to outlaw discrimination against girls . 
 We call on international organisations to ensure the world 's 61 million out @-@ of @-@ school children are in education by the end of 2015 . 
 = = = Criminal investigation , arrests , and acquittals = = = 
 The day after the shooting , Pakistan 's Interior Minister Rehman Malik stated that the Taliban gunman who shot Yousafzai had been identified . Police named 23 @-@ year @-@ old Atta Ullah Khan , a graduate student in chemistry , as the gunman in the attack . As of 2015 he remained at large , possibly in Afghanistan . 
 The police also arrested six men for involvement in the attack , but they were later released for lack of evidence . As of 7 November 2012 , Mullah <unk> , the cleric who ordered the attack on Yousafzai , was confirmed to be hiding in Eastern Afghanistan by US sources there . 
 On 12 September 2014 , ISPR Director , Major General Asim Bajwa , told a media briefing in Islamabad that the 10 attackers belong to a militant group called " Shura " . General Bajwa said that <unk> Rehman was the first militant group member who was identified and apprehended by the troops . Acting upon the information received during his interrogation , all other members of the militant group were arrested . It was an intelligence @-@ based joint operation conducted by ISI , police , and military . 
 In April 2015 , the ten who were arrested were sentenced to life in prison by Judge Mohammad Amin <unk> , a counterterrorism judge , with the chance of eligibility for parole , and possible release , after 25 years . It is not known if the actual would @-@ be assassins were among the ten sentenced . In June 2015 , it was revealed that eight of the ten men tried in @-@ camera for the attack had in fact been secretly acquitted , insiders revealed one of the men acquitted and freed was the murder bid 's mastermind . It is believed that all other men who shot Yousafzai fled to Afghanistan afterwards and were never even captured . The information about the release of suspects came to light after the London Daily Mirror attempted to locate the men in prison . Senior police official Salim Khan stated that the eight men were released because there was not enough evidence to connect them to the attack . 
 = = Continuing activism = = 
 Yousafzai spoke before the United Nations in July 2013 , and met Queen Elizabeth II in Buckingham Palace . In September she spoke at Harvard University , and in October she met with US President Barack Obama and his family ; during that meeting , she confronted him on his use of drone strikes in Pakistan . In December she addressed the Oxford Union . In July 2014 Yousafzai spoke at the Girl Summit in London , advocating for rights for girls . In October 2014 , after receiving the World Children 's Prize for the rights of the child in Mariefred , Sweden , she announced donating $ 50 @,@ 000 through the UNRWA , to help rebuild 65 schools in Gaza . 
 = = = Representation = = = 
 Former British Prime Minister Gordon Brown arranged for Yousafzai 's appearance before the United Nations in July 2013 . Brown also requested that McKinsey consultant <unk> Shahid , a friend of the Yousafzai family , chair Malala 's charity fund , which had gained the support of Angelina Jolie . Google 's vice @-@ president Megan Smith also sits on the fund 's board . 
 In November 2012 the consulting firm Edelman began work for Yousafzai on a pro bono basis , which according to the firm " involves providing a press office function for Malala . " The office employs five people , and is headed by speechwriter Jamie Lundie . McKinsey also continues to provide assistance to Yousafzai . 
 = = = Malala Day = = = 
 On 12 July 2013 , Yousafzai 's 16th birthday , she spoke at the UN to call for worldwide access to education . The UN dubbed the event " Malala Day " . It was her first public speech since the attack , leading the first ever Youth Takeover of the UN , with an audience of over 500 young education advocates from around the world . 
 The terrorists thought they would change my aims and stop my ambitions , but nothing changed in my life except this : weakness , fear and hopelessness died . Strength , power and courage was born ... I am not against anyone , neither am I here to speak in terms of personal revenge against the Taliban or any other terrorist group . I 'm here to speak up for the right of education for every child . I want education for the sons and daughters of the Taliban and all terrorists and extremists . 
 Yousafzai received several standing ovations . Ban Ki @-@ moon , who also spoke at the session , described her as " our hero " . Yousafzai also presented the chamber with " The Education We Want " , a Youth Resolution of education demands written by Youth for Youth , in a process co @-@ ordinated by the UN Global Education First Youth Advocacy Group , telling her audience : 
 Malala day is not my day . Today is the day of every woman , every boy and every girl who have raised their voice for their rights . 
 The Pakistani government did not comment on Yousafzai 's UN appearance , amid a backlash against her in Pakistan 's press and social media . 
 = = = Nobel Peace Prize = = = 
 On 10 October 2014 , Yousafzai was announced as the co @-@ recipient of the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize for her struggle against the suppression of children and young people and for the right of all children to education . Having received the prize at the age of 17 , Yousafzai is the youngest Nobel laureate . Yousafzai shared the prize with Kailash Satyarthi , a children 's rights activist from India . She is the second Pakistani to receive a Nobel Prize , Abdus Salam being a 1979 Physics laureate , and the only Pakistani winner of the Nobel Peace Prize . 
 After she won the Nobel Peace Prize , there was praise , but also some disapproval of the decision to award it to her . A Norwegian jurist , Fredrik Heffermehl , commented on the winning of Malala 's Nobel Prize : " This is not for fine people who have done nice things and are glad to receive it . All of that is irrelevant . What Nobel wanted was a prize that promoted global disarmament . " 
 A young Mexican man interrupted Yousafzai 's Nobel Peace Prize award ceremony in protest for the 2014 Iguala mass kidnapping in Mexico , but was quickly taken away by security personnel . Yousafzai later sympathised , and acknowledged that problems are faced by young people all over the world , saying " there are problems in Mexico , there are problems even in America , even here in Norway , and it is really important that children raise their voices " . 
 = = = School for Syrian refugee girls = = = 
 On 12 July 2015 , her 18th birthday , Yousafzai opened a school in the Bekaa Valley , Lebanon , near the Syrian border , for Syrian refugees . The school , funded by the not @-@ for @-@ profit Malala Fund , offers education and training to girls aged 14 to 18 years . Yousafzai called on world leaders to invest in " books , not bullets " . 
 = = Works = = 
 Yousafzai 's memoir I Am Malala : The Story of the Girl Who Stood Up for Education and was Shot by the Taliban , co @-@ written with British journalist Christina Lamb , was published in October 2013 by Little , Brown and Company in the US and by Weidenfeld & Nicolson in the UK A reviewer for The Guardian called the book " fearless " and stated that " the haters and conspiracy theorists would do well to read this book " , though she criticised " the stiff , know @-@ it @-@ all voice of a foreign correspondent " that is interwoven with Yousafzai 's . A reviewer for The Washington Post called the book " riveting " and wrote that " It is difficult to imagine a chronicle of a war more moving , apart from perhaps the diary of Anne Frank . " Entertainment Weekly gave the book a " B + " , writing that " Malala 's bravely eager voice can seem a little thin here , in I Am Malala , likely thanks to her co @-@ writer , but her powerful message remains undiluted . " 
 The All Pakistan Private School 's Federation announced that the book would be banned in its 152 @,@ 000 member institutions , stating that it disrespected Islam and could have a " negative " influence . Pakistani investigative editor Ansar Abbasi described her work as " providing her critics something ' concrete ' to prove her as an ' agent ' of the West against Islam and Pakistan " . 
 A children 's edition of the memoir was published in 2014 under the title I Am Malala : How One Girl Stood Up for Education and Changed the World . The audio book edition , narrated by Neela <unk> , won the 2015 Grammy Award for Best Children 's Album . 
 = = Reception in Pakistan = = 
 Reception of Yousafzai in Pakistan is mixed . Dawn columnist Huma Yusuf summarized three main complaints of Yousafzai 's critics : " Her fame highlights Pakistan 's most negative aspect ( rampant militancy ) ; her education campaign echoes Western agendas ; and the West 's admiration of her is hypocritical because it overlooks the plight of other innocent victims , like the casualties of U.S. drone strikes . " Another Dawn journalist , Cyril Almeida , addressed the public 's lack of rage against the Tehrik @-@ i @-@ Taliban Pakistan ( TTP ) , blaming the failing state government . Journalist <unk> Baig described her as being used to justify Western imperialism as " the perfect candidate for the white man to relieve his burden and save the native " . Yousafzai was also accused on social media of being a CIA spy . 
 However , Yousafzai does have some support in Pakistani media ; Farman Nawaz ( editor Border Times Pakistan ) argues that Yousafzai would have gained more fame in Pakistan if she belonged to the province of Punjab . His opinion was not given importance by the mainstream media of Pakistan but his views in this regard were published by Daily Outlook Afghanistan . 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 Yousafzai has been awarded the following national and international honours : 
 2011 : International Children 's Peace Prize ( nominee ) 
 2011 : National Youth Peace Prize 
 Anne Frank Award for Moral Courage , January 2012 
 Sitara @-@ e @-@ Shujaat , Pakistan 's third @-@ highest civilian bravery award , October 2012 
 Foreign Policy magazine top 100 global thinker , November 2012 
 2012 : Time magazine Person of the Year shortlist 
 Mother Teresa Awards for Social Justice , November 2012 
 Rome Prize for Peace and Humanitarian Action , December 2012 
 2012 : Top Name in Annual Survey of Global English , January 2013 
 Simone de Beauvoir Prize , January 2013 
 Memminger <unk> 1525 , March 2013 ( conferred on 7 December 2013 in Oxford ) 
 Doughty Street Advocacy award of Index on Censorship , March 2013 
 Fred and Anne Jarvis Award of the UK National Union of Teachers , March 2013 
 Vital Voices Global Leadership Awards , Global Trailblazer , April 2013 
 One of Time 's " 100 Most Influential People in the World " , April 2013 
 <unk> Internacional Catalunya Award of Catalonia , May 2013 
 Annual Award for Development of the OPEC Fund for International Development ( <unk> ) , June 2013 
 International Campaigner of the Year , 2013 Observer Ethical Awards , June 2013 
 2012 : Tipperary International Peace Award , Ireland Tipperary Peace Convention , August 2013 
 Portrait of Yousafzai by Jonathan Yeo displayed at National Portrait Gallery , London ( 2013 ) 
 Ambassador of Conscience Award from Amnesty International 
 2013 : International Children 's Peace Prize , <unk> Foundation 
 2013 : Clinton Global Citizen Awards from Clinton Foundation 
 Harvard Foundation 's Peter Gomes Humanitarian Award from Harvard University 
 2013 : Anna Politkovskaya Award – Reach All Women in War 
 2013 : Reflections of Hope Award – Oklahoma City National Memorial & Museum 
 2013 : Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought – awarded by the European Parliament 
 2013 : Honorary Master of Arts degree awarded by the University of Edinburgh 
 2013 : Pride of Britain ( October ) 
 2013 : Glamour magazine Woman of the Year 
 2013 : <unk> Hammer Award at <unk> Leadership Awards ( November ) 
 2013 : International Prize for Equality and Non @-@ Discrimination 
 2014 : Nominee for World Children 's Prize also known as Children 's Nobel Prize 
 2014 : Awarded Honorary Life Membership by the <unk> ( Ireland ) 
 2014 : Skoll Global Treasure Award 
 2014 : Honorary Doctor of Civil Law , University of King 's College , Halifax , Nova Scotia , Canada 
 2014 : Nobel Peace Prize , shared with Kailash Satyarthi 
 2014 : Philadelphia Liberty Medal 
 2014 : One of Time Magazine " The 25 Most Influential Teens of 2014 " 
 2014 : Honorary Canadian citizenship 
 2015 : Grammy Award for Best Children 's Album 
 2015 : Asteroid <unk> Malala named in her honour . 
 2016 : Honorary president of the students union of the University of Sheffield 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 A documentary entitled He Named Me Malala by American filmmaker Davis Guggenheim was released on 2 October 2015 . National Geographic broadcast the film on 29 February 2016 . 
 A fictionalised version of Yousafzai appears at Herb <unk> 's funeral in " Still Broken " , an episode of the Netflix series <unk> Horseman . She is referred to as " That Pakistani girl who keeps winning Nobel Prizes . " 
 = Seacology = 
 Seacology is a nonprofit 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) charitable organization headquartered in Berkeley , California , that works to preserve island ecosystems and cultures around the world . Founded in 1991 , it began with the work of ethnobotanist Paul Alan Cox , who researched tropical plants and their medicinal value in the village of Falealupo in Samoa during the mid @-@ 1980s . When the villagers were pressured into selling logging rights to their rainforest in 1988 to build a new school , Cox and his wife offered to help secure funds for the new school in return for an agreement with the villagers to protect their forest . With the help of his friends and family , Cox secured the funds within six months , later earning him and the village chief , <unk> Senio , the Goldman Environmental Prize for their efforts . Word spread throughout the islands , and with increasing demand for similar projects , Cox , along with Bill Marré and Ken Murdock , decided to form Seacology and expand their work internationally . For the first few years , the organization operated on a volunteer basis . Duane Silverstein became the first employee in 1999 , and headquarters were relocated to Berkeley , not far from his residence . 
 Because of the high risk of extinction for island fauna and the decline in coral reef ecosystems , Seacology 's primary focus is projects in which villagers sign contracts under which they agree to help protect either terrestrial or marine habitat for a specified time in return for new buildings or services . The operations are low @-@ cost , averaging around US $ 20 @,@ 000 to $ 25 @,@ 000 . Construction is done with local labor and without the use of machinery . Seacology selects its projects by reviewing the recommendations of its field representatives and its scientific advisory board . 
 By mid @-@ 2016 , Seacology had initiated more than 275 projects globally , and helped preserve 753 @,@ 456 acres ( 3 @,@ 049 km2 ; 1 @,@ 177 sq mi ) of marine habitat and 615 @,@ 745 acres ( 2 @,@ 492 km2 ; 962 @.@ 1 sq mi ) of terrestrial habitat . At the same time , they had helped construct 104 new facilities and provided 36 programs , which included educational materials , vital medical services , and environmental training . In addition to helping local people on islands like Fiji , Kendhoo , and many others , their projects have helped protect mangrove forests , sea turtles , marine mammals called dugongs , and one of the rarest primates in the world : the Hainan black crested gibbon . Seacology also awards an annual Seacology Prize to indigenous islanders for their efforts in conservation and cultural preservation . The organization helps support island communities by fostering ecotourism , and has helped raise emergency funds following destructive tsunamis . Its budget is modest , and it does not compensate its board members . It has won awards from Yahoo ! and Travel + Leisure magazine , and has been featured in the music video " What About Now " by the American rock band Daughtry . 
 = = History = = 
 Seacology was founded in 1991 by ethnobotanist Paul Alan Cox in Hawaii using prize money and consulting fees resulting from his efforts to preserve 30 @,@ 000 acres ( 120 km2 ; 47 sq mi ) of rainforest outside the village of Falealupo on the island of <unk> 'i in Samoa . He later recorded these events in his book , Nafanua : Saving the Samoan Rain Forest . Cox began his work in Samoa in 1973 during his first Mormon missionary service , at which time he learned from local people about the medicinal properties of the native plants . After working with local communities in other rainforests , Cox returned to Samoa in 1984 with his family . His aim was to find a cure for cancer , which had claimed the life of his mother earlier that year . In return for the help of the local healers ( called <unk> ) , Cox offered to share the revenue generated by his research with the local villages . Over time , his research identified five new drugs , including the therapeutic agent <unk> , a potential treatment for HIV . <unk> was isolated in a concoction made from the bark of the local <unk> tree ( <unk> nutans ) and shared with him by a healer named <unk> <unk> , who used it to treat hepatitis . Cox set up royalty agreements to ensure that the Samoans will share in the revenue . 
 In 1988 , his research was threatened when the Samoan government pressured the village of Falealupo to pay $ 65 @,@ 000 for a new school , warning that if the village did not provide a new school within a year , they would withdraw the teachers from the village , leaving the children without an opportunity for a formal education . Shortly after receiving this notice from government , a foreign @-@ owned logging company offered the village exactly $ 65 @,@ 000 to log the entire 30 @,@ 000 acres ( 120 km2 ; 47 sq mi ) surrounding Falealupo . Lacking a source of revenue , the villages eventually sold the logging rights to the forest , but when Cox learned of the situation and witnessed the logging for himself , he immediately sought an explanation from the village elders and then requested that they halt the logging so that he could raise money for the school . Despite initial skepticism , Cox convinced the high chief , <unk> Senio , who then helped persuade the rest of the elders . Senio then drew his machete and raced 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) to halt the logging . 
 The new school was built after Cox and his wife , Barbara , were able to raise the money in six months partly by mortgaging their house . Cox also obtained financial support from others and took over payments on the mortgage for the school . Verne Read , a businessman and financial supporter of Bat Conservation International , took over payments on the mortgage for the school . Ken Murdock , founder of the herbal company Nature 's Way , and Rex Maughan , owner of Forever Living Products , funded the construction of the school and repaid the loggers for their $ 20 @,@ 000 advance . During a tribal ceremony held in February 1989 , Cox , along with the village chiefs ( matai ) signed the " The Falealupo Covenant " , which legally protected the forest for 50 years in exchange for their help . During the ceremony , the village chiefs also bestowed chief 's titles on Murdock and Maughan and proclaimed that Cox was a reincarnation of their god , Nafanua , because like Nafanua , he did not come from Samoa and both had fought to protect the village and the forest . The title bestowed upon him made Cox responsible for the well @-@ being of the village and obligated that he return to visit . 
 In 1992 , Cox and his friends had finished helping the Samoan villagers at Falealupo , as well as nearby <unk> , which encountered the same problem . Prior to that , Murdock , who later became Seacology 's President , suggested continuing their work by seeking out more villages with which they could exchange projects for marine and forest reserves . As demand among island villages grew , Bill Marré , a business consultant and executive coach who later became a member of the Board of Trustees and the Chairman 's Advisory Council , suggested establishing a nonprofit organization to continue their work . He suggested the name " Seacology " to reflect the organization 's focus on island conservation , and helped <unk> the nonprofit in 1991 , along with Cox and Murdock . Using his own funds , Marré paid the costs of starting the organization and covered its administrative costs for the first three years . Together with his assistant , Marré helped advertise Seacology by giving lectures at schools and universities , visiting other island nations , and writing articles about the work for the local media . 
 In Falealupo , Seacology continued their work , funding projects with a total of $ 485 @,@ 000 as of 2005 . When cyclone <unk> destroyed the primary school at Falealupo in 1990 , Seacology helped raise funds to rebuild it . The school was completely rebuilt again in 1991 following Cyclone Val . Several years after completing the school , the organization helped establish trails and build a rainforest information center , followed in 1997 by an elevated canopy walkway as part of an ecotourism project to help generate income for the people and provide funds for a retirement system for the village elders . The walkway has since become one of Samoa 's leading tourist attractions , and was yielding an average of $ 1 @,@ 000 each month for the community in 2001 — bringing in more money than the villagers would have earned from selling their forest . Satisfied with the results , the villagers at Falealupo declared that they would honor the contract they had made with Cox to protect the forest forever , rather than just 50 years . In 1997 , both Cox and Senio , the village chief , shared the Goldman Environmental Prize for their work . 
 For the first six years of its existence , Seacology operated as a volunteer organization with no employees . Four years after being founded , Seacology 's administrative office moved to Ken Murdock 's office . The office moved again in 1999 to Berkeley , California after Cox offered a job to Duane Silverstein — then the Executive Director of the Goldman Fund , which had previously honored Cox with the Goldman Environmental Prize . Silverstein had been inspired by the work Cox had done in Samoa , and agreed to take the position of Executive Director of Seacology under the condition that the office be relocated to within walking distance of his house . 
 = = Activities = = 
 Seacology is a nonprofit organization that works to preserve both island habitats and cultures by exchanging services for local assistance and cooperation with conservation efforts . As of 2000 , it was reported to be the only conservation organization to focus entirely on island preservation . Seacology has 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status ( providing federal income tax deductions for some donors ) because it is a charitable , non @-@ profit organization . According to its mission statement on its website , " Seacology searches for win @-@ win situations where both the local environment is protected and islanders receive some tangible benefit for doing so . " 
 Islands constitute a large portion of the world 's surface . Combined , the largest 125 islands cover an area the size of Europe , and if the economic zones that include marine resources ( found within a few miles of shore ) are included , islands make up one @-@ sixth of the Earth 's surface area and hold half of all marine species . Scientific surveys have shown that coral reefs are declining rapidly due to climate change , dynamite and cyanide fishing , and marine pollution . According to evolutionary biologist E. O. Wilson , bird species that are endemic to islands face a greater risk of extinction — 40 times greater than on the continents . At least 255 island bird species have become extinct since the appearance of humans , with 158 lost during prehistory and 97 lost between 1600 and 1994 . In comparison , between 17 and 20 species of continental birds became extinct between 1600 and 1994 . Because the small land area of islands can only support small populations , the biggest threat to endemic wildlife is habitat loss . Other threats include direct exploitation ( hunting and pet trade ) , disease , and invasive species . 
 To save island habitats around the world , Seacology staff initiate projects by first holding meetings with local villagers to determine their needs . These needs often include schools , a community center , solar energy , or freshwater delivery . Once their needs are determined , Seacology makes a deal with the local community , offering to provide the needed service in return for a forest reserve or a no @-@ take fishing area around a coral reef . Facilities such as schools and community centers are built using local labor , and Seacology provides approximately $ 20 @,@ 000 for supplies and to facilitate the construction . Seacology has field representatives stationed around the world who monitor and report the progress of the projects in their region , as well as seek new projects in their respective regions or islands . New project suggestions are reviewed by the Board of Directors . The Scientific Advisory Board provide additional recommendations , based on the latest research . 
 In addition to their projects , Seacology played an active role in the creation of the National Park of American Samoa through the work of their scientists and donors . In 2008 , Seacology started its Carbon Offset Fund , where donations of $ 40 @.@ 00 went directly towards renewable energy and reforestation projects . That same year , they collaboratively funded the creation of a nursery run by the non @-@ governmental organization ( NGO ) <unk> in Madagascar to raise 3 @,@ 000 seedlings of the endangered palm <unk> <unk> . The two organizations have also collaborated to protect the <unk> Forest in southeastern Madagascar . In <unk> and Manado , Seacology was involved in testing a new method of restoring coral reef , which involved planting white ceramic modules that were shaped like 3 @-@ dimensional snowflakes to maximize the surface area for corals to grow . 
 In 2007 , Seacology became an international organization with greater visibility , despite their small staff . International affiliate programs , such as Seacology Germany and Seacology Japan were created to help raise funds to support island projects . The following year , Seacology U.K. was created , followed by Seacology Scandinavia in 2009 . For its global efforts , Seacology has received several awards , including the Global Vision Award in Travel + Leisure , the Blue Award in Islands Magazine , and Yahoo ! ' s Pick for Good in September 2006 . 
 = = = Projects = = = 
 According to their 2014 Annual Report , Seacology has funded over 250 projects globally . The island communities that have aided in these efforts have collectively received facilities , including schools , community centers , and other important structures . Educational materials , vital medical services , and environmental training have been provided in many programs . 
 When projects are agreed upon with an island community , local rituals often coincide with the start of the project , particularly in the Pacific Islands , where a common custom involves drinking kava , a mildly narcotic drink made from the ground @-@ up root of a pepper plant . The ritual is hundreds of years old , and has been described by the Seacology staff as being relaxing , especially because of the friendly environment . Seacology staff often dress in local attire . The villagers perform dances , and the staff are invited to join in , often to the amusement of the villagers . 
 When the projects begin , the work is done without machines , with supplies being shipped on small boats and then carried by hand from the beach . Project costs range between $ 5 @,@ 000 and $ 150 @,@ 000 , although the average is between $ 20 @,@ 000 and $ 25 @,@ 000 . The protected areas that result from these deals typically involve a 20- to 30 @-@ year commitment . Seacology hopes that during that time the local people grow to respect these resources and ideally progress to a point where they are less dependent on natural resources . According to marine biologist Mark Erdmann , in a worst @-@ case scenario , if the people violate the contract and destroy the habitat , Seacology will have still made a difference in their lives through its low @-@ cost investment , whereas larger conservation organizations might invest large sums of money but through not addressing the immediate needs of the people , if the project fails , both lose that investment and not have helped the community . 
 In one of Seacology 's projects , villagers in Fiji refused a $ 700 @,@ 000 offer by foreign businessmen to buy one of the islands and signed an agreement that prohibited development for 20 years and established a 10 @-@ year no @-@ take fishing reserve encompassing 80 square miles ( 210 km2 ) around the island . On the island of Kendhoo , part of the Baa Atoll in the Maldives , Seacology paid $ 30 @,@ 000 in 2003 to build a kindergarten in exchange for a ban on harvesting endangered sea turtle eggs , which the government did not prohibit . In the Trang Province of Thailand , another project helps protect the habitat of seagrass beds and mangrove forest to provide habitat for endangered marine mammals called dugongs ( Dugong dugon ) . In 2003 , Seacology and a Chinese organization worked together to form an agreement with the people of Hainan Island where in return for scholarships for nearly 200 middle @-@ school children , the people would stop cutting down the trees around <unk> Reserve , home to one of the rarest primates in the world , the Hainan black crested gibbon ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) and the nearly extinct subspecies of Eld 's deer ( <unk> <unk> ) found on Hainan . In a project on Cát Bà Island in Vietnam , the organization helped protect the golden @-@ headed langur , another one of the world 's most endangered primates , by paying cash and helping establish exclusive harvesting and fishing rights for the local people in return for their efforts in patrolling the beaches and forests for poachers . In 1999 , Seacology began work to establish a new national park around Mt . <unk> , near Antananarivo in Madagascar . The mountain is home to 120 species of endangered orchids and several medicinal herbs , including Helichrysum <unk> , which is used as an antiseptic and treatment for bronchitis ; <unk> <unk> , which is used for healing wounds ; <unk> altissima , which is used to treat eczema ; <unk> <unk> , which is used to treat coughing ; and <unk> <unk> , which is used to lower malarial fever . 
 = = = Sri Lanka Mangrove Conservation Project = = = 
 In 2015 , Seacology launched its largest @-@ ever project , a $ 3 @.@ 4 million initiative to protect all of Sri Lanka 's remaining mangrove forests and restore many degraded ones . Through Sri Lanka @-@ based NGO <unk> ( also known as the Small Fishers Federation of Lanka ) , Seacology is funding a significant expansion of that organization 's existing <unk> and job @-@ training programs . In exchange , the beneficiaries of these programs must agree to assist in protecting their local mangrove habitats . The training is designed in part to give low @-@ income women in these communities alternatives to harvesting mangroves , a subsistence activity that has contributed to the forests ' degradation . The project also established three large nursery facilities to grow several species of mangroves , to be replanted in areas previously cleared for aquaculture and other unsustainable development , as well as several areas destroyed during the Sri Lankan Civil War . 
 The effort was endorsed by the government of Sri Lanka , which has agreed to assist with demarcating the country 's mangroves . 
 = = = Service awards = = = 
 Created by cofounder Bill Marré in 1992 and underwritten by Ken Murdock in honor of his mother , the Seacology Prize is awarded each year to an indigenous islander based on achievements in island conservation and cultural preservation . Many of the award recipients are people who risk their lives and wellbeing to preserve their culture and environment but receive little or no public recognition for their work . The prize includes a reward of $ 10 @,@ 000 . 
 In 2010 , it was awarded to <unk> <unk> from <unk> @-@ Sud in Madagascar for his forest conservation efforts in <unk> <unk> in northeastern Madagascar . <unk> , an <unk> and research guide , had created his own forest reserve , called <unk> ( meaning " on the high hill " ) , and planned to use his prize money to fund reforestation efforts , develop tourist facilities , and expand the reserve . Another winner of the Seacology Prize was the Icelandic filmmaker and former reporter for RÚV <unk> Ragnarsson , who won the award in 2008 for his efforts in preserving the highlands of Iceland . 
 = = = Ecotourism = = = 
 In response to the growing demand for ecotourism , Seacology opened up its fundraising expeditions to the public in 2006 . These trips include destinations like Fiji , and offer both unusual travel opportunities and a means to help improve the quality of life for the indigenous people . The experiences have been described as " moving " because of the close personal interactions with the local people . Some tours visit locations seldom visited by Westerners . On the tours , Seacology encourages travelers to explore the culture and economy by trying local foods . 
 Following the 2002 Bali bombings , Silverstein reported that tourism fell by over 90 percent on the island of Bali , mostly due to sensational media reporting . He was in Bali a few days after the attack and reported that he saw little or no risk to tourists in the Muslim villages of the region . 
 = = = Tsunami relief funds = = = 
 Following the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami , Seacology established a tsunami relief fund to help four impacted communities with which the organization had previously completed projects . Following the model of their projects , the Seacology staff asked the local people what they needed to rebuild their economy and infrastructure . In <unk> , Sri Lanka , the people requested fishing nets and boats . The people of <unk> Village in the Andaman Islands requested goats and chickens . On Kendhoo in the Maldives , the tsunami had destroyed the local plant life , so seedlings were needed in order to restore the environment . In Trang Province , Thailand , basic structural repair was requested . Seacology emphasized that it would repair and replace the projects that had been damaged or destroyed in the tsunami . 
 As of late 2005 , Seacology had raised $ 261 @,@ 716 for the relief work , with all of it going directly to fund the efforts . All donors received details of how the money was spent , as well as photos of the work . The California Association of <unk> later honored Seacology for the relief work with their Achievement in Innovation Award . 
 Previous work by Seacology in the region had helped minimize the damage caused by the tsunami . Seacology Prize recipient Anuradha Wickramasinghe from Sri Lanka noted that the mangrove forests that were preserved shielded the community , whereas nearby villages that had cleared their mangroves to create industrial shrimp farms had not fared so well . Mangroves also buffered <unk> Village in the hard @-@ hit Andaman Islands ; the village suffered little loss of human life or structural damage compared to the nation 's capital city of Port Blair . 
 Following the 2009 Samoa tsunami , Seacology once again started a tsunami relief effort . They helped Samoan villages by providing new water tanks and pipelines , and also helped to clean up mangroves and inshore coral reefs that were littered with debris from nearby motels . 
 = = Finances = = 
 Seacology is a small nonprofit , with only seven full @-@ time staff , and as a result has little overhead costs and operates on a modest budget . Its tax identification number is 87 @-@ <unk> . According to Silverstein , its annual budget for all of its staff and office expenditures is significantly lower than the median compensation for business chief executive officers ( CEOs ) alone . Board members receive no compensation and are not reimbursed for the costs of attending board meetings . Unlike other environmental groups , Seacology does not offer memberships , which further reduces its expenditures . Staff answer the phone instead of using automated answering services , and Seacology respects donor privacy and is compliant with the Children 's Online Privacy Protection Act ( <unk> ) . 
 In 2014 , Seacology reported $ 2 @,@ 309 @,@ 541 in donations and grants and a total of $ 2 @,@ 335 @,@ 266 when other revenue was included . Its expenses that year totaled $ 1 @,@ 656 @,@ 772 with $ 286 @,@ 981 going toward fundraising and $ 130 @,@ 329 supporting management and other general expenses . Financial support comes mostly from individuals , foundations , and companies such as Nu Skin Enterprises , which pays annual royalties for the plant @-@ based cosmetic formulas Cox developed for facial creams and other skincare products . Board members also contribute a sizable portion of the annual budget , donating a minimum of $ 10 @,@ 000 per year to the organization . 
 = = Leadership = = 
 Seacology is governed by its Board of Directors , which consists of corporate leaders who share a commitment to island conservation and the preservation of island cultures . Paul Alan Cox is the Chairman of Seacology . He received his PhD from Harvard University , and served as a professor at Brigham Young University , the Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences , and Uppsala University . Cox served as the Director of the National Tropical Botanical Garden ( <unk> ) for seven years , and as of 2011 , he is the Executive Director of the Institute for <unk> , which is affiliated with the <unk> . His research interests include island plant ecology and ethnobotany of island cultures , and he has published more than 150 scientific papers and reviews . For his research on new medicinal plants , he was named one of eleven " Heroes of Medicine " by Time magazine . Cox is an advocate of indigenous peoples , and has learned several of island languages . 
 The Executive Director of Seacology is Duane Silverstein , who for 18 years prior to joining the organization acted as the Executive Director of the Goldman Fund and headed the Goldman Environmental Prize . He has written articles that have appeared in Asian Geographic as well as various scuba diving magazines , and he is a National Fellow of The Explorers Club . Silverstein has met with heads of state around the world , including several presidents of the United States , as well as several Secretaries @-@ General of the United Nations . In addition to having his work covered in newspapers and periodicals , including Time magazine , the Bangkok Post , and the San Francisco Chronicle , he was also selected as an " All @-@ Stars Among Us " in People magazine , for which he was honored at the 2009 Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game . In 2008 , Silverstein and Seacology were briefly featured alongside several organizations in the music video for " What About Now " by the American rock band Daughtry . In 2010 , Silverstein was awarded the one of the Jefferson Awards for Public Service and also was given the 2010 Coastal Hero Award by Sunset magazine . 
 The vice chair of Seacology is Ken Murdock , who also founded the herbal company Nature 's Way after his mother was cured of a serious illness with an herbal medicine . Murdock played a key role in the creation of Seacology , and Nature 's Way covered Seacology 's administrative costs for three years . Murdock has volunteered in Samoa , during which time he resided on Manu 'a and learned the local language . 
 The Scientific Advisory Board of Seacology includes island biodiversity specialists , whose research focuses on the conservation of oceanic and terrestrial island ecosystems . The Scientific Advisory Board generates recommendations for new conservation projects based on the latest research available . Among the eleven members are researcher and Pulitzer Prize winner Jared Diamond , entomologist and evolutionary biologist E. O. Wilson , and oceanographer Sylvia Earle . As the founder of Seacology , Cox is also a member of the advisory board . 
 = Battle of Caishi = 
 The Battle of Caishi ( Battle of Ts 'ai @-@ shih ; Chinese : <unk> ) was a major naval engagement of the Jin – Song Wars of China that took place on November 26 – 27 , 1161 . Soldiers under the command of Wanyan Liang ( the Prince of Hailing ) , the Jurchen emperor of the Jin dynasty , tried to cross the Yangtze River to attack Song China . Yu Yunwen , a civil official , commanded the defending Song army . The paddle @-@ wheel warships of the Song fleet , equipped with trebuchets that launched incendiary bombs made of gunpowder and lime , decisively defeated the light ships of the Jin navy . 
 Starting in 1125 the Jin had conquered all Song territories north of the Huai River . In 1142 , a peace treaty settled the border between the two states , putting the Jin in control of northern China and the Song in control of the south . Wanyan Liang was enthroned in 1150 , and was intent on uniting northern and southern China under a single emperor . In 1158 , he asserted that the Song had violated the 1142 treaty , a pretext for declaring war on the Song . He began preparations for the war in the following year . He instituted a draft in which all able @-@ bodied men were required to enlist . The draft was unpopular , precipitating revolts that were later suppressed . The Jin army left the capital of Kaifeng on October 15 , 1161 , and pushed through from the Huai to the Yangtze River without much resistance from the Song . 
 The Song were fortified along the Yangtze front . Wanyan Liang planned to cross the river at Caishi , south of modern @-@ day Nanjing . He embarked from the shore of the Yangtze on November 26 , and clashed with Song forces led by Yu Yunwen in a naval engagement . Wanyan Liang lost the battle and retreated to Yangzhou . Wanyan Liang was assassinated in a military camp by his own men shortly after the Caishi battle . A military coup had taken place in the Jin court while Wanyan Liang was absent , <unk> Emperor Shizong as the new emperor . A peace treaty signed in 1165 ended the conflict between Song and Jin . 
 Song sources likely inflated the number of Jin soldiers and casualties at Caishi , but the 18 @,@ 000 figure for the Song army is plausible . Modern studies suggest that the battle was smaller and that both sides were more evenly matched than traditional accounts suggest . Nonetheless , the victory boosted the morale of the Song infantry and halted the southern advance of the Jin army . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Song ( 960 – 1276 ) was a Chinese dynasty . To their north were the Jurchens , a confederation of semi @-@ agrarian tribes from Manchuria in northeast Asia . While the Song and Jurchen had once been military allies , the Jurchen tribes , unified under the rule of Wanyan Aguda , plotted a revolt in 1114 to end their vassalage under the Khitan @-@ led Liao dynasty . Aguda established the Jin dynasty in 1115 and adopted the title of emperor . The Jin negotiated a joint attack with the Song against the Khitans . They planned the attack for 1121 and then rescheduled to 1122 . In 1122 , the Jurchens captured the Liao Supreme and Western Capitals . The Song tried yet failed to capture the Liao Southern Capital of Yan ( modern Beijing ) , which fell later that year to the Jin . The military weakness of the Song gave the Jin more diplomatic leverage over the Song . Negotiations between the Song and Jin produced a treaty in 1123 , but bilateral relations deteriorated because of territorial disputes over the Sixteen Prefectures . In 1125 , the Jurchens invaded the Song . 
 By 1127 , Jin had conquered most of northern China and besieged the Song capital of Kaifeng twice . In the second siege of Kaifeng , Emperor Qinzong of the Song was captured . The Jurchens took him and the Song royal family to Manchuria as hostages . Members of the Song court who had evaded capture fled south , where they established a temporary capital , first in the Song southern capital ( modern Shangqiu ) , and then in Hangzhou in 1129 . The move of the Song capital south to Hangzhou signals the transition from the Northern Song era to the Southern Song . Qinzong 's younger brother , Prince Zhao Gou , was enthroned as Qinzong 's successor in the southern capital in 1127 ; he is known posthumously as Emperor Gaozong . The Jurchen general Wuzhu crossed the Yangtze River in 1130 and tried to capture Gaozong , but the emperor escaped . Wuzhu retreated north across the Yangtze , where he fought off a stronger Song fleet commanded by Han Shizhong . 
 The Jin persisted with their advance into the remaining Song territories south of the Yangtze . They faced an insurgency of Song loyalists in the north , the deaths of some important leaders , and military offensives by Song generals like Yue Fei . The Jurchens created the puppet government of Da Qi to serve as a buffer state between Song and Jin , but Qi failed to defeat the Song . The Jin abolished Qi in 1137 . As the Jin gave up on conquering the Southern Song , diplomatic talks for a peace treaty resumed . Signed in 1142 , the Treaty of Shaoxing established the boundary between the two states along the Huai River , which runs north of the Yangtze . The treaty forbade the Song from purchasing horses from the Jin , but smuggling continued in the border markets . The relations between the two states were mostly peaceful from 1142 to 1161 , the year Wanyan Liang went to war . 
 = = = Preparation for war = = = 
 Wanyan Liang was crowned Jin emperor in 1150 after killing his cousin and predecessor , Emperor Xizong , in a palace coup . Wanyan Liang considered himself more of a Chinese authoritarian ruler than a Jurchen leader who ruled through a tribal council . The History of Jin contends that Wanyan Liang told his officials that the three desires of his life were conquest , absolute power , and women . His ultimate ambition was to rule over all of China , not just the north . In his childhood , Wanyan Liang adopted Song practices like drinking tea by learning from Song emissaries , and once he had become emperor , he pursued a policy of <unk> the state . His affinity for the culture of the Song earned him the Jurchen nickname of " aping the Chinese " . He moved the Supreme Capital of the Jin from Huining in Manchuria to Beijing and promoted Kaifeng to his Southern Capital in 1157 . He also moved government institutions south , tore down palaces of Jurchen chieftains in Manchuria , and constructed new palaces in Beijing and Kaifeng . He made plans to move the Jin capital further south to the center of China . Wanyan Liang 's construction projects drained the Jin treasury . 
 Plans for a war against the Southern Song began in 1158 . That year , Wanyan Liang claimed that the Song had broken the 1142 treaty that banned them from acquiring horses . In 1159 , he began building up his army in preparation for an invasion . He acquired weapons , which he stored in Beijing , as well as horses allegedly numbering 560 @,@ 000 . Wanyan Liang understood that an invasion of the Song would require a lot of men . He ensured that Han Chinese soldiers were drafted into the war effort alongside Jurchen soldiers . The recruitment drive lasted until 1161 . Naval confrontations were likely because the Jin planned on traveling by river . Ships were seized for the war and 30 @,@ 000 of the recruits were assigned to the Jin fleet . Wanyan Liang authorized the building of ships for the war in March 1159 , under the auspices of the Ministry of War . Construction began in the Tong ( <unk> ) prefecture near Beijing . Wanyan Liang appointed himself head of the army and took personal command of the Jurchen forces . The draft was unpopular . Several revolts erupted against it , many of them in the Jin provinces neighboring the Song . But Wanyan Liang allowed no dissent . He had his stepmother executed after hearing that she was critical of the war effort . 
 In order to eliminate any challenge to his legitimacy as emperor of a united China , Wanyan Liang ordered the execution of all male members of the Song and Liao royal families residing in Jin territory . The execution of 130 members of the two royal clans in the span of a few months proved unpopular , and the Khitans soon revolted in Manchuria . They refused to be drafted into the army , maintaining that conscription would leave the homeland of the Khitans unprotected from rival tribes on the steppes . Wanyan Liang rebuffed their demands . The Khitan rebels killed several Jurchen officials . The rebellion was fragmented , and there were separate plans either to spread the revolt further by operating from Shangjing , the former Liao capital , or to move the Khitan people from Manchuria to Central Asia , where the Kara @-@ Khitan Khanate had formed after the demise of Liao . Wanyan Liang was forced to divert resources and men away from the war effort to suppress the rebellion . 
 Diplomatic exchanges between the Song and Jin did not stop during the period preceding the war . The History of Song claims that the Song realized that the Jin were planning for an invasion when they noticed the discourtesy of one of the Jin diplomats . Some Song officials foresaw the impending war , but Emperor Gaozong hoped to maintain peaceful relations with the Song 's northern neighbor . His reluctance to antagonize the Jin delayed the fortification of the Song border defenses . The Song quickly built just three military garrisons in 1161 . Wanyan Liang departed from Kaifeng on October 15 , 1161 . The offensive comprised four armies , and Wanyan Liang personally led the army that entered Anhui . The Jin passed the Huai River boundary on October 28 , advancing into Song territory . The Song resistance was minimal because they had fortified the southern shore of the Yangtze River and not the Huai . 
 = = Naval battle = = 
 Wanyan Liang 's army built its encampment near Yangzhou on the northern side of the Yangtze River . The Jin advance had been slowed by Song victories in the west , where the Song captured several prefectures from the Jin . Wanyan Liang commanded his forces to cross the Yangtze at Caishi , south of modern Nanjing . A naval battle between Jin and Song took place on November 26 and 27 , 1161 . The Song troops were led by Yu Yunwen – a scholar @-@ official – and his lieutenants Dai Gao , Jian Kang , Shi <unk> , and others . Yu , who was a Drafting Official of the Secretariat ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , was at Caishi to distribute awards to Song soldiers who had been selected for their outstanding service ; it was by chance that his visit coincided with Wanyan Liang 's campaign . When he first arrived , the Song forces at Caishi were scattered and lacked a central leader . Yu took command and built a cohesive army . The Jin performed a ritual sacrifice of horses a day before the battle . On November 26 , Jin troops embarked from the shore of the Yangtze and engaged the Song fleet . Some of the ships they boarded were shoddily built . The Jin had lost several ships in Liangshan , where they were bogged down by the shallow depths of Liangshan Lake as they were being transported to the Grand Canal . Wanyan Liang had urgently requested the construction of more ships in 1161 to compensate for those still stuck in Liangshan . One account of the war contends that the Jin ships were constructed in a week with materials recycled from destroyed buildings . The shortage of vessels and the poor quality of those available prevented the Jin from ferrying more soldiers needed for fighting a naval battle with the Song . 
 The Song military response was likely stronger than Wanyan Liang had anticipated . The paddle @-@ wheel ships of the Song navy could move more rapidly and outmaneuver the slower Jin ships . The Song kept their fleet hidden behind the island of <unk> Shan . The ships were to depart the island once a scout on horseback announced the approach of the Jin ships by signalling a concealed flag atop the island 's peak . Once the flag became visible , the Song fleet commenced their attack from both sides of the island . Song soldiers operated traction trebuchets that launched incendiary " thunderclap bombs " and other soft @-@ cased explosives containing lime and sulphur , which created a noxious explosion when the casing broke . The Jin soldiers who managed to cross the river and reach the shore were assaulted by Song troops waiting on the other side . The Song won a decisive victory . Wanyan Liang was defeated again in a second engagement the next day . After burning his remaining ships , he retreated to Yangzhou , where he was assassinated before he could finish preparations for another crossing . 
 Estimates for the number of soldiers and casualties at the battle vary widely . A Song source reports that there were 18 @,@ 000 Song soldiers stationed in Caishi , a number that historian Herbert Franke considers plausible . However , Song estimates for the number of Jin troops are likely inflated . One document claims that 400 @,@ 000 Jin soldiers were present at the battle . This number is doubtful , bearing in mind that the Song had only 120 @,@ 000 soldiers fighting on the entire front . Song historians may have confused the total number of Jin personnel deployed on the front with the number of Jin combatants at Caishi . The inflated figure could have referred to the number of soldiers that the Jin army had before crossing the Huai River toward the Yangtze . The desertions and casualties from suppressing revolts while advancing southward would have shrunk that number by the time the Jin reached the Yangtze . The History of Jin , a document written from the perspective of the Jin , reports Jin casualties between one meng 'an ( a Jurchen unit of a thousand soldiers ) and a hundred men , and two meng 'an and two hundred men . The History of Song reports Jin casualties numbering four thousand soldiers and two commanders of <unk> ( ten thousand men ) rank . An account of the battle by a different Song source holds that 24 @,@ 000 Jin soldiers died and that 500 combatants and five meng @-@ an were taken as prisoners . A more conservative Song source estimates that the Jin only had 500 soldiers and 20 ships at Caishi . It is not certain which of these figures is more accurate ; Franke believes that the safest conclusion that can be drawn is that the number of Jin casualties was not greater than four thousand . 
 = = Military and naval technology = = 
 An account of the Song 's technological capabilities is given in the Hai Qiu Fu ( " <unk> Ode on the Sea @-@ eel Paddle Wheel Warships " ) : 
 The men inside them paddled fast on the treadmills , and the ships glided forwards as though they were flying , yet no one was visible on board . The enemy thought that they were made of paper . Then all of a sudden a thunderclap bomb was let off . It was made with paper ( carton ) and filled with lime and sulphur . ( Launched from trebuchets ) these thunderclap bombs came dropping down from the air , and upon meeting the water exploded with a noise like thunder , the sulphur bursting into flames . The carton case rebounded and broke , scattering the lime to form a smoky fog , which blinded the eyes of men and horses so that they could see nothing . Our ships then went forward to attack theirs , and their men and horses were all drowned , so that they were utterly defeated . 
 There were up to 340 ships in the Song fleet during the battle of Caishi in 1161 . The Song fleet used trebuchets to bombard the Jin ships with incendiary bombs ( pili huoqiu <unk> or huopao <unk> ; " thunderclap fire balls " ) that contained a mixture of gunpowder , lime , scraps of iron , and a poison that was likely arsenic . Reports that the bomb produced a loud sound suggests that the nitrate content of the gunpowder mixture was high enough to create an explosion . The powdered lime in the bombs at Caishi generated a cloud of blinding smoke similar to tear gas . The huoqiu released the smoke once the casing of the bomb shattered . <unk> activated the bombs after launching . 
 The Jin conscripted thousands of blacksmiths to build the armor and weaponry of the fleet , and workers to dig out the canal necessary for transporting the ships from Tong to the Grand Canal through the northern port of <unk> ( <unk> ) , modern Tianjin . The Jin armored their light ships with thick rhinoceros hides . The ships had two stories ; on the lower deck were the oarsmen responsible for rowing the ship , while soldiers on the upper deck could fire missile weapons . Three different variations of the warships were constructed . Several of the ships became bogged down in Liangshan , and the ships built to replace them were of an inferior quality . The Jin fleet were unable to defeat the larger and faster warships of the Song . 
 The battle is significant in the technological history of the Song navy . The technological advances of the Song navy ensured its access to the East China Sea , where they competed with the military forces of Jin and Mongol rivals . Although huopao launched by the ship @-@ mounted trebuchets had been invented decades earlier , the bombs did not become mandatory on Song warships until 1129 . Paddle @-@ wheel ships operated with treadmills were constructed continuously in various sizes between 1132 and 1183 . The engineer Gao Xuan devised a ship outfitted with up to eleven paddle wheels on each side , and Qin <unk> , another engineer , designed the iron plating for armoring the ships in 1203 . All these advances supported a rapid increase in the size of the force ; according to the 20th @-@ century historian Joseph Needham , " From a total of 11 squadrons and 3 @,@ 000 men [ the Song navy ] rose in one century to 20 squadrons totalling 52 @,@ 000 men " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Traditional Chinese historiography celebrated the battle of Caishi as an important victory for China . Caishi was held in the same esteem as the Battle of Fei River in 383 , when the Eastern Jin defeated the northern invaders of the Former Qin . However , its portrayal as a victory against overwhelming odds , in which 18 @,@ 000 Song soldiers overcame an army of nearly half a million men , is likely an exaggeration . Modern historians believe that the number of Jin soldiers was far lower . The Song possessed multiple advantages , and the battle was more evenly matched than contemporaneous historians suggest . The Song had larger ships and ample time to prepare while the Jin army gathered supplies and ships for the crossing . It was also impossible for the Jin to use cavalry , the most important asset of the Jurchen military , during a naval engagement . 
 A modern analysis of the background of the conflict and the battlefield has also shown that it was a smaller engagement than traditionally believed . Its effects were more psychological than material . The battle was not solely responsible for dooming Wanyan Liang 's military campaign ; his own failings also led to his downfall . Wanyan Liang 's generals detested him , and his relationship with his men had deteriorated over the course of the war . His authoritarianism made him equally unpopular among his own people . There was a widespread disapproval of his reign in the empire , and Wanyan Liang 's policies had alienated the Jurchens , the Khitans , and the Han Chinese . Disaffected officers conspired to kill him , and he was assassinated on December 15 , 1161 . Emperor Shizong succeeded Wanyan Liang as ruler of the Jin . He had been enthroned weeks before the assassination , in a military coup that installed him as emperor while Wanyan Liang was absent from the court . Shizong eventually rescinded many of Wanyan Liang 's sinification policies . 
 The victory boosted the morale of the Song soldiers and increased dissatisfaction among the Jin army . News of the victory improved confidence in the government and bolstered the stability of the Song . The Jurchens gave up their ambitions of conquering the Southern Song and reunifying China . The Jin army withdrew in 1162 , and diplomatic relations between the two states resumed . Emperor Gaozong retired nine months after the conclusion of the battle . The reasons for his abdication are complicated , but Gaozong 's handling of the war with Wanyan Liang may have had a part in his decision to resign . He had ignored the warnings of a Jin attack and his hopes for conciliation held back plans for strengthening the Song defenses . 
 Military clashes continued in Huainan and Sichuan , but Jin incursions after Caishi had no intent of reaching the Yangtze . The Jin had discovered that southern China 's many lakes and river impeded their cavalry . They signed a peace treaty with the Song in 1165 , ending hostilities . The Huai River border remained the same and the Song continued to pay annual indemnities to the Jin , but the Song no longer recognized their state as a Jin vassal . 
 = Flower ( video game ) = 
 Flower is a video game developed by Thatgamecompany and published by Sony Computer Entertainment . Flower , designed by Jenova Chen and Nicholas Clark , was released in February 2009 on PlayStation 3 , via the PlayStation Network . PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita versions of the game were ported over by Bluepoint Games , and released in November 2013 . The game was intended as a " spiritual successor " to Flow , a previous title by Chen and Thatgamecompany . In Flower , the player controls the wind , blowing a flower petal through the air using the movement of the game controller . Flying close to flowers results in the player 's petal being followed by other flower petals . Approaching flowers may also have side @-@ effects on the game world , such as bringing vibrant color to previously dead fields or activating stationary windmills . The game features no text or dialogue , forming a narrative arc primarily through visual representation and emotional cues . 
 Flower was primarily intended to arouse positive emotions in the player , rather than to be a challenging and " fun " game . This focus was sparked by Chen , who felt that the primary purpose of entertainment products like video games was the feelings that they evoked in the audience , and that the emotional range of most games was very limited . The team viewed their efforts as creating a work of art , removing gameplay elements and mechanics that were not provoking the desired response in the players . The music , composed by Vincent Diamante , dynamically responds to the player 's actions and corresponds with the emotional cues in the game . Flower was a critical success , to the surprise of the developers . Reviewers praised the game 's music , visuals , and gameplay , calling it a unique and compelling emotional experience . It was named the " best independent game of 2009 " at the Spike Video Game Awards , and won the " Casual Game of the Year " award by the Academy of Interactive Arts and Sciences . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Flower is divided up into six main levels and one credits level . Each level is represented by a flower in a pot on a city apartment windowsill , and upon selecting one the player is taken to the " dream " of that flower . Once inside a level , the player controls the wind as it blows a single flower petal through the air . Changes in the pitch and roll of the floating petal are accomplished by tilting the PlayStation 3 controller . Pressing any button blows the wind harder , which in turn moves the petal faster . The camera generally follows just behind the petal , though it sometimes moves to show a new objective or consequence of the player 's actions . 
 Groups and lines of flowers are present in each level ; approaching these with the petal causes them to bloom and a new petal to trail the first . When the player approaches certain flowers or groups of flowers , changes are made to the game world . These include opening new areas , transforming dead grassy areas to bright green fields , or activating wind turbines . These changes generally result in new flowers sprouting for the player to interact with . Flying through each flower results in a musical chime that harmonizes with the music . The music itself dynamically adjusts as changes are made to the world . The more flower petals the player has trailing the lead petal , the faster the petals move . It is impossible for the player to lose a level or any progress . The game features no enemies , hit points , or time limits . A single play @-@ through of the game takes approximately one hour . 
 Although no speech or text is used anywhere in the game aside from credits and interaction hints in the main menu , the six flower dreams follow a narrative arc . The player 's starting location in each stage appears to be near the ending location of the previous one , and through the course of the game the player approaches a distant city . The first levels focus on restoring life and color to the landscape . After activating a series of windmills , the player flies through a nighttime field , illuminating darkened strings of lights until they reach the city . The city is full of menacing metal structures , small arcs of electricity , and washed @-@ out buildings ; the player enlivens the city in the final two levels and transforms it into a bright and cheerful place . 
 As the player progresses through the different levels of the game , the city viewed through the apartment window in the level selection screen gradually becomes more vibrant and colorful . If the player triggers three secret flowers in each level , the cityscape is replaced with a bright field with mountains in the background . The music changes in scope as the game progresses , growing in scale and complexity and adding to the narrative arc . The credits level is played in a similar manner to the main levels , but as the player flies through each flower the name of a person involved in the game appears above it . Flower includes PlayStation Network trophies in keeping with the game 's feel . While some are objective @-@ based , many are centered on relaxing and watching the scenery . 
 = = Development = = 
 Flower was developed as a spiritual successor to Flow , a 2006 Flash game created by Jenova Chen and Nicholas Clark while the two were students at the University of Southern California . Flow was later developed into a PlayStation 3 game by Thatgamecompany in 2007 and a PlayStation Portable game by SuperVillain Studios in 2008 . Flower was Thatgamecompany 's " first game outside the safety net of academia " . It was first announced at the Tokyo Game Show on September 24 , 2007 , and was released on the PlayStation Network on February 12 , 2009 . Flower was intended primarily to provoke positive emotions in the player , and to act as " an emotional shelter " . Six to nine people were involved at varying stages of development . Chen , who co @-@ founded Thatgamecompany with game producer Kellee Santiago , was the creative director in charge of the game , while Clark was the lead designer . Chen described the game as " an interactive poem exploring the tension between urban and nature " . He decided on the " nature " theme early in the development process , saying that he " had this concept that every PlayStation is like a portal in your living room , it leads you to somewhere else . I thought ; wouldn 't it be nice if it was a portal that would allow you to be embraced by nature " . 
 Before beginning work , the development team commissioned two pieces of music that they felt would inspire the right emotional tone for the game to guide their efforts . They created a number of prototypes , including concepts focused on growing flowers and based around human consciousness . The team decided that a prototype centered on petals floating in the wind best captured the emotions they wanted to evoke . They made keeping the player in a peaceful emotional state their design focus , and removed elements that frustrated players such as petal collection requirements to unlock levels and game mechanics that were too traditional and made the players too excited . The team tried to not place any barriers in the levels , allowing the player to go anywhere in an open world , but realized that without a few guidelines , such as the camera focusing on new flowers or segmenting the levels , players became confused and frustrated . Chen described the process as " almost like we wanted to throw away the traditional game design , but we end up picking up all the pieces we threw away and putting them back because we know those are actually needed to deliver a good guided experience " . The overall development time was two years , but the team spent three quarters of that time in the prototyping stage . After deciding on the game elements , Flower was produced in only six months . 
 The game 's focus on emotions was sparked by Chen , who felt that the primary purpose of entertainment products like video games was the feelings that they evoked in the audience , and that the emotional range of most games was very limited . Chen tried to make the game focus more on emotions than on a message ; he specifically changed the design of Flower when early testers felt there was a message of promoting green energy in the game . To make Flower have the " emotional spectrum " that he wanted , Chen looked at the development process as creating a work of art , rather than a " fun " game , which would not provoke the desired emotions . He summarized this view by saying that the only gameplay mechanic is hitting a flower to trigger a new event . The team specifically cut out deeper gameplay elements because these would have added " challenge " to the game , which , while fun , would not have been relaxing . Sony Santa Monica contracted with Bluepoint Games to create ports of the game for the PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita , which were published in November 2013 to correspond with the release of the PlayStation 4 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music for Flower was created by Vincent Diamante , a video game music composer and professor at the University of Southern California 's Interactive Media Division . He had previously scored the music for Cloud , Chen 's first game , and <unk> when they were both at the University of Southern California . He worked directly with the development team to integrate the music into the game by adjusting the placements of flowers and the tones that each type played when they were reached . He did this by harmonizing the gameplay with the music , and adjusting the music dynamically to correspond to changes in the game world . Diamante used his music to influence the development team in adapting ideas he had for the game . 
 The music and instruments in each level were chosen to correspond to the game world and the level 's placement in the overall emotional arc . The music is composed of multiple layers of acoustic instrument tracks that rise and fall in correlation with the player 's actions . The instruments used include pianos , string instruments such as classical guitars , and woodwinds such as bass flutes and bassoons . The number of instruments playing increases in correlation with the amount of petals that the player gathers . The music is meant to suggest natural sounds like wind . The instrument tracks were intended to be able to stand on their own , even when used in a large orchestrated group as in levels three and six . Several times in the development process , Diamante became so attached to a piece of music that needed alteration that he composed a new piece to replace it . Diamante was long in talks with Sony to produce an album of music from the game . On April 8 , 2010 a soundtrack album was released by Sony for purchase on the PlayStation Network . The album , titled Flower : Original Soundtrack from the Video Game , contains 8 tracks with a total duration of 1 : 04 : 37 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Flower was well received by critics . Alice Liang of 1UP.com applauded the game , saying that " the freedom of movement makes the game feel as relaxing as a gently wafting breeze " . She felt that " fun " did not fully describe the game experience , saying that it had a " well @-@ constructed movie 's emotional arc " and that the game 's music , visuals , and gameplay all drew the player into a compelling emotional experience . She also felt that it was very replayable , which offset its brevity . Ryan Clements of IGN agreed with Liang 's opinion , saying that it provided " more enjoyment , emotion and enlightenment than any game " he had played in years . Though he noted that the game would not appeal to everyone , he described it as " something very unique and very powerful " , referring to it as a " must @-@ play " . Michael <unk> of PALGN called it an " utterly unique , brave and moving game brimming with personality and intent " , though he noted that as it was closer to a work of art than a game , many players would not be interested in it . Gerard Campbell of The Press similarly described it as something more than a game , calling it a " perfect foil " to " ultra @-@ violent shoot- ' em @-@ up " games and summarizing it as " one of the most refreshing and relaxing games around " . 
 Eurogamer 's Tom Bramwell had similar praise , describing it as " pleasantly innocent and uplifting " , though he awarded it a lower score than other reviewers as he felt the US $ 9 @.@ 99 price was too high for the game 's length . This criticism was not universal , as reviewers such as Jason Hill of The Age called the A $ 13 Australian price " reasonable " and described the length as not " overstay [ ing ] its welcome " . Critics such as GamePro 's Terry <unk> and GameTrailers echoed the same praises as other reviewers for the game ; GameTrailers said that it was " less a game and more an experience . You don 't necessarily " play " Flower ; you interact with it , " while <unk> noted the music as the best part of the game 's presentation . Tom Hoggins of The Daily Telegraph felt that Flower would " reignite the ' video games as art ' debate " and was of the opinion that it was a " wonderful work of art " in addition to a game . The positive reception surprised the developers , as they had expected a mixed reaction . 
 Flower received the " Best Independent Game Fueled by Dew " award in the 2009 Spike Video Game Awards . It was similarly named the " Best Indie Game " of 2009 by Playboy . It was nominated for the 2009 " Outstanding Innovation in Gaming " , " Outstanding Achievement in Sound Design " , " Outstanding Achievement in Original Music Composition " , and " Outstanding Innovation Achievement in Game Direction " awards , and won the " Casual Game of the Year " award by the Academy of Interactive Arts and Sciences . It was nominated for the " Use of Audio " video game awards by the British Academy of Film and Television Arts and won the " Artistic Achievement " award . Its soundtrack was awarded the 2009 " Best Original Soundtrack " prize from G4 . The music was also nominated for the Game Audio Network Guild 's " Music of the Year " award and won the " Best Interactive Score " award . Its gameplay debut at the 2008 Electronic Entertainment Expo resulted in multiple awards , including " Best E3 Download Game " from 1UP.com , " Best Original Game " from UGO , and " Special Achievement for Innovation " from IGN . 
 In 2011 , Flower was chosen through a public vote out of an initial selection of 240 to be one of 80 games showcased in a 2012 exhibit at the Smithsonian American Art Museum titled " The Art of Video Games " . In 2013 , the museum acquired the game for its permanent collection . The game was showcased in the 2015 Smithsonian exhibition , Watch This ! Revelations in Media Art . 
 = No. 486 Squadron RAAF = 
 No. 486 Squadron was a maintenance unit of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . It was formed in August 1946 as part of No. 86 ( Transport ) Wing , which operated Douglas C @-@ 47 Dakotas out of RAAF Station Schofields , New South Wales . The squadron transferred to RAAF Station Richmond in June 1949 . It relocated again to RAAF Base Canberra in April 1954 , before returning to Richmond in August 1958 to commence maintenance of No. 86 Wing 's newly delivered Lockheed C @-@ 130 Hercules . The squadron was disbanded between August 1964 and March 1966 . In the 1980s and 1990s , it was responsible for servicing the RAAF 's Boeing 707 tanker / transports , as well as the Hercules . No. 486 Squadron was again disbanded at Richmond in October 1998 , and its functions handed over to No. 86 Wing 's Hercules squadrons . 
 = = History = = 
 No. 486 ( Maintenance ) Squadron was established at RAAF Station Schofields , New South Wales , on 26 August 1946 . Commanded by Wing Commander Alexander <unk> , its allocated strength was 257 , including ten officers . The unit was part of No. 86 ( Transport ) Wing , which also controlled Nos. 36 , 37 , and 38 Squadrons , flying Douglas C @-@ 47 Dakotas , and No. 386 ( Base ) Squadron . No. 37 Squadron was disbanded in February 1948 and No. 386 Squadron in March 1949 . On 22 June 1949 , No. 86 Wing , comprising Nos. 36 , 38 and 486 Squadrons , relocated to the nearby RAAF Station Richmond . No. 486 Squadron 's role included servicing and replacing engines , and fitting long @-@ range fuel tanks and spraying equipment . It occasionally serviced CAC Wirraways in addition to its Dakota maintenance tasks . 
 On 20 April 1954 , No. 86 Wing was transferred to RAAF Base Canberra to help satisfy the Federal government 's VIP transport needs . There No. 486 Squadron maintained two Convair Metropolitans , as well as Dakotas . The squadron returned to Richmond on 29 August 1958 in anticipation of the entry into RAAF service of the Lockheed C @-@ 130A Hercules . The official history of the post @-@ war Air Force described the Hercules as " probably the biggest step @-@ up in aircraft capabilities " the RAAF had ever received , considering it roughly four times as effective as the Dakota , taking into account the improvements in payload , range , and speed . The Hercules was also the first turboprop aircraft operated by the RAAF . The arrival of the C @-@ 130 meant that for a time No. 486 Squadron was maintaining three types of transport aircraft : Hercules , Dakotas and Metropolitans . Heavier maintenance and upgrades to the Hercules were carried out by No. 2 Aircraft Depot , also based at Richmond . The availability of Lockheed spare parts from the US caused problems for No. 486 Squadron early in the C @-@ 130A 's Australian service , grounding one aircraft for almost a year . 
 No. 86 Wing was disbanded following the entry into service of the RAAF 's first de Havilland Canada DHC @-@ 4 Caribou tactical transports in April 1964 . Because the Caribous were primarily for support of the Australian Army , an overarching wing headquarters for the Caribous and Hercules was considered inappropriate . On 3 August 1964 , No. 486 Squadron was also disbanded and its equipment , staff and records divided between Nos. 36 and 38 Squadrons . No. 37 Squadron was re @-@ established at Richmond in February 1966 , flying C @-@ 130E Hercules . Consequently , on 28 March , No. 486 Squadron was re @-@ formed under the auspices of RAAF Base Richmond to service both C @-@ 130 models . Four technicians from No. 486 Squadron were killed in a car accident near Windsor on 26 June 1968 . The unit 's maintenance program was reorganised in September 1973 . It played a significant role supporting relief efforts in the wake of Cyclone Tracy , which struck Darwin , Northern Territory , on Christmas Day 1974 . No. 486 Squadron had thirteen Hercules available by the night of 25 December , and a further six by New Years Day . These nineteen aircraft flew over 1 @,@ 250 hours , carrying more than 7 @,@ 000 passengers and over 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 pounds ( 450 @,@ 000 kg ) of cargo . The C @-@ 130As operated by No. 36 Squadron were replaced by C @-@ 130H models in 1978 , having clocked up 147 @,@ 000 accident @-@ free flying hours . 
 No. 486 Squadron celebrated its 40th Anniversary on 26 August 1986 . No. 86 Wing re @-@ formed at Richmond on 2 February 1987 , under the newly established Air Lift Group ( ALG ) . As well as No. 486 Squadron , the wing controlled No. 33 Squadron flying Boeing 707 transports , Nos. 36 and 37 Squadrons flying C @-@ 130H and C @-@ 130E Hercules respectively , and Air Movements Training and Development Unit . No. 486 Squadron was responsible for operational and intermediate @-@ level maintenance of the 707s as well as the Hercules . It also managed flight simulators and all ground @-@ based equipment . The C @-@ 130Es operated by No. 37 Squadron achieved 200 @,@ 000 accident @-@ free flying hours in 1988 . Two years later , No. 36 Squadron achieved 100 @,@ 000 accident @-@ free flying hours on the C @-@ 130H . Some C @-@ 130 maintenance tasks were outsourced to commercial firms beginning in the late 1980s , and Air New Zealand won a four @-@ year depot maintenance contract in 1990 . Following conversion of four of No. 33 Squadron 's six aircraft to aerial tankers between 1988 and 1992 , No. 486 Squadron took on responsibility for servicing the 707s ' refuelling pods . 
 In 1989 , the Australian Government employed the Hercules and Boeing 707s for transport during the pilots ' dispute that curtailed operations by the two domestic airlines ; the resulting spike in operational hours necessitated No. 486 Squadron sending detachments to several locations throughout the country to cope with increased maintenance demands . In May 1993 , squadron personnel accompanied Hercules and 707s transporting Australian troops from Somalia after they had taken part in United Nations humanitarian operations . By the mid @-@ 1990s , No. 486 Squadron 's strength was over 400 personnel . One of its challenges was the availability of spare parts for the Boeing 's ageing Pratt & Whitney JT3D engines . Qantas undertook heavier maintenance of the 707s at its jet base in Mascot . Other depot @-@ level maintenance of No. 86 Wing aircraft was the responsibility of No. 503 Wing , which had been formed from No. 2 Aircraft Depot in July 1992 . No. 486 Squadron was disbanded in October 1998 , after transferring its functions to Nos. 36 and 37 Squadrons . 
 = Oregon State Capitol = 
 The Oregon State Capitol is the building housing the state legislature and the offices of the governor , secretary of state , and treasurer of the U.S. state of Oregon . It is located in the state capital , Salem . The current building , constructed from 1936 to 1938 , and expanded in 1977 , is the third to house the Oregon state government in Salem . Two former capitol buildings were destroyed by fire , one in 1855 and the other in 1935 . 
 New York architects Trowbridge & Livingston conceived the current structure 's Art Deco , stripped classical design , in association with Francis <unk> . Much of the interior and exterior is made of marble . The Oregon State Capitol was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1988 . 
 The Public Works Administration , part of the U.S. government , partially financed construction , which was completed during the Great Depression , in 1938 . The building was erected at a cost of $ 2 @.@ 5 million for the central portion of the building , which includes a dome of 166 feet ( 51 m ) . The wings , which doubled the floor space of the building to about 233 @,@ 750 square feet ( 21 @,@ 716 m2 ) , were added later for $ 12 @.@ 5 million . The grounds outside the capitol building contain artwork , fountains , and flora , including the state tree ( Douglas fir ) and state flower ( Oregon grape ) . 
 = = Early capitol buildings = = 
 Before the creation of the Oregon Territory in 1848 , the Oregon Country provisional government , through legislation on June 27 , 1844 and December 19 , 1845 , selected Oregon City as the capital . Thus Oregon 's first capitol was in Oregon City . One of the private buildings used by this government was constructed by John L. Morrison in 1850 ; it served as a capitol until the government moved to Salem . The designation of Oregon City as the seat of power was by proclamation of Governor Joseph Lane . In 1850 , the legislature passed an act designating Salem the capital . However , Governor John P. Gaines refused to relocate and remained in Oregon City along with the Oregon Supreme Court ( except justice Orville C. Pratt ) until an act of Congress on May 14 , 1852 settled the matter in Salem 's favor . 
 On January 13 , 1855 , the Oregon Territorial Legislature passed a bill moving the seat of government from Salem to Corvallis . Governor George Law Curry and many others objected to the move , since public buildings in Salem were already under construction . Curry sent the matter to the Secretary of the Treasury in Washington , D.C. , where Secretary James Guthrie declared the move invalid unless acted on by the United States Congress . Thereafter , Curry and Oregon Secretary of State Benjamin Harding moved back to Salem . 
 On December 3 , 1855 , the legislature convened in Corvallis and quickly introduced legislation to move the capital back to Salem . This bill passed on December 15 , 1855 . Three days later , the legislature re @-@ convened in Salem . However , the statehouse burned down on the 29th , and the legislature re @-@ opened debate about where to seat the capital . They decided to ask the people of the territory to vote on the question . A vote was to be held in June 1856 , after which the two cities receiving the most votes would have a runoff . The initial vote set up a runoff between Eugene and Corvallis , but after some ballots were invalidated due to not being cast in accordance with the law , the two winners were Eugene and Salem . An October runoff gave Eugene the most votes , but the earlier vote @-@ tossing led to a low turnout . With such low public participation , the election was ignored , and the capital remained in Salem . 
 A permanent resolution of the capital location issue came in 1864 . In 1860 , the legislature put the question once again to a popular vote . On a vote in 1862 , no city received the 50 percent minimum required by law . In an 1864 election , Salem received 79 percent and was declared the state capital . The Oregon Constitution lists the seat of state government in Article XIV as Marion County , of which Salem is the seat . 
 = = = First capitol = = = 
 The land developed for the permanent capitol buildings was Salem block 84 , sold to the state for this purpose by pioneer and Salem founder W. H. Willson . Construction of the first capitol building began in 1854 , shortly after Congress confirmed Salem as the capital city . However , with the capital moving to Corvallis the next year , construction was temporarily halted . After the capital 's return to Salem , the building was nearly completed by late 1855 . This territorial capitol , of Greek Revival @-@ style , stood 50 feet ( 15 m ) wide and 75 feet ( 23 m ) long ( 15 by 23 m ) , with a stone facade and a 10 @-@ foot ( 3 m ) portico . Built of native ashlar blocks , the exterior walls , two stories high , ranged in color from a deep sky blue to white . The first floor was 19 feet ( 5 @.@ 8 m ) tall and the second 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) tall with an eight @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) entablature . The building was decorated with four Ionic columns on the front ( west ) end . The building housed a variety of rooms , including a federal courthouse with a chamber measuring 20 by 27 feet ( 6 by 8 m ) and an executive office of 18 by 20 ft ( 5 @.@ 5 by 6 m ) on the first floor . Also on the first floor was the House chamber , measuring 36 by 46 feet ( 11 by 14 m ) and having three entrances . The first floor also held the main hall , which included an entrance 15 feet ( 5 m ) wide . On the second floor was the Senate chamber , 26 by 36 feet ( 8 by 11 m ) . Additionally , the Territorial Library was housed in a room that was 20 by 36 feet ( 6 by 11 m ) . The second story also had a gallery viewing area for the House , three committee rooms , and several rooms for government clerks . The capitol was designed by Captain Charles Bennet , who participated in the discovery of gold at Sutter 's Mill in 1848 , and construction supervised by William H. Richter at a total cost of $ 25 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = = Fire = = = = 
 On the evening of December 29 , 1855 , a fire destroyed the first capitol building and many of the territory 's public records . Starting in the unfinished northeast corner of the structure , still unoccupied by the government , the fire was not discovered until around 12 : 30 am . Arson was suspected , but no one was arrested . 
 The site of the burned @-@ out capitol building remained a pile of stones for several years after the fire . A downtown building , Nesmith 's Building ( later named the Holman Building ) , served as a temporary capitol from 1859 until 1876 . The legislature met on the second and third floors of that building , which also housed the other state offices . 
