 Retvizan was raised by the Japanese on 22 September 1905 and renamed Hizen , after Hizen Province , two days later . The ship departed Port Arthur on 19 November and arrived at Sasebo on 27 November where her repairs lasted until November 1908 . Her fighting tops were removed , her light weapons were replaced by Japanese ones , and her boilers were replaced by Miyabara boilers . The barrels and breeches of her main guns were replaced by Japanese @-@ built examples and all four above @-@ water torpedo tubes were removed . In Japanese service her crew numbered 796 officers and crewmen . 
 Hizen was assigned to the 1st Fleet on 1 December 1909 and was refitted in 1913 . She was dispatched to Esquimalt , British Columbia , in October 1914 to reinforce the weak British squadron there , then diverted to Honolulu , Hawaii , before the end of the month to watch the German gunboat SMS Geier after that ship arrived on 15 October . Hizen watched the port in company with the armoured cruiser Asama until Geier was interned on 8 November by the Americans . Afterwards she and Asama headed south in search of the German East Asia Squadron , but never located them ; the ship was recalled home in February 1915 . On 13 December 1915 , Hizen was assigned to the 5th Division of the 3rd Fleet until relieved on 10 May 1917 . The ship served in the Indian Ocean at some point during the war where she probably escorted troop convoys . 
 Hizen supported the Japanese intervention in the Russian Civil War in 1918 and was often stationed in Vladivostok as a guardship . On 1 September 1921 she was reclassified as a 1st class coast defence ship and disarmed at Sasebo in April 1922 in accordance with the Washington Naval Treaty . She was stricken on 20 September 1923 and sunk as a target ship in the Bungo Channel on 25 July 1924 . 
 = 1966 Liberty Bowl = 
 The 1966 Liberty Bowl was a post @-@ season American college football bowl game between the Virginia Tech Hokies and the Miami Hurricanes at Memphis Memorial Stadium in Memphis , Tennessee on December 10 , 1966 . The game was the final contest of the 1966 college football season for both teams , and ended in a 14 – 7 victory for the Miami Hurricanes . A then @-@ record 39 @,@ 101 tickets were sold for the game , but due to 36 @-@ degree temperatures at game time , only 25 @,@ 012 spectators attended . The game marked just the second time that Virginia Tech had played in a bowl game since the creation of the team in 1892 . The game also marked the second time in each school 's history that the two teams had faced each other . The previous meeting , held in 1953 , ended in a 26 – 0 shutout victory for the Hurricanes . Current Virginia Tech head football coach and then @-@ player Frank Beamer participated in the game as a backup cornerback for the Hokies . 
 = = Pregame buildup = = 
 = = = Virginia Tech = = = 
 The Hokies were led on defense by All @-@ America safety Frank Loria , who caught three interceptions and returned three punts for touchdowns as a junior during the 1966 season . In addition , Virginia Tech defensive end George <unk> was named to the Associated Press second @-@ team All @-@ America team , and helped keep the Hurricanes ' offense in check for most of the game . On offense , fullback Tommy Groom served as the third of the Hokies ' three team captains during the game . Virginia Tech was coached by Jerry Claiborne , who was in his sixth year as head coach of the Hokies . Under Claiborne , Virginia Tech had amassed a strong 8 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 record with wins over Kentucky , Florida State , and Virginia and a 70 – 12 blowout win over traditional rival VMI in the final game of the season . The Hokies ' sole loss came in the first game of the season against Tulane , and Virginia Tech drew a 13 – 13 tie against West Virginia . 
 = = = Miami = = = 
 The ninth @-@ ranked Hurricanes boasted a 7 – 2 – 1 regular @-@ season record , including wins over Southern California and Florida . The Hurricanes were led on the field by three @-@ time All @-@ American <unk> Ted Hendricks , who would later go on to a Hall of Fame career in the National Football League . Off the field , the Hurricanes were coached by Charlie Tate , who would head the Hurricanes football team until 1970 . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The game kicked off in frigid 36 ° F ( 2 ° C ) weather , and from the beginning , defense dominated . In the first half , Tech held Miami to just 16 yards of total offense . On the opposite side of the ball , Miami set bowl game records for fewest rushing yards allowed and fewest first downs allowed . The Hokies got the first big break of the game after blocking Miami 's first punt of the game . Taking over at the Miami 21 @-@ yard line , it took Virginia Tech just five plays to march into the end zone for an early 7 – 0 lead . Virginia Tech and Miami battled to a stalemate for the rest of the first half , and Tech went into halftime still clinging to a 7 – 0 lead . 
 In the second half , Tech 's fortune turned . Late in the third quarter , the Virginia Tech defense stopped Miami 's offense again , but instead of receiving the punt cleanly , the Hokies committed a roughing the kicker penalty that allowed Miami to retain possession of the ball with a first down . A few plays later , Miami scored its first touchdown of the game . In the fourth quarter Miami finally took the lead on a 10 @-@ play , 70 @-@ yard drive . The Hokies were unable to answer the Hurricanes ' score , and Miami won the 1966 Liberty Bowl , 14 – 7 . 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 Miami 's Jimmy Cox was named the game 's most valuable player after catching five passes for 77 yards — accounting for nearly half of Miami 's total offensive output . Miami earned just three rushing first downs during the game , setting a Liberty Bowl record that has yet to be broken . 
 Each team had two players pass the ball . Tech 's Tommy Stafford finished the game having completed four 13 passes for 59 yards and one interception . Several times during the game , the Hokies had also played with Barker passing the ball . He finished having completed two of his three passes for 13 yards . On the Miami side of the ball , Miller completed nine of 26 passes for 99 yards and Olivo completed one pass for nine yards . 
 On the ground , Virginia Tech 's Tommy Francisco led all runners with 21 carries for 55 yards . Backing up Francisco was Tech 's Sal Garcia , who finished with three carries for 15 yards . Miami 's leading rusher was McGee , who carried the ball 12 times for 36 yards . Backing up McGee was Acuff , who finished with six carries for 25 yards . 
 = Maryland Route 222 = 
 Maryland Route 222 ( MD 222 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . The state highway runs 11 @.@ 36 miles ( 18 @.@ 28 km ) from MD 7 in Perryville north to U.S. Route 1 ( US 1 ) near Conowingo . MD 222 parallels the Susquehanna River in western Cecil County , connecting Perryville and Conowingo with Port Deposit . Due to limitations in the highway in Port Deposit , including a steep hill and a low railroad bridge , the state highway has a truck bypass that uses MD 275 , MD 276 , and US 1 through Woodlawn and Rising Sun to connect Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) with US 222 in Conowingo . 
 MD 222 was originally constructed as MD 268 , a number presently assigned to North Street in Elkton . The state highway was paved from Perryville to Port Deposit in the late 1910s and early 1920s . MD 268 was extended north to Conowingo in the early 1930s . In 1938 , MD 268 was superseded when US 222 was extended south from US 1 in Conowingo to US 40 in Perryville . The only significant change as US 222 occurred when a new alignment was constructed around the interchange with I @-@ 95 in the early 1960s . MD 222 was designated in 1995 when US 222 was rolled back to its former and present terminus at US 1 in Conowingo . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 222 begins at an intersection with MD 7 ( Broad Street ) in downtown Perryville . The state highway heads north as two @-@ lane Aiken Avenue to US 40 ( Pulaski Highway ) immediately to the east of the toll plaza for the Thomas J. Hatem Memorial Bridge . The disconnected old alignment continues straight as Aiken Avenue Extended while MD 222 heads northeast as Perryville Road to cross over CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision . The state highway curves north and receives the other end of the old alignment , Clayton Street , before leaving the town of Perryville and passing Perryville High School . MD 222 intersects the southern end of MD 824 ( <unk> Road ) and the entrance to the Perryville Outlet Center before meeting I @-@ 95 ( John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway ) at a folded diamond interchange . The state highway passes the entrance to Hollywood Casino Perryville before reaching an intersection with the northern end of MD 824 and MD 275 ( <unk> Drive ) . MD 222 Truck follows MD 275 north toward Rising Sun , while MD 222 turns west onto Bainbridge Road toward Port Deposit . 
 MD 222 heads through a mix of forest and farmland , crossing Happy Valley Branch before passing the entrance to the former United States Naval Training Center , Bainbridge , which contains the Edward W. Haviland House and the original campus of the Tome School . The state highway then begins a steep descent from a high bluff to the Susquehanna River , with the southbound direction gaining a climbing lane . Upon entering the town limits of Port Deposit , MD 222 's name changes to Main Street and the highway makes a sharp turn to the north to parallel the river and Norfolk Southern Railway 's Port Road Branch The state highway intersects MD 276 ( Centre Street ) in the center of Port Deposit . MD 222 passes the Paw Paw Building and intersects Granite Avenue before crossing Rock Run and passing under a low railroad bridge to the west side of the tracks . The state highway leaves the town of Port Deposit and continues north as Susquehanna River Road , closely paralleling the river and passing through its forested flood plain , much of which is part of Susquehanna State Park . Soon after crossing <unk> Creek , MD 222 reaches its northern terminus at an intersection with US 1 ( Conowingo Road ) at the eastern end of Conowingo Dam . Following US 1 northeast to the community of Conowingo leads to the southern terminus of US 222 and the northern terminus of MD 222 Truck . 
 MD 222 is a part of the National Highway System as a principal arterial from US 40 north to MD 275 within Perryville . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now MD 222 was originally designated MD 268 . The first paved section of MD 268 was Aiken Avenue from Broad Street north to around present @-@ day US 40 in Perryville , which was surfaced by 1910 . Aiken Avenue was extended north to the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad ( now CSX ) as a state @-@ aid road by 1919 . The highway was extended as a state road north from the B & O crossing to the top of the bluff above Port Deposit by 1921 . Pavement was extended through Port Deposit to Rock Run in 1923 . The final section of MD 268 , Susquehanna River Road , was under construction by 1930 and completed by 1933 . The highway reused an abandoned railroad bridge to cross <unk> Creek . 
 The first change in alignment in MD 268 occurred around 1934 when a bridge was constructed over the B & O Railroad in Perryville , leaving behind Aiken Avenue Extended and Clayton Street . US 222 was extended south to US 40 in Perryville , then on Broad Street , in 1938 , assuming all of MD 268 . US 222 was reconstructed from US 40 to Port Deposit during World War II to improve access to the naval training center . In 1963 , a new alignment was created for the interchange with I @-@ 95 , bypassing <unk> Road , which became MD 824 . US 222 's southern terminus was rolled back to US 1 in Conowingo in 1995 ; MD 222 was designated along its present course at the same time . MD 222 became the only signed state @-@ numbered highway in Maryland with a number that matches a U.S. Highway . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in Cecil County . 
 = = Related routes = = 
 = = = Truck route = = = 
 Maryland Route 222 Truck is a signed 12 @.@ 49 @-@ mile ( 20 @.@ 10 km ) truck bypass of MD 222 from MD 222 in Perryville to US 1 and US 222 in Conowingo . The signed route follows MD 275 from MD 222 in Perryville north to MD 276 in Woodlawn . MD 222 Truck continues north on MD 276 from Woodlawn north to US 1 west of Rising Sun . The truck route then heads west on US 1 ( in a wrong @-@ way concurrency ) to US 222 's southern terminus in Conowingo . MD 222 Truck has existed since at least 2002 . 
 Junction list 
 The entire route is in Cecil County . 
 = = = Auxiliary routes = = = 
 MD 222 has three auxiliary routes that are maintained by the Maryland Transportation Authority ( <unk> ) and provide access to the authority 's facilities around I @-@ 95 's interchange with MD 222 and the John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway toll plaza to the east of the Millard E. Tydings Memorial Bridge . 
 MD <unk> is the designation for Chesapeake Overlook Parkway , a 0 @.@ 09 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 14 km ) spur west from the intersection of MD 222 and the ramps to and from southbound I @-@ 95 . This spur intersects MD <unk> near its western end and serves as the entrance to Hollywood Casino Perryville . 
 MD <unk> is the designation for Turnpike Drive , a 0 @.@ 89 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 43 km ) service road that heads south from MD <unk> and veers west to parallel the southbound lanes of I @-@ 95 . The state highway provides access to the <unk> administration building , the Perryville barracks of the Maryland State Police , and the adjacent truck weigh station on southbound I @-@ 95 . 
 MD <unk> is the designation for G.R. Dawson Drive , a 0 @.@ 48 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 77 km ) service road that heads west from MD 222 and parallels the northbound lanes of I @-@ 95 . The state highway provides access to a truck weigh station on northbound I @-@ 95 . 
 = Soul Reaver 2 = 
 Soul Reaver 2 is an action @-@ adventure game developed by Crystal Dynamics and published by Eidos Interactive . It is a sequel to Legacy of Kain : Soul Reaver and the third game in the Legacy of Kain series . Originally developed as a PlayStation and Dreamcast project , it was reworked into a PlayStation 2 and Microsoft Windows title in early production , and was released in 2001 . Soul Reaver 2 was followed by two sequels , Blood Omen 2 and Legacy of Kain : Defiance , in 2002 and 2003 . 
 The game continues the adventures of the vampire @-@ turned @-@ wraith Raziel , the protagonist of Soul Reaver . Though Raziel initially seeks to exact revenge on Kain , his murderer and former master , this objective is superseded by a higher quest for knowledge . Traveling through history , he gradually exposes the truth behind his own past and destiny . 
 Hoping to deliver a more story @-@ focused , cinematic experience than Soul Reaver , Crystal Dynamics researched time travel fiction , theology , and the works of Joseph Campbell when creating Soul Reaver 2 's narrative . Critics praised the game for its involved storyline , visuals and puzzles , but criticized it for lacking replay value and ending without a definite resolution . Its developers felt the final product fell short of their ambitions , but it performed well commercially , and was included on Sony 's " Greatest Hits " list . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Soul Reaver 2 is a single @-@ player action @-@ adventure game . The player controls Raziel , a ghostly " ex @-@ vampire " , from a third @-@ person perspective . Gameplay , which is based on the original Soul Reaver , prompts the player to shift between two planes of existence — the material and spectral realms — to progress . The material realm represents the physical , living world , whereas the spectral realm is a warped mirror of this environment . In the spectral realm , the player cannot manipulate objects and weapons , and water is insubstantial . Raziel 's health slowly regenerates in the spectral world , whereas it gradually depletes in the material realm . If Raziel runs out of health in the material world , he is shunted into the spectral realm , and if killed in this plane , he returns to the nearest checkpoint . Save points enable players to record their progress and continue their game . 
 Raziel retains most of the powers he possessed in the previous game , such as the abilities to glide , climb walls , fire bolts of telekinetic energy , and swim . To sustain his strength and travel between the planes , he must devour souls ; this is typically accomplished by defeating enemies . The game 's combat consists of a hack and slash system , entailing the use of combinations of attacks before executing a finishing move . Human enemies exist only in the material world , and include mercenaries , demon hunters , and the Sarafan , a monastic order of vampire hunters ; other material creatures include dogs , thralls , and mutants . <unk> are enemies who exclusively inhabit the spirit world , whereas cross @-@ planar beings such as demons and shades can pursue the player between both realms . Enemies leave behind souls when killed , which replenish Raziel 's health once consumed . 
 The player 's primary weapon is a ghostly version of the Soul Reaver sword , referred to as the wraith @-@ blade . The wraith @-@ blade is symbiotically bound to Raziel , and can be summoned or dismissed at any time in the material world , but , if overused , the sword can turn against Raziel , siphoning his health . Other weapons include claws , swords and spears . As the game progresses , the player encounters magical forges which imbue the wraith @-@ blade with elemental powers associated with darkness , light , air , and fire . These enhancements have various uses , but are only available in the material realm . If Raziel shifts , he loses his active elemental <unk> , and must re @-@ forge the blade at locations scattered throughout the game world . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Soul Reaver 2 is set in Nosgoth , a fictional land with fantasy aspects . In the first game in the series , Blood Omen : Legacy of Kain , the vampire Kain embarks on a journey to restore the Pillars of Nosgoth — nine supernatural edifices which are inextricably tied to the health of the land , but become corrupted . During his adventure , Moebius , a manipulative sorcerer , tricks Kain into orchestrating the destruction of the vampire race : Kain is left the last surviving vampire in Nosgoth . After restoring eight of the Pillars , Kain discovers that he would need to sacrifice his own life to restore the final corrupt one . Realizing that his death would ensure the annihilation of his species , he refuses to kill himself . This triggers the Pillars ' collapse , and dooms the world to eternal decay , but enables Kain to live on and revive the vampire race . 
 By the time of Soul Reaver , 1500 years later , Kain is a despotic emperor , his vampires dominate the land , and Nosgoth hinges on the brink of collapse . The Elder God , a demiurge @-@ like entity , lurks beneath Nosgoth and controls the cycle of reincarnation ; the vampires , whose biological immortality opposes his doctrine , are his enemies . In Soul Reaver , Raziel — Kain 's lieutenant — is executed by Kain , but The Elder God resurrects him and encourages him to exact revenge . Traversing the wasteland and murdering the vampires , Raziel confronts Kain , who attacks him with the Soul Reaver sword , imbued with a spirit which absorbs its victims ' souls . The Soul Reaver shatters when it strikes Raziel , and the blade 's spirit binds itself to his arm . His motives still mysterious , Kain lures Raziel through a time portal into Nosgoth 's past . 
 In Soul Reaver 2 , it is established that , in Nosgoth , fatalism is an actuality — history is immutable , and all individuals are subject to predestination . Raziel , due to his paradoxical destiny , is the only exception to this rule — his presence enables temporal paradoxes to be triggered , altering history for better or worse . Kain relies on Raziel 's free will in a bid to outsmart Moebius and resolve the dilemma he faced in Blood Omen , ultimately hoping to enable both the restored Pillars and the vampire race to co @-@ exist in the future . Soul Reaver 2 opens as Raziel emerges from the time slip and is greeted by Moebius , having arrived in an era 30 years prior to the events of Blood Omen . Two further time periods , 100 years after and 500 years before Blood Omen respectively , are also explored as the story progresses . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Raziel returns as the protagonist of Soul Reaver 2 . In Soul Reaver , Raziel discovered that he was once a human and a leading member of the vampire @-@ hunting Sarafan brotherhood , and his epiphanies drive the conflict in the story . Kain , the antagonist of Soul Reaver , appears as a non @-@ player character in cutscenes , urging Raziel to unearth his destiny . Moebius the Time Streamer , a sorcerer who was a villain in Blood Omen , attempts to manipulate Raziel into destroying Kain — it is revealed that he is an agent of The Elder God , Raziel 's ally and guide in Soul Reaver , who is slowly established as a more sinister entity . Ariel , a specter bound to the Pillars who featured in Blood Omen and Soul Reaver , returns , and the vampire Vorador , also from Blood Omen , assists Raziel early in the game . The ancient vampire Janos Audron , a new character who was previously only mentioned in Blood Omen , acts as Raziel 's mentor towards the end of the story . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game begins by summarizing Soul Reaver 's ending : Raziel confronts Kain in Nosgoth 's wasteland , and pursues him through a portal leading to the past . Moebius , the leader of a vampire @-@ hunting crusade in this age , coerces Raziel to re @-@ embrace his former heritage as a Sarafan vampire hunter by killing Kain . Though Raziel is initially eager to do so , his enthusiasm wanes over time as he witnesses the ruthlessness of Moebius 's soldiers . Kain , who is destined to die at Raziel 's hands in this era , implores Raziel to thwart fate and instead facilitate his quest to restore the Pillars . After he learns that Moebius serves The Elder God , and that he has thus been duped , Raziel faces a decision : indulge his lust for vengeance but submit to fate by killing Kain , or defy his cohorts and exercise his free will by exerting mercy . 
 While exploring this period , Raziel discovers evidence that two ancient races waged war in Nosgoth 's distant past . One race created the Pillars to banish their adversaries , but the enemy race — the Hylden — retaliated with a curse which transformed the Pillars ' architects into the first vampires . Kain explains that , had he sacrificed himself , the vampire race — the rightful inheritors of the Pillars — would have become extinct . Raziel chooses to spare Kain , causing a paradox ; history reshuffles itself to accommodate the extension of Kain 's life . He , however , refuses to indulge Kain 's plans any further , instead opting to explore his own past . Vorador tells Raziel that the last of the ancient vampires , Janos Audron , held the key to Raziel 's destiny , but Janos was murdered by the Sarafan five centuries ago . 
 Deciding to speak with Janos , Raziel orders Moebius to send him further back in time . Moebius deceives Raziel , instead conveying him over a century into the future , where he and The Elder God highlight the consequences of the Pillars ' destruction to turn Raziel against Kain . Raziel navigates the future era and finds his own way back to the age of the Sarafan and Janos Audron . There , Janos presents Raziel with the Reaver , a younger version of the physical Soul Reaver blade which will later house a soul @-@ devouring spirit . Suddenly , a group of Sarafan led by Raziel 's former , human self launch an ambush , and Janos sacrifices himself . Raziel swears vengeance as Janos dies , and pursues the attackers . He uses the Reaver to kill them and his younger self , renouncing his Sarafan past . 
 The wraith @-@ blade attached to Raziel 's arm , over @-@ aroused after the deaths of the Sarafan , suddenly seizes control of the physical Reaver , and impales Raziel ; Raziel , horrified , then realizes his destiny . He himself has always been the ravenous spirit inside the Reaver , and therefore is fated to be stuck in a time loop ; the sword shattered against him in Soul Reaver because it was unable to consume itself . While his soul is being drawn into the sword , Kain emerges and tears the Reaver from Raziel 's body , saving him in reciprocation and forcing history to reshuffle again . However , this paradox strains Nosgoth 's history too far , enabling the Hylden to return and jeopardize his ambition to restore the Pillars . Amidst Kain 's dismay , Raziel realizes that the wraith @-@ blade is still bound to him , and laments that his destiny has not been changed , but merely postponed . 
 = = Development = = 
 Even before the release of Soul Reaver , Crystal Dynamics were aware that they would create a follow @-@ up , but had no " master plan " . Soul Reaver uses the engine of Gex : Enter the Gecko . Prior to the beginning of development , director Amy Hennig emphasized that the role @-@ playing game elements of Blood Omen , stronger dialogue and character interaction , a greater variety of <unk> mechanics , and wider use of the spectral realm should figure into the sequel . Pre @-@ production began in late 1999 , and the project briefly entered development for the PlayStation and Dreamcast with a targeted release date in fall of 2000 . The team was given approval to switch to the PlayStation 2 after creating a proof @-@ of @-@ concept demo for E3 2000 , and the game was announced as an exclusive title for the newer console . Executive producer Andrew Bennett analogized the developers ' design sensibilities to the non @-@ linear nature of Nintendo 's The Legend of Zelda and Mario franchises , but said it was decided that Soul Reaver 2 would not be a " traditional ' complete a level , fight a boss ' type of game " . Level designers constructed a generalized puzzle and object @-@ interaction system , helping to prevent an undesired re @-@ emergence of Soul Reaver 's abundant block puzzles . Instead of creating more inherent and optional abilities for Raziel , they focused on including new , mandatory enhancements for the Soul Reaver weapon . 
 On the decision to downplay Raziel 's quest for vengeance against Kain in this sequel , Hennig explained , " he 's being pretty simple @-@ minded , he 's sort of being very black @-@ and @-@ white in his interpretation of things , and being kind of petulant [ ... ] he 's not really as heroic as Kain is , and he has a lot of stuff to figure out , basically , about what 's going on " . Soul Reaver 2 was crafted to feature a more cinematic , story @-@ focused experience than its predecessor , which the developers felt had been " patchy " in this regard . It entered production after Blood Omen 2 , but shipped almost six months before the latter game . A separate team within Crystal Dynamics , with creative autonomy , developed Blood Omen 2 , and contradictions created by its scenario hindered work on Soul Reaver 2 . After researching time travel fiction , Hennig devised a subplot concerning temporal paradoxes to resolve the continuity problems between both titles , and established that Blood Omen 2 's story is a product of the final paradox created when Kain saves Raziel at the end of Soul Reaver 2 . Other themes were inspired by the works of Joseph Campbell , and theology surrounding Gnosticism . Concepts which formulated the crux of the story included the idea " that the only way a hero can ever succeed is by following his own path " , and the question , " can you change history or not ? And if so , what does it mean to change history - in terms of being responsible for the repercussions ? " 
 British comic book writer Paul Jenkins was drafted by Crystal Dynamics to help refine the game 's script . Though Soul Reaver features a variety of boss encounters , Soul Reaver 2 does not ; this was a conscious decision on the part of the staff , to ensure the game 's pacing more closely emulated that of a novel or a film . While expanding the series ' fiction , Hennig sought to take people back to the characters and mythology of the original Blood Omen , and built on its latent themes , including issues of fatalism , ethical dilemma and morality . In an interview , she stated that " the game will have a proper ending this time " , and said " it has a conclusion . It 's the end of a chapter . There won 't be a cliffhanger " . However , the story needed to be restructured several times before its completion , and , like the original Soul Reaver , many planned areas and abilities were excised , including three elemental forges ( earth , water and spirit ) , more Reaver enhancements , and nine " spell @-@ type things " . She explained that the project 's small programming crew , its switch to the PlayStation 2 , and its limited 17 month production schedule had forced the team to " pick their battles " , leading numerous features to be simplified or eliminated . Commenting on the final product , lead designer Richard Lemarchand said that Soul Reaver 2 " fell short of what the team had wanted to accomplish . In particular , some puzzles were too opaque , the combat was rather one @-@ dimensional , [ and the story ] ended without a decent resolution " . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Soul Reaver 2 was composed by Kurt Harland , of American band Information Society , and Jim Hedges . Harland and Hedges had already collaborated on Soul Reaver , but Hedges had not previously contributed compositions . The adaptive audio framework from the previous game returned ; depending on signals from the game in certain situations — such as combat , puzzles , danger or suspense — the game 's soundtrack actively changes . Music from both Soul Reaver and Soul Reaver 2 was released on a promotional soundtrack in 2001 . 
 Gordon Hunt returned as the game 's recording director , with Kris Zimmerman as casting director . Voice actors from both Blood Omen and Soul Reaver reprised their roles , with Michael Bell playing Raziel and Simon Templeman portraying Kain . The Elder God was again voiced by Tony Jay , Richard Doyle voiced Moebius , and Anna Gunn played Ariel . Paul Lukather , absent from Soul Reaver , rejoined the cast as Vorador . René Auberjonois , the only newcomer to the Legacy of Kain series , provided the voice of Janos Audron . 
 = = Release = = 
 Publisher Eidos Interactive was " broadly satisfied " with the commercial performance of Soul Reaver 2 , which sold more than 500 @,@ 000 copies by June 2002 . Later , Sony re @-@ released it under the " Greatest Hits " label . Shortly after the initial PlayStation 2 release in October 2001 , the Microsoft Windows port shipped , developed by Nixxes Software BV . The PlayStation 2 release featured bonus material , including voice casting outtakes , artworks , a soundtrack , trailers , the game 's dialogue script , and a compilation of Nosgoth 's history . In 2002 , the game was released in Japan by publisher Titus Software . In 2012 , digital distribution services GOG.com and Steam made the Windows port of Soul Reaver 2 available for purchase . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On the PlayStation 2 , Soul Reaver 2 respectively received an aggregate score of 80 @.@ 71 % and 80 / 100 from rating websites GameRankings and Metacritic . Various reviewers held its storytelling , visuals and sound in high regard , but described its gameplay as dull and unsatisfying . Doug Perry of IGN praised the game 's dark atmosphere and intriguing story , but said that it can become tiresome and drag on . He thought the " haughtiness " and drama of the dialogue , particularly between Raziel and Kain , was often overdone , and noted that its gameplay was near identical to that of its predecessor but with less replay value . Perry enjoyed the new puzzles involving the elemental powers of the Reaver for being more complex and diverse than the block puzzles of Soul Reaver , and praised the combat system . He gave the game a score of 9 @.@ 0 , but in his later review for Defiance , he revised his opinion , saying this rating was " way too high " and " that game told a great story , but just didn 't deserve that score " . 
 Joe Fielder of GameSpot gave Soul Reaver 2 a score of 8 @.@ 8 and called it an excellent sequel , again praising the change to elemental puzzles and the combat system , but criticizing the dearth of sidequests and boss fights , and the lack of definite resolution to the storyline . Electronic Gaming Monthly 's reviewer said that it triumphed as an aesthetic showcase , but deemed its gameplay mediocre and unappealing . The reviewer for Game Informer regarded Soul Reaver 2 as " quite engrossing " . Star Dingo of GamePro similarly praised its graphics , sound design and voice acting , but condemned missed creative opportunities concerning the potential of the spectral realm and time travel , saying that the game " takes as many steps back as it does forward , and ends up teetering precariously over the brink of being a disappointment " . The review concurred with IGN that the plot and dialogue , though entertaining , sometimes bordered on pretentiousness , and Game Revolution 's Duke Ferris repeatedly compared the story to a soap opera . 
 Other critics , such as GameZone 's Michael Lafferty , were less reserved in their praise of the narrative — The Electric Playground referred to it as " a textbook example to other console developers on how to write videogame prose " — but agreed that its complex and involved backstory could alienate some players . The Adrenaline Vault 's Mike Laidlaw stated that " the folks at Crystal Dynamics obviously have no kindness in their heart for game reviewers trying desperately to describe the plot " . Journalists also commonly cited Soul Reaver 2 's poor lifespan and replayability as an issue ; the reviewer for Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine opined that " the problem is that there just isn 't much gameplay there " and Fielder warned that play " burns bright , but not as long as you 'd like " . 
 = Hell Comes to Quahog = 
 " Hell Comes to Quahog " is the third episode of the fifth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy , an episode produced for Season 4 . It originally aired on Fox on September 24 , 2006 . The episode follows teenage daughter Meg after she requests that her parents buy her a car . At the showroom , however , her father , Peter , decides to buy a tank , instead of the car Meg was interested in . Deciding to pay for a new car herself , Meg is able to get a job at Superstore USA , which eventually destroys the local economy of Quahog , and upsets the local community . 
 The episode was written by Kirker Butler and directed by Dan Povenmire . It received mostly positive reviews from critics for its storyline and entertaining cultural references . It was viewed by 9 @.@ 66 million viewers in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Dave Boat , Carrie Fisher , Phil LaMarr , Rachael MacFarlane and Fred Tatasciore , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " Hell Comes to Quahog " was released on DVD along with twelve other episodes from the season on September 18 , 2007 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Peter , Cleveland , Joe , and Quagmire are spending the evening at The Drunken Clam , when Peter is reminded to pick up Meg from the roller skating rink . They then go to the rink and continue to enjoy themselves , but forget to pick up Meg when they leave . After skating home in the rain , Meg asks the family for her own car . The next day , Peter takes his daughter to the local car showroom , where she shows an interest in a sedan . Distracted by a large tank at the dealership , however , Peter is tricked into buying it . At first , Peter uses the tank himself , despite it being intended for Meg , but then he teaches Meg to drive it . Later that day , however , the two accidentally run over Joe , and he impounds the tank . Frustrated , Meg decides to earn the money for her own car , and is able to get a job at the local Quahog mega store , Superstore USA , working under a man named Mr. Penisburg . The shops in Quahog soon become bankrupt because of the new superstore , and citizens are informed that there will be widespread electricity blackouts because of Superstore USA 's increasing power @-@ demand . As the town is enduring a massive heat wave , the rest of the citizens become angered . 
 Meanwhile , Peter loses his job at the Pawtucket Brewery because Superstore USA has its own brewery and they cannot compete . <unk> , Peter joins an angry protest outside the store , but after entering the store to encourage customers to leave , Peter is impressed by its central cooling system , and decides to become an employee also working under Mr. Penisburg with Meg as his superior . Later , his daughter is promoted to assistant manager by Mr. Penisburg , who immediately instructs her to fire Peter . Despite her reservations about her father , she chooses her family over her job and quits . In the meantime , Brian and Stewie decide to eliminate the superstore completely by retrieving Peter 's tank , and driving it through the superstore , while Peter and Meg escape through an emergency exit . After bulldozing the store , Brian and Stewie drive outside and demolish it and Penisburg with the tank 's cannon . Immediately afterwards , the electricity supply to Quahog is restored , and life returns to normal . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Kirker Butler and directed by Dan Povenmire . Most of the music throughout the episode was written by Walter Murphy , including the 1970s song , " A Fifth of Beethoven " , which was played at the roller rink scene . In addition , the music that is played when Brian and Stewie are destroying the store follows the style of Elmer Bernstein 's theme to Stripes . Several variations were made to the Iceman scene , who was originally meant to be fighting with his wife , but was changed for legal reasons . 
 Several scenes and gags had to be removed from the television broadcast of the episode , as they were deemed inappropriate . This includes a scene when Brian recalls being stroked too hard by a " Special Child , " which he retaliates against by biting the child 's hand . The final scene , also censored from television airing , involved Chris laughing excessively at one of his own jokes , concluding with " Oh , I <unk> and pooped . " These scenes were removed from FOX , but not from Adult Swim or the DVD . Another scene involves a man driving in a Hummer , while watching the 2005 film Madagascar in his car . The man then exclaims " Dude , those animals are so fucking funny , " which was mistakenly broadcast uncensored in Canada , though this problem was corrected for future broadcasts . The censors remained intact in the United States . 
 " Hell Comes to Quahog " , along with the twelve other episodes from Family Guy 's fifth season , were released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on September 18 , 2007 . The sets included brief audio commentaries by Seth MacFarlane and various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes and animatics , a special mini @-@ feature which discusses the process behind drawing Peter Griffin , and mini @-@ feature entitled " Toys , Toys Galore " . 
 In addition to the regular cast , voice actor Dave Boat , actress Carrie Fisher , voice actor Phil LaMarr , voice actress Rachael MacFarlane and voice actor Fred Tatasciore guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Lori Alan , actress Alex Breckenridge , actor Johnny Brennan , actor Ralph Garman , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin and writer John Viener made minor appearances . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title of the episode parodies the title of the 1988 cult film , Hell Comes to Frogtown . In the opening scene of the episode , Peter , Joe , Quagmire and Cleveland are shown playing ping pong at the local bar . Once Joe accidentally hits their final ping pong ball out a window , Peter responds by forcing the puppet character Mr. Moose , from the children 's television series Captain Kangaroo , to tell a knock @-@ knock joke . This causes hundreds of ping pong balls to cascade from the ceiling above them . Going on to exclaim the amount of fun he is having , Peter recounts his performance in a Broadway musical version of the 1984 film Red Dawn . 
 After being reminded to pick up Meg at the local roller rink , Peter and his friends decide to go skating After returning home without Meg , the Griffin family are shown watching a Pepperidge Farm commercial on their television . Immediately afterwards , Meg enters her home , and begs her parents to get buy her a new vehicle . Reluctant to do so , Peter informs Meg that plenty of people are able to get around without a car , including the fictional Marvel Comics superhero Iceman . Finally deciding to give in and purchase a vehicle for Meg , the Griffin family head to the local car dealership . While there , Brian notices a large amount of <unk> , and questions who would ever want to drive one . A cutaway then shows a loud , obnoxious man driving a yellow Hummer , who goes on to brag about being able to watch the 2005 film Madagascar while driving , and proceeds to destroy two vehicles in the process while yelling the name of former United States Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld . 
 Returning home with the tank , Peter decides to surprise his wife , Lois , with his new purchase . Once Lois opens her eyes , she exclaims the phrase " Bocce balls ! " , which was originally from the 1984 comedy film Splash . Coming to accept the tank , Lois and Peter decide to take it to a drive @-@ in theater , where they are shown watching a film entitled The Even Couple , by screenwriter Neil Simon , and starring actors Jeff Daniels and Bill Pullman . The next day , after the tank is impounded by Joe , the family is shown watching the CBS television drama Ghost Whisperer , with Jennifer Love Hewitt then appearing on screen . Meg then interrupts , and expresses her anger at her father for allowing the tank to be impounded . Her father then responds by stating that it is " not the worst thing " he has ever done , with a cutaway of Peter murdering Yogi Bear then being shown . 
 The Superstore USA store is similar to Wal @-@ Mart . Frustrated by her father , Meg decides to get a job at Superstore USA . As she is being instructed about her job by her new boss , he tells her to feed the deformed man Sloth from the 1985 film The Goonies . As Superstore USA begins to take over the town , it is announced that rolling blackouts will be performed in order to meet the store 's need for electricity . A commercial during Quahog 's local news is then played , parodying the theme to the 1971 children 's television series The Electric Company . While Stewie and Brian attack the store , the manager of Superstore USA runs to hide in the bathroom before being crushed by the billboard in front of him . This is a reference to the Jurassic Park scene where the attorney also hides in a bathroom before being eaten by the T @-@ Rex . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a slight improvement over the previous week , the episode brought in 9 @.@ 66 million viewers on its original airing , according to the Nielsen ratings . The episode acquired a 3 @.@ 4 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , tying with The Simpsons , and edging out series creator Seth MacFarlane 's second show American Dad ! , in both ratings and total viewership . 
 Reviews of the episode by television critics were mostly positive , noting its " hilarious beginning and the nice ending . " Dan Iverson of IGN praised the episode , stating that the episode " looks to show that this fifth season is going to bring the series back to the irreverent basics that made it so appealing . " Iverson went on to comment that some of the jokes were " extremely funny " and that " the episode had it all , from the Electric Company bit to making fun of people who drive <unk> and watch movies like Madagascar . " In the conclusion of his review , Iverson gave the episode an eight out of ten . Brett Love of TV Squad also gave the episode a positive review , calling the installment much better than the previous two episode 's from the season , " Stewie Loves Lois " and " Mother Tucker " , but criticized the storyline 's similarity to the South Park episode " Something Wall @-@ Mart This Way Comes " . Love commented negatively on the portrayal of Peter working at the superstore , however , stating , " it 's a fine line when they go retarded with Peter . Sometimes it plays really funny , and sometimes it just gets annoying . " 
 = George Dewhurst ( cricketer ) = 
 George Alric R. Dewhurst ( 31 October 1894 – 4 January 1954 ) was a Trinidadian cricketer who played for West Indies before the team attained Test match status . A highly regarded wicket @-@ keeper , Dewhurst was an influential and popular member of the Trinidad and West Indian sides . In his later career , he improved substantially as a batsman . He toured England with the West Indies team in 1923 but missed the 1928 tour of England in controversial circumstances . Despite continued speculation that he would be recalled , he did not play representative cricket again . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Dewhurst made his first @-@ class debut for Trinidad in 1920 , playing two matches against Barbados . The following season , he played twice in the Inter @-@ Colonial Tournament , and also played both games in 1922 . In the final of the latter tournament , he scored 58 , his maiden first @-@ class half @-@ century and only his second score in double figures . 
 During 1923 , a representative West Indian team toured England . Dewhurst was selected as wicket @-@ keeper for the tour . He played in 15 games to score 182 runs at an average of 10 @.@ 11 , with one half @-@ century : 52 against Nottinghamshire . Although not the team 's official vice @-@ captain , Dewhurst was very influential in the side . His performances as wicket @-@ keeper were widely praised in the English press , and according to one team @-@ mate from that tour , the bowling was difficult for a wicket @-@ keeper to take . Despite competition from C. Piggott , whom many Trinidadians considered a superior wicket @-@ keeper , Dewhurst secured his place as Trinidad 's wicket @-@ keeper after the tour . Many critics regarded Dewhurst as the best wicket @-@ keeper in the West Indies . 
 Dewhurst continued to play for Trinidad between 1923 and 1926 , although , owing to his business commitments , he was unable to play in every game . In 1926 he played against the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) , which was touring the West Indies , for both Trinidad and a West Indies team . He passed fifty three times against the touring team , and such was his improvement as a batsman that critics suggested he could hold a place in the West Indies team for his batting alone . However , Dewhurst did not play another first @-@ class match until 1930 . 
 = = Controversy and later career = = 
 Dewhurst occasionally captained Trinidad in the Inter @-@ Colonial Tournament and was a candidate to captain the West Indies cricket team in England in 1928 , when the two most likely men were unwilling or unable to lead the team . Dewhurst had acted as vice @-@ captain of the West Indies team in 1926 to Harold Austin , but in the event , Karl Nunes was selected as captain . Dewhurst was also overlooked as vice @-@ captain in favour of <unk> Wight although the latter had no captaincy experience . Dewhurst was named in the team to tour England , but he withdrew . Some newspaper reports blamed illness for his decision , others suggested business reasons . Critics believed that Dewhurst 's absence adversely affected the team ; the replacement wicket @-@ keepers were not regarded as equal to Dewhurst 's ability , and the vice @-@ captain had little success . It was suggested that Dewhurst only missed the tour because he had not been chosen as vice @-@ captain . Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack noted : " The absence of Dewhurst — a member of the team of 1923 — was very severely felt . " However , Dewhurst was criticised in the West Indies for being unsporting by refusing to go on the tour . 
 After an absence from first @-@ class cricket , Dewhurst returned to play for Trinidad in 1930 when the MCC toured the West Indies . Before the series , he was named in the press as a candidate to lead the West Indies Test team . A Barbados newspaper claimed that he was the only suitable potential captain from Trinidad . The same report suggested that , while he may not have been available for every Test , he was an ideal leader if the selectors chose different captains for the matches played on each island . During the tour , and before the Trinidad Test , the Trinidad team played the MCC . Nelson Betancourt captained in the first game and won the match ; Dewhurst led in the second and was defeated . Subsequently , Betancourt was selected as captain for the Trinidad Test match . Citing " insularity and prejudice " in West Indian selection , an article in a Trinidad newspaper stated : " The selection of Betancourt in preference to Dewhurst was a pre @-@ arranged affair , the latter being only given the leadership of the second Trinidad team in order to keep quiet a suspicious and already much chagrined public . " The newspaper suggested that Dewhurst had been set up to fail when the selectors gave him a weaker team to play the MCC , that he still out @-@ performed Betancourt in captaincy , and that the decision was based on factors other than ability . 
 The match between Trinidad and MCC was Dewhurst 's last in first @-@ class cricket . In 31 first @-@ class matches , he scored 665 runs at an average of 16 @.@ 21 , passing fifty in six innings . He held 47 catches and made 13 stumpings . Both the Trinidad and West Indian selectors continued to leave Dewhurst out of teams . He was not chosen to tour Australia with the West Indies in 1930 – 31 . One press report suggested " reasons are to be found in directions other than cricket " , and that minds had been " poisoned " . Dewhurst continued to be mentioned as a prospective selection , and even as a possibility for the West Indies captaincy , in the early 1930s , and critics still believed him to be the best wicket @-@ keeper in the West Indies . But his lack of regular cricket was considered to count against him . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Writing about cricket in Trinidad , historian C. L. R. James noted that Dewhurst always kept wicket " excellently " , but that many Trinidadians considered Piggott a better wicket @-@ keeper who was only left out because he was black and Dewhurst was white . James recalled that people were astonished when Piggott was not chosen to tour England in 1923 . But he suggests it was not a surprise as without Dewhurst 's selection , among the Trinidad representatives on the West Indian team , there would have been no players from the Queen 's Park Club , the most prestigious club on the island , nor would there have been any white players . Writing in 1927 , in the expectation that Dewhurst would tour England the following year , his 1923 team @-@ mate C. R. Browne wrote that Dewhurst 's " heart is as big as his body " and that his " expansive smile captures many victims " . He described him as " very unassuming , but winning in appearance Dewhurst is effective in his job and inspires confidence in bowler and fieldsmen alike . Without Trinidad 's skipper no West Indies Team is complete . " 
 = William A. Spinks = 
 William Alexander Spinks Jr . ( 1865 – 1933 ) was an American professional player of carom billiards in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . He was known professionally as William A. Spinks or ( in the <unk> practice common in his era ) W. A. Spinks , and occasionally also referred to as Billy Spinks . In addition to being amateur Pacific Coast Billiards Champion several times , a world champion contender in more than one cue sports discipline , and an exhibition player in Europe , he became the co @-@ inventor ( with William Hoskins ) in 1897 of modern billiard cue chalk . 
 He was originally ( and again in retirement from the billiards circuit ) a Californian , but spent much of his professional career in Chicago , Illinois . At his peak , his was a household name in U.S. billiards ; the New York Times ranked Spinks as one of " the most brilliant players among the veterans of the game " , and he still holds the world record for points scored in a row ( 1 @,@ 010 ) using a particular shot type . Aside from his billiards playing career , he founded a lucrative sporting goods manufacturing business . He was both an oil company investor and director , and a flower and fruit farm operator and horticulturist , originator of the eponymous Spinks cultivar of avocado . 
 = = As an inventor ( 1892 – 97 ) = = 
 While Spinks was a world @-@ class player , his lasting contributions to cue sports were the innovations he brought to the game and the industry resulting from his fascination with the abrasives used by players on the leather tips of their cue sticks . 
 Cue " chalk " ( used since at least 1807 ) helps the tip better grip the cue ball ( very briefly ) on a stroke and prevents <unk> , as well as permitting the player to impart a great deal more spin to the ball , vital for position play and for spin @-@ intensive shots , such as <unk> . In the 1800s , true chalk ( generally calcium carbonate lumps , suspended from strings ) , and even plaster was often used , but players experimented with other powdery , abrasive substances , since true chalk had a deleterious effect on the game equipment , not only discoloring the billiard cloth but also allegedly damaging the fabric . 
 In 1892 , Spinks was particularly impressed by a piece of natural chalk @-@ like substance obtained in France , and presented it to chemist and electrical engineer William Hoskins ( 1862 – 1934 ) of Chicago for analysis . He determined it was porous volcanic rock ( pumice ) originally probably from Mount Etna , Sicily . Using the rock as a starting place , the two experimented together with different formulations of various materials to achieve the cue ball " action " that Spinks sought . 
 They eventually narrowed their search to a mixture of Illinois @-@ sourced silica and the abrasive substance corundum or <unk> ( a form of aluminum oxide , Al2O3 ) , founding William A. Spinks & Company with a factory in Chicago after securing a patent on March 9 , 1897 . Spinks later left the company as an active party , but it retained his name and was subsequently run by Hoskins , and later by Hoskins 's cousin Edmund F. Hoskin , after Hoskins moved on to other projects . 
 While regular calcium carbonate chalk had been packaged and marketed on a local scale by various parties ( English player Jack Carr 's " Twisting Powder " of the 1820s being the earliest recorded example , although considered dubious by some billiards researchers ) , the Spinks Company product ( which is still emulated by modern manufacturers with differing , proprietary compounds ) effectively revolutionized billiards . The modern product provided a cue tip friction enhancer that allowed the tip to better grip the cue ball briefly and impart a previously unattainable amount of spin on the ball , which consequently allowed more precise and extreme cue ball control , made <unk> less likely , made curve and <unk> shots more plausible , and ultimately spawned the new cue sport of artistic billiards . Even the basic draw and follow shots of pool games ( such as eight @-@ ball and nine @-@ ball ) depend heavily on the effects and properties of modern billiard " chalk " . 
 Spinks made a " fortune " from his co @-@ invention and the company that sold it to the world . 
 = = As a player = = 
 Spinks was a formidable specialist and professional competitor in straight rail billiards ( early on ) , and balkline billiards ( one of the most difficult of all cue sports ) , especially 14 @.@ 2 and later 18 @.@ 2 balkline , and skilled enough at the even more difficult 18 @.@ 1 variant to hold his own against World Champions . 
 = = = 1890s : Rise as a professional contender = = = 
 He moved to the East from California , as it was the center of high @-@ quality playing . He began his competitive professional playing career in Brooklyn , New York , ca . 1892 , at about 27 years of age . 
 On December 19 , 1893 , in Brooklyn , Spinks played in an exhibition that also featured the great Maurice Daly and young champion Frank Ives , and gave demonstrations of fancy <unk> shots ( see illustration ) . He also played a 14 @.@ 2 balkline match against World Champion Jacob Schaefer Sr. ; Schaefer won , 250 – 162 , with a high run and average of 88 and 20 ( respectively ) to Spinks 's 33 and 13 . 
 In 1894 , he was living in Cincinnati , Ohio , and in January of that year offered a convoluted challenge to veteran <unk> Edward McLaughlin of Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , to play him either a single 14 @.@ 2 match to 600 points for US $ 500 each ( a substantial amount of money in that period for someone to put up personally on a bet – approximately $ 13 @,@ 675 in modern dollars ) in New York City , or one in New York and one in Philadelphia , or one in Cincinnati and one in Philadelphia , whatever McLaughlin preferred , and even offered to pay travel expenses to Cincinnati . 
 Spinks issued an even more curious challenge in November 1894 , to play 14 @.@ 2 balkline against ( almost ) any challenger to 600 points for a $ 1 @,@ 000 pot again , and while including French champion Edward <unk> , the bet specifically excluded the top @-@ three names in that era of the sport , namely Shaefer , Ives and George Franklin Slosson . The challenge was accepted by well @-@ known Chicago pro Thomas Gallagher ( in a match that future champion Ora Morningstar traveled all the way to Chicago to see ) . 
 Spinks was apparently not a fan of upstart <unk> Ives in particular . Days after issuing his caveat @-@ laden challenge , Spinks was described by an onlooking journalist as " very uneasy until the seventeenth inning " as a spectator at the 14 @.@ 2 balkline World Champion challenge match between Ives and incumbent Schaefer ; the latter 's point total had been trailing , sometimes badly , in all sixteen previous innings until he rallied in the final inning of the game . Spinks , along with Gallagher , even helped Schaefer train in 14 @.@ 2 for another match against Ives , in October of that year ; though Spinks lost this practice match 600 – 369 ( averages 23 vs. 14 ) , he had a high run of 109 , to Schaefer 's 102 ( and Gallagher 's 157 total ) . 
 Spinks was reported in the press in 1895 to be specifically desired as a competitor in an upcoming seven @-@ man invitational tournament for " second class " professional players ( i.e. , not the top 3 ) , organized by Daly , and with as much as $ 1 @,@ 200 ( approx . $ 34 @,@ 133 in modern dollars ) added . 
 Spinks had moved to Chicago by 1896 , and was perfecting his billiard chalk with Hoskins . That year he was noted for besting McLaughlin at 14 @.@ 2 by a comfortable 2500 – 2300 margin ( with averages of 11 vs. 10 ) in a five @-@ evening 14 @.@ 2 match for $ 250 ( approx . $ $ 7 @,@ 111 , in modern dollars ) , December 8 – 12 , in Slosson 's New York City billiard hall . At one point he had trailed rather badly , 1500 – 1880 , after McLaughlin pulled off a stunning run of 140 ( Spinks 's highest recorded run of the match was 69 ) . 
 By 1897 , the year of the launch of Spinks & Company , he had evidently overcome his seeming reluctance to face World Champions again ( perhaps from having several years ' experience with his own product prototypes ) . Spinks competed in ( but did not win ) a December 3 open tournament . 
 The next month in New York City , a January 15 – 21 , 1898 double @-@ elimination , five @-@ man invitational 18 @.@ 2 balkline tournament was arranged , again in Chicago . It was a handicapped event , featuring the five top players from the previous event – Schaefer and Ives , as World Champions , had to reach 600 points to Spinks 's , William Catton 's and George Butler Sutton 's 260 . Without having to rely on the 600 @-@ point handicap , Spinks beat Schaefer flat @-@ out , 260 – 139 ( with a high run of 48 vs. Schaefer 's 38 ) in his January 18 second game . Spinks ( with a high run of " only " 44 ) was defeated in a very close 249 – 260 third game a day later by Catton ( high run 56 ) – by way of comparison , the same night Ives trounced Sutton by a whopping 400 – 160 . By January 20 , Spinks seemed to be running out of steam , as Sutton took him 260 – 118 , ( high runs 73 vs. 30 ) , and he lost again 154 – 400 ( with another high run of 44 ) to Ives a day later . ( In Spinks 's defense , he not only did better against Ives than Catton had , but Ives also had a very impressive high run of 136 , making it virtually impossible to catch up . ) This loss put Spinks out of the tournament at 4th place . 
 = = = 1900s : World @-@ class competitor = = = 
 Spinks was still considered a newsworthy contender over a decade later , for the World 18 @.@ 2 Balkline Championship of 1909 , being enumerated in " a fine list of entries " anticipated for the March event . 
 On January 11 , Spinks ( with a high run of 51 ) beat former amateur champion and then @-@ pro Calvin Demarest , 250 – 199 , in only 15 innings – despite scoring 0 points in 4 innings and only 1 @-@ point in another – by building several solid runs in the innings in which things went his way . For all intents and purposes it was a 10 @-@ inning win . Demarest took his revenge only days later , defeating Spinks in a close 250 – 225 , 23 @-@ inning game on January 13 , despite Spinks 's high run of 78 ( his highest 18 @.@ 2 run on record in publicly available sources , and considerably higher than Demarest 's 52 that night ) . Spinks lost to him again the very next day , 175 – 250 , in an exhibition game , though Spinks had a solid high run of 69 . 
 In January 1909 , just prior to an 18 @.@ 1 balkline championship at Madison Square Garden ( in which Spinks was not competing ) , he and Maurice Daly were observed playing practice games with Sutton for the latter 's pre @-@ event training , in Daly 's billiard hall in New York City , on multiple occasions over a several @-@ day stretch . While Spinks lost all but one of the recorded matches of this series , one loss was by a single point , at 400 – 399 , and another was a close 400 – 370 . His victory was 300 – 194 – surprising given that 18 @.@ 1 was not his preferred game . 
 Many articles of the era stress that Spinks was a Californian , because during this period American billiards was completely dominated by East @-@ Coasters and a few <unk> . 
 = = = 1910s – 1920s : Setting a record and leveling the field = = = 
 Spinks was noted in 1912 for a still @-@ unbroken world record run of 1 @,@ 010 continuous points at 18 @.@ 2 balkline using the " chuck nurse " ( a form of nurse shot ) , and could have made more , but stopped . Later , anchor space rules were instituted especially to curtail the effectiveness of the chuck nurse . The use of such repetitive , predictable shots by Spinks , Schaefer Sr. and their contemporaries led to the development of the more advanced and restrictive 14 @.@ 1 balkline rules ( invented in 1907 , but not played professionally until 1914 ) , which further thwarted the ease of reliance on nurse shots than the older balkline games already did . 
 In August 1915 , Spinks was tapped to join a consultative panel of notable players and major billiard hall proprietors to help develop a new handicapping system for balkline billiards , organized by the Brunswick @-@ Balke @-@ Collender Company , at that time the organizers of the World Championships . The inspiration for the new system was simply making it possible for the newly ascendant Willie Hoppe to be meaningfully challenged – his near @-@ <unk> was hurting billiard tournament revenues , because the outcome was considered foreordained by many potential ticket @-@ buyers . The system was expected to level the playing field in other ways , especially making it easier for skilled amateurs to enter the professional ranks . 
 Well into the 1920s , Spinks was still a well @-@ respected figure in the billiards industry , and wrote articles for publications such as Billiards Magazine , in which he sometimes focused on rather esoteric topics , as in his January 1923 piece on " Ventilation of Billiard Rooms " in an era when tobacco smoking was prevalent . 
 = = As an oilman and farm operator = = 
 Spinks described himself as a director of an oil company at the 1900 census . He invested money from his billiard equipment corporation in the petroleum industry in California . 
 While Spinks was not operating a farm by 1900 , the W. A. Spinks Ranch was a large enough operation by 1909 to employ a staff of farmhands , and included land in Bradbury Canyon , near Duarte , California , where Spinks resided at the time . He described himself as a flower farmer ( among other such specialists in the area ) in 1910 , and later as an " avocado rancher " . As a <unk> horticulturist , he developed the Spinks avocado cultivar . Spinks was active in the growers ' community , and in 1922 hosted a large regional farm bureau meeting of avocado farmers at his ranch @-@ land " mountain estate " . Although active as a <unk> , Spinks made no known lasting contributions to that field . 
 = = = Spinks avocado = = = 
 The Spinks variety of avocado , Persea americana ' Spinks ' , was developed by William A. Spinks at his Duarte ranch between 1910 and 1920 . In 1920 , Spinks provided a supply of his avocados for a University of California at Berkeley and California Avocado Association comparison of avocado strains . The Spinks avocado fruit was shown to be more resistant to freezing than other avocados . They also proved to be the second @-@ longest @-@ lasting in storage out of the ten varieties tested . 
 Considered " famous " by 1918 , the Duarte @-@ based Spinks avocado orchards were contracted to supply seedlings in 1919 for the palace of Xu <unk> , the President of China before communism , and other prestigious gardens in Asia . The Spinks varietal was eventually supplanted in popularity by the Hass avocado , the dominant commercial strain today . 
 = = Private life = = 
 William A. Spinks Jr . , the youngest of five children , was born July 11 , 1865 , in the then @-@ small township of San Jose , California , to struggling farmer William Sr. and wife Cynthia J. ( Prather ) Spinks . He had blue eyes , dark hair and a ruddy complexion , and was 5 feet 8 inches ( 1 @.@ 73 m ) tall by adulthood . His education is obscure . 
 On September 1 , 1891 , Spinks married Clara Alexandria <unk> ( b . December 12 , 1871 , Gothenburg , Sweden , immigrated 1872 ; d . October 4 , 1949 , Los Angeles ) ; they were to remain together for over 40 years . They returned to California from Chicago before the turn of the century . After a period in a San Francisco apartment ( ca . 1900 ) , they lived in the then @-@ rural Los Angeles suburbs of Duarte ( ca . 1910 ) where their farm was , and Monrovia ( later , by 1920 ) where they maintained a modest house . After William 's business success , the couple became extensive world travelers . 
 William Spinks died January 15 , 1933 , aged 67 , in Monrovia , California . In Los Angeles County 's San Gabriel Valley , Spinks Canyon , its stream Spinks Canyon Creek , and the local major residential thoroughfare Spinks Canyon Road ( running through Duarte 's northernmost residential area , Duarte Mesa ) , are named after him . 
 = Godsmack = 
 Godsmack is an American rock band from Lawrence , Massachusetts , formed in 1995 . The band is composed of founder , frontman and songwriter Sully Erna , guitarist Tony Rombola , bassist Robbie Merrill , and drummer Shannon Larkin . Since its formation , Godsmack has released six studio albums , one EP ( The Other Side ) , four DVDs , one compilation album ( Good Times , Bad Times ... Ten Years of Godsmack ) , and one live album ( Live and Inspired ) . 
 The band has had three consecutive number @-@ one albums ( Faceless , IV , and The Oracle ) on the Billboard 200 . The band also has 20 top ten rock radio hits , including 15 songs in the top five , a record number of top ten singles by a rock artist . 
 Since its inception , Godsmack has toured on Ozzfest on more than one occasion , and has toured with many other large tours and festivals , including supporting its albums with its own arena tours . Godsmack has sold over 20 million records in just over a decade . In honor of the band 's success and the release of their sixth studio album , 1000hp , Mayor Marty Walsh has declared August 6 as " Godsmack Day " in the city of Boston . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and All Wound Up ( 1995 – 97 ) = = = 
 In February 1995 , Sully Erna decided to start a new band as the lead singer after playing the drums for more than 23 years , including more than two years in the now @-@ defunct band Strip Mind . His new band , The Scam , formed with Erna on vocals , Robbie Merrill on bass , local guitarist and friend Lee Richards on guitar , and Tommy Stewart on drums . The Scam quickly changed its name to Godsmack , after recording one demo . The newly formed band started playing small bars in their hometown of Boston . Locally popular songs such as " Keep Away " and " Whatever " soon brought them to the top of the hit charts in the Boston / New England area . 
 The band 's name , according to Erna statement in a 1999 interview , " I was making fun of somebody who had a cold sore on his lip and the next day I had one myself and somebody said , It looks like God smacked your face for making fun . The name stuck and they went by Godsmack from then on . We were aware of the Alice in Chains song but didn 't really think much about it . " In 1996 , Tony Rombola and Joe D 'Arco joined Godsmack as the guitarist and drummer , after Richards left upon learning he had a six @-@ year @-@ old child and Stewart left due to personal differences . In the same year , the band entered the studio for the first time , recording its first CD titled All Wound Up . The CD was recorded in just three days for $ 2 @,@ 600 . 
 For the next two years , the band played throughout the Boston area . Eventually Godsmack 's CD landed in the hands of Rocko , the night @-@ time DJ for Boston radio station WAAF ( FM ) . The radio station put " Keep Away " into heavy rotation and the song rose to the number one spot at the station very quickly . Newbury Comics , a New England record store chain , agreed to sell the CD on consignment . Shortly after the success of " Keep Away " , Godsmack went back into the studio and recorded a single titled " Whatever " , which became the new local favorite on WAAF ( FM ) . In an interview Sully Erna stated , " We had been selling maybe 50 copies a month at the time WAAF picked up the album . All of a sudden we started moving over a thousand records a week . ( ... ) I was doing all this from my bedroom . After years of grinding away , things finally started taking off " . 
 = = = Godsmack ( 1998 – 99 ) = = = 
 In mid @-@ 1998 , Universal / Republic Records signed the band to their label . Joe D 'Arco was dismissed from the band . He was replaced by former drummer Tommy Stewart , who returned after expressing a desire to be in the band again . The band 's first studio recording All Wound Up was re @-@ mastered , and the finished self @-@ titled debut CD album Godsmack was released to the public six weeks later . This led to the band 's first headlining tour , " The Godsmack Tour " with Jim Rose Circus as the opening act . After the album 's release the band went on the street playing club shows as well as playing at Ozzfest and Woodstock ' 99 . This was followed by a tour in Europe supporting Black Sabbath . Roxanne Blanford from Allmusic gave the album three out of five stars , stating , " Godsmack confidently brought metal into the technological age " . The album entered the Billboard 200 at number twenty @-@ two , and was certified 4x platinum by the RIAA in 2001 after being initially certified gold in 1999 . 
 The album sold well despite being initially pulled from the shelves in some stores due to concerns over some of its lyrical content . The band and its record label later added a Parental Advisory sticker to the album , and some stores ordered amended copies of the album . Erna commented in Rolling Stone magazine stating , " Our record has been in the marketplace for more than a year now without a parental advisory sticker and this is the one and only complaint ... Stickers and lyrics are by nature subjective ... We have decided to put a sticker on the record " . This controversy did not appear to adversely affect album sales but , according to Erna , helped , " It 's almost taunting kids to go out and get the record to see what we 're saying on it " . The album also had four successful singles which were " Whatever " , " Keep Away " , " Voodoo " and " Bad Religion " . 
 = = = Awake ( 2000 – 01 ) = = = 
 In 2000 , Godsmack returned to the studio after the multi @-@ platinum success of Godsmack to start recording Awake . The album was released on October 31 , 2000 . The album debuted at number five on the Billboard 200 , and has been certified 2x platinum by the RIAA . " Vampires " , a song on the album , also earned the band a Grammy nomination for Best Rock Instrumental Performance in 2002 . With the release of Awake , Godsmack toured Europe supporting Limp Bizkit . Erna said at the time , " We 've been touring nonstop since August 1998 , So most of Awake was written on tour while we were ping @-@ <unk> between America and Europe , building up the band . " Ozzfest " was actually the only big tour where we rode under someone else 's wings ; we did a lot of work on our own . " The band played Ozzfest in 2000 again as they had in 1999 . 
 Two of the songs on the album were used in United States Navy commercials ( " Sick of Life " and " Awake " ) as background music . Erna stated , " Someone in the military is a fan , and they asked if they could use the music , and we accepted " . However , Erna insisted in an interview that Godsmack does not support any war . 
 = = = The Scorpion King , Faceless and The Other Side ( 2002 – 05 ) = = = 
 In 2002 , Erna was asked to write and perform a song for the soundtrack to The Scorpion King . The motion picture was the third in the Mummy saga , and was a spin @-@ off prequel of the Mummy series . The song Godsmack wrote and performed was titled " I Stand Alone " and the song became the number 1 single at Rock Radio and the most played Active Rock song in 2002 for 14 weeks straight . It was also used in the game Prince of Persia : Warrior Within . 
 With Shannon Larkin ( ex Ugly Kid Joe , Souls at Zero , Wrathchild America , MF Pitbulls ) replacing Tommy Stewart , who left due to personal differences for the second time , Godsmack went back into the studio to record a new album that was released in 2003 . Faceless debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 , selling 269 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , and the album would go on to sell over one million copies in the United States . Faceless managed to beat West Coast nu metal band Linkin Park , with the release of their second studio album Meteora , which dropped to number two on the Billboard 200 . Faceless also debuted at number nine on the Top Canadian Albums and at number one on the Top Internet Albums and remained at that position for two weeks . A massive Tour of America and Europe supporting Metallica followed . 
 The lead single " Straight Out of Line " received a Grammy Award nomination for " Best Hard Rock Performance " . The award went to Evanescence 's single " Bring Me to Life " . The album got its name after a swimming @-@ pool incident . However , in a later interview Merrill stated otherwise , making it unclear of how the album 's title came to be , " It came from the band 's feeling that , despite our radio and sales success , we still flew a bit under the radar " . 
 On March 16 , 2004 The Other Side , an acoustic EP , was released . The album debuted at number five on the Billboard 200 ; this is a relatively high position for an acoustic EP . It included several previously released songs re @-@ recorded as acoustic versions , as well as three new acoustic tracks . One new song , " Touché " , featured Godsmack 's first guitar player , Lee Richards , as well as John <unk> , who were at that time in the now defunct band Dropbox , The other two new acoustic tracks were " Running Blind " and " Voices " . The song " Asleep " is actually an acoustic version of " Awake " from the band 's second album Awake . Godsmack shifted from its " heavy " sound to a more mellow acoustic sound on this EP in the same manner Alice in Chains did in the Sap and Jar of Flies EPs , one of many similarities to Alice in Chains for which the band has been criticized . In 2004 , Godsmack opened for Metallica 's " Madly in Anger with the World tour " , and headlined the tour along with Dropbox . Afterwards , in autumn 2004 , the band played several acoustic shows to promote The Other Side , while at the same time continuing to open for Metallica . 
 = = = IV and Ten Years of Godsmack ( 2006 – 07 ) = = = 
 On April 25 , 2006 , Godsmack released its fourth studio album simply titled IV , followed by a tour that would continue until August 2007 , titled " The IV tour " . The album was produced by Erna and engineered by the well known producer and engineer Andy Johns , known for engineering Led Zeppelin 's Led Zeppelin IV . The first single from the album , " Speak " was released on February 14 , 2006 . The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 , selling 211 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . 
 IV has since been certified gold . The band had written over forty songs for the album , but the final track listing had eleven tracks , Larkin commented , " it 's Sully 's band and his vision . [ ... ] When it comes time to pick the songs it 's all Sully " . The album 's minimalist name " IV " derives not only from its being the band 's fourth studio album , but also from a running piece of backstage humor , as related by Larkin and Erna in an interview . 
 To celebrate ten years as a band , Godsmack released a greatest hits album entitled Good Times , Bad Times ... Ten Years of Godsmack on December 4 , 2007 . The album debuted at number thirty @-@ five on the Billboard 200 , selling 40 @,@ 000 copies in the first week of release . It includes a cover of the Led Zeppelin song " Good Times Bad Times " , as well as a DVD of Godsmack 's acoustic performance in Las Vegas at House of Blues . The album was originally intended to be a boxed set , but the band scrapped the plans so they could release a best of album . Godsmack will follow the release of the album with an acoustic tour . Despite rumors of the band going on hiatus as a result of releasing a greatest hits album , Erna was quoted as saying , " we 're not going away , we are just gonna take a break and enjoy our 10th year anniversary and kind of recharge our batteries . And then Godsmack will be back , and we will come back bigger and badder than ever . " 
 = = = The Oracle and break ( 2008 – 13 ) = = = 
 In November 2008 , Larkin announced that the band would be reforming and recording a new album . The following summer , the band toured as support to Mötley Crüe 's Crüe Fest 2 tour and released a non @-@ album single , " Whiskey Hangover " . After the tour , Godsmack started production for their new album . The album , titled The Oracle was released on May 4 , 2010 . Arriving to popular reception , The Oracle is Godsmack 's third straight full @-@ length studio album to debut at No. 1 with 117 @,@ 000 sold in the first week of release . Erna had this to say about the early sound album , " It 's gonna be really heavy . I mean , it 's very aggressive . I 'm not really sure ; it 's very premature right now . Right now we just finished one track for the Crüe Fest this Summer . But as far as the whole record goes , I think it 's going to be a lot more in your face . I don 't think there 's going to be any ' Voodoo 's or ' Serenity 's on this one . We decided to go balls out ! " . 
 Godsmack headlined the fourth annual Mayhem Festival alongside Disturbed . The band entered the studio in January 2012 to mix a live album plus record several covers for an upcoming release . The band then went on tour in the spring with Staind . Godsmack has completed work on an EP of cover songs . Godsmack released their new live album Live & Inspired on May 15 , 2012 . The set included a bonus EP of cover tracks . In January 2013 , Erna announced a short solo tour through America . In February , Sully said in an interview that Godsmack would take a break during 2013 . " We are going to take some time away now because we just ran for two years " he said in an interview with Loudwire . 
 = = = 1000hp ( 2014 – present ) = = = 
 In February 2014 , Erna tweeted that the band has made progress in the songwriting process for its next studio album , tentatively scheduled for late 2014 release . He also mentioned that the band finished 11 songs for the new record in two weeks . In April , the band announced that they have recorded 15 songs , ten of which will make the final cut . In May , Erna announced that the album is titled 1000hp ( 1000 Horsepower ) . The album 's title track was released as a single the following month . The album was released on August 5 , 2014 and sold around 58 @,@ 000 copies in the United States in its first week of release to land at position No. 3 on The Billboard 200 chart . Since release the disc has spawned the single Something Different and What 's Next . The band have unified a campaign to aid military veterans with their latest single What ’ s Next . 
 Godsmack also headlined 2014 Uproar Festival . They were announced on August 20 , 2014 , to be part of the Soundwave Festival in Australia . It has expanded to a 2 @-@ day festival for the first time , in February / March 2015 and followed by series of shows and tours around Europe . In July 2015 , The band has revealed dates for an upcoming North American fall headline tour . The run includes dates with Sevendust . Also in August 2015 Godsmack announced a new leg of North American dates that will keep the band busy through mid @-@ November . 
 On October 14 , 2015 , Godsmack released a digital single called " Inside Yourself " available for a limited free download . The song was released on iTunes on November 20 , 2015 . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Godsmack has been described as nu metal , heavy metal , post @-@ grunge , hard rock , and alternative metal . The band 's primary influences include Aerosmith , Alice in Chains , Black Sabbath , Led Zeppelin , Metallica , Pantera and Rush according to Erna , Larkin , and Rombola . Erna has cited Layne Staley as his primary influence . 
 The overall sound of the band 's first two albums sound similar to the sound of the Alice in Chains album Dirt . However , Godsmack has attempted to distance themselves from the Alice in Chains comparison with Erna stating in an interview with Matt Ashare , " I 've just never really heard that in our music " . 
 The band 's music is often compared to Alice in Chains which the band cites as an influence . Adrien Begrand of PopMatters states , " Erna perfectly mimics the late Layne Staley 's low , guttural , sinister singing and <unk> , metal @-@ inspired growls " <unk> 's vocals also seem to be reminiscent of Metallica 's James <unk> and , " The band 's music is a faithful retread of Jerry Cantrell 's churning , tuned @-@ down hard rock " . Katherine Turman of Amazon.com states the band has " dark , swirling , commanding music " . She also commented on the band 's third album Faceless , which " mixes arena rock in the vein of an Alice in Chains " , " riff @-@ heavy , layered tunes and sharp , confident bridge @-@ burning lyrics " . 
 Erna 's singing style has been stated as " the snarl of James Hetfield " , and " composed of dark harmony that sounds a lot like Alice in Chains " . Merrill 's bass style has been described as " bulldozer bottom with occasional slap @-@ bass reverb " . Larkin 's drumming is thought to " worship at the twin altars of Neil Peart and John Bonham " . And Rombola 's guitar playing style has been praised as " guitars that sound like percussion instruments " . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Current members 
 Sully Erna – lead vocals , rhythm guitar , keyboards , harmonica , drums , percussion ( 1995 – present ) 
 Robbie Merrill – bass , backing vocals ( 1995 – present ) 
 Tony Rombola – lead guitar , backing vocals ( 1996 – present ) 
 Shannon Larkin – drums , percussion ( 2002 – present ) 
 Former members 
 Lee Richards – lead guitar , backing vocals ( 1995 – 1996 ) 
 Tommy Stewart – drums , percussion ( 1995 – 1996 , 1998 – 2002 ) 
 Joe D 'Arco – drums , percussion ( 1996 – 1998 ) 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Godsmack ( 1998 ) 
 Awake ( 2000 ) 
 Faceless ( 2003 ) 
 IV ( 2006 ) 
 The Oracle ( 2010 ) 
 1000hp ( 2014 ) 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = = Grammy Awards = = = 
 = = = Billboard Awards = = = 
 = = = Boston Music Awards = = = 
 = = = Metal Edge Readers ' Choice Awards = = = 
 = A Different Kind of Love Song = 
 " A Different Kind of Love Song " is a song by American recording artist Cher , taken from her 24th studio album , Living Proof ( 2002 ) . The song was written and produced by Sigurd Rosnes and Johan Aberg , with additional writing done by Michelle Lewis , and was co @-@ produced by Anders Hansson . The dance @-@ pop song alludes to themes of tragedy , heroism and brotherhood , and was released as a double A @-@ side single with " The Music 's No Good Without You " in July 2002 through Warner Bros. Records and WEA . 
 " A Different Kind of Love Song " received mostly positive reviews from music critics , who deemed it as one of the album 's highlights , although noting Cher 's heavily processed vocals due to the use of auto @-@ tune . The song charted on a few Billboard components , such as Dance / Club Play Songs , where it reached number one , Hot Dance Music / Maxi @-@ Singles Sales , peaking at number two , and on the Adult Contemporary chart . No accompanying music video was commissioned for " A Different Kind of Love Song " ; however , the track was performed a few times by Cher , including on a Will & Grace episode , her concert tour Living Proof : The Farewell Tour , and during the 50th American Bandstand in 2002 . 
 = = Composition and release = = 
 " A Different Kind of Love Song " is a dance @-@ pop song written and produced by Johan Aberg , while additional writing was done by Michelle Lewis , and Sigurd Rosnes . Anders Hansson co @-@ produced the song . According to Michael Paoletta of Billboard , the track " finds [ Cher ] not rocking the " Believe " boat too much : the chorus is soaring , the beats are foot @-@ stomping , and the singer 's vocals are gloriously affected . " Jim Farber of Entertainment Weekly perceived that Cher 's vocals are heavily processed due to the use of auto @-@ tune . Lyrically , " A Different Kind of Love Song " alludes to themes of tragedy , heroism and brotherhood , as noted by Rolling Stone journalist Barry Walters . The song was also treated with different remixes done by producers such as Rodney Jerkins . In an interview with MTV News , Jerkins expressed that he was flattered to be working with Cher . He further added , " It 's incredible to be able to work with a true diva . Cher said she just wanted me to do my thing , which was the most incredible thing in the world . And I had fun doing it . " His remix was included on the 2003 compilation album The Very Best of Cher . " A Different Kind of Love Song " was released as a single on July 2002 , with " The Music 's No Good Without You " as its A @-@ side . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Michael Paoletta of Billboard considered the album version of the song " perfect " , but questioned that " it may be too upbeat for clubland " . Reviewing Living Proof , Jim Farber of Entertainer Weekly noted that the songs " have enough oomph to make this more than a one @-@ shot comeback , " while Kerry L. Smith of Allmusic selected it as a " track pick " from his album review . Slant Magazine called the song " euphoric " . 
 " A Different Kind of Love Song " charted on few Billboard components . On the chart issue dated August 31 , 2002 , the song reached the top position on the Dance / Club Play Songs , and peaked at number 30 on the Adult Contemporary chart . It also peaked at number two on the Hot Dance Music / Maxi Singles chart . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 No music video was made for " A Different Kind of Love Song " . However , Cher performed it on the comedy series Will & Grace in 2002 , where she made a special guest appearance in the episode , " AI : Artificial Insemination Part 2 " , as God . The singer also performed the track during the first leg of the Living Proof : The Farewell Tour , and on April 20 , 2002 , during the 50th American Bandstand . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Cher - vocals 
 Johan Aberg - writer , producer , bass , guitars , keyboard , programming , mixing 
 Michelle Lewis - writer 
 Sigurd Rosnes - writer 
 Anders Hansson - producer 
 Neil Tucker - assistant engineer 
 Esbjörn Gunnarsson - bass 
 Ziggy - backing vocals , keyboard , programming 
 Dennis B - keyboard , programming , mixing 
 Björn Engelmann - mixing 
 Marie <unk> - backing vocals 
 Credits adapted from Living Proof liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = WASP @-@ 15b = 
 WASP @-@ 15b is an extrasolar planet discovered in 2008 by the SuperWASP collaboration , which seeks to discover exoplanets that transit their host stars . The planet orbits its host star at a distance of 0 @.@ 05 AU every four days . The mass of this planet is about one half that of Jupiter , but its radius is nearly 50 % larger than Jupiter 's , making the density of this planet only one quarter that of water ; it is thought that some other form of heating must explain its extremely low density . WASP @-@ 15b 's discovery was published on April 29 , 2009 . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 WASP @-@ 15 was first observed by the WASP @-@ South branch of the SuperWASP project , which operates from the South African Astronomical Observatory , between May 4 , 2006 and July 17 , 2006 . It was later observed by both WASP @-@ South and SuperWASP @-@ North , which is based in the Canary Islands , from January 31 , 2007 to July 17 , 2007 and from January 31 , 2008 to May 29 , 2008 . Further analysis taken from 24 @,@ 943 collected data points revealed eleven full or partial transits . 
 Follow @-@ up observations were conducted by a European and American science team at the 1 @.@ 2 m Leonhard Euler Telescope at La Silla Observatory in Chile , which further raised the possibility of the existence of a planet in WASP @-@ 15 's orbit ; use of the CORALIE spectrograph on the Euler Telescope between March 6 , 2008 and July 17 , 2008 revealed that the variations in radial velocity measurements were not because of an eclipsing binary star system . 
 CORALIE and the High Resolution Echelle Spectrometer ( HIRES ) revealed the spectrum of WASP @-@ 15 , which was used to derive the star 's characteristics . The science team studying WASP @-@ 15 found that , after running best @-@ fit models , WASP @-@ 15 's radial velocity and transit shifts were most likely due to the existence of a planet . 
 WASP @-@ 15 's planet , WASP @-@ 15b , had one of the lowest densities known amongst extrasolar planets when it was discovered . Its discovery paper was published by the American Astronomical Society on April 29 , 2009 in the Astronomical Journal . 
 = = Host star = = 
 WASP @-@ 15 is an F @-@ type star located in the Hydra constellation . It is located approximately 308 parsecs ( 1 @,@ 004 light years ) from Earth and has an apparent magnitude of 10 @.@ 9 , making it invisible to the unaided eye . The star is 1 @.@ 18 times more massive than the Sun , and has a radius that is 1 @.@ 477 times larger than that of the Sun , making it more diffuse . WASP @-@ 15 has an effective temperature of 6300 K , and is thus hotter than the Sun , although at 3 @.@ 9 billion years , it is also younger . WASP @-@ 15 has a metallicity of [ Fe / H ] of <unk> , which means that it has 68 % of the iron found in the Sun . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 WASP @-@ 15b has a mass of 0 @.@ 542 times Jupiter 's mass and a radius that is 1 @.@ 428 times Jupiter 's radius . Due in part to its proximity to its host star , a distance of 0 @.@ <unk> AU ( 7 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 km ) , WASP @-@ 15b is greatly inflated , with a density of 0 @.@ 247 g / cm3 . Another factor , such as an internal heat source , is suspected to add to this extremely high radius and extremely low density . WASP @-@ 15b orbits its host star every 3 @.@ <unk> days . It also has an orbital inclination of <unk> , making it almost edge @-@ on as seen from the Earth 's perspective . 
 = Highgate tube station = 
 Highgate is a London Underground station and former railway station in Archway Road , in the London Borough of Haringey in north London . The station takes its name from nearby Highgate Village . It is on the High Barnet branch of the Northern line , between Archway and East Finchley stations and is in Travelcard Zone 3 . 
 The station was originally opened in 1867 as part of the Great Northern Railway 's line between Finsbury Park and Edgware stations . As part of their only partially completed Northern Heights plan , the London Underground started serving the station in 1941 , using new platforms in tunnels beneath the surface station . The platforms of the surface station remain , but were last used in 1954 , and the section of the line through them to Finsbury Park was lifted by 1972 . One of the original 1867 station buildings still exists , and is in use as a private house . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Original station = = = 
 Highgate station was originally constructed by the Edgware , Highgate and London Railway in the 1860s on its line from Finsbury Park station to Edgware station . Before the line was opened it was purchased in July 1867 by the larger Great Northern Railway ( GNR ) , whose main line from King 's Cross ran through Finsbury Park on its way to Potters Bar and the north . The station opened along with the railway to Edgware on 22 August 1867 . 
 Because of the hilly terrain , the station was built in a deep cutting excavated from Highgate Hill adjacent to Archway Road . Tunnels penetrated the hillside at each end of the station , leading towards East Finchley to the north and Crouch End to the south . When built , the station had two side platforms , with three tracks between them , and a station building on the south side . A footbridge linked the two platforms . 
 A branch line was constructed from Highgate to Alexandra Palace by the Muswell Hill Railway ( MHR ) and opened on 22 May 1872 . The new branch split from the original route north of the station in a wide arc around Highgate Wood . The next station on the branch line when it opened was Muswell Hill , and in 1902 an intermediate station opened at Cranley Gardens . 
 In the 1880s , the station was rebuilt , with two tracks flanking a central island platform instead of the two side platforms . The island platform was accessed from a ticket office in the middle of the footbridge . In 1911 , the MHR branch was taken over by the GNR . After the 1921 Railways Act created the Big Four railway companies , the GNR became part of the London & North Eastern Railway ( LNER ) in 1923 . 
 = = = Northern Heights project = = = 
 In 1935 , the London Passenger Transport Board ( LPTB ) announced a proposal , which became known as the Northern Heights project , to take over the LNER lines from Finsbury Park to Edgware , High Barnet and Alexandra Palace , and link them to both the Northern line at East Finchley and to the Northern City line at Finsbury Park . The construction of the first phase of this project involved extending tube train services from the Northern line 's existing terminus at Archway station ( then also called Highgate ) , through a new section of paired tunnels under Highgate station to emerge south of East Finchley station , where track connections to the LNER line were made . 
 To provide an interchange between the new deep @-@ level platforms and the existing surface platforms , a subterranean concourse was constructed immediately beneath the existing station . The concourse was connected to the deep @-@ level platforms with escalators and to the existing platforms by stairs . Street entrances to the concourse were provided from the south ( Archway Road ) and the north ( Priory Gardens ) . At the same time , the buildings on the surface platforms were partly reconstructed and the footbridge was removed . Northern line services through the new tunnels to East Finchley started operating on 3 July 1939 although they did not stop at Highgate until later . 
 = = = Wartime = = = 
 Following the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 , works to complete the electrification of the LNER lines were slowed or halted . The line from Finchley Central to Edgware closed for reconstruction on 11 September 1939 . Northern line services were extended from East Finchley to High Barnet on 14 April 1940 , and started serving the deep level platforms at Highgate on 19 January 1941 , though not all of the new station buildings had been completed . The surface platforms at Highgate continued to be served by LNER steam trains . 
 The deep @-@ level platforms were constructed to accommodate extra @-@ long nine @-@ car trains , which were planned for services on the Northern line , but never served Highgate , having been withdrawn at the start of the war . With the interchange between LNER and Northern line services available at Highgate from January 1941 , LNER trains to East Finchley ended on 2 March 1941 , after which they operated between Finsbury Park and Alexandra Palace only . In 1942 , LNER services through Highgate were reduced to rush hour only operations . During the war , the deep @-@ level platforms at Highgate were used , as many were , as a shelter from the bombing of London by the Luftwaffe , and , later , V @-@ 1 and V @-@ 2 missiles . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 After the war , plans to complete the Northern Heights project were reviewed . In early 1946 , the conversion of the LNER line from Mill Hill East to Edgware was scheduled by the LPTB for completion between January 1947 and June 1948 . No work was carried out as maintenance works and reconstruction of war damage on the existing network had the greatest call on London Underground funds . Funds for new works were severely limited and priority was given to the completion of the western and eastern extensions of the Central line to West Ruislip , Epping and Hainault . Despite being shown as under construction on underground maps as late as 1950 , work never restarted on the unimplemented parts of the Northern Heights project . 
 After a temporary closure between October 1951 and January 1952 , British Railways ( the successor to the LNER ) ended passenger services between Finsbury Park and Alexandra Palace permanently on 3 July 1954 . British Rail freight traffic continued to pass through the station until 1964 . After freight traffic ceased , the line continued to be used for occasional London Underground rolling stock transfers between Highgate depot and the Northern City line , with the stock being pulled over the unelectrified lines by battery locomotives . This ceased in 1970 because of the poor condition of some of the intermediate bridges , and the track was lifted through the surface platforms in 1972 . 
 Completion of the station buildings was delayed for many years . Designed by the architect Charles Holden , the pre @-@ war plans included a large entrance building at the top of the hill next to The Woodman public house with a pair of escalators between the entrance and the sub @-@ surface concourse . These were to be enclosed in an inclined structure down the side of the cutting parallel with the surface tracks . Taking inspiration from the local legend , the building would have been topped by a statue of Dick Whittington and his cat . When works were finished in 1957 , a single , upwards only , escalator was provided to take passengers from the sub @-@ surface ticket hall up to a simple exit at the top of the cutting . 
 One of the GNR 's station buildings remains on the north side of the surface platforms , used as a private residence . Much of the route between Finsbury Park and Alexandra Palace now forms part of the Parkland Walk , although this bypasses the station site for safety reasons . 
 = = Services and connections = = 
 = = = Services = = = 
 The station is in Travelcard Zone 3 , between Archway and East Finchley stations . Train frequencies vary throughout the day , but generally operate every 3 – 7 minutes between 06 : 01 and 01 : 01 northbound and 05 : 37 and 00 : 18 southbound ( as of 2015 ) . 
 = = = Connections = = = 
 As of 2015 , London Bus routes 43 , 134 and 263 and night bus route N20 serve the station . 
 = = Use in media = = 
 The disused platforms and tunnels have sometimes been used for filming and have appeared in several productions including the feature film <unk> , and the television series EastEnders and Waking the Dead . 
 = Myrmecia inquilina = 
 Myrmecia inquilina is a species of ant endemic to Australia in the subfamily Myrmeciinae , first discovered in 1955 and described by Athol Douglas and William Brown Jr. in 1959 . These ants are large , measuring 21 @.@ 4 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 84 in ) . During the time of its discovery , Douglas and Brown announced M. inquilina as the first social parasite among the primitive subfamilies , and today it is one of the two known Myrmecia species to have no worker caste . Two host species are known , Myrmecia nigriceps and Myrmecia vindex . Aggression between M. inquilina and its host species does not occur , and colonies may only produce M. inquilina brood months after the inquiline queens begin to lay their eggs . Queens eat the colony brood or trophic eggs , and other Myrmecia species may kill M. inquilina queens if they reject them . Due to its restricted distribution and threats to its habitat , the ant is " vulnerable " according to the IUCN Red List . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Before the discovery of M. inquilina , scientists believed that parasitic ants did not exist in the primitive ant subfamilies and were only known in Dolichoderinae , Formicinae and Myrmicinae ; many authors believed that primitive ants lacked a certain trait that would prevent parasitic ants from forming , but the discovery of M. inquilina now hints possible parasitic lifeforms in Ponerinae and some army ants . Brown collected the first specimens in 1955 from large fallen trees in Western Australia , and it was officially announced as the first parasitic ant among the primitive subfamilies in 1956 . In 1959 , Australian naturalist Athol Douglas and American entomologist William Brown Jr. provided the first description of the ant in an Insectes <unk> journal article . Its specific epithet inquilina derives from the word <unk> , meaning " tenant " . This name references the parasitic nature of the species , living inside a colony as a " guest " of another species . 
 Brown discovered the holotype female from an M. vindex nest on 23 March 1955 northwest from Wagin at <unk> Rocks , Western Australia . The specimen is currently housed in the Western Australian Museum in Perth . Two <unk> paratype females were also collected with the holotype , looking very similar to each other except for the mandibles and colouration . The mandibular dentition varies among the three , and one of the paratypes is darker than the holotype . In 1991 , a published journal reviewing the species groups assigned M. inquilina to the M. cephalotes species group . However , entomologists placed it in the M. gulosa species group one month after placing it in the M. cephalotes species group . 
 = = Description = = 
 M. inquilina is a large species , though it is smaller than its host . The body length of the ant is 21 @.@ 4 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 84 in ) , the head including the clypeus is 2 @.@ 9 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 11 in ) , the antennal scape 3 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 14 in ) and the diameter of the eyes are 1 @.@ 25 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 05 in ) . The mandibles are slender with four to five acutely shaped teeth . The antennae are morphologically similar to M. vindex , but it is smaller in comparison ; the petiole node is also longer and wider . The postpetiole is subtriangular and more narrow than those seen on M. vindex queens . The clypeus , legs and antennae are covered in <unk> ( spots ) , and the postpetiole and gaster have less <unk> . M. inquilina can be distinguished from other ants due to its lack of pilose ( long soft hairs ) ; only small erect setae are mostly found on the mandibles and gastric apex , but short hair can be found on the legs , and on the dorsum , thorax and cervix . The ant has pubescence ( soft short hair ) finer and more abundant than M. vindex . The pubescence is greyish in colour , and it is shorter and more noticeable on the clypeus and appendages while it is conspicuous on the postpetiole and gaster . 
 The colour of the head and gaster are black , shading into reddish brown on the clypeus and around the frontal carinae . The mesosoma ( alitrunk ) , node , and legs are brownish @-@ red and light , with the legs becoming yellowish in certain areas . The antennae and mandibles are brownish yellow , and the teeth have black edges . Overall , M. inquilina can be distinguished from others by its black head and its almost hairless body . Its colour is similar to M. nigriceps , but M. nigriceps is larger and covered in hair , along with a head more rounded than other species . M. inquilina does not have a worker caste , making it a <unk> parasite . 
 Five males collected from an M. vindex nest are presumed to be M. inquilina , but the similarities between the two species cannot confirm if the males are M. inquilina . While the males collected are morphologically similar to M. vindex males , the head and gaster are darker , and two specimens show a reddish @-@ brown colour at the base of the first gastric segment , a characteristic that does not occur in M. vindex males . The genitalia is similar , but a more detailed study can distinguish these features among the two ants . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 M. inquilina is only found in the south @-@ west of Western Australia , with the holotype collected 225 kilometres ( 140 miles ) from Perth . M. inquilina occurs in colonies with M. vindex and M. nigriceps , found in soil , under logs and flat rocks in woodland . They are commonly found in granite outcrops and wooded areas , with trees such as Corymbia calophylla , Acacia acuminata and a large unidentified species of Allocasuarina ( possibly Allocasuarina <unk> ) present . The type locality was in an area cleared for agricultural purposes , but some areas were still wooded ; many fallen large trees were present . M. inquilina is typically found deep inside the nests , around 25 centimetres ( 10 inches ) and can be found next to the queen . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 M. inquilina is one of the two known Myrmecia species to not have a worker caste , and it is an inquiline to M. nigriceps and M. vindex colonies . M. inquilina is a polygynous species ; colonies can house between two and several dozen queens , but some of them nesting in the colony are originally from there . Due to this , some M. inquilina females are ergatoid ants that lose their wings after <unk> in their cocoons . The parasitic queen ( s ) may only coexist indefinitely , but M. inquilina queens replace all host brood with their own eggs several months after infiltrating the nest . This only occurs if M. inquilina queens eat or destroy the brood laid by their host , and workers will even tend to the brood and protect it from potential invaders . M. inquilina queens tend to nest near the host queen and her brood , attended by worker ants without any form of aggression . Observations suggest that parasitic queens feed on trophic eggs laid by workers . Predatory threats only include other Myrmecia species ; they are rejected by a potential host colony . For example , M. regularis workers immediately seize M. inquilina queens and kill it as soon as the two species come into contact . 
 Aerial dispersion is important in this species , despite its restricted distribution . Queens never forage outside or leave the nest , unless under severe deprivation . Before nuptial flight , fully developed females start to occur during summer . Between 9 and 10 pm in January , queens and males start to emerge from their host nest and begin to mate . Observations show that the alates will climb up onto objects such as lighted fluorescent lamps and begin to fly after half an hour of endless running . When queens are looking for a host nest or wandering openly , M. vindex foragers may identify a queen and seize her ; such behaviour suggests that workers actively recruit fertilised queens for their nest . Host colonies tend to be smaller and <unk> when compared to other colonies without any inquiline queens , but host colonies can still produce alate offspring . 
 = = Status = = 
 M. inquilina is the only species in its genus to be listed as " vulnerable " by the IUCN Red List . This , however , needs updating . Habitat loss may be responsible for the ant to be potentially endangered ; Douglas and Brown note that a contamination of dieldrin spray to control the <unk> ant destroyed many nests housing M. inquilina , and burn @-@ offs are also a threat to colonies housing M. inquilina . 
 = Sie werden aus Saba alle kommen , BWV 65 = 
 Sie werden aus Saba alle kommen ( They will all come forth out of Sheba ) , BWV 65 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed it in 1724 in Leipzig for Epiphany and first performed it on 6 January 1724 . 
 Bach wrote the cantata to conclude his first Christmas season as Thomaskantor in Leipzig which had been celebrated with five cantatas , four of them new compositions , the Magnificat and a new Sanctus . The text by an anonymous author , who possibly supplied texts of two of the Christmas cantatas as well , combines the prescribed readings for the feast day , the prophecy from the Book of Isaiah and the gospel of Matthew about the Wise Men from the East . The librettist begins with a quotation from the prophecy , comments it by a stanza of the early anonymous Christmas carol " Ein Kind <unk> zu Bethlehem " , says in a sequence of recitatives and arias that the prophecy was fulfilled in Bethlehem , concluding that the Christian should bring his heart as a gift . The cantata ends with a chorale , stanza 10 of Paul Gerhardt 's hymn " Ich hab in Gottes Herz und Sinn " . 
 Bach scored the cantata in seven movements festively , for two vocal soloists ( tenor and bass ) , a four @-@ part choir and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of two horns , two recorders , two oboes da caccia , strings and basso continuo . All recitatives are secco , but the full orchestra plays for the opening chorus , the last aria and the closing chorale . 
 = = History and words = = 
 Bach wrote the cantata in his first year as Thomaskantor ( director of church music ) in Leipzig to conclude his first Christmas season on the Feast of Epiphany . For the celebrations on three days of Christmas , New year 's Day and the following Sunday , he had performed five cantatas , four of them new compositions , the Magnificat and a new Sanctus in D major : 
 Christen , ätzet diesen Tag , BWV 63 
 Sanctus in D major , BWV 238 
 Magnificat in E @-@ flat major , BWV 243a 
 Darzu ist erschienen der Sohn Gottes , BWV 40 
 Sehet , welch eine Liebe hat uns der Vater erzeiget , BWV 64 
 Singet dem Herrn ein neues Lied , BWV 190 
 Mein <unk> Jesus ist <unk> , BWV 154 . 
 The prescribed readings for the feast day were taken from the Book of Isaiah , the heathen will convert ( Isaiah 60 : 1 – 6 ) , and from the Gospel of Matthew , the Wise Men from the East bringing gifts of gold , myrrh and frankincense to the newborn Jesus ( Matthew 2 : 1 – 12 ) . The unknown poet of the cantata text may be the same as for BWV 40 and BWV 64 for the Second and Third Day of Christmas , a person " theologically competent and poetically <unk> " , as the Bach scholar Klaus Hofmann writes . The librettist begins with the final verse of the epistle reading , Isaiah 's prophecy " all they from Sheba shall come : they shall bring gold and incense " . The poet juxtaposes the prediction by a chorale , stanza 4 of the old anonymous Christmas carol " Ein Kind <unk> zu Bethlehem " ( " <unk> <unk> in Bethlehem " , " A babe is born in Bethlehem " , 1543 ) , which describes the arrival of the " <unk> <unk> aus Saba " ( Kings from Sheba ) , related to the epistle . The first recitative proclaims that the gospel is the fulfillment of the prophecy and concludes that it is the Christian 's duty to bring his heart as a gift to Jesus . This idea is the theme of the following aria . The second recitative equals the gifts of the contemporary Christian to those of the kings : Faith to the gold , Prayer to the incense , and Patience to the myrrh . The last aria expresses that the devoted Christian offers his heart as a present . The cantata ends with a chorale . The text is not extant , but it is assumed to be stanza 10 of Paul Gerhardt 's hymn " Ich hab in Gottes Herz und Sinn " . 
 Bach first performed the cantata for Epiphany on 6 January 1724 . In his Christmas Oratorio of 1734 , Bach dedicated Part VI , Herr , wenn die <unk> Feinde <unk> , to the topic and the occasion and first performed it on 6 January 1735 . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in seven movements . The opening chorus is followed by an ancient chorale , then the male soloists sing a sequence of recitative and aria each . The work is completed by a closing chorale . Bach scored the cantata for two vocal soloists ( tenor ( T ) and bass ( B ) ) , a four @-@ part choir and a festive Baroque instrumental ensemble of two horns ( Co ) , two recorders ( Fl ) , two oboes da caccia ( Oc ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) , and basso continuo . Bach employed a pair of horns before in his Christmas cantata Darzu ist erschienen der Sohn Gottes , BWV 40 , and later in his cantata for Christmas 1724 , Gelobet <unk> du , Jesu Christ , BWV 91 , and later in Part IV of his Christmas Oratorio . He wrote the title as " J. J. Festo <unk> : <unk> à 2 Core du Chasse . 2 Hautb : da Caccia . / due <unk> 2 Violini è Viola con 4 Voci " , which means : Jesus help . Feast of the Epiphany : concerto for 2 hunting horns . 2 oboes da caccia / two recorders 2 violins and viola with 4 voices . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The keys and time signatures are taken from the book on all cantatas by the Bach scholar Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 Bach uses scoring and especially instrumentation to illustrate the contrast of poverty and abundance . While all recitatives are secco , and the strings are silent for the first aria which is supported only by the oboes da caccia in low register , a festive orchestra with three kinds of wind instruments and strings accompanies not only , as usual , the opening chorus and the closing chorale , but also the penultimate movement , a tenor aria expressing how the believer gives his heart as a present . Hofmann notes that Bach " combines high art with the folk style " . 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 The opening chorus , " Sie werden aus Saba alle kommen " ( They will all come forth out of Sheba ) , depicts , that " alle " ( all ) , not just the three Magi , gather and move to adore . Horn signals call first and prevail throughout the movement . Canonical and imitation developments illustrate the growing of a crowd . The central section is an extended choral fugue , framed by two sections with the voices embedded in a repeat of the instrumental introduction . John Eliot Gardiner remarked in connection with his Bach Cantata Pilgrimage that the instrumentation resembles Near Eastern music , the recorders representing " the high pitches often associated with oriental music and the oboes da caccia ( in tenor register ) to evoke the shawm @-@ like double @-@ reed instruments ( <unk> and <unk> ) of the Near East " . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 The same idea is rendered in a stanza from an archaic Christmas carol , " Die <unk> <unk> aus Saba <unk> dar " ( The kings came out of Sheba ) , telling of the three Kings from Sheba as mentioned by Isaiah . Its melody , in triple time , is set for four parts . 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 The first recitative , " Was dort <unk> <unk> , das ist zu Bethlehem <unk> . " ( What Isaiah prophesied there has happened in Bethlehem . ) , applies the situation to the individual Christian , who has nothing to offer as a gift but his heart , explained in an arioso ending . The musicologist Julian Mincham notes unexpected harmonies when the stable of Bethlehem is mentioned , as if to illustrate the " lowliness of that birthplace " . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 The first aria , " Gold aus Ophir ist zu <unk> " ( Gold from Ophir is too meager ) , is accompanied by the oboes da caccia , whose low register together with the bass voice conveys the humility expressed in the words . The instruments keep repeating the first motif , reminding of the initial idea that gold is not good enough . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
 The tenor recitative , " <unk> nicht , du , <unk> Seele Licht , mein Herz " ( Do not scorn , o You the light of my soul , my heart ) , begins with a plea , expressed in a downward line over a ninth . It ends on the notion " des <unk> <unk> <unk> mir <unk> im Himmel werden " ( the abundance of the greatest wealth must some day be mine in Heaven ) . 
 = = = 6 = = = 
 To show the abundance , the dance @-@ like aria , " Nimm mich dir zu eigen hin " ( Take me to Yourself as Your own ) , is accompanied by all the wind instruments , playing concertante and together . Instead of a conventional da capo aria , Bach creates a bar form by repeating the text of the second idea on new musical material . A long ritornello of 32 measures " contains an almost unprecedented variety of instrumental colouring " , as Mincham writes . 
 = = = 7 = = = 
 The closing chorale , " Ei nun , mein Gott , so fall ich dir <unk> in deine Hände . " ( Ah ! now , then , my God , I fall confidently into Your hands . ) , is sung on the melody of " Was mein Gott will , das g ’ <unk> <unk> " , which Bach used frequently later , as the base for his chorale cantata BWV 111 and movement 25 of his St Matthew Passion . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The listing is taken from the selection on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . Choirs and orchestras are roughly marked as large by red background ; performances with one voice per part ( OVPP ) and instrumental groups playing period instruments in historically informed performances are highlighted green . 
 = Star Trek V : The Final Frontier = 
 Star Trek V : The Final Frontier is a 1989 American science fiction film released by Paramount Pictures . It is the fifth feature film based on Star Trek , and a sequel to the 1966 – 1969 Star Trek television series . Taking place shortly after the events of Star Trek IV : The Voyage Home , the plot follows the crew of the USS Enterprise @-@ A as they confront a renegade Vulcan , Sybok , who is searching for God at the center of the galaxy . 
 The film was directed by cast member William Shatner , following two films directed by his co @-@ star , Leonard Nimoy . Shatner also developed the initial storyline in which Sybok searches for God but instead finds an alien being . Series creator Gene Roddenberry disliked the original script , while Nimoy and DeForest Kelley objected to the premise that their characters , Spock and Leonard McCoy , would betray Shatner 's James T. Kirk . The script went through multiple revisions to please the cast and studio , including cuts in the effects @-@ laden climax of the film . Despite a writers ' guild strike cutting into the film 's pre @-@ production , Paramount commenced filming in October 1988 . 
 Many Star Trek veterans assisted in the production ; art director Nilo Rodis developed the designs for many of the film 's locales , shots and characters , while Herman Zimmerman served as production designer . Production problems plagued the film on set and during location shooting in Yosemite National Park and the Mojave Desert . As effects house Industrial Light & Magic 's best crews were busy and too expensive , the production used Bran Ferren 's company for the film 's effects , which had to be revised several times to keep down costs . The film 's ending was reworked because of poor test audience reaction and the failure of planned special effects . Jerry Goldsmith , composer for Star Trek : The Motion Picture , returned to score The Final Frontier . 
 The Final Frontier was released in North America on June 9 , 1989 , amidst a summer box office crowded with sequels and blockbuster films . It had the highest opening gross of any film in the series at that point and was number one its first week at the box office , but its grosses quickly dropped in subsequent weeks . The film received generally mixed to poor reviews by critics on release , and according to its producer , it nearly killed the franchise . The next entry in the series , Star Trek VI : The Undiscovered Country , received a more positive reception . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The crew of the newly commissioned USS Enterprise ( NCC @-@ 1701 @-@ A ) are enjoying shore leave after the starship 's shakedown cruise goes poorly . At Yosemite National Park James T. Kirk , recently demoted back to Captain after the events of the previous two films , is camping with Spock and Dr. Leonard McCoy . Their leave is interrupted when the Enterprise is ordered by Starfleet Command to rescue human , Klingon , and Romulan hostages on the planet Nimbus III . Learning of the Enterprise 's mission , the Klingon Captain Klaa decides to pursue Kirk for personal glory . 
 On Nimbus III , the Enterprise crew discovers that renegade Vulcan Sybok , Spock 's half @-@ brother , is behind the hostage crisis . Sybok reveals the hostage situation was a ruse to lure a starship to Nimbus III . Sybok wants to use a ship to reach the mythical planet Sha Ka Ree , the place where creation began ; the planet lies behind a seemingly impenetrable barrier near the center of the galaxy . Sybok uses his unique ability to reveal and heal the innermost pain of a person through the mind meld to subvert the wills of the hostages and crew members . Only Spock and Kirk prove resistant to Sybok ; Spock is unmoved by the experience and Kirk refuses the Vulcan 's offer , telling him that his pain is what makes him human . Sybok reluctantly declares a truce with Kirk , realizing he needs his leadership experience to navigate the Enterprise to Sha Ka Ree . 
 The Enterprise successfully breaches the barrier , pursued by Klaa 's vessel , and discovers a lone blue planet . Sybok , Kirk , Spock , and McCoy journey to the surface , where Sybok calls out to his perceived vision of God . An entity appears , and when told of how Sybok breached the barrier , demands that the starship be brought closer to the planet . When a skeptical Kirk inquires , " What does God need with a starship ? " , the entity attacks him in retribution . The others doubt a god who would inflict harm on people for pleasure . 
 Realizing his foolishness , Sybok sacrifices himself in an effort to combat the creature and allow the others to escape . Intent on stopping the being , Kirk orders the Enterprise to fire a photon torpedo at their location , to little effect . Spock and McCoy are beamed back to the ship , but Klaa 's vessel attacks the Enterprise before Kirk can be transported aboard . The vengeful entity reappears and tries to kill Kirk when Klaa 's vessel destroys it in a hail of fire . Kirk is beamed aboard the Klingon ship , where Spock and the Klingon General <unk> force Klaa to stand down . The Enterprise and Klingon crews celebrate a new détente , and Kirk , Spock , and McCoy resume their vacation at Yosemite . 
 = = Cast = = 
 William Shatner as James T. Kirk . Shatner practiced aerobics and strength training daily to prepare for the role . The physical activity and directing duties meant he woke at 4 a.m. every day during filming , no matter what time he fell asleep . 
 Leonard Nimoy as Spock , the Enterprise 's half @-@ Vulcan , half human science officer . Nimoy noted The Final Frontier was the most physical film in the series , which reflected Shatner 's energetic sensibility and what he enjoyed doing most on the show — " running and jumping " . Nimoy recalled Shatner 's attempts to instruct him in riding a horse , although Nimoy had ridden many horses bareback when playing American Indian roles for Republic Pictures serials . 
 DeForest Kelley as Leonard McCoy , chief medical officer . Kelley also noted the physicality required for the film and enjoyed doing things that he had not been asked to do in years . " I was very pleased to see that he [ Shatner ] brought it along in fine style , " he said . Kelley noted that his own ambition to direct had deserted him after seeing difficulties Nimoy faced directing the previous two Star Trek films . 
 The other members of the USS Enterprise @-@ A crew include chief engineer Montgomery Scott ( James Doohan ) , helmsman Hikaru Sulu ( George Takei ) , navigator Pavel Chekov ( Walter Koenig ) , and communications officer Nyota Uhura ( Nichelle Nichols ) . Takei said that despite studio pressure to complete the film on time , Shatner maintained a creative and enthusiastic atmosphere on set . " I have enormous admiration for his ability to block that kind of pressure from seeping on to the set . " Takei said that he found the biggest challenge of the film was learning to ride horses . Moreover , Takei acknowledged , " despite our sometimes strained personal history , I found working with Bill [ Shatner ] as a director to be surprisingly pleasant . " 
 Laurence Luckinbill plays Sybok . Sean Connery was originally contacted to star in the role , but was busy with Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade . Shatner discovered Luckinbill by chance ; channel surfing late one night , he saw him perform as Lyndon Baines Johnson . When Shatner called to offer him the role , Luckinbill accepted immediately . 
 Casting director Bill Shepard was in charge of filling additional roles . He combed through initial auditions with promising actors , then presented his choices to Shatner . Both men called the actors back as many as two or three times before each role was cast . Additional players include Todd Bryant as Klingon Captain Klaa , with Spice Williams @-@ Crosby as <unk> , Klaa 's lieutenant . Bryant was playing ping pong at a beach party when a casting director offered him the role . Bryant performed his audition twice , as Shatner requested that he repeat his performance speaking in Klingon . Williams @-@ Crosby thought <unk> was Kirk 's girlfriend when she arrived for her audition , but recalled afterwards that it was " fun " to play a villain . David Warner , Charles Cooper and Cynthia Gouw play the Federation , Klingon , and Romulan ambassadors to Nimbus III . Warner did not audition , but agreed to the role after Shatner swore that his character would survive the film . The director originally intended George Murdock to play the Klingon diplomat <unk> , but changed his mind on seeing Cooper 's performance . Murdock was recast as the " God " entity . Bill Quinn played McCoy 's father in one of his last roles . Producer Harve Bennett made a cameo as a Starfleet admiral . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 During the 1966 – 69 Star Trek television series , Shatner and Nimoy 's lawyers drafted what Shatner termed a " favored nations clause " , with the result that whatever Shatner received — e.g. , a pay raise or script control — Nimoy also got and vice versa . Nimoy had directed Star Trek III : The Search for Spock and Star Trek IV : The Voyage Home . Shatner had previously directed plays and television episodes ; when he signed on for The Voyage Home following a pay dispute , Shatner was promised he could direct the next film . 
 Shatner conceived his idea for the film 's story before he was officially given the director 's job . His inspiration was televangelists ; " They [ the televangelists ] were repulsive , strangely horrifying , and yet I became absolutely fascinated , " he recalled . Shatner was intrigued that not only did these personalities convince others God was speaking directly to them , but they became wealthy by what Shatner considered false messages . The televangelists formed the basis for the character " Zar " , later " Sybok " . Shatner 's first outline was titled " An Act of Love " , and many of its elements — the Yosemite vacation , the abduction of Klingon , human and Romulan hostages on the failed paradise planet — survived to the final film . In Shatner 's early draft , Kirk is overwhelmed by Zar 's superior numbers of followers and Spock , McCoy and the rest of the Enterprise crew come to believe in Zar 's divinity . Kirk feigns acceptance of Zar 's beliefs to travel with him to the God planet , which to Shatner would be a desolate , fiery waste . When Kirk confronts " God " , the image of the being transforms into that of Satan , and Kirk , Spock , and McCoy split up in their escape . Kirk eludes capture but goes back to save his friends from being carried away to Hell . 
 Shatner had presented his idea to studio head Frank Mancuso while filming The Voyage Home . Mancuso liked Shatner 's idea and agreed to hire a writer to draft a film treatment . Shatner wanted novelist Eric Van <unk> , but negotiations between <unk> and Paramount failed over the author 's requested $ 1 million salary . Shatner dictated the story himself and gave it to Paramount 's production president Ned Tanen for input . 
 Producer Harve Bennett was exhausted by his work on the previous three Star Trek films and wanted to move on , feeling that he was not part of the " Star Trek " family and that he had been mistreated by Nimoy . When Shatner tried to convince Bennett to reconsider , the producer insisted on a meeting at his home . After several hours of discussion Bennett agreed to return . Bennett disagreed with several elements of Shatner 's story , feeling that because no one could assuredly answer the question of God 's existence , the ending of the film would never be satisfying . Bennett also told Shatner that the film had the feeling of a tone poem rather than an adventure story . The studio agreed with Bennett , reasoning that the subject matter could be too weighty or offensive to theatergoers . 
 Shatner and Bennett began reworking the story . Concerned that knowing the renegade Sybok 's motivation from the beginning of the story was anticlimactic , the team moved the revelation to later in the story . Shatner said that Bennett also suggested turning the God entity into an " evil alien pretending to be God for his own gain " . Having satisfied themselves and Paramount with the adjustments , Shatner and Bennett approached Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan writer and director Nicholas Meyer to pen the script , but he was unavailable . Bennett found a script by David Loughery and showed his work to Shatner , who agreed that he would be a good fit for the task of scripting Star Trek . 
 Not everyone was happy with the story . Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry objected to the characters ' search for God in general , and more particularly , the idea of a God as portrayed by Western religion . One of Roddenberry 's employees suggested some of his employer 's animosity towards the story stemmed back to Star Trek : The Motion Picture . Roddenberry had wanted to approach that film with similar ideas that investigated the nature of God but was rejected by Paramount . Roddenberry , Nimoy and Kelley all disagreed that Spock and McCoy would betray Kirk , which Loughery explained was done to give a conflict in which " one man stands alone " from the rest . 
 Loughery stopped work on the script when the Writers Guild of America went on strike , and the production was further delayed when Nimoy began working on another project . During this time , Shatner reconsidered elements of the Star Trek V story ; he made Sybok 's character softer and more sympathetic . When the writers ' strike ended Loughery returned to work on the script while Shatner flew to the Himalayas for a job . When he returned , he felt betrayed by Loughery 's revisions , which he felt transformed the search for God into the search for the mythical paradise Sha Ka Ree — a word play on " Sean Connery " , whom they wanted for Sybok 's role . Though Shatner convinced Bennett and Loughery to revise much of the script , Sha Ka Ree remained ; it was changed to a place of ultimate knowledge of which Sybok had received visions . The script was also rewritten to address Nimoy and Kelley 's concerns . 
 While Roddenberry , Kelley and Nimoy gave their approval to the revised script , Paramount was concerned that the film would go over @-@ budget as written and ordered cuts . Shatner 's envisioned angels and demons at the film 's climax were converted to rock monsters that the false god would animate from the earth . Shatner wanted six of the creatures , but was forced to accept just one . Concerned that the franchise 's momentum following The Voyage Home had disappeared , Paramount rushed the film into production in late 1988 despite the writers ' strike cutting into pre @-@ production . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Nilo Rodis , who had worked on two previous Star Trek features , was appointed the role of art director , and worked with Shatner to establish the film 's visual design . Shatner sought a grittier and more realistic feel to the Star Trek universe , and so the two worked together to visualize the film from start to finish . After Shatner explained the entire story in a day @-@ long session , Rodis went home and sketched out each scene from the script . Shatner was pleased with the results , especially with Rodis ' designs for Shatner 's most expansive or dramatic shots . 
 Rodis 's input in developing the early character and costume designs was significant . Shatner praised his costume designs as being futuristic but plausible and in keeping with the continuity established in previous Star Trek films . After being disappointed by the costume designers approached to realize Rodis ' ideas , Shatner suggested that Rodis become the costume designer as well . Bennett hired Dodie Shepard as the costume supervisor ; Shepard 's role was to oversee the costume fabrication and keep track of the clothes during filming . To save on costs , Shepard clothed extras with existing items from Western Costume 's warehouses . The constrained budget meant Shatner could not completely redesign the Starfleet uniforms , but Rodis created new brown field uniforms for the film 's location scenes as well as the leisure clothes the crew wears during shore leave . 
 Rodis and Shatner also drew up sketches of what the various aliens seen in the film would look like . Shatner picked Kenny Myers as the special @-@ effects makeup artist . Myers discussed the sketches with Shatner and made casts of actors ' faces using dental alginate . These casts were used for close @-@ up , high @-@ quality " A " makeups , as well as less complicated masks for far @-@ away and background characters . Shatner hired Richard Snell as makeup supervisor , advising him to make each Klingon forehead distinct . 
 Shatner hired Herman Zimmerman as production designer . His decision was based on Zimmerman 's work on the sets for Star Trek : The Next Generation , and he felt that the designer could convey Shatner 's futuristic yet grounded aesthetic . Zimmerman was immediately put in charge of designing all @-@ new sets for the Klingon Bird of Prey bridge , the Enterprise 's bridge , elevator shafts and bowels , and Nimbus III interiors . At one point , he was building five sets at once . Art department head Michael Okuda created <unk> backlit controls on the Klingon ship and Enterprise . The corridors for the Enterprise were the same as those used in the Next Generation television series . The bridge set alone cost $ 250 @,@ 000 . The Nimbus III city of Paradise was one of the last locations to be designed and created , because its design relied on what exterior location and terrain was used . Zimmerman created a sketch of the town 's layout over three days , drawing inspiration from a circular Moroccan fortress . Creation of the city cost $ 500 @,@ 000 and took five weeks of construction in 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) heat . 
 Tim Downs scouted possible areas for location filming . He looked for a location that could stand in for three different venues without the production having to move or change hotels : the film 's opening scene ; the God planet 's establishing shots ; and the Nimbus III Paradise City . Downs was familiar with the Mojave desert and thought that locations near Ridgecrest , California , would serve the production 's needs , so he took photos based on sketches Rodis had provided of what the locations might look like . Downs also shot photos with filters and tried to accomplish dust effects with his car to replicate ideas for how some sequences would be shot . When Downs returned with the photos , Shatner felt that the locations the scout found would be perfect for the film . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began in October 1988 , in and around Los Angeles , California . Shortly before the beginning of location shooting , Hollywood union truck drivers or teamsters went on strike to protest pay cuts and overtime changes . With deadlines looming , the production searched for non @-@ union drivers , aware that the Teamsters might retaliate by sabotaging equipment or flying airplanes above the filming to ruin audio recordings . After one of the production 's camera trucks exploded in the studio parking lot , the non @-@ union drivers headed to Yosemite National Park under cover of darkness with a police escort . 
 The film 's Yosemite scenes were all shot on location . Long shots of Kirk scaling the mountain were filmed with stunt doubles , while Shatner 's closer shots had him on a fiberglass set positioned in front of the camera , with the real mountains visible in the background . Aided by two trainers , Shatner had spent weeks at the Paramount lot , learning to climb a wooden replica . Laszlo scouted out a tall peak on which the production created a rock face with safety net . The overhead shot gave the impression Kirk was climbing at a great height , while unnatural background features such as swimming pools were camouflaged . In the scene , Spock watches Kirk 's ascent , and saves him when he slips and falls using levitating boots . Most of the shots framed Nimoy from the waist up ; in these scenes the actor was supported by a crane that gave the appropriate " float " to achieve the effect . <unk> footage of Shatner falling was shot later at Paramount and composited , while stuntman Ken Bates set a record for the highest American descender fall by plummeting off El Capitan — with a wire support rig — for long shots . In reviewing the dailies of the first two days of shooting , the production realized that a pine tree in the frame during Kirk and Spock 's mountain dialogue ruined the illusion of height , while a shot of Shatner clinging to the face of El Capitan appeared muddy due to clouds obscuring the sun and ruining the depth of field . The scenes had to be reshot later . 
 After the Yosemite shots , location shooting moved to desert locales . Nimbus III and its town , Paradise City , were recreated in the Mojave . The town was created as a haphazard collection of spaceship parts and futuristic scrap . Shatner " cracked " during the filming in 110 ° F ( 43 ° C ) heat , insulting the head electrician and ignoring Laszlo 's request for additional setup time . When a driver failed to appear and stranded Shatner and a skeleton crew , a park ranger came to the rescue and the production managed to film scenes of Sybok 's followers before they lost daylight . Shatner called the resulting half @-@ jogging pace of the dehydrated extras " the Sybok shuffle " . The production spent three more weeks filming the rest of the desert scenes , finishing the last night scene shortly before sunrise and the trip back to Los Angeles . 
 At Paramount , the crew filmed all the scenes that would take place on soundstages , including the Enterprise and Bird @-@ of @-@ Prey sets , the Paradise City interiors , and the campfire location . Production was smoother on set , and the crew shot scenes ahead of schedule . The crew fabricated a stand @-@ in set for the God planet location , where additional scenes were filmed to combine with the location footage . Spock 's catching of Kirk as the captain falls off El Capitan was filmed against a set that replicated the forest floor and was rotated ninety degrees . 
 Shatner scheduled the campfire scenes to be the last ones shot , after which the cast and crew had a small celebration before a traditional wrap party later . The cast celebrated the end of filming in the last week of December 1988 , and gave a press conference on the set of the Enterprise bridge on December 28 . Shatner returned to Paramount Studios a few days after principal photography had wrapped to organize the film 's post @-@ production schedule . This included showing a rough cut of the film — minus the special effects — to studio personnel . Shatner recalled that the film received praise and left the screening " reveling " in its reception ; it turned out to be a " momentary victory " once he saw the special effects . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 During the Writers Strike , producer Ralph Winter confronted what writer Paul Mandell termed an " unenviable " effects situation . Industrial Light & Magic had provided the effects for the previous three Star Trek films , and Winter wanted them to work on The Final Frontier . However , the effects house 's best technicians were working on Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade and Ghostbusters II . With a stretched budget and short timeframe , Winter had to look elsewhere . To save time and money , he planned to create as many effects as he could either on stage , or through camera trickery . The producers solicited test footage from various effects houses to judge which was best able to create the film 's main effects , including the planet Sha Ka Ree and the godlike being which resided there . Bran Ferren 's effects company Associates and Ferren was picked . Ferren had worked on films such as Altered States and Little Shop of Horrors ; hiring the New York @-@ based studio made The Final Frontier the first film in the Star Trek series produced on both the east and west coasts of the United States . 
 Associates and Ferren had three months to complete the effects work — around half the usual industry timeframe . Shatner insisted on viewing lots of test footage before he proceeded with each shot , requesting time @-@ consuming changes if he did not like an effect . Ferren promoted a " low @-@ tech " approach to realizing complicated effects , but his cost estimates were too expensive and interfered with the scope of other live @-@ action sequences . Winter recalled that the production had budgeted $ 4 million for the film 's effects , slightly more than The Voyage Home . " The first pass " , he said , " with all the things [ Shatner ] wanted , was [ $ 5 or $ 6 ] million " . Combined with Ferren 's figures , the film 's budget climbed to $ 33 million . The studio called a meeting with executives and began cutting out effects shots . 
 To reduce the optical effects workload , Ferren rejected bluescreen compositing , opting instead for rear projection . This process , he reasoned , would save time , and would make sense for elements such as the Enterprise 's bridge viewer , where compositing would lack the softness of a real transmitted image . Designer Lynda Weinman used a Mac II to create the animatics cut into the film during production , which were eventually replaced by the film 's finished effects . 
 The rock monster climax of the film was ultimately dropped due to difficulties during filming . The monster , dubbed the Rockman , was a large latex rubber suit that breathed fire on command . Effects personnel smoked cigarettes and blew smoke into the suit 's tubing , loading it with smoke that it would slowly emit , obscuring some obvious rubber parts . On the last day of location shooting , the Rockman began suffering mechanical problems ; the suit stopped breathing fire , and the desert wind dissipated the smoke . The result , Shatner wrote , was that " our guy in the silly rubber suit ultimately just looked like ... well , a guy in a silly rubber suit . " With no time to return to the location , Shatner was forced to get wide shots and hope that the setting could be reproduced in the studio , but admitted that it was likely it was not going to work for the film . 
 Once back at the studio for non @-@ location filming , Shatner and Ferren met to discuss how to replace the Rockman . The agreed @-@ upon idea was an " amorphous blob of light and energy " that would rise up and chase after Kirk , shape @-@ shifting while in pursuit . The visuals took weeks before they were ready to be shown after the completion of principal photography . When Shatner saw the effects , however , he was disappointed with the low quality . Bennett and Shatner attempted to get money to reshoot the ending of the film , but Paramount turned them down . 
 ILM delivered the main Enterprise model , which was built by Magicam in 1978 for the first movie , to Associates and Ferren . However , scenes which included the Enterprise in the Earth @-@ orbiting Spacedock platform , as well as the Spacedock itself , were taken directly from ILM 's previous work in Star Trek IV : The Voyage Home . The Enterprise model had been damaged when it was loaned out for touring purposes , meaning the 30 @,@ 000 panels on the model had to be repainted by hand . While production wrapped , Ferren continued work on the miniatures and other optical effects at his New Jersey studio . The opticals were completed in Manhattan before being sent west ; for example , bluescreen footage of the motion controlled miniatures was filmed in Hoboken , New Jersey . In New York , the blue screen was replaced by a moving starfield — a single finished shot of a ship moving through space required as many as fifty pieces of film . The Great Barrier effects were created using chemicals , which were dropped into a large water tank to create swirls and other reactions . The " God column " , in which the false god appeared , was created by a rapidly rotating cylinder through which light was shone ; the result appeared on film as a column of light . Ferren used a beam splitter to project actor George Murdock 's head into the cylinder , giving the appearance that the false god resided within the column . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 Days after filming was completed , Shatner returned to Paramount to supervise the film 's edit , soundscape creation and score , and integration of optical effects . Editor Peter E. Berger had already assembled rough cuts of various sequences , and with only weeks before the film 's scheduled completion , the production team set about the task of salvaging the film 's ending through editing . The false god 's screen time was reduced , and Ferren 's " god blob " effect was replaced with a closeup of the actor 's face , along with shots of lightning and smoke . At the time , Shatner felt that the edits " pulled a rabbit out of a hat " , solving many of the film 's problems . 
 Shatner 's cut ran slightly over two hours ( not including end credits or the opticals ) , which Paramount thought was too long . Their target runtime was one hour forty @-@ five minutes , which would guarantee twice @-@ nightly theatrical screenings . Bennett was handed the task of shortening the film 's running time , despite Shatner 's view that nothing could possibly be removed . Shatner was horrified by Bennett 's edit , and the two <unk> over what parts to restore or cut . 
 In early test screenings , the film received negative reviews . Of the first test audience , only a small portion considered the film " excellent " , a rating that most other Star Trek films had enjoyed . Segments of the film were re @-@ edited for the theatrical release . Five minutes of footage was excised to improve the film 's pacing , and an additional scene was included on the Bird @-@ of @-@ Prey to make the circumstances of Kirk 's rescue clearer . The second screening , with the final effects and sound in place , received much better reviews . 
 = = Audio = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Music critic Jeff Bond wrote that Shatner made " at least two wise decisions " in making The Final Frontier ; beyond choosing Luckinbill as Sybok , he hired Jerry Goldsmith to compose the film 's score . Goldsmith had written the Academy Award @-@ nominated score for Star Trek : The Motion Picture , and the new Trek film was an opportunity to craft music with a similar level of ambition while adding action and character — two elements largely missing from The Motion Picture . Goldsmith did not want to accentuate the film 's comedy with music , feeling it would " [ take ] drama to the point of silliness " . He focused on the God planet as his most difficult task . 
 Goldsmith 's main theme begins with the traditional opening notes from Alexander Courage 's original television series theme ; an ascending string and electronic bridge leads to a rendition of the march from The Motion Picture . According to Jeff Bond , Goldsmith 's use of The Motion Picture 's march led to some confusion among Star Trek : The Next Generation fans , as they were unfamiliar with the music 's origins . Another theme from The Motion Picture to make a return appearance is the Klingon theme from the 1979 film 's opening scene . Here , the theme is treated in what Bond termed a " Prokofiev @-@ like style as opposed to the avant @-@ garde counterpoint " as seen in The Motion Picture . Goldsmith also added a crying ram 's horn . 
 The breadth of The Final Frontier 's locations led Goldsmith to eschew the two @-@ themed approach of The Motion Picture in favor of leitmotifs , recurring music used for locations and characters . Sybok is introduced with a synthesized motif in the opening scene of the film , while when Kirk and Spock discuss him en route to Nimbus III it is rendered in a more mysterious fashion . The motif also appears in the action cue as Kirk and company land on Nimbus III and try to free the hostages . When Sybok boards the Enterprise , a new four @-@ note motif played by low brass highlights the character 's obsession . The Sybok theme from then on is used in either a benevolent sense or a more percussive , dark rendition . Arriving at Sha Ka Ree , the planet 's five @-@ note theme bears resemblance to Goldsmith 's unicorn theme from Legend ; " ... the two melodies represent very similar ideas : lost innocence and the tragic impossibility of recapturing paradise , " writes Bond . The music features cellos conveying a pious quality , while the appearance of " God " begins with string glissandos but turns to a dark rendition of Sybok 's theme as its true nature is exposed . As the creature attacks Kirk , Spock and McCoy , the more aggressive Sybok theme takes on an attacking rhythm . When Spock appeals to the Klingons for help , the theme takes on a sensitive character before returning to a powerful sequence as the ship destroys the god @-@ creature . 
 The original soundtrack for the film was originally released by Epic Records , and included nine score tracks ( mostly out of film order ) and the song " The Moon Is a Window to Heaven " by Hiroshima . On Tuesday November 30 , 2010 , La @-@ La Land Records reissued the soundtrack in a 2 @-@ CD edition featuring the film 's complete score on the first disc and the original soundtrack album and some alternate cues on the second disc . 
 = = = Sound effects = = = 
 Mark Mangini served as The Final Frontier 's sound designer ; he had previously worked on The Voyage Home . Because Mangini was concerned about creating continuity within Star Trek 's sounds , he decided to reuse some effects rather than create new and different @-@ sounding ones — as such , the Bird of Prey 's cloak effect , beaming sounds , and the Enterprise engines sound similar to past movies . Mangini collaborated with Shatner to work out how the completely new effects would sound . For Sybok 's mind melds , Shatner wanted the sounds of beating hearts and breathing . 
 Mangini was also responsible for the film 's foley and dialogue replacement ; foley editors created background audio in sync with actions on screen to enrich the soundscape . The sound of Klingons walking , for example , was conveyed with chains and leather for a " rough " sound . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The Final Frontier appeared amidst several other films that grappled with quests for God and spiritual meaning ; author Peter <unk> regarded the film as part of an " almost fashionable " trend of 1980s science fiction movies with religious motifs . Regent 's Park College professor and Baptist minister Larry Kreitzer argues the film was " deliberately constructed " to raise the issues of God and the Biblical concept of paradise , Eden . Dixie State College professor Ace Pilkington went further , saying that after the " theological preoccupations " of the television series and previous films , " where else can the Enterprise go [ ... ] but in quest of God ? " Pilkington notes that The Final Frontier has roots in many plots from the series including " The Way to Eden " ( which also deals with a brilliant man hijacking the Enterprise to find the place of creation ) , " The Apple " , and " Shore Leave " ; a common thread between the paradises described is that they are always " too good to be true " . John S. <unk> agrees , pointing out that the idea of paradise has been seen many times in the series , but almost always illusory or deadened . 
 While many Star Trek episodes dealt with false deities , The Final Frontier is one of the few that , in the words of religious scholar Ross Shepard Kraemer , " intentionally confronted and explored theological questions , including the existence of God . " Theologian Larry Kreitzer dubbed it the film most preoccupied with religious ideas . According to the film , centuries in the future , beliefs in Eden persist , even among other alien races such as the Klingons and Romulans . <unk> , the view of God is homogenized — no one disputes Sybok 's references to God as a " he " . Kreitzer finds that the film 's theological interpretation is offered by Kirk 's words : " Maybe He [ God ] is not out there , Bones . Maybe He 's right here , in the human heart . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Release = = = 
 The Final Frontier was expected to be one of the summer 's biggest movies and a sure hit , despite its appearing in a market crowded with other sequels and blockbusters such as Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade , Ghostbusters II and Batman . Never before had so many sequels been released at the same time . Analysts expected The Final Frontier to make nearly $ 200 million . 
 Marketing included an MS @-@ DOS computer game , part of an increasing trend of game tie @-@ ins to movies . J.M. Dillard wrote the film 's novelization , which was on The New York Times Best Seller list for four weeks . Paramount sold Star Trek @-@ branded apparel through catalogues , and Kraft made a Star Trek @-@ branded marshmallow dispenser . While Star Trek had a built @-@ in fan market , marketing tie @-@ ins were risky at the time and even high @-@ grossing films could not guarantee success of related merchandise . Unlike other summer blockbusters , Star Trek had no mass @-@ market appeal and no major food or beverage promotions , but sold pins and posters in theaters , bypassing retailers . 
 In its first week , The Final Frontier was number one at the domestic box office . Its $ 17 @.@ 4 million opening on 2 @,@ 202 screens beat the $ 16 @.@ 8 million total of The Voyage Home and made it the best Star Trek opening weekend to that point . The Voyage Home , however , had played in only 1 @,@ 349 theaters at a time with lower ticket prices . In its second week The Final Frontier tumbled 58 % to make $ 7 @.@ 1 million ; in its third week it grossed only $ 3 @.@ 7 million . It had a wide release of ten weeks , shorter than that of any Star Trek film before it . 
 The Final Frontier grossed $ 49 @,@ 566 @,@ 330 in the domestic box office for a global total of $ 63 million . The season proved to be another record @-@ breaker for the film industry , with domestic summer box @-@ office revenues of $ 2 @.@ 05 billion . The Final Frontier was the season 's tenth @-@ best @-@ grossing film , although it failed to make expected returns . It and Pink Cadillac were the early summer 's biggest box @-@ office disappointments . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Critics generally gave The Final Frontier poor reviews . The film holds a 22 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 43 reviews , with the critical consensus " Filled with dull action sequences and an underdeveloped storyline , this fifth Trek movie is probably the worst of the series . " At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average out of 100 to critics ' reviews , The Final Frontier received a score of 43 based on 16 reviews . 
 Rob Lowing of The Sun Herald called the film " likeable but average " . The Chicago Sun @-@ Times ' Roger Ebert and The Washington Post 's Rita Kempley gave the film negative reviews , calling the film " a mess " and " a shambles " , respectively . The New York Times 's Caryn James considered the film to be disappointing to fans and non @-@ fans alike , while Chris Hicks of the Deseret News disagreed , feeling that the film approached issues in the same vein as the television series and that fans would enjoy it . Ansen and Lowing considered Shatner 's direction during action sequences weak , with Lowing adding that the second half of the film felt directionless . Hicks wrote that the film 's broad humor gave the film an inconsistent tone . In contrast , Chris Dafoe of the Toronto The Globe and Mail called it " the most intentionally funny " episode of the film series . Christian Science Monitor 's David Sterritt stated that at its best , The Final Frontier showed " flashes " of the humor that propelled The Voyage Home , and Lowing deemed Shatner 's direction at its best during comedic moments . 
 Critics such as Newsweek 's David Ansen judged the principal characters ' performances satisfactory ; " these veterans know each other 's moves so well they 've found a neat comic shorthand that gets more laughs out of the lines than they deserve " , Ansen wrote . Stan James of The Advertiser wrote that Warner was wasted in his role and most characters lacked any " drive and motivation " . In comparison , Luckinbill 's Sybok received praise from critics such as USA Today 's Mike Clark , who wrote that " he has the voice and stature of the golden screen 's most scintillating intellectual villains " , although he felt that he never seemed threatening or suspenseful . James considered Sybok the most " distinctive , compelling villain " of the series since Khan Noonien Singh in Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan . 
 The special effects were generally considered poor . Murphy wrote that the film fell apart after the arrival at Sha Ka Ree , where the " great special effects that graced parts I through IV are nowhere to be seen " . Ebert 's review agreed , saying that the visuals managed to inspire awe ever so briefly before dissolving into " an anticlimatic special effects show with a touch of The Wizard of Oz thrown in for good measure " . Kempley wrote the Enterprise 's objective was " to pass through an impenetrable ( Ha ! ) swirl of what appears to be cosmic Windex , beyond which is the planet <unk> , home of God , or perhaps California shot through a purple filter . " 
 Bennett blamed part of The Final Frontier 's failure on the change from a traditional Thanksgiving @-@ season Star Trek opening , to the sequel @-@ stuffed summer release period , and the diffusion of Star Trek fan viewership following the premiere of The Next Generation . Winter felt they should have recognized the film 's plot was too reminiscent of V 'ger from Star Trek : The Motion Picture and that the search for God was a mistake ; while he felt many parts of the film were good , they " smoked [ their ] own press releases " and nearly killed the franchise . Initially , Shatner believed that the film would get a positive response . In the morning after the opening night , he woke Nimoy up to tell him that the Los Angeles Times had given The Final Frontier a positive review . Soon after a local television reporter also gave the film a good review , and Shatner recalled that he incorrectly " began sensing a [ positive ] trend " . He later agreed that the film nearly ended the film series , and looking back on the film called it a " failed but glorious attempt " at a thought @-@ provoking film that did not come together . Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry considered elements of this film to be " apocryphal at best " , and particularly disliked the idea that Sarek had fathered a child ( Sybok ) with a Vulcan before Amanda . Nevertheless , the film is considered canon . Even George Takei expected the film to be a disappointment because " the script seemed rather a muddle ... as if three separately interesting stories force @-@ sealed together into one " which " made for a confusing and ultimately tiresome two hours " . 
 Considered a critical and commercial failure , the poor performance of The Final Frontier jeopardized the production of further Star Trek features . Bennett was given the go @-@ ahead to begin work on his own prequel concept that would have cast new actors to play the main cast at Starfleet Academy . Loughery worked with Bennett on a story inspired by Santa Fe Trail . When Paramount president Ned Tanen resigned , support for Bennett 's prequel idea evaporated . Paramount instead wanted another film with the original cast , and Bennett decided to leave the franchise . Winter remained with the production and The Wrath of Khan director Nicholas Meyer returned to direct the original cast 's final movie , Star Trek VI : The Undiscovered Country . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released on VHS videotape in December 1989 . It was also released as a widescreen VHS edition . The video was among the top @-@ selling videocassettes for weeks after its release , and it enjoyed a resurgence in popularity in the months leading to the release of its sequel ; it was Paramount 's top @-@ selling title in the third quarter of 1991 . A Laserdisc version of the film was released by Pioneer <unk> ; The Final Frontier was the 21st @-@ best @-@ selling title for the platform in 1990 . 
 The film was released on DVD on April 20 , 1999 , as a bare @-@ bones edition with no bonus extras . It was re @-@ released on DVD as a 2 @-@ Disc Special Collector 's Edition on October 14 , 2003 , with bonus extras added , including footage of the principal photography wrap press conference , an interview with Shatner the day before filming began , a retrospective documentary and a commentary track by Shatner and his daughter Liz . 
 Paramount released The Final Frontier Blu @-@ ray Disc in May 2009 to coincide with the release of Star Trek , along with the other five films featuring the original crew , packaged as Star Trek : Original Motion Picture Collection . The Final Frontier was remastered in 1080p high @-@ definition from the 2000 high definition master prepared for the DVD . All six films in the set have new 7 @.@ 1 Dolby TrueHD audio . The disc features a new commentary track by renowned Star Trek authors and contributors Michael and Denise Okuda , Judith and Garfield Reeves @-@ Stevens and Daren <unk> , as well as the previously recorded commentary track by Shatner and his daughter . Shatner wanted to produce a director 's cut of the movie similar to Star Trek : The Motion Picture and Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan with improved special effects and scenes omitted from the original release ; however , he stated in an interview that Paramount would not support the venture . 
 = Rhys ap Gruffydd = 
 Rhys ap Gruffydd or ap Gruffudd ( often anglicised to " Griffith " ) ( 1132 – 28 April 1197 ) was the ruler of the kingdom of Deheubarth in south Wales from 1155 to 1197 . Today , he is commonly known as The Lord Rhys , in Welsh Yr <unk> Rhys , although this title may have not been used in his lifetime . He usually used the title " Proprietary Prince of Deheubarth " or " Prince of South Wales " , but two documents have been discovered in which he uses the title " Prince of Wales " or " Prince of the Welsh " . Rhys was one of the most successful and powerful Welsh princes , and , after the death of Owain Gwynedd of Gwynedd in 1170 , the dominant power in Wales . 
 Rhys 's grandfather , Rhys ap Tewdwr , was king of Deheubarth , and was killed at Brecon in 1093 by Bernard de Neufmarché . Following his death , most of Deheubarth was taken over by the Normans . Rhys 's father , Gruffydd ap Rhys , eventually was able to become ruler of a small portion , and more territory was won back by Rhys 's older brothers after Gruffydd 's death . Rhys became ruler of Deheubarth in 1155 . He was forced to submit to King Henry II of England in 1158 . Henry invaded Deheubarth in 1163 , stripped Rhys of all his lands and took him prisoner . A few weeks later he was released and given back a small part of his holdings . Rhys made an alliance with Owain Gwynedd and , after the failure of another invasion of Wales by Henry in 1165 , was able to win back most of his lands . 
 In 1171 Rhys made peace with King Henry and was confirmed in possession of his recent conquests as well as being named Justiciar of South Wales . He maintained good relations with King Henry until the latter 's death in 1189 . Following Henry 's death Rhys revolted against Richard I and attacked the Norman lordships surrounding his territory , capturing a number of castles . In his later years Rhys had trouble keeping control of his sons , particularly Maelgwn and Gruffydd , who maintained a feud with each other . Rhys launched his last campaign against the Normans in 1196 and captured a number of castles . The following year he died unexpectedly and was buried in St David 's Cathedral . 
 = = Genealogy and early life = = 
 Rhys was the second son of Gruffydd ap Rhys , ruler of part of Deheubarth , by his second wife Gwenllian ferch Gruffydd , daughter of Gruffudd ap Cynan , king of Gwynedd . His elder brother was Maredudd ap Gruffydd , and there were two younger brothers , Morgan and Maelgwn . He also had two older half @-@ brothers , Anarawd and Cadell , from his father 's first marriage . Rhys married Gwenllian ferch Madog , daughter of Madog ap Maredudd , the last Prince of all Powys . 
 His grandfather , Rhys ap Tewdwr , had been king of all Deheubarth until his death in 1093 . Rhys ap Tewdwr was killed in Brycheiniog , and most of his kingdom was taken over by Norman lords . Gruffydd ap Rhys was forced to flee to Ireland . He later returned to Deheubarth and ruled a portion of the kingdom , but was forced to flee to Ireland again in 1127 . When Rhys was born in 1132 , his father held only the commote of <unk> in Cantref Mawr . 
 The death of King Henry I of England and the ensuing rivalry between Stephen and Matilda gave the Welsh the opportunity to rise against the Normans . A revolt spread through south Wales in 1136 , and Gruffydd ap Rhys , aided by his two eldest sons , Anarawd and Cadell , defeated the Normans in a battle near Loughor , killing over five hundred . After driving Walter de Clifford out of Cantref <unk> , Gruffydd set off to Gwynedd to enlist the help of his father @-@ in @-@ law , Gruffudd ap Cynan . In the absence of her husband , Gwenllian led an army against the Norman lordship of <unk> ( Kidwelly ) , taking along her two youngest sons , Morgan and Maelgwn . She was defeated and killed by an army commanded by Maurice de Londres of <unk> Castle . Morgan was also killed and Maelgwn captured . 
 Gruffydd formed an alliance with Gwynedd , and later in 1136 the sons of Gruffudd ap Cynan , Owain Gwynedd and Cadwaladr ap Gruffydd , led an army to Ceredigion . Their combined forces won a decisive victory over the Normans at the Battle of <unk> Mawr . Ceredigion was reclaimed from the Normans , but was annexed by Gwynedd as the senior partner in the alliance . Gruffydd ap Rhys continued his campaign against the Normans in 1137 , but died later that year . The leadership of the family now passed to Rhys 's half @-@ brother Anarawd ap Gruffydd . In 1143 , when Rhys was eleven , Anarawd was murdered by the bodyguard of Cadwaladr ap Gruffydd , brother of Owain Gwynedd , king of Gwynedd . Owain punished Cadwaladr by depriving him of his lands in Ceredigion . 
 = = First battles ( 1146 – 1155 ) = = 
 Anarawd 's brother , Cadell ap Gruffydd , took over as head of the family . Gilbert de Clare , Earl of Pembroke , rebuilt Carmarthen castle in 1145 then began a campaign to reclaim Ceredigion . He built a castle in the commote of <unk> , but Cadell , aided by Hywel ab Owain Gwynedd who held Ceredigion for Gwynedd , destroyed it in 1146 . Rhys appears in the annals for the first time in 1146 , fighting alongside his brothers Cadell and Maredudd in the capture by assault of Llansteffan Castle . This was followed by the capture of <unk> in 1147 , Carmarthen in 1150 and Loughor in 1151 . In 1151 Cadell was attacked while out hunting by a group of Norman and Flemish knights from Tenby , and left for dead . He survived , but suffered injuries which left him unable to play an active role , and in 1153 he left on a pilgrimage to Rome . 
 Maredudd became ruler of Deheubarth and continued a campaign , begun in 1150 , aimed at recovering Ceredigion , which had been held by Gwynedd since 1136 . Maredudd and Rhys were able to drive Hywel ab Owain Gwynedd from Ceredigion by 1153 . The same year Rhys is recorded as an independent commander for the first time , leading an army to capture the Norman castle of St Clears . Maredudd and Rhys also destroyed the castles at Tenby and <unk> that year . Maredudd died in 1155 at the age of twenty @-@ five and left Rhys as ruler of Deheubarth . Around this time he married Gwenllian ferch Madog , daughter of Madog ap Maredudd , prince of Powys . 
 = = Early reign = = 
 = = = Loss of territory ( 1155 – 1163 ) = = = 
 Shortly after becoming ruler of Deheubarth , Rhys heard rumours that Owain Gwynedd was planning to invade Ceredigion in order to reclaim it for Gwynedd . Rhys responded by building a castle at Aberdyfi in 1156 . The threatened invasion did not take place , and Turvey claims that Owain 's intention may have been to test the resolve of the new ruler . 
 King Stephen had died in October 1154 , bringing to an end the long dispute with the Empress Matilda which had helped Anarawd , Cadell and Maredudd to extend their rule in Deheubarth . With disunity within the realm no longer a problem , the new king of England , Henry II , soon turned his attention to Wales . He began with an invasion of Gwynedd in 1157 . This invasion was not entirely successful , but Owain Gwynedd was induced to seek terms and to give up some territory in the north @-@ east of Wales . 
 The following year , Henry prepared an invasion of Deheubarth . Rhys made plans to resist , but was persuaded by his council to meet the king to discuss peace terms . The terms were much harsher than those offered to Owain : Rhys was stripped of all his possessions apart from Cantref Mawr , though he was promised one other cantref . The other territories were returned to their Norman lords . 
 Among the Normans who returned to their holdings was Walter de Clifford , who reclaimed Cantref <unk> , then invaded Rhys 's lands in Cantref Mawr . An appeal to the king produced no response , and Rhys resorted to arms , first capturing Clifford 's castle at Llandovery then seizing Ceredigion . King Henry responded by preparing another invasion , and Rhys submitted without resistance . He was obliged to give hostages , probably including his son Hywel . 
 The king was absent in France in 1159 , and Rhys took the opportunity to attack Dyfed and then to lay siege to Carmarthen , which was saved by a relief force led by Earl Reginald of Cornwall . Rhys retreated to Cantref Mawr , where an army led by five earls , the Earls of Cornwall , Gloucester , Hertford , Pembroke and Salisbury , marched against him . The earls were assisted by Cadwaladr , brother of Owain Gwynedd , and Owain 's sons , Hywel and Cynan . However they were forced to withdraw and a truce was arranged . In 1162 , Rhys again attempted to recover some of his lost lands , and captured Llandovery castle . The following year Henry II returned to England after an absence of four years and prepared for another invasion of Deheubarth . Rhys met the king to discuss terms and was obliged to give more hostages , including another son , Maredudd . He was then seized and taken to England as a prisoner . Henry appears to have been uncertain what to do with Rhys , but after a few weeks decided to free him and allow him to rule Cantref Mawr . Rhys was summoned to appear before Henry at Woodstock to do homage together with Owain Gwynedd and Malcolm IV of Scotland . 
 = = = Welsh uprising ( 1164 – 1170 ) = = = 
 In 1164 all the Welsh princes united in an uprising . Warren suggests that when Rhys and Owain were obliged to do homage to Henry in 1163 they were forced to accept a status of dependent vassalage instead of their previous client status , and that this led to the revolt . Rhys had other reasons for rebellion , for he had returned to Deheubarth from England to find that the neighbouring Norman lords were threatening Cantref Mawr . His nephew , <unk> ab Anarawd , who was the captain of his bodyguard , had been murdered at the instigation of Roger de Clare , Earl of Hertford . The murderer had been given the protection of the Clares in Ceredigion . Rhys first appealed to the king to intercede ; when this failed , he invaded Ceredigion and recaptured all of it apart from the town and castle of Cardigan . The Welsh revolt led to another invasion of Wales by King Henry in 1165 . Henry attacked Gwynedd first , but instead of following the usual invasion route along the north coast he attacked from the south , following a route over the Berwyn hills . He was met by the united forces of the Welsh princes , led by Owain Gwynedd and including Rhys . According to Brut y Tywysogion : 
 ... [ King Henry ] gathered an innumerable host of the selected warriors of England and Normandy and Flanders and Gascony and Anjou ... and against him came Owain and Cadwaladr the sons of Gruffydd with all the host of Gwynedd , and Rhys ap Gruffydd with all the host of Deheubarth and Iorwerth the Red son of Maredudd and the sons of Madog ap Maredudd with all the host of Powys . 
 Torrential rain forced Henry 's army to retreat in disorder without fighting a major battle , and Henry vented his spleen on the hostages , having Rhys 's son Maredudd blinded . Rhys 's other son , Hywel , was not among the victims . Rhys returned to Deheubarth where he captured and burned Cardigan Castle . He allowed the garrison to depart , but held the castellan , Robert Fitz @-@ Stephen , as a prisoner . Shortly afterwards Rhys captured <unk> castle . 
 In 1167 he joined Owain Gwynedd in an attack on Owain Cyfeiliog of southern Powys , and spent three weeks helping Owain besiege the Norman castle of Rhuddlan . In 1168 he attacked the Normans at Builth , destroying its castle . Rhys benefited from the Norman invasion of Ireland in 1169 and 1170 , which was largely led by the Cambro @-@ Norman lords of south Wales . In 1167 the King of Leinster , Diarmait Mac Murchada , who had been driven out of his kingdom , had asked Rhys to release Robert Fitz @-@ Stephen from captivity to take part in an expedition to Ireland . Rhys did not oblige at the time , but released him the following year and in 1169 Fitz @-@ Stephen led the vanguard of a Norman army which landed in Wexford . The leader of the Norman forces , Richard de Clare , 2nd Earl of Pembroke , known as " Strongbow " , followed in 1170 . According to Warren : 
 They were prompted to go by a growing suspicion that King Henry did not intend to renew his offensive against the Welsh , but was instead seeking an accommodation with the Welsh leaders . 
 The departure of the Norman lords enabled Rhys to strengthen his position , and the death of Owain Gwynedd in late 1170 left him as the acknowledged leader of the Welsh princes . 
 = = Later reign = = 
 = = = Peace with King Henry ( 1171 – 1188 ) = = = 
 In 1171 King Henry II arrived in England from France , on his way to Ireland . Henry wished to ensure that Richard de Clare , who had married Diarmait 's daughter and become heir to Leinster , did not establish an independent Norman kingdom in Ireland . His decision to try a different approach in his dealings with the Welsh was influenced by the events in Ireland , although Warren suggests that " it seems likely that Henry began rethinking his attitude to the Welsh soon after the débâcle of 1165 " . Henry now wished to make peace with Rhys , who came to Newnham to meet him . Rhys was to pay a tribute of 300 horses and 4 @,@ 000 head of cattle , but was confirmed in possession of all the lands he had taken from Norman lords , including the Clares . They met again in October that year at Pembroke as Henry waited to cross to Ireland . Rhys had collected 86 of the 300 horses , but Henry agreed to take only 36 of them and remitted the remainder of the tribute until after his return from Ireland . Rhys 's son , Hywel , who had been held as a hostage for many years , was returned to him . Henry and Rhys met once more at Laugharne as Henry returned from Ireland in 1172 , and shortly afterwards Henry appointed Rhys " justice on his behalf in all Deheubarth " . According to A. D. Carr : 
 This meant the delegation to him of any authority which the king might have claimed over his fellow Welsh rulers ; it might also have involved some authority over the king 's Anglo @-@ Norman subjects ... Rhys was more than a native Welsh ruler ; he was one of the great feudatories of the Angevin empire . 
 The agreement between Henry and Rhys was to last until Henry 's death in 1189 . When Henry 's sons rebelled against him in 1173 Rhys sent his son Hywel Sais to Normandy to aid the king , then in 1174 personally led an army to Tutbury in Staffordshire to assist at the siege of the stronghold of the rebel Earl William de Ferrers . When Rhys returned to Wales after the fall of Tutbury , he left a thousand men with the king for service in Normandy . King Henry held a council at Gloucester in 1175 which was attended by a large gathering of Welsh princes , led by Rhys . It appears to have concluded with the swearing of a mutual assistance pact for the preservation of peace and order in Wales . In 1177 Rhys , Dafydd ab Owain , who had emerged as the main power in Gwynedd , and Cadwallon ap Madog from <unk> <unk> a <unk> swore fealty and liege homage to Henry at a council held at Oxford . At this council the king gave Meirionnydd , part of the kingdom of Gwynedd , to Rhys . There was some fighting in Meirionnydd the following year , but Rhys apparently made no serious attempt to annex it . 
 Rhys built a number of stone castles , starting with Cardigan castle , which was the earliest recorded native @-@ built stone castle in Wales . He also built Carreg <unk> castle near Llandeilo , a castle set in a spectacular position on a mountain top . He held a festival of poetry and song at his court at Cardigan over Christmas 1176 . This is generally regarded as the first recorded Eisteddfod . The festival was announced a year in advance throughout Wales and in England , Scotland , Ireland and possibly France . Two chairs were awarded as prizes , one for the best poem and the other for the best musical performance . J. E. <unk> Williams suggests that this event may be an adaptation of the similar French <unk> . R.R. Davies suggests that the texts of Welsh law , traditionally codified by Hywel Dda at Whitland , were first assembled in book form under the aegis of Rhys . 
 Rhys founded two religious houses during this period . Talley Abbey was the first Premonstratensian abbey in Wales , while <unk> was a Cistercian nunnery , only the second nunnery to be founded in Wales and the first to prosper . He became the patron of the abbeys of Whitland and Strata Florida and made large grants to both houses . Giraldus Cambrensis , who was related to Rhys , gives an account of his meetings with Rhys in 1188 when Giraldus accompanied Archbishop Baldwin around Wales to raise men for the Third Crusade . Some Welsh clerics were not happy about this visit , but Rhys was enthusiastic and gave the Archbishop a great deal of assistance . Giraldus says that Rhys decided to go on crusade himself and spent several weeks making preparations , but was eventually persuaded to change his mind by his wife Gwenllian , " by female artifices " . 
 = = = Final campaigns ( 1189 – 1196 ) = = = 
 Henry II died in 1189 and was succeeded by Richard I. Rhys considered that he was no longer bound by the agreement with King Henry and attacked the Norman lordships surrounding his territory . He ravaged Pembroke , Haverfordwest , and Gower and captured the castles of St. Clear 's , Laugharne , and Llansteffan . Richard 's brother , Prince John ( later King John ) , came to Wales in September and tried to make peace . He persuaded Rhys to raise the siege of Carmarthen and accompany him to Oxford to meet Richard . Rhys arrived at Oxford to discover that Richard was not prepared to travel there to meet him , and hostilities continued . 
 In his later years Rhys had trouble keeping control of his sons , particularly Maelgwn and Gruffydd . In 1189 Gruffydd persuaded Rhys to imprison Maelgwn , and he was given into Gruffydd 's keeping at Dinefwr . Gruffydd handed him over to his father @-@ in @-@ law , William de Braose . Gruffydd is also said to have persuaded his father to annex the lordship of <unk> and its chief castle of Nevern , held by William FitzMartin , in 1191 . This action was criticized by Giraldus Cambrensis , who describes Gruffydd as " a cunning and artful man " . William FitzMartin was married to Rhys 's daughter Angharad , and , according to Giraldus , Rhys " had solemnly sworn , by the most precious relics , that his indemnity and security should be faithfully maintained " . Rhys had also annexed the Norman lordships of <unk> and <unk> in 1190 . In 1192 Rhys secured Maelgwn 's release , but by now Maelgwn and Gruffydd were bitter enemies . In 1194 Rhys was defeated in battle by Maelgwn and Hywel , who imprisoned him in Nevern castle , though Hywel later released his father without Maelgwn 's consent . Giraldus suggests that Rhys 's incarceration in Nevern castle was divine vengeance for the dispossession of William FitzMartin . In 1195 two other sons , Rhys Gryg and Maredudd , seized <unk> and Dinefwr , and Rhys responded by imprisoning them . Rhys launched his last campaign against the Normans in 1196 . He captured a number of castles , including Carmarthen , Colwyn , Radnor and <unk> , and defeated an army led by Roger de Mortimer and Hugh de Say near Radnor , with forty knights among the dead . This , the Battle of Radnor , was Rhys ' last battle . William de Braose offered terms , and <unk> was returned to him . 
 = = = Death and aftermath ( 1197 ) = = = 
 In April 1197 Rhys died unexpectedly and was buried in St David 's Cathedral . The chronicler of Brut y Tywysogion records for 1197 : 
 ... there was a great pestilence throughout the island of Britain ... and that tempest killed innumerable people and many of the nobility and many princes , and spared none . That year , four days before May Day , died Rhys ap Gruffydd , Prince of Deheubarth and unconquered head of all Wales . 
 Rhys died excommunicate , having quarreled with the Bishop of St. David 's , Peter de Leia , over the theft of some of the bishop 's horses some years previously . Before he could be buried in the cathedral , the bishop had his corpse scourged in posthumous penance . 
 Rhys had nominated his eldest legitimate son , Gruffydd ap Rhys , as his successor , and soon after his father 's death Gruffydd met the Justiciar , Archbishop Hubert Walter , on the border and was confirmed as heir . Maelgwn , the eldest son but illegitimate , refused to accept this and was given military assistance by Gwenwynwyn ab Owain of Powys . Maelgwn took the town and castle of Aberystwyth and captured Gruffydd , whom he handed over to the custody of Gwenwynwyn . Gwenwynwyn later handed him over to the king , who imprisoned him at Corfe Castle . Gruffydd was set free the following year and regained most of Ceredigion . In 1201 Gruffydd died , but this did not end the fighting between rival claimants . In 1216 Llywelyn the Great of Gwynedd held a council at Aberdyfi where he allocated parts of Deheubarth to several sons and grandsons of Rhys . 
 = = Character and historical assessment = = 
 Giraldus Cambrensis frequently mentions Rhys in his writings and describes him as " a man of excellent wit and quick in repartee " . Gerald tells the story of a banquet at Hereford in 1186 where Rhys sat between two members of the Clare family . What could have been a tense affair , since Rhys had seized lands in Ceredigion previously held by the Clare family , passed off with an exchange of courteous compliments , followed by some good @-@ natured banter between Rhys and Gerald about their family connections . Rhys gave Gerald and Archbishop Baldwin a great deal of assistance when they visited Wales to raise troops for the crusade in 1188 , and Gerald several times refers to his " kindness " and says that Rhys accompanied them all the way from Cardigan to the northern border of Ceredigion " with a liberality peculiarly praiseworthy in so illustrious a prince " . 
 Another contemporary writer also wrote of Rhys if Roger Turvey is correct in stating that Walter Map 's piece Of the King <unk> deals with Rhys under a pseudonym . Map was less favourably disposed toward Rhys , describing him as " This king I have seen and know , and hate " , but goes on to say " I would not have my hatred blacken his worth ; it is not my wish ever to suppress any man 's excellence through envy " . He tells the following story about <unk> / Rhys : 
 This same man gave provisions to his enemies when besieged and driven by risk of famine to capitulate ; he wished them to be overcome by his own strength and not by want of bread ; and though he deferred victory , he increased the renown of it . 
 Davies provides the following assessment of Rhys : 
 Rhys 's career was indeed a remarkable one . Its very length was a tribute to his stamina and skill : he had occupied the stage of Welsh politics for over fifty years , from his first appearance in his early ' teens , at the capture of Llansteffan castle in 1146 , to his death in 1197 . But it was his achievement which was astounding : he had reconstituted the kingdom of Deheubarth and made it the premier Welsh kingdom . For once , the poet 's compliment was well @-@ deserved : Rhys had restored " the majesty of the South " . 
 Davies also notes two flaws in Rhys 's achievement . One was the personal nature of his accord with Henry II , which meant that it did not survive Henry 's death . The other was his inability to control his sons and to force the other sons to accept Gruffydd as his successor . 
 = = Children = = 
 Rhys had at least nine sons and eight daughters . Confusingly , three of the sons were named Maredudd and two of the daughters were named Gwenllian . 
 Gruffydd ap Rhys II ( died 1201 ) was the eldest legitimate son and was nominated by Rhys as his successor . He married Maud de Braose , the daughter of William de Braose . 
 Maelgwn ap Rhys ( died 1231 ) , who was the eldest son but illegitimate , refused to accept Gruffydd as his father 's successor . A bitter feud developed between the two , with several of Rhys 's other sons becoming involved . 
 Rhys Gryg ( died 1233 ) married a daughter of the Earl of Clare . Rhys eventually became the main power in Deheubarth , but never ruled more than a portion of his father 's realm and was a client prince of Llywelyn the Great of Gwynedd . 
 Hywel ap Rhys ( died 1231 ) spent many years as a hostage at the court of Henry II and on his return became known as Hywel Sais ( Hywel the Saxon , i.e. Englishman ) . 
 Maredudd ap Rhys ( died 1239 ) was also given as a hostage , but was less fortunate than Hywel . He was blinded by King Henry after the failure of the invasion of Wales in 1165 , and became known as Maredudd <unk> ( Maredudd the Blind ) . He ended his days as a monk at Whitland Abbey . 
 Another Maredudd ( died 1227 ) became Archdeacon of Cardigan . 
 Rhys 's daughter Gwenllian ferch Rhys married Rhodri ab Owain , prince of the western part of Gwynedd . 
 Another Gwenllian ( circa 1178 – 1236 ) married Ednyfed Fychan , seneschal of Gwynedd under Llywelyn the Great , and through her , Rhys became an ancestor of the Tudor dynasty . Through the Tudors inter @-@ marrying with the House of Stuart Rhys is an ancestor to the current ruling house of the United Kingdom and also an ancestor of several ruling houses in Europe . When Henry Tudor landed in Pembrokeshire , Wales in 1485 to make a bid for the throne , his descent from Rhys was one of the factors which enabled him to attract Welsh support ( Henry flew a ( Welsh ) dragon banner at the battle of Bosworth Field ) . 
 Angharad ferch Rhys married William FitzMartin , lord of <unk> . 
 Other daughters married the Welsh rulers of <unk> and <unk> . 
 = Sunderland Echo = 
 The Sunderland Echo is an evening newspaper serving the Sunderland , South Tyneside and East Durham areas of North East England . The newspaper was founded by Samuel Storey , Edward Backhouse , Edward Temperley Gourley , Charles Palmer , Richard Ruddock , Thomas <unk> and Thomas Scott Turnbull in 1873 , as the Sunderland Daily Echo and Shipping Gazette . Designed to provide a platform for the Radical views held by Storey and his partners , it was also Sunderland 's first local daily paper . 
 The inaugural edition of the Echo was printed in Press Lane , Sunderland on 22 December 1873 ; 1 @,@ 000 copies were produced and sold for a halfpenny each . The Echo survived intense competition in its early years , as well as the depression of the 1930s and two World Wars . Sunderland was heavily bombed in the Second World War and , although the Echo building was undamaged , it was forced to print its competitor 's paper under wartime rules . It was during this time that the paper 's format changed , from a broadsheet to its current tabloid layout , because of national newsprint shortages . 
 The Echo is published Monday – Saturday and is part of the Johnston Press group — one of the United Kingdom 's largest publishers of local and regional newspapers . As of Jun 2015 , the paper had an average daily circulation of 16 @,@ 860 , with around 43 @,@ 500 readers , and a very active website . It retails at 70 pence . The Echo was based at Echo House , Pennywell Industrial Estate , Sunderland , from 1976 until April 2015 . It now shares a site with sister papers the Hartlepool Mail and Shields Gazette at Alexander House , 1 Mandarin Road , Rainton Bridge Business Park , Houghton @-@ le @-@ Spring . 
 = = General overview = = 
 = = = Facts and figures = = = 
 The Sunderland Echo is an award @-@ winning evening newspaper , published from Monday to Saturday each week . The paper has a daily circulation of 15 @,@ 249 , with an overall readership of 48 @,@ 557 , representing about 16 @.@ 5 % of adults in the area . The news coverage provided by the Echo focuses mainly on local events , including human interest , crime and court stories , as well as reports on the local Premier League football team , Sunderland AFC . 
 Reader profile statistics suggest that 51 % of Echo readers are male , and 49 % are female . The highest proportion of readers , 18 % , are between the ages of 45 and 54 . Independent research carried out for the Echo in 2000 found readers spent an average of 33 minutes reading the paper . The same survey showed the Echo appealed to people across the range of demographics , with between 44 and 50 % of people in each socio @-@ economic grouping being regular readers . Current industry figures show between 14 @.@ 5 % and 19 % of each socio @-@ economic grouping in the area being readers 
 = = = Circulation and supplements = = = 
 The Sunderland Echo covers a circulation area of 40 square miles ( 100 km2 ) in North East England , which includes parts of South Tyneside and County Durham , as well as the city of Sunderland . Whitburn , Marsden and The <unk> , all to the north of Sunderland , are among the South Tyneside communities covered . Peterlee , Horden , Seaham , <unk> , Murton and Seaton , to the south of Sunderland , are the main towns and villages in the East Durham circulation area . The paper is also sold in Washington , <unk> and Durham , which are to the west of Sunderland . Villages on the outskirts of the city , including Houghton @-@ le @-@ Spring , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Hetton @-@ le @-@ Hole are included in the circulation area too . The main newspaper rivals in the Sunderland and County Durham area include The Northern Echo , The Journal , the Hartlepool Mail and the Evening Chronicle . The Sunderland Star , a free weekly newspaper printed by the Echo , is also distributed in the city . According to independent research conducted on behalf of the Echo in 2000 , the " popularity of the Echo in Sunderland and East Durham is greater than that of all other regional newspapers put together " . 
 In addition to the main newspaper , the Echo also produces a number of regular supplements and articles of specialist interest each week . These include sport and business supplements each Monday , a Down Your Way local news supplement on Tuesdays , jobs , junior football and nostalgia features on Wednesdays , an entertainment supplement , cars guide and nostalgia stories on Thursdays and a property pull @-@ out on Fridays . The Saturday edition includes a leisure pull @-@ out , featuring fashion , entertainment and restaurant reviews , while a local history nostalgia supplement , Retro , is published once a month . Nostalgia calendars , featuring old photographs of Sunderland and Seaham , are also produced . 
 = = Early years = = 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 The first edition of the Sunderland Daily Echo and Shipping Gazette was printed on 22 December 1873 , on a flat @-@ bed press in Press Lane , Sunderland . Five hundred copies of the four @-@ page issue were produced at noon and 4 pm , and sold for a halfpenny each . 
 Samuel Storey , a former teacher and future Sunderland mayor and Member of Parliament , founded the paper to provide a platform for his political views and to fill a gap in the newspaper market . Although the 100 @,@ 000 @-@ strong population of Sunderland was already served by two weekly newspapers — The Sunderland Times and The Sunderland Herald — neither reflected the radical views held by Storey and his partners and there were no daily papers in the town . Storey promised readers in the first edition that , if things went wrong , " the Echo would try its best to put them right " . But he added : " Always with moderation and without esteeming all those who oppose us as fools and knaves . " Early copies of the Echo included lengthy reports of Liberal meetings , and critical articles on Liberal opponents . 
 The Sunderland Echo was launched with an initial investment of £ 3 @,@ 500 , raised by donations of £ 500 each from Storey and his business partners . Those joining the venture were Quaker banker Edward Backhouse , shipbroker and MP Edward Temperley Gourley , shipbuilder and MP Sir Charles Palmer , newspaper editor Richard Ruddock , rope @-@ maker Thomas <unk> and draper Thomas Scott Turnbull . Lack of experience — only Ruddock had previous knowledge of newspaper management — and over @-@ optimistic estimates of costs meant that the initial funds were quickly exhausted . Storey later admitted : " In our childlike , simple ways , we thought this might be sufficient , but in a few months all the money was gone , so we paid in another £ 3 @,@ 500 and that soon went too . " As the prospect of any great financial success receded , Ruddock , Gourley and Palmer withdrew from the project . Storey , however , remained dedicated to the idea , and took on their shares . A further £ 7 @,@ 000 in investment from Storey enabled the remaining partners to abandon the " wheezing flat @-@ bed press " and , in July 1876 , the Echo moved to new premises at 14 Bridge Street , Sunderland . 
 = = = Bridge Street = = = 
 Bridge Street remained the home of the Echo for the next 100 years . Old buildings were demolished , new machine and composing rooms built on West Wear Street and two rotary presses installed just before the move , each capable of printing 24 @,@ 000 copies an hour . These changes brought about increased circulation , but it took another seven years before the Echo made a profit . It was a time of intense competition ; the Sunderland Times converted from a bi @-@ weekly to a daily paper in the same month as the Echo moved to Bridge Street , and Tory supporters started a paper of their own , the Sunderland Daily Post . The Sunderland Times was the first to collapse , but the Post survived for the next quarter of a century , providing the Echo with an often bitter rival . 
 Following the deaths of two further partners , Backhouse in 1879 and Turnbull in 1880 , Storey bought their shares to become the Echo 's chief proprietor . A year later , in 1881 , he met Scottish @-@ born millionaire Andrew Carnegie , and formed a syndicate with him to set up new newspapers and buy up others . Among those purchased were the Wolverhampton Express and Star , the Northern Daily Mail in Hartlepool and the Portsmouth Evening News . An attempt to buy the Shields Gazette , the country 's oldest daily newspaper , failed . The syndicate finally broke up in 1885 , with Storey retaining control of the Echo , Hampshire Telegraph , Portsmouth News and the Northern Daily Mail . These papers formed the basis of a new company , Portsmouth and Sunderland Newspapers Ltd , formed in the 1930s . The 19th century ended with the rivalry between the Echo and the Sunderland Daily Post intensifying . The Silksworth Colliery strike of 1891 pitted the two papers against each other , with the Post attacking Storey for having exploited the strike for political gain . Storey successfully sued for libel . 
 = = 20th century = = 
 = = = Consolidation = = = 
 The new century saw the Echo falling behind the times in its production methods . Established as a " leading daily newspaper " , it was one of the last to still be setting type by hand in 1900 . This changed in 1902 , when Linotype lead @-@ setting machines were brought in to set type mechanically . A landslide victory for the Liberal Party followed at the 1906 General Election , which heralded a new era for the Echo . The paper 's old rival , the Sunderland Daily Post , was discontinued six months later , and the Football Echo was launched on 7 September 1907 . 
 World War I brought its own difficulties for the Echo . Reporters went off to battle and , after the cost of newsprint soared , the paper was forced to double in price to a penny . The Echo 's 50th anniversary in 1923 was marked by a visit from company chairman Samuel Storey . Storey died two years later , three months after his eldest son Fred , and the chairmanship passed to another Samuel — Fred 's elder son . In the same year , plans were laid to improve the Bridge Street premises . The work included enlarging the printing works and was completed by the end of the 1920s . 
 = = = Depression years = = = 
 The depression of the 1930s brought mass unemployment to Sunderland . But , for the Echo , it was also a time of important structural changes in ownership . A new company controlling the three titles owned by the Storey family was formed in 1934 — Portsmouth and Sunderland Newspapers Ltd . There was a change in name for the Echo too , when the word Daily was dropped from its title of Sunderland Daily Echo and Shipping Gazette . The decade also , however , brought a fire which destroyed most of the bound files of archive copies of the Echo . Nineteenth @-@ century editions of the Echo can only be accessed in Sunderland at the City Centre Library in Fawcett Street . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 The Second World War brought havoc to Wearside , with Sunderland one of the seven most heavily bombed towns in the country . Despite the heavy shelling of the North East coast and River Wear , the Echo offices and printing plant escaped undamaged . The Shields Gazette , the Echo 's nearest rival , was not as fortunate . Its premises in Chapter Row , South Shields , were bombed in September 1941 and , under an emergency wartime arrangement , the paper was printed on the Echo presses . The Echo continued to be published throughout the war , despite paper rationing , a lack of reporters and a strict censorship of photographs . The war did have one major impact on the Echo — in the form of its size . Wartime restrictions on newsprint reduced the former broadsheet to its present tabloid size , and this style has been retained ever since . 
 = = = Post @-@ war changes and centenary = = = 
 The post @-@ war years saw the Echo drop Shipping Gazette from its main title @-@ piece , following a redesign in 1959 . Instead , the paper became known as Echo Sunderland for several years , although the name Sunderland Echo and Shipping Gazette continued to be printed in much smaller type above the new title . A further title @-@ piece redesign in 1972 , however , dispensed with the words Shipping Gazette and introduced an illustration of Wearmouth Bridge alongside the title Echo Sunderland . 
 Following a major refurbishment of the Bridge Street base in the mid @-@ 1960s , the next milestones for the paper came in 1973 . The first was Sunderland A.F.C. ' s 1 – 0 win over Leeds United in the FA Cup Final . Ian Porterfield 's winning goal was headline news at the time , giving the Echo its all @-@ time record circulation figure of 95 @,@ 000 copies of the Sports Echo . The second important event of 1973 was the 100th anniversary of the paper . Celebrations included a birthday party , with dignitaries such as Sunderland A.F.C. manager Bob Stokoe among the guests . Lord Buckton , the chairman of Portsmouth and Sunderland Newspapers Ltd , announced his retirement at the event , and was succeeded by his son , The Honourable Richard Storey . News of a move from Bridge Street to Pennywell , Sunderland , was also announced during the anniversary celebrations . The old newspaper building has since been replaced by a modern apartment block . The Echo name still lives on , however , as the project as been named <unk> . 
 = = Modern era = = 
 = = = Decades of change = = = 
 The Echo moved from Bridge Street to a purpose @-@ built newspaper office at Echo House , Pennywell Industrial Estate , in 1976 . The move brought an end to the traditional methods of printing using hot molten metal to produce type and printing plates , and introduced computer technology . The £ 4 million development saw the Echo become the first daily newspaper in the North East to be completely produced by photo @-@ composition and web @-@ offset printing . It also saw a change in the Echo 's appearance , with a new shape , bolder typefaces and clearer printing . The first new @-@ look Echo was printed at Pennywell on 26 April 1976 and was issue number 32 @,@ 512 . 
 Another change inspired by the move was a return for the Football Echo man . The cartoon character had for years indicated the match results of Sunderland with a smile , a frown or a tear , while adorning the outside wall of the Bridge Street building . After several years in storage , he was returned to the wall of the new Echo building in 1976 , where he still remains today . 
 In 1985 there was a break in tradition when the Echo title @-@ piece appeared reversed out in white on a red background , instead of the more familiar red or black lettering . The new title @-@ piece was designed to give a greater impact to the colourful front page . It was the first in a series of changes which included dropping Sunderland from the title in 1990 , the paper simply becoming The Echo . This change was reversed in 1997 , with a return to the name Sunderland Echo . 
 = = = Technological changes = = = 
 The 1990s saw the Echo take a huge technological leap forward when a £ 12 million printing press was installed . It was used for the first time in December 1996 and was capable of printing up to 70 @,@ 000 newspapers an hour . The press was part of a multimillion @-@ pound revamp , which also saw journalists making up full news pages on computer screens for the first time . The Echo 's first internet news service was also launched in 1996 . A further £ 5 million was spent on updating the pre @-@ press and press hall area in 2004 , to improve printing quality and speed of production . 
 The Echo was still part of Portsmouth and Sunderland Newspapers until the end of the 1990s , although printed by Northeast Press , a subsidiary of the main company . However , the last link to the original founder , Samuel Storey , disappeared in 1999 , when Johnston Press took over the business in May that year . The Sunderland Echo is still published by Northeast Press , although Johnston Press — the nation 's second largest regional publisher — now owns the whole company . In September 2012 it was announced the multimillion @-@ pound press hall was to close , with the loss of 81 jobs , and printing operations moved to Sheffield . On Saturday , 3 November , the final Echo was printed in Sunderland . The Echo was based at Echo House , Pennywell Industrial Estate , Sunderland , from 1976 until April 2015 . It now shares a site with sister papers the Hartlepool Mail and Shields Gazette at Alexander House , 1 Mandarin Road , Rainton Bridge Business Park , Houghton @-@ le @-@ Spring . 
 = = = On @-@ line revolution = = = 
 The Echo 's new @-@ look website was launched in February 2007 , while a digital editing suite was created within the office at the same time . The audio @-@ visual equipment allows reporters to both write about and film stories as they happen , and the articles can be published on @-@ line within seconds . 
 Statistics show that almost 80 @,@ 000 people visited the Echo 's website in January 2007 , and this figure had risen to 216 @,@ 000 by January 2008 . , for 2013 the audited figures reflected about 122 @,@ 000 adult visitors per month . The website is updated 24 hours a day , seven days a week , with stories including football match reports and football transfer rumours among the most popular . Slideshows , videos and podcasts are also included on the site in addition to the news of the day . 
 = = = Expansion into magazine production = = = 
 The Sunderland Echo branched out into magazine production in October 2009 , with the free ' high @-@ end lifestyle ' publication etc . Twelve thousand copies are produced each month , and etc can also be read as an E @-@ magazine online . It also has a website , <unk> , which was launched in February 2012 . The publication is aimed at an ABC1 audience and , although produced by staff based at Echo House in Sunderland , it is distributed across the North East , from Alnwick in Northumberland to Yarm in North Yorkshire , as well as by direct delivery . Aimed at people with ' a large disposable income , ' etc includes features on fashion , beauty , motoring , travel , property , food and wine , as well as celebrity interviews . 
 = = Awards and recognition = = 
 The Echo has won numerous accolades , as well as government praise , for its campaigning journalism , specialist writing , community work , photographic images and appeals for good causes over the decades . Examples of notable writing include a 2006 campaign highlighting the threat posed by bogus callers to the elderly and a 2005 campaign to protect 999 crews from being attacked on duty , which both received official praise in Parliament . A 1996 drug education campaign , which included the creation of a telephone service for tip @-@ offs about suspected local drug dealers , was also highly praised . The Newspaper Society named the Echo as its Campaigning Newspaper of the Year for the Drug Busters drive , and the campaign also won an award from the International Newspaper Marketing Association . 
 In the 135 years of its existence , the Echo has become part of the culture of the North East of England and a replica branch office of the Sunderland Daily Echo and Shipping Gazette was built at the open air Beamish Museum in County Durham in 1991 . Designed to show visitors how the newspaper would have operated in around 1913 , the life @-@ size exhibit includes a distribution office , reporter 's office , stationery shop and fully working printing press . The replica office took museum staff several months to research and create , and was opened by Sir Richard Storey , great @-@ grandson of Echo founder Samuel Storey , on 10 May 1991 . 
 A racehorse was named after the paper in 1991 , which was owned by a consortium of 250 Echo readers . The gelding won races at Hamilton , Redcar , Newcastle upon Tyne and Haydock in the early 1990s , but had to be put down on 17 February 1996 after pulling up badly lame during a routine morning gallop . The Echo was also used in a display at the Science Museum in London in 1999 , to show how writing can be made simpler for people with reading difficulties , and a specially printed edition of the newspaper appeared on the TV show Touching Evil , starring Robson Green , in the same year . 
 = Grigory Potemkin = 
 Prince Grigory Aleksandrovich Potemkin @-@ <unk> ( Russian : <unk> ́ <unk> Алекса ́ ндрович Потёмкин @-@ <unk> ́ <unk> ; ‘ <unk> ’ , r Grigoriy Aleksandrovich <unk> @-@ Tavricheskiy ; October 11 [ O.S. September 30 ] 1739 – October 16 [ O.S. October 5 ] 1791 ) was a Russian military leader , statesman , nobleman and favourite of Catherine the Great . He died during negotiations over the Treaty of Jassy , which ended a war with the Ottoman Empire that he had overseen . 
 Potemkin was born into a family of middle @-@ income noble landowners . He first attracted Catherine 's favor for helping in her 1762 coup , then distinguished himself as a military commander in the Russo @-@ Turkish War ( 1768 – 1774 ) . He became Catherine 's lover , favorite and possibly her consort . After their passion cooled , he remained her lifelong friend and favored statesman . Catherine obtained for him the title of Prince of the Holy Roman Empire and gave him the title of Prince of the Russian Empire among many others : he was both a Grand Admiral and the head of all of Russia 's land and irregular forces . Potemkin 's defining achievements include the peaceful annexation of the Crimea ( 1783 ) and the successful second Russo @-@ Turkish War ( 1787 – 1792 ) . The fall of Ottoman stronghold Izmail that he orchestrated prompted <unk> Derzhavin and Osip <unk> to write Russia 's first national anthem , " Let the thunder of victory sound ! " . 
 In 1774 , Potemkin became the governor @-@ general of Russia 's new southern provinces . An absolute ruler , he worked to colonize the wild steppes , controversially dealing firmly with the Cossacks who lived there . He founded the towns of Kherson , Nikolayev , Sevastopol , and <unk> ( now Dnipropetrovsk ) . Ports in the region became bases for his new Black Sea Fleet . His rule in the south is associated with the " Potemkin village " , a largely fictional method of ruse involving the construction of painted façades to mimic real villages , full of happy , well @-@ fed people , for visiting officials to see . Potemkin was known for his love of women , gambling and material wealth ; he oversaw the construction of many historically significant buildings , including the Tauride Palace in St. Petersburg . A century after Potemkin 's death , his name was given to the Battleship Potemkin , which featured in the 1905 Russian Revolution and was fictionalized in Battleship Potemkin , a silent film by Sergey Eisenstein . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 A descendant of the Moscovite diplomat Pyotr Potemkin ( 1617 @-@ 1700 ) , Grigory was born in the village of <unk> near Smolensk into a family of middle @-@ income noble landowners . The family claimed Polish ancestry . His father , Alexander Potemkin , was a decorated war veteran ; his mother Daria was " good @-@ looking , capable and intelligent " , though their marriage proved ultimately unhappy . Potemkin received his first name in honour of his father 's cousin Grigory <unk> Kizlovsky , a civil servant who became his godfather . It has been suggested that Kizlovsky fathered Potemkin , who became the centre of attention , heir to the village and the only son among six children . As the son of an ( albeit petty ) noble family , he grew up with the expectation that he would serve the Russian Empire . 
 After Alexander died in 1746 , Daria took charge of the family . In order to achieve a career for her son , and aided by Kizlovsky , the family moved to Moscow , where Potemkin enrolled at a gymnasium school attached to the University of Moscow . The young Potemkin became adept at languages and interested in the Russian Orthodox Church . He enlisted in the army in 1750 at age eleven , in accordance with the custom of noble children . In 1755 a second inspection placed him in the élite Horse Guards regiment . Having graduated from the University school , Potemkin became one of the first students to enroll at the University itself . Talented in both Greek and theology , he won the University 's Gold Medal in 1757 and became part of a twelve @-@ student delegation sent to Saint Petersburg later that year . The trip seems to have affected Potemkin : afterwards he studied little and was soon expelled . Faced with isolation from his family , he rejoined the Guards , where he excelled . At this time his net worth amounted to 430 souls ( serfs ) , equivalent to that of the poorer gentry . His time was taken up with " drinking , gambling , and promiscuous lovemaking " , and he fell deep in debt . 
 Grigory Orlov , one of Catherine 's lovers , led a palace coup in June 1762 that ousted the Emperor Peter III and enthroned Catherine II . Sergeant Potemkin represented his regiment in the revolt . Allegedly , as Catherine reviewed her troops in front of the Winter Palace before their march to the Peterhof , she lacked a sword @-@ knot ( or possibly hat plumage ) , which Potemkin quickly supplied . Potemkin 's horse then ( appeared to ) refuse to leave her side for several minutes before Potemkin and horse returned to the ranks . After the coup Catherine singled out Potemkin for reward and ensured his promotion to second lieutenant . Though Potemkin was among those guarding the ex @-@ Tsar , it appears that he had no direct involvement in Peter 's murder in July . Catherine promoted him again to <unk> ( gentleman of the bedchamber ) , though he retained his post in the Guards . Potemkin was soon formally presented to the Empress as a talented mimic ; his imitation of her was well received . 
 = = = Courtier and general = = = 
 Although Catherine had not yet taken Potemkin as a lover , it seems likely that she passively — if not actively — encouraged his flirtatious behaviour , including his regular practice of kissing her hand and declaring his love for her : without encouragement , Potemkin could have expected trouble from the <unk> ( Catherine 's lover Grigory and his four brothers ) who dominated court . Potemkin entered Catherine 's circle of advisers , and in 1762 took his only foreign assignment , to Sweden , bearing news of the coup . On his return , he was appointed Procurator , and won a reputation as a lover . Under unclear circumstances , Potemkin then lost his left eye and fell into a depression . His confidence shattered , he withdrew from court , becoming something of a religious hermit . Eighteen months later , Potemkin reappeared , probably summoned by Catherine . He became an army paymaster and oversaw uniform production . Shortly after , he became a Guardian of Exotic Peoples at the new All @-@ Russian Legislative Commission , a significant political post . In September 1768 , Potemkin became <unk> ( chamberlain ) ; two months later Catherine had his military commission revoked , fully attaching him to court . In the interval , the Ottoman Empire had started the Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1768 to 1774 and Potemkin was eager to prove himself , writing to Catherine : 
 The only way I can express my gratitude to Your Majesty is to shed my blood for Your glory . This war provides an excellent opportunity for this and I cannot live in idleness . Allow me now , Merciful Sovereign , to appeal at Your Majesty 's feet and request Your Majesty to send me to ... the front in whatever rank Your Majesty wishes ... [ to serve ] just for the duration of the war . 
 Potemkin served as Major @-@ General of the cavalry . He distinguished himself in his first engagement , helping to repulse a band of unruly Tatar and Turkish horsemen . He also fought in Russia 's victory at the Battle of <unk> and the taking of the town . Potemkin saw action virtually every day , particularly excelling at the Battle of <unk> , after which his commander Aleksandr Mikhailovich Golitsyn recommended him to Catherine . Potemkin 's army , under Pyotr Rumyantsev , continued its advance . Potemkin fought at the capture of <unk> , a display of courage and skill for which he received the Order of St. Anna . At the Battle of Larga , he won the Order of St. George , third class , and fought well during the rout of the main Turkish force that followed . On leave to St. Petersburg , the Empress invited him to dine with her more than ten times . 
 Back at the front , Potemkin won more military acclaim , but then fell ill ; rejecting medicine , he recovered only slowly . After a lull in hostilities in 1772 his movements are unclear , but it seems that he returned to St. Petersburg where he is recorded , perhaps apocryphally , to have been one of Catherine 's closest advisers . Though Orlov was replaced as her favourite , it was not Potemkin who benefited . Alexander Vasilchikov , another Horse @-@ Guardsman , replaced Orlov as the queen 's lover . Potemkin returned to war in 1773 as Lieutenant @-@ General to fight in <unk> . It appears that Catherine missed him , and that Potemkin took a December letter from her as a summons . In any case Potemkin returned to St. Petersburg as a war hero . 
 = = = Favorite of Catherine II = = = 
 Potemkin returned to court in January 1774 expecting to walk into Catherine 's arms . The political situation , however , had become complex . <unk> Pugachev had just arisen as a pretender to the throne , and commanded a rebel army thirty thousand strong . In addition , Catherine 's son Paul turned eighteen and began to gain his own support . By late January Potemkin had tired of the impasse and effected ( perhaps with encouragement from Catherine ) a " melodramatic retreat " into the Alexander Nevsky Monastery . Catherine relented and had Potemkin brought back in early February 1774 , when their relationship became intimate . Several weeks later he had usurped Vasilchikov as Catherine 's favorite , and was given the title of Adjutant General . When Catherine 's friend Friedrich Melchior , Baron von Grimm objected to Vasilchikov 's dismissal , she wrote back to him , " Why do you reproach me because I dismiss a well @-@ meaning but extremely boring bourgeois in favour of one of the greatest , the most comical and amusing , characters of this iron century ? " His uncouth behavior shocked the court , but Potemkin showed himself capable of suitable formality when necessary . 
 The frequent letters the pair sent to each other survive , revealing their affair to be one of " laughter , sex , mutually admired intelligence , and power " . Many of their trysts seem to have centered around the <unk> sauna in the basement of the Winter Palace ; Potemkin soon grew so jealous that Catherine had to detail her prior love @-@ life for him . Potemkin also rose in political stature , particularly on the strength of his military advice . In March 1774 he became Lieutenant @-@ Colonel in the <unk> Guards , a post previously held by Alexei Orlov . He also became captain of the Chevaliers @-@ Gardes from 1784 . In quick succession he won appointment as Governor @-@ General of Novorossiya , as a member of the State Council , as General @-@ in @-@ Chief , as Vice @-@ President of the College of War and as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Cossacks . These posts made him rich , and he lived lavishly . To improve his social standing he was awarded the prestigious Order of St. Alexander Nevsky and Order of St. Andrew , along with the Polish Order of the White Eagle , the Prussian Order of the Black Eagle , the Danish Order of the Elephant and the Swedish Royal Order of the Seraphim . 
 That Catherine and Potemkin married is " almost certain " , according to Simon Sebag Montefiore ; biographer Virginia Rounding expresses some doubt . In December 1784 Catherine first explicitly referred to Potemkin as her husband in correspondence , though 1775 , 1784 and 1791 have all been suggested as possible nuptial dates . In all , Catherine 's phrasing in 22 letters suggested he had become her consort , at least secretly . Potemkin 's actions and her treatment of him later in life fit with this : the two at least acted as husband and wife . By late 1775 , however , their relationship was changing , though it is uncertain exactly when Catherine took a secretary , Pyotr Zavadovsky , as a lover . On 1 January 1775 , Zavadovsky became Adjutant @-@ General to the Empress ( he became her official favorite in May ) and Potemkin moved to command the St. Petersburg troop division . Signs of a potential " golden adieu " for Potemkin include his 1775 appointment , at Catherine 's request , to the title of Prince of the Holy Roman Empire . Though he was " bored " with Catherine , the separation was relatively peaceful . The Prince was sent on a tour to <unk> , but , contrary to the expectations of some onlookers ( though not Catherine 's ) , he returned a few weeks later . He then snubbed her gift of the Anichkov Palace , and took new apartments in the Winter Palace , retaining his posts . Though no longer Catherine 's favorite , he remained her favored minister . 
 Though the love affair appeared to end , Catherine and Potemkin maintained a particularly close friendship , which continued to dominate their lives . Most of the time this meant a ménage à trois in the court between the pair and Catherine 's latest swain . The favorite had a high @-@ pressure position : after Zavadovsky came Semyon <unk> ( May 1777 to May 1778 ) , Ivan Rimsky @-@ Korsakov ( May 1778 to late 1778 ) , Alexander Lanskoy ( 1780 to 1784 ) , Alexander Yermolov ( 1785 @-@ 1786 ) , Alexander Dmitriev @-@ Mamonov ( 1786 @-@ 1789 ) and Platon Zubov ( 1789 @-@ 1796 ) . Potemkin checked candidates for their suitability ; it also appears that he tended to the relationships and " filled in " between favorites . Potemkin also arranged for Catherine to walk in on Rimsky @-@ Korsakov in a compromising position with another woman . During Catherine 's ( comparatively ) long relationship with Lanskoy , Potemkin was particularly able to turn his attentions to other matters . He embarked upon a long series of other romances , including with his own nieces , one of whom may have borne him a child . 
 = = = Diplomat = = = 
 Potemkin 's first task during this period was foreign policy . An anglophile , he helped negotiate with the English ambassador , Sir James Harris , during Catherine 's initiative of Armed Neutrality , though the south remained his passion . His plan , known as the Greek Project , aspired to build a new Byzantine Empire around the Turkish capital in Constantinople . <unk> the Ottoman Empire would require détente with Austria ( technically still the Habsburg Monarchy ) , and its ruler Joseph II . They met in May 1780 in the Russian town of Mogilev . The ensuing alliance represented the triumph of Potemkin 's approach over courtiers such as Catherine 's son Paul , who favored alliance with Prussia . The May 1781 defensive treaty remained secret for almost two years ; the Ottomans were said to still have been unaware of it even when they declared war on Russia in 1787 . 
 Elsewhere , Potemkin 's scheme to develop a Russian presence in the rapidly disintegrating state of Persia failed . Plans for a full @-@ scale invasion had previously been cut back and a small unit sent to establish a trading post there was quickly turned away . Potemkin focused instead on Russia 's southern provinces , where he was busy founding cities ( including Sevastopol ) and creating his own personal kingdom , including his brand new Black Sea Fleet . That kingdom was about to expand : under the Treaty of <unk> <unk> , which had ended the previous Russo @-@ Turkish war , the Crimean Khanate had become independent , though effectively under Russian control . In June 1782 it was descending again into anarchy . By July 1783 , Potemkin had engineered the peaceful annexation of the Crimea and Kuban , capitalizing on the fact that Britain and France were fighting elsewhere . The Kingdom of Georgia accepted Russian protection a few days later with the Treaty of Georgievsk searching for protection against Persia 's aim to reestablish its suzerainty over Georgia ; the Karabakh Khanate of Persia initially looked as though it might also , but eventually declined Russian help . Exhausted , Potemkin collapsed into a fever he barely survived . Catherine rewarded him with one hundred thousand roubles , which he used to construct the Tauride Palace in St. Petersburg . 
 = = = Governor @-@ General and city builder = = = 
 Potemkin returned to St. Petersburg in November 1783 and was promoted to Field Marshal when the Crimea was formally annexed the following February . He also became President of the College of War . The province of Tauris ( the Crimea ) was added to the state of Novorossiya ( lit . New Russia . ) Potemkin moved south in mid @-@ March , as the " Prince of Tauris " . He had been the namestnik of Russia 's southern provinces ( including Novorossiya , Azov , Saratov , Astrakhan and the Caucasus ) since 1774 , repeatedly expanding it via military action . He kept his own court , which rivalled Catherine 's : by the 1780s he operated a chancellery with fifty or more clerks and had his own minister , Vasili Popov , to oversee day @-@ to @-@ day affairs . Another favored associate was Mikhail <unk> . 
 The " criminal " breaking of the Cossack hosts , particularly the Zaporozhian Cossacks in 1775 , helped define his rule . However , Montefiore argues that given their location , and in the wake of the Pugachev rebellion , the Cossacks were likely doomed in any case . By the time of Potemkin 's death , the Cossacks and their threat of anarchic revolt were well controlled . Among the <unk> Cossacks he was known as <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = = Builder = = = = 
 Potemkin then embarked on a period of city @-@ founding . Construction started at his first effort , Kherson , in 1778 , as a base for a new Black Sea Fleet he intended to build . Potemkin approved every plan himself , but construction was slow , and the city proved costly and vulnerable to plague . Next was the port of <unk> , annexed with the Crimea , which became Sevastopol . Then he built Simferopol as the Crimean capital . His biggest failure , however , was his effort to build the city of <unk> ( lit . The glory of Catherine ) , now Dnipropetrovsk . The second most successful city of Potemkin 's rule was Nikolayev ( now better known as Mykolaiv ) , which he founded in 1789 . Potemkin also initiated the redesign of Odessa after its capture from the Turks ; it was to turn out to be the greatest . 
 Potemkin 's Black Sea Fleet was a massive undertaking for its time . By 1787 , the British ambassador reported twenty @-@ seven battleships . It put Russia on a naval footing with Spain , though far behind the British Navy . The period represented the peak of Russia 's naval power relative to other European states . Potemkin also rewarded hundreds of thousands of settlers who moved into his territories . It is estimated that by 1782 the populations of Novorossiya and Azov had doubled during a period of " exceptionally rapid " development . Immigrants included Russians , foreigners , British convicts diverted from Australia , Cossacks and controversially Jews . Though the immigrants were not always happy in their new surroundings , on at least one occasion Potemkin intervened directly to ensure families received the cattle to which they were entitled . Outside of Novorossiya he drew up the defensive Azov @-@ <unk> line , constructing forts at Georgievsk , Stavropol and elsewhere and ensured that the whole of the line was settled . 
 In 1784 Lanskoy died and Potemkin was needed at court to console the grieving Catherine . After Alexander Yermolov was installed as the new favorite in 1785 , Catherine , Yermolov and Potemkin cruised the upper Volga . When Yermolov attempted to unseat Potemkin ( and attracted support from Potemkin 's critics ) , he found himself replaced by Count Alexander Dmitriev @-@ Mamonov in the summer of 1786 . Potemkin returned to the south , having arranged that Catherine would visit in the summer of 1787 . She reached Kiev in late January , to travel down the Dnieper after the ice had melted ( see Crimean journey of Catherine the Great ) . Potemkin had other lovers at this time , including a ' Countess ' Sevres and a Naryshkina . Leaving in April , the royal party arrived in Kherson a month later . On visiting Sevastopol , Austria 's Joseph II , who was traveling with them , was moved to note that " The Empress is totally ecstatic ... Prince Potemkin is at the moment all @-@ powerful " . 
 = = = = " Potemkin Village " = = = = 
 The notion of the Potemkin village ( coined in German by critical biographer Georg von Helbig as German : <unk> <unk> ) arose from Catherine 's visit to the south . Critics accused Potemkin of using painted façades to fool Catherine into thinking that the area was far richer than it was . Thousands of peasants were alleged to have been stage @-@ managed for this purpose . Certainly , Potemkin had arranged for Catherine to see the best he had to offer ( organising numerous exotic excursions ) and at least two cities ' officials did conceal poverty by building false houses . It seems unlikely , however , that the fraud approached the scale alleged . The Prince of Ligne , a member of the Austrian delegation , who had explored on his own during the trip , later proclaimed the allegations to be false . 
 = = = Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief = = = 
 Potemkin remained in the south , gradually sinking into depression . His inactivity was problematic , given that he was now Russia 's commander @-@ in @-@ chief and , in August 1787 , another Russo @-@ Turkish war broke out ( the second of Potemkin 's lifetime ) . His opponents were anxious to reclaim the lands they had lost in the last war , and they were under pressure from Prussia , Britain and Sweden to take a hostile attitude towards Russia . Potemkin 's bluster had probably contributed to the hostility , either deliberately or accidentally ; either way , his creation of the new fleet and Catherine 's trip to the south had certainly not helped matters . In the center , Potemkin had his own Yekaterinoslav Army , while to the west lay the smaller Ukraine Army under the command of Field @-@ Marshal Rumyantsev @-@ <unk> . On water he had the Black Sea Fleet , and Potemkin was also responsible for coordinating military actions with Russia 's Austrian allies . Potemkin and Catherine agreed on a primarily defensive strategy until the spring . Though the Turks were repelled in early skirmishes ( against the Russian fortress at Kinburn ) , news of the loss of Potemkin 's beloved fleet during a storm sent him into a deep depression . A week later , and after kind words from Catherine , he was rallied by the news that the fleet was not in fact destroyed , but only damaged . General Alexander Suvorov won an important victory at Kinburn in early October ; with winter now approaching , Potemkin was confident the port would be safe until the spring . 
 Turning his attention elsewhere , Potemkin established his headquarters in <unk> and planned future operations . He assembled an army of forty or fifty thousand , including the newly formed Kuban Cossacks . He divided his time between military preparation ( creating a fleet of a hundred gunboats to fight within the shallow <unk> ) and chasing the wives of soldiers under his command . Meanwhile , the Austrians remained on the defensive across central Europe , though they did manage to hold their lines . Despite advice to the contrary , Potemkin pursued an equally defensive strategy , though in the Caucasus Generals <unk> and Pavel Potemkin were making some inroads . In early summer 1788 , fighting intensified as Potemkin 's forces won their naval confrontation with the Turks with few losses , and began the siege of Ochakov , a Turkish stronghold and the main Russian war aim . Less promising was that St. Petersburg , exposed after Russia 's best forces departed for the Crimea , was now under threat from Sweden in the Russo @-@ Swedish War of 1788 – 90 . Potemkin refused to write regularly with news of the war in the south , compounding Catherine 's anxiety . 
 Potemkin argued with Suvorov and Catherine herself , who were both anxious to assault Ochakov , which the Turks twice managed to supply by sea . Finally , on 6 December , the assault began and four hours later the city was taken , a coup for Potemkin . Nearly ten thousand Turks had been killed at a cost of ( only ) two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half thousand Russians . Catherine wrote that " you [ Potemkin ] have shut the mouths of everyone ... [ and can now ] show magnanimity to your blind and empty @-@ headed critics " . Potemkin then visited the naval yard at <unk> , founded Nikolayev , and traveled on to St. Petersburg , arriving in February 1789 . In May he left once more for the front , having agreed contingency plans with Catherine should Russia be forced into war with either Prussia or the upstart Poland , which had recently successfully demanded the withdrawal of Russian troops from its territory . ( Catherine herself was just about to change favorites for the final time , replacing Dmitriev @-@ Mamonov with Platon Zubov . ) Back on the Turkish front , Potemkin advanced towards the fortress of Bender on the Dniester river . 
 The summer and autumn of 1789 saw numerous victories against the Turks , including the Battle of <unk> in July ; in early September , the Battle of <unk> and the capture of both <unk> and <unk> ( modern day Odessa ) ; and finally the surrender of the Turkish fortress at Akkerman in late September . The massive fortress at Bender surrendered in November without a fight . Potemkin opened up a lavish court at Jassy , the capital of Moldavia , to " winter like a sultan , revel in his mistresses , build his towns , create his regiments — and negotiate peace with [ the Turks ] ... he was emperor of all he surveyed " . Potemkin even established a newspaper , Le Courrier de <unk> . His preferred lover at the time — though he had others — was <unk> <unk> , an affair which continued into 1790 . Potemkin renamed two ships in her honor . As part of the diplomatic machinations , Potemkin was given the new title of " Grand Hetman of the Black Sea and Yekaterinoslav Cossack Hosts " and in March he assumed personal control of the Black Sea fleet as Grand Admiral . 
 In July 1790 the Russian Baltic Fleet was defeated by the Swedish at the Battle of Svensksund . Despite the damage , the silver lining for the Russians was that the Swedes now felt able to negotiate on an even footing and a peace was soon signed , based on the status quo ante bellum , thus ending the threat of invasion . The peace also freed up military resources for the war against the Turks . Potemkin had moved his evermore lavish court to Bender and there were soon more successes against Turkey , including the capture of <unk> @-@ Pasha and , on the second attempt , of Kilia on the Danube . By the end of November , only one major target remained : the Turkish fortress of Izmail . At Potemkin 's request , General Suvorov commanded the assault , which proved to be costly but effective . The victory was commemorated by Russia 's first , albeit unofficial , national anthem , " Let the thunder of victory sound ! " , written by <unk> Derzhavin and Osip <unk> . 
 After two years he returned to St. Petersburg to face the threat of war against an Anglo @-@ Prussian coalition in addition to the war with Turkey . His return was widely celebrated with the " Carnival of Prince Potemkin " . The Prince came across as polite and charming though his latest mistress , Princess Ekaterina <unk> , appeared sidelined and Potemkin found himself embroiled in court intrigue whilst trying to force Zubov out . Catherine and Potemkin fought over military strategy ; the Empress wanted no compromise , while Potemkin wanted to buy time by appeasing the Prussians . Fortunately for the Russians , the Anglo @-@ Prussian alliance collapsed and a British ultimatum that Russia should accept the status quo ante bellum was withdrawn . In this way , the threat of a wider war receded . Though Russia was still at war with the Ottomans , Potemkin 's focus was now Poland . Potemkin had conservative allies including Felix Potocki , whose schemes were so diverse that they have yet to be fully untangled . For example , one idea was for Potemkin to declare himself king . 
 Success on the Turkish front continued , mostly attributable to Potemkin . He now had the opportunity to confront the Turks and dictate a peace , but that would mean leaving Catherine . His procrastination soured Catherine 's attitude towards him , a situation compounded by Potemkin 's choice of the married Princess <unk> <unk> <unk> ( née Shuvalova ) as his latest mistress . In the end , Potemkin was given the requisite authority to negotiate with the Turks ( and , afterwards , to pursue his Polish ambitions ) , and dispatched by Catherine back to the south . She sent a note after him , reading " Goodbye my friend , I kiss you " . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Potemkin fell ill in the fever @-@ ridden city of Jassy , though he kept busy , overseeing peace talks , planning his assault on Poland and preparing the army for renewed war in the south . He fasted briefly and recovered some strength , but refused medicine and began to feast once again , consuming a " ham , a slated goose and three or four chickens " . On October 13 [ O.S. October 2 ] , he felt better and dictated a letter to Catherine before collapsing once more . Later , he awoke and dispatched his entourage to Nikolayev . On October 16 [ O.S. October 5 ] 1791 Potemkin died in the open steppe , 40 miles from Jassy . Picking up on contemporary rumor , historians such as the Polish Jerzy Łojek have suggested that he was poisoned because his madness made him a liability , but this is rejected by Montefiore , who suggests he succumbed to bronchial pneumonia instead . 
 Potemkin was embalmed and a funeral was held for him in Jassy . Eight days after his death , he was buried . Catherine was distraught and ordered social life in St. Petersburg be put on hold . Derzhavin 's ode Waterfall lamented his death ; likewise many in the military establishment had looked upon Potemkin as a father figure and were especially saddened by his death . Polish contemporary Stanisław Małachowski claimed that Aleksandra von Engelhardt , a niece of Potemkin and wife to Franciszek Ksawery Branicki , a magnate and prominent leader of the Targowica Confederation , also worried for the fate of Poland after the death of the man who had planned to revitalise the Polish state with him as its new head . Potemkin had used the state treasury as a personal bank , preventing the resolution of his financial affairs to this day . Catherine purchased the Tauride Palace and his art collection from his estate , and paid off his debts . Consequently , he left a relative fortune . Catherine 's son Paul , who succeeded to the throne in 1796 , attempted to undo as many of Potemkin 's reforms as possible . The Tauride Palace was turned into a barracks , and the city of <unk> , which had been named in Potemkin 's honor , was renamed . 
 Potemkin 's grave survived a destruction order issued by Paul and was eventually displayed by the Bolsheviks . His remains now appear to lie in his tomb at St. Catherine 's Cathedral in Kherson . The exact whereabouts of some of his internal organs , including his heart and brain first kept at Golia Monastery in Jassy , remain unknown . 
 = = Personality and reputation = = 
 Potemkin " exuded both menace and welcome " ; he was arrogant , demanding of his courtiers and very changeable in his moods but also fascinating , warm and kind . It was generally agreed among his female companions that he was " amply endowed with ' sex appeal ' " . Louis Philippe , comte de Ségur described him as " colossal like Russia " , " an inconceivable mixture of grandeur and pettiness , laziness and activity , bravery and timidity , ambition and insouciance " . The internal contrast was evident throughout his life : he frequented both church and numerous orgies , for example . In Ségur 's view , onlookers had a tendency to unjustly attribute to Catherine alone the successes of the period and to Potemkin the failures . An eccentric workaholic , Potemkin was vain and a great lover of jewelry ( a taste he did not always remember to pay for ) , but he disliked sycophancy and was sensitive about his appearance , particularly his lost eye . He only agreed to having portraits made of him twice , in 1784 and again in 1791 , both times by Johann Baptist von <unk> and from an angle which disguised his injury . 
 Potemkin was also an intellectual . The Prince of Ligne noted that Potemkin had " natural abilities [ and ] an excellent memory " . He was interested in history and generally knowledgeable . Potemkin loved the classical music of the period , as well as opera . He liked all food , both peasant and fine ; particular favorites included roast beef and potatoes , and his anglophilia meant that English gardens were prepared wherever he went . A practical politician , his political ideas were " quintessentially Russian " , and he believed in the superiority of the Tsarist autocracy ( he once described the French revolutionaries as " a pack of madmen " ) . Potemkin 's habits included biting his nails , to the point where he developed <unk> . One evening , at the height of his power , Potemkin declared to his dinner guests : 
 Everything I have ever wanted , I have ... I wanted high rank , I have it ; I wanted medals , I have them ; I loved gambling , I have lost vast sums ; I liked giving parties , I 've given magnificent ones ; I enjoy building houses , I 've raised palaces ; I liked buying estates , I have many ; I adore diamonds and beautiful things – no individual in Europe owns rarer or more exquisite stones . In a word , all my passions have been sated . I am entirely happy ! 
 Ultimately Potemkin proved a controversial figure . Criticisms include " laziness , corruption , debauchery , indecision , extravagance , falsification , military incompetence and disinformation on a vast scale " but supporters hold that only " the <unk> [ devotion to luxury ] and extravagance ... are truly justified " , stressing Potemkin 's " intelligence , force of personality , spectacular vision , courage , generosity and great achievements " . Though not a military genius , he was " seriously able " in military matters . Potemkin 's contemporary Ségur was quick to criticise , writing that " nobody thought out a plan more swiftly [ than Potemkin ] , carried it out more slowly and abandoned it more easily " . Another contemporary , the Scotsman Sir John Sinclair , added that Potemkin had " great abilities " but was ultimately a " worthless and dangerous character " . Russian opponents such as Semyon Vorontsov agreed : the Prince had " lots of intelligence , intrigue and credit " but lacked " knowledge , application and virtue " . 
 = = Family = = 
 Potemkin had no legitimate descendants , though it is probable he had illegitimate issue . Four of his five sisters lived long enough to bear children , but only the daughters of his sister Marfa Elena ( sometimes rendered as ' Helen ' ) received Potemkin 's special attention . The five unmarried Engelhardt sisters arrived in court in 1775 on the direction of their recently widowed father Vassily . Legend suggests Potemkin soon seduced many of the girls , one of whom was twelve or thirteen at the time . An affair with the third eldest , Varvara , can be verified ; after that had subsided , Potemkin formed close — and probably amorous — relationships successively with Alexandra , the second eldest , and Ekaterina , the fifth . 
 Potemkin also had influential relatives . Potemkin 's sister Maria , for example , married Russian senator Nikolay <unk> : their son Alexander was decorated for his service under Potemkin in the army ; their daughter Ekaterina married first into the <unk> family , and then the wealthy landowner Lev Davydov . She had children with both husbands , including highly decorated General Nikolay Raevsky , Potemkin 's great @-@ nephew . His wider family included several distant cousins , among them Count Pavel Potemkin , another decorated military figure , whose brother Mikhail married Potemkin 's niece Tatiana Engelhardt . A distant nephew , Felix Yusupov , helped murder Rasputin in 1916 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Despite attempts by Paul I to play down Potemkin 's role in Russian history , his name found its way into numerous items of common parlance . The phrase Potemkin village entered common usage in Russia and globally , despite its fictional origin . A century after Potemkin 's death , the Battleship Potemkin was named in his honour . The ship became famous for its involvement in the Russian Revolution of 1905 and subsequent dramatization in The Battleship Potemkin , a Soviet movie by Sergey Eisenstein , which at one point was named the greatest film of all time . The name of the giant seaside staircase in Odessa , featured in the movie , eventually became known as the Potemkin Stairs . 
 = Hard Ball = 
 " Hard Ball " ( also known as " Negotiation " ) is the fifteenth episode of NBC 's first season of 30 Rock . It was written by one of the season 's co @-@ producers , Matt Hubbard , and directed by one of the season 's supervising producers , Don Scardino . It aired on February 22 , 2007 in the United States . Guest stars who appeared in the episode were David Alan <unk> , Gregg Bello , Katrina Bowden , Kevin Brown , Grizz Chapman , Rachel Dratch , Keith Powell , Lonny Ross and Gregory <unk> . Tucker Carlson and Chris Matthews also appear as themselves in the episode . 
 The episode focuses on Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) trying to clear her name after being misquoted in an interview for Maxim Magazine . Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) begins negotiations to Josh Girard 's ( Lonny Ross ) new contract . Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) becomes the newest member of Tracy Jordan 's ( Tracy Morgan ) entourage . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Josh 's contract is due for renewal , Jack enters negotiation mode . Jack is looking to save money with the negotiations outcome , so Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) warns Josh to be careful . Later , thinking Josh is ill , Liz goes to order some soup and on her way , sees Josh . He meets with a producer from The Daily Show , which angers Liz , who decides to help Jack negotiate . When Josh and his agent return to negotiate , believing that an offer from the Daily Show was on the table , Jack promptly reveals that he was able to get the offer from the Daily Show pulled and thus leave Josh with no negotiating power . Jack then offers Josh the same terms as his previous contract , but Liz , upset that Josh was not made to suffer for his " betrayal " by speaking with another show , orders Josh to start doing the worm . 
 Meanwhile , Jenna gets into trouble after she is misquoted in Maxim magazine , allegedly saying that she hates the troops . This happened due to Jenna <unk> the interviewer and thinking he meant theater troupes . The resulting outrage prompts Jack to get her an interview on Hardball with Chris Matthews to clear up the confusion over her comments . During the interview , Jenna confuses Osama bin Laden and then @-@ Senator Barack Obama , who was running for the Democratic Party nomination for President . A further attempt to clear Jenna 's name backfires when swastikas are accidentally brandished on the TGS with Tracy Jordan stage . 
 Tracy allows Kenneth into his entourage , but in the process discovers that Grizz ( Grizz Chapman ) and Dot Com ( Kevin Brown ) have been allowing him to win at things such as Halo , Trivial Pursuit , and basketball . Tracy " fires " Grizz and Dot Com from the entourage , but the union between Tracy and Kenneth does not jell . Grizz and Dot Com come to the rescue after Tracy is surrounded by a mob outside 30 Rockefeller Plaza , which is protesting against the controversy caused by Jenna . 
 = = Production = = 
 Rachel Dratch , longtime comedy partner and fellow Saturday Night Live alumna of Fey , was originally cast to portray Jenna . Dratch played the role in the show 's original pilot , but in August 2006 , Jane Krakowski was announced as Dratch 's replacement . Executive producer Lorne Michaels announced that while Dratch would not be playing a series regular , she would appear in various episodes in a different role . In this episode , Dratch played Martha Blanch , the activist who is leading the protests , outside of 30 Rockefeller Center , against Jenna . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In the U.S. , the episode remained the lowest @-@ rated episode of the series , in total viewers , until the fifth season . This episode was viewed by 4 @.@ 6 million viewers and received a rating of 2 @.@ 4 / 5 in the key adults 18 – 49 demographic according to the Nielsen ratings system . The 2 @.@ 4 refers to 2 @.@ 4 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and the 5 refers to 5 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . " Hard Ball " held 86 % of 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old viewers who had viewed the Scrubs episode " My Therapeutic Month " which aired at 9 : 00PM EST , before " Hard Ball " at 9 : 30 . 
 Julia Ward of TV Squad exclaimed that the episode 's three storylines were " all brilliant " . She praised Alec Baldwin , saying that " his negotiation scenes were gold as was his line delivery " . She felt that Baldwin 's great acting was " not unique to this episode " , and was what earned him the Golden Globe . Ward finished her review by saying that it was " satisfying to see a show come together as 30 Rock [ had in the ] past few weeks - settling into its rhythm [ and ] finding its feet " . Eric Goldman of IGN felt that this episode " did a very skillful job of juggling three different storylines , all of which delivered solid laughs " . He thought that the crew of 30 Rock had figured out " better uses for Jenna , and this episode offered some nice moments for her " . He also enjoyed Tracy and Kenneth 's subplot , saying it " was a decent one " . 
 " Hard Ball " was nominated for a total of three awards , winning one . Jeff Richmond was nominated for a Creative Arts Emmy Award in the category of Outstanding Original Main Title Theme Music for his work on this episode . Matt Hubbard , the writer of this episode , was also nominated for a Writers Guild of America Award in the category of Best Episodic Comedy . The episode was also submitted to voters for the Primetime Emmy Awards category Outstanding Comedy Series , which it won . 
 = Coatbridge = 
 Coatbridge ( Scots : <unk> or <unk> , Scottish Gaelic : <unk> a ' <unk> ) is a town in North Lanarkshire , Scotland , about 10 miles ( 16 km ) east of Glasgow city centre , set in the central Lowlands . The town , with neighbouring Airdrie , is part of the Greater Glasgow urban area . While the earliest known settlement of the area dates back to the Stone Age era , the founding of the town can be traced to the 12th century when a Royal Charter was granted to the Monks of Newbattle Abbey by King Malcolm IV . Coatbridge , along with its neighbour Airdrie , forms the area known as the Monklands . 
 It was during the last years of the 18th century that the area developed from a loose collection of hamlets into the town of Coatbridge . The town 's development and growth have been intimately connected with the technological advances of the industrial revolution , and in particular with the hot blast process . Coatbridge was a major Scottish centre for iron works and coal mining during the 19th century and in this period was described as ' the industrial heartland of Scotland ' and the ' Iron Burgh ' . 
 Coatbridge also had a notorious reputation for air pollution and the worst excesses of industry . By the time of the 1920s however , coal seams were exhausted and the iron industry in Coatbridge was in rapid decline . After the Great Depression the Gartsherrie ironwork was the last remaining iron works in the town . One publication has commented that in modern @-@ day Coatbridge ' coal , iron and steel have all been consigned to the heritage scrap heap ' . 
 Coatbridge today is best described as a working class town anchored to Glasgow , the largest city in Scotland . It has also been described as " populated largely by people of Irish descent " . 
 = = History = = 
 There are various explanations for the origin of the town 's name . The place name Coatbridge first appears on a number of 19th century maps , although Roy 's 1750 map notes ' <unk> ' as a hamlet in the Old Monkland area . Older Scots ' Cot ( t ) ' ( cottage ) and ' brig ' ( bridge ) . ( This reflected in the way locals refer to the town or its centre as ' The Brig ' : " I 'm just going up the Brig. " ) One source states ' Coatbridge ' is either derived from the Middle English ' cote ' , ( cottage ) or from the Old Welsh ' coed ' meaning ' wood ' . 
 An alternative explanation is that from around the 13th century the local area was owned by the Colt family , sometimes known as Coats , and their estate generated place @-@ names such as Coatbridge , Coatdyke , <unk> and <unk> . Drummond and Smith suggest the name derives from the granting of land to <unk> le Colt around the time of the 12th century . However , Early Scots / ol / had vocalized to / o ̞ u / by the 16th century and subsequently <unk> to / <unk> / in Modern Scots , so that ' Colt ' would have become ' <unk> ' rather than ' Coat ' . Modern Scots ' Cot ' ( cottage ) is realized / kot / . 
 = = = Early history : from Bronze Age to Middle Ages = = = 
 Settlement of the Coatbridge area dates back 3000 years to the Mesolithic Age . A circle of Bronze Age stone coffins was found on the Drumpellier estate in 1852 . A number of other Bronze Age urns and relics have been found in Coatbridge . An Iron Age wood and thatch <unk> dwelling was sited in the Loch at the present day Drumpellier Country Park . Dependent upon the water level in the loch , the remains can still be seen today . 
 Roman coins have been unearthed in Coatbridge , and there are the remains of a Roman road on the fringes of the town near the M8 motorway . 
 = = = Middle Ages to late 18th century = = = 
 The ' Monklands ' area inherited its name after the area was granted to the Cistercian monks of Newbattle Abbey by King Malcolm IV in 1162 . 1n 1323 the Monklands name appeared for the first time on Stewards ' charter . The Monks mined coal and farmed the land until the time of the reformation when the land was taken from them and given to private landowners . In 1641 the parish of Monklands was divided between New Monkland ( present day Airdrie ) and Old Monkland ( present day Coatbridge ) . In 1745 Bonnie Prince Charlie 's Jacobite army seized Coatbridge from government troops on their march to Edinburgh in an action described as the ' Canter of Coatbridge ' . Coatbridge was described in the 1799 Statistical Account as an ' immense garden ' with ' extensive orchards ' , ' luxurious crops ' where ' rivers abound with salmon ' . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 The Monkland Canal was constructed at the end of the 18th century initially to transport coal to Glasgow from the rich local deposits . The invention of the hot blast furnace process in 1828 meant that Coatbridge 's ironstone deposits could be exploited to the maximum by the canal link and hot blast process . The new advances meant that iron could be produced with two thirds less fuel . By the mid 19th century there were numerous hot blast furnaces in operation in Coatbridge . 
 The prosperous industry which had sprung up around the new iron industry required vast numbers of largely unskilled workers to mine ironstone and work in the blast furnace plants . Coatbridge therefore became a popular destination for vast numbers of Irish ( especially from County Donegal in Ulster ) arriving in Scotland . The iron bars and plates produced in Coatbridge iron works were the raw materials needed throughout the British Empire for railways , construction , bridge building and shipbuilding . One example of uses Coatbridge ' iron was put to included armour plating for British ships fighting in the Crimean War . 
 Over the course of the following forty years the population of Coatbridge grew by 600 % . The character of the Coatbridge area changed from a rural , Presbyterian landscape of small hamlets and farmhouses into a crowded , polluted , Irish Catholic industrial town . In 1840 , Rev William Park wrote that : 
 One contemporary observer at this time noted that Coatbridge is ' not famous for its sylvan beauties of its charming scenery ' and ' offers the visitor no inducements to loiter long ' . However , ' a visit to the large Gartsherrie works is one of the sights of a lifetime ' . 
 Most of the town 's population lived in tight rows of terraced houses built under the shadow of the iron works . These homes were often owned by their employers . Living conditions for most were appalling , tuberculosis was rife . 
 For a fortunate few though fortunes could be won ' with a rapidity only equalled by the princely gains of some of the adventurers who accompanied Pizarro to Peru ' , noted one observer . Among the most notable success stories were the six sons of Coatbridge farmer Alexander Baird . The Baird family had become involved in coal mining but opened an iron foundry in order to exploit the new hot blast process of iron smelting invented by James Beaumont Neilson . The Baird 's subsequently constructed numerous iron foundries in Coatbridge including the famous Gartsherrie iron works . The waste heap or ' <unk> ' from the Baird 's Gartsherrie works was said to be as large as the great pyramid in Egypt . One son , James Baird , was responsible for erecting sixteen blast @-@ furnaces in Coatbridge between 1830 and 1842 . Each of the six sons of Alexander Baird was reputed to have become a millionaire . 
 The town was vividly described by Robert Baird in 1845 : 
 In the 19th century , the Baird family wielded a pervasive influence over Coatbridge . They were responsible for the design of the lay out of present @-@ day Coatbridge town centre . The land for the Town Hall and the land which later came to form Dunbeth Park was given to the town by the Bairds . Gartsherrie church was built by the Baird family . The Bairds donated the site on the Main Street for the erection of St. Patrick 's Catholic Church . However , they also used patronage of the Orange Order to try and undermine the local trade union movement . 
 = = = 20th / 21st centuries = = = 
 By 1885 , the once plentiful Monklands ironstone deposits had been largely exhausted . It became increasing expensive to produce iron in Coatbridge as raw materials had to be imported from as far afield as Spain . The growth of the steel industry ( in nearby Motherwell ) had also led to a start of a decline in demand for the pig iron Coatbridge produced . Living conditions remained grim . In the 1920s Lloyd George 's ' Coal and Power ' report described the living conditions in the Rosehall area of Coatbridge : 
 George Orwell 's book The Road to Wigan Pier was illustrated by a photograph of homes in the Rosehall area of Coatbridge . In 1934 there was an exodus to Corby in England when the local Union Plant relocated . This had the effect of a hammer blow impact on the town 's iron industry and ushered in the end of serious iron production . The decline of the Clydeside shipbuilding industry in the 1950s meant the demand for iron finally collapsed . A legacy of ' devastating ' unemployment , appalling housing conditions and some of the worst overcrowding in Scotland left its stamp on the Coatbridge of the early 1930s . As late as 1936 Coatbridge was the most overcrowded place in Scotland . 
 In the 1930s and 1950s however massive programmes of state @-@ sponsored house building saw thousands of new homes built in Coatbridge and some of the worst examples of slum housing were cleared away . By the early 1980s 85 % of homes in Coatbridge were part of local authority housing stock . The last of the blast furnaces , William Baird 's famous Gartsherrie works , closed in 1967 . 
 Since the 1970s there have been various initiatives to attempt to regenerate Coatbridge . Urban Aid grants , European Union grants and , more recently , Social Inclusion Partnership 's have attempted to breathe new life into Coatbridge . Despite these efforts the town 's population has continued to fall and in recent years the town has been dubbed the ' most dismal in Scotland ' . 
 = = Geography = = 
 At 55 ° 51 ′ 44 ″ N 4 ° 1 ′ 46 ″ W ( 55 @.@ 861 ° , <unk> ° ) , Coatbridge is situated in Scotland 's Central Lowlands . The town lies 88 metres ( 288 ft ) above sea level , 9 miles ( 14 @.@ 5 km ) east of Glasgow , 6 miles ( 10 km ) south of Cumbernauld and 2 miles ( 3 km ) west of Airdrie . Although Coatbridge has no major river running through it , the North Calder Water runs east @-@ west to the south and the now defunct Monkland Canal used to run straight through the centre of the town toward Glasgow . The canal route through Coatbridge can still be seen today . There are also several smaller burns which run through Coatbridge , most of which drain to the North Calder Water . Coatbridge has four significant public parks . Dunbeth park , West End park , Whifflet park and Drumpellier Country park . Woodend and Witchwood Loch are situated on the north @-@ west edge of Coatbridge . 
 = = = Topography = = = 
 The topography of Coatbridge was an important feature in the towns development during the industrial revolution . Coatbridge rests 60 metres below the ' <unk> plateau ' which neighbouring Airdrie sits on the edge of . The low @-@ lying flat ground of Coatbridge was a vital factor in the siting of the towns ' blast furnaces and the Monkland Canal route . Although Airdrie was an already established town and had local supplies of ironstone , the Monkland Canal link did not extend into Airdrie because of its higher elevation . The Clyde Valley plan of 1949 described Coatbridge as ' situated over a flooded coalfield ' . Tenement buildings in Coatbridge were not built to the same level as Glasgow tenements due to danger of local subsidence from centuries of local mining . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 Dunbeth hill where the present local authority municipal buildings stand is a wedge of rock which was probably squeezed upwards by the force of two ( now @-@ extinct ) fault lines . There are the remains of spreads of glacial sands along the crest of Drumpellier , the west bank of Gartsherrie Burn and along modern day Bank Street . Kirkwood , Kirkshaws and <unk> sit on a sandstone capped ridge looking south over the Clyde Valley . The vital Coatbridge black band coal field extended from Langloan to beyond the eastern edge of the town . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Like much of the British Isles , Coatbridge experiences a temperate maritime climate with relatively cool summers and mild winters . The prevailing wind is from the west . Regular but generally light precipitation occurs throughout the year . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Coatbridge is the home of ' Scotland 's <unk> Museum ' , Summerlee Heritage Park , which contains an insight into the life in industrial Coatbridge . A row of 1900s @-@ 1960s cottages , a working tram line and a real coal mine can all be experienced on site . The park is situated on the remains of one of Coatbridge 's historic blast furnaces . In recent years there has been something of a cultural renaissance in the town , largely rooted in the St. Patrick 's Day Festival . 
 = = = Literature , theatre and film = = = 
 Janet Hamilton , the nineteenth century poet and essayist , died in Langloan in 1873 . Present @-@ day writers Anne Donovan ( Orange prize winner ) , Brian Conaghan ( the author of three novels The Boy Who Made it Rain ' ( 2011 ) ' When Mr Dog Bites ' ( 2014 ) and ' The Bombs That Brought Us Together ' ( 2016 ) ) and award @-@ winning author Des Dillon are all from Coatbridge . Coatbridge has regularly featured in Des Dillon 's work . Two of his books about Coatbridge have been turned into plays . 
 Mark Millar is a Coatbridge comic book writer whose Wanted comic book series has been translated into a feature film starring Angelina Jolie and Morgan Freeman , as well as the highly successful graphic novel <unk> which was adapted into the successful film of the same name in 2010 . Coatbridge born Dame Laurentia McLachlan was the Benedictine abbess of the <unk> Community whose correspondence with George Bernard Shaw and Sydney Cockerell was the subject of the film The Best of Friends . Coatbridge is also home to the annual Deep Fried Film Festival . Local filmmakers Duncan and Wilma Finnigan have been described by The List as ' the John Cassavetes and Gena Rowlands of Coatbridge ' . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Thomas McAleese ( alias Dean Ford ) was the lead singer of The Marmalade who had a UK number one single in 1969 with a cover of The Beatles ' ' Ob @-@ La @-@ Di , Ob @-@ La @-@ Da ' . Coatbridge brothers Greg Kane and Pat Kane are the band Hue and Cry . Coatbridge born Alan Frew is the ex @-@ pat lead singer of Canadian group Glass Tiger . Cha Burns ( deceased ) , <unk> O 'Neill and JJ Gilmour of The Silencers are from Coatbridge . Coatbridge sisters Fran and Anna were a famous duo on the Scottish traditional music scene . 
 = = = Coatbridge and Ireland = = = 
 Coatbridge is especially noted for its historical links with Ireland . This is largely due to large scale immigration into the town from Ulster ( especially from County Donegal ) in the 19th century and throughout most of the 20th century . Indeed , the town has been called ' little Ireland ' . 
 The most obvious manifestation of these links can be seen in the annual St. Patrick 's Day Festival . The festival is sponsored by the Irish Government and Guinness . The festival runs for over a fortnight and includes lectures , film shows , dance / Gaelic football competitions and music performances . The festival is the largest Irish celebration in Scotland . 
 = = = Coatbridge accent = = = 
 The Coatbridge accent has been categorised as making less use of the Scots tongue and exhibiting a tendency to stress the ' a ' vowel differently from general Scots usage . Examples of this are seen the pronunciation of the words stair ( <unk> ) , hair ( <unk> ) , fair ( <unk> ) and chair ( <unk> ) . This different enunciation has been attributed to the impact of successive influxes of Ulster Catholic immigrants into Coatbridge . However , the distinctiveness of the Coatbridge accent and pronunciation has diminished as the various surrounding populations ( especially Glasgow ) have mingled with that of Coatbridge . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Coatbridge 's local football team are Albion Rovers . Albion Rovers play in the Scottish Football League , and Cliftonhill is where they play their home games . The " Wee Rovers " were founded in 1882 when two local Coatbridge clubs , Rovers and Albion , amalgamated to form the club bearing the name . The club 's greatest success came in 1920 when they reached the final of the Scottish Cup at Hampden Park . Noted Albion Rovers players from the past have included Jock Stein , Bernie Slaven and Tony Green . Former Celtic players John Hughes , John McNamee , Gerry <unk> and Peter Grant are all from Coatbridge . Scottish football international Chris <unk> was born in Coatbridge . Another former player Alec Reid from Coatbridge went on to be a very successful DJ and entertainer and is very well known around the district . Coatbridge CC a local amateur club founded in 1976 became Scottish Champions in 1986 and again in 1988 , the club was founded by Jim McCann , Frank Webb , Gerry Gallagher , and Jim Dickson . The club started life in the Central Scottish Amateur league but moved to the Caledonian League in 1984 after reaching the Scottish cup final for the first time . They went on to win the Scottish cup in 1986 and in 1988 won both the Scottish cup and West of Scotland cup all finals played at Hampden Park . The club was managed by a number of Managers including Jim McCann and Gordon <unk> but Willie Cox and Coach Alfie Conn of Rangers and Celtic were the most successful winning three National Cups . 
 Drumpellier Cricket Club has been in continuous existence for around 150 years and the club have a ground in the Drumpellier area . 
 Greyhound and Speedway racing also took part in the town , using the Albion Rovers FC ground . Greyhound Racing began on 11 December 1931 and lasted until 1986 . The Edinburgh Monarchs rode there in 1968 @-@ 69 ( as the Coatbridge Monarchs ) after losing their track at Meadowbank Stadium to the developers for the 1970 Commonwealth Games . Glasgow Tigers moved from Hampden Park to Coatbridge in 1973 , and stayed there until June 1977 , when they were forced out by the greyhound racing . 
 The Coatbridge Indoor bowling club hosted the World Indoor Bowls Championships from 1979 until 1987 . 
