 The Supreme Court denied a number of Free Speech Clause claims throughout the 1920s , including the appeal of a labor organizer , Benjamin Gitlow , who had been convicted after distributing a manifesto calling for a " revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat " . In Gitlow v. New York ( 1925 ) , the Court upheld the conviction , but a majority also found that the First Amendment applied to state laws as well as federal laws , via the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment . Holmes and Brandeis dissented in several more cases in this decade , however , advancing the argument that the Free Speech Clause protected a far greater range of political speech than the Court had previously acknowledged . In Whitney v. California ( 1927 ) , in which Communist Party USA organizer Charlotte Anita Whitney had been arrested for " criminal syndicalism " , Brandeis wrote a dissent in which he argued for broader protections for political speech : 
 Those who won our independence . . . believed that freedom to think as you will and to speak as you think are means indispensable to the discovery and spread of political truth ; that without free speech and assembly discussion would be futile ; that with them , discussion affords ordinarily adequate protection against the dissemination of noxious doctrine ; that the greatest menace to freedom is an inert people ; that public discussion is a political duty ; and that this should be a fundamental principle of the American government . 
 In Herndon v. Lowry ( 1937 ) , the Court heard the case of African American Communist Party organizer Angelo Herndon , who had been convicted under the Slave Insurrection Statute for advocating black rule in the southern United States . In a 5 – 4 decision , the Court reversed Herndon 's conviction , upholding Holmes ' " clear and present danger " test for the first time and arguing that the state of Georgia had not demonstrated that Herndon 's actions met this standard . 
 In 1940 , Congress enacted the Smith Act , making it illegal to advocate " the propriety of overthrowing or destroying any government in the United States by force and violence " . The statute provided law enforcement a tool to combat Communist leaders . After Eugene Dennis was convicted in the Foley Square trial for attempting to organize a Communist Party , he petitioned for certiorari , which the Supreme Court granted . In Dennis v. United States ( 1951 ) , the Court upheld the law , 6 – 2 . Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson relied on Holmes ' " clear and present danger " test as adapted by Learned Hand : " In each case [ courts ] must ask whether the gravity of the ' evil ' , discounted by its improbability , justifies such invasion of free speech as necessary to avoid the danger . " Clearly , Vinson suggested , clear and present danger did not intimate " that before the Government may act , it must wait until the putsch is about to be executed , the plans have been laid and the signal is awaited . " In a concurring opinion , Justice Felix Frankfurter proposed a " balancing test " , which soon supplanted the " clear and present danger " test : 
 The demands of free speech in a democratic society as well as the interest in national security are better served by candid and informed weighing of the competing interests , within the confines of the judicial process . 
 In Yates v. United States ( 1957 ) , the Supreme Court limited the Smith Act prosecutions to " advocacy of action " rather than " advocacy in the realm of ideas " . Advocacy of abstract doctrine remained protected while speech explicitly inciting the forcible overthrow of the government was punishable under the Smith Act . 
 During the Vietnam War , the Court 's position on public criticism of the government changed drastically . Though the Court upheld a law prohibiting the forgery , mutilation , or destruction of draft cards in United States v. O 'Brien ( 1968 ) , fearing that burning draft cards would interfere with the " smooth and efficient functioning " of the draft system , the next year , the court handed down its decision in Brandenburg v. Ohio ( 1969 ) , expressly overruling Whitney v. California . Now the Supreme Court referred to the right to speak openly of violent action and revolution in broad terms : 
 [ Our ] decisions have fashioned the principle that the constitutional guarantees of free speech and free press do not allow a State to forbid or proscribe advocacy of the use of force or law violation except where such advocacy is directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action and is likely to incite or cause such action . 
 Brandenburg discarded the " clear and present danger " test introduced in Schenck and further eroded Dennis . In Cohen v. California ( 1971 ) , the Court voted 5 – 4 to reverse the conviction of a man wearing a jacket reading " Fuck the Draft " in the corridors of a Los Angeles County courthouse . Justice John Marshall Harlan wrote in the majority opinion that Cohen 's jacket fell in the category of protected political speech despite the use of an expletive : " one man 's vulgarity is another man 's lyric . " 
 = = = Political speech = = = 
 = = = = Anonymous speech = = = = 
 In Talley v. California ( 1960 ) , the Court struck down a Los Angeles city ordinance that made it a crime to distribute anonymous pamphlets . Justice Hugo Black wrote in the majority opinion : " There can be no doubt that such an identification requirement would tend to restrict freedom to distribute information and thereby freedom of expression . . . . Anonymous pamphlets , leaflets , brochures and even books have played an important role in the progress of mankind . " In McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission ( 1995 ) , the Court struck down an Ohio statute that made it a crime to distribute anonymous campaign literature . However , in Meese v. Keene ( 1987 ) , the Court upheld the Foreign Agents Registration Act of 1938 , under which several Canadian films were defined as " political propaganda " , requiring their sponsors to be identified . 
 = = = = Campaign finance = = = = 
 In Buckley v. <unk> ( 1976 ) , the Supreme Court reviewed the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 and related laws , which restricted the monetary contributions that may be made to political campaigns and expenditure by candidates . The Court affirmed the constitutionality of limits on campaign contributions , stating that they " serve [ d ] the basic governmental interest in safeguarding the integrity of the electoral process without directly impinging upon the rights of individual citizens and candidates to engage in political debate and discussion . " However , the Court overturned the spending limits , which it found imposed " substantial restraints on the quantity of political speech . " 
 The court again scrutinized campaign finance regulation in McConnell v. Federal Election Commission ( 2003 ) . The case centered on the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 ( BCRA ) , a federal law that imposed new restrictions on campaign financing . The Supreme Court upheld provisions which barred the raising of soft money by national parties and the use of soft money by private organizations to fund certain advertisements related to elections . However , the Court struck down the " choice of expenditure " rule , which required that parties could either make coordinated expenditures for all its candidates , or permit candidates to spend independently , but not both , which the Court agreed " placed an unconstitutional burden on the parties ' right to make unlimited independent expenditures . " The Court also ruled that the provision preventing minors from making political contributions was unconstitutional , relying on Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District . 
 In Federal Election Commission v. Wisconsin Right to Life , Inc . ( 2007 ) , the Court sustained an " as applied " challenge to BCRA , holding that issue ads may not be banned from the months preceding a primary or general election . In Davis v. Federal Election Commission ( 2008 ) , the Supreme Court declared the " Millionaire 's Amendment " provisions of the BCRA to be unconstitutional . The Court held that easing BCRA restrictions for an opponent of a self @-@ financing candidate spending at least $ 350 @,@ 000 of his or her own money violated the freedom of speech of the self @-@ financing candidate . 
 In Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission ( 2010 ) , the Court ruled that the BCRA 's federal restrictions on electoral advocacy by corporations or unions were unconstitutional for violating the Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment . The Court overruled Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce ( 1990 ) , which had upheld a state law that prohibited corporations from using treasury funds to support or oppose candidates in elections did not violate the First or Fourteenth Amendments . The Court also overruled the portion of McConnell that upheld such restrictions under the BCRA . In other words , the ruling was considered to hold that " political spending is a form of protected speech under the First Amendment " . 
 In McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission ( 2014 ) , the Court ruled that federal aggregate limits on how much a person can donate to candidates , political parties , and political action committees , combined respectively in a two @-@ year period known as an “ election cycle , ” violated the Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment . 
 = = = = Flag desecration = = = = 
 The divisive issue of flag desecration as a form of protest first came before the Supreme Court in Street v. New York ( 1969 ) . In response to hearing an erroneous report of the murder of civil rights activist James Meredith , Sidney Street burned a 48 @-@ star U.S. flag . Street was arrested and charged with a New York state law making it a crime " publicly [ to ] mutilate , deface , defile , or defy , trample upon , or cast contempt upon either by words or act [ any flag of the United States ] . " In a 5 – 4 decision , the Court , relying on Stromberg v. California ( 1931 ) , found that because the provision of the New York law criminalizing " words " against the flag was unconstitutional , and the trial did not sufficiently demonstrate that he was convicted solely under the provisions not yet deemed unconstitutional , the conviction was unconstitutional . The Court , however , " resist [ ed ] the pulls to decide the constitutional issues involved in this case on a broader basis " and left the constitutionality of flag @-@ burning unaddressed . 
 The ambiguity with regard to flag @-@ burning statutes was eliminated in Texas v. Johnson ( 1989 ) . In that case , Gregory Lee Johnson burned an American flag at a demonstration during the 1984 Republican National Convention in Dallas , Texas . Charged with violating a Texas law prohibiting the vandalizing of venerated objects , Johnson was convicted , sentenced to one year in prison , and fined $ 2 @,@ 000 . The Supreme Court reversed his conviction in a 5 – 4 vote . Justice William J. Brennan , Jr. wrote in the decision that " if there is a bedrock principle underlying the First Amendment , it is that government may not prohibit the expression of an idea simply because society finds the idea offensive or disagreeable . " Congress then passed a federal law barring flag burning , but the Supreme Court struck it down as well in United States v. <unk> ( 1990 ) . A Flag Desecration Amendment to the U.S. Constitution has been proposed repeatedly in Congress since 1989 , and in 2006 failed to pass the Senate by a single vote . 
 = = = = <unk> military awards = = = = 
 While the unauthorized wear or sale of the Medal of Honor has been a punishable offense under federal law since the early 20th century , the Stolen Valor Act made criminal the act of not only wearing , but also verbally claiming entitlement to military awards that a person did not in fact earn . In United States v. Alvarez ( 2012 ) , the Supreme Court struck down the Stolen Valor Act , ruling that the law violated the right to free speech for the government to punish people for making false claims regarding military service or honors . The decision was a 6 – 3 ruling , but the six justices in the majority could not agree on a single rationale for it . 
 = = = Commercial speech = = = 
 Commercial speech is speech done on behalf of a company or individual for the purpose of making a profit . Unlike political speech , the Supreme Court does not afford commercial speech full protection under the First Amendment . To effectively distinguish commercial speech from other types of speech for purposes of litigation , the Court uses a list of four indicia : 
 The contents do " no more than propose a commercial transaction " . 
 The contents may be characterized as advertisements . 
 The contents reference a specific product . 
 The disseminator is economically motivated to distribute the speech . 
 Alone , each <unk> does not compel the conclusion that an instance of speech is commercial ; however , " [ t ] he combination of all these characteristics . . . provides strong support for . . . the conclusion that the [ speech is ] properly characterized as commercial speech . " 
 In Valentine v. <unk> ( 1942 ) , the Court upheld a New York City ordinance forbidding the " distribution in the streets of commercial and business advertising matter . " Writing for a unanimous court , Justice Owen Roberts explained : 
 This court has unequivocally held that streets are proper places for the exercise of the freedom of communicating information and disseminating opinion and that , though the states and municipalities may appropriately regulate the privilege in the public interest , they may not unduly burden or proscribe its employment in their public thoroughfares . We are equally clear that the Constitution imposes no such restraint on government as respects purely commercial advertising . 
 In Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council ( 1976 ) , the Court overruled Valentine and ruled that commercial speech was entitled to First Amendment protection : 
 What is at issue is whether a State may completely suppress the dissemination of <unk> truthful information about entirely lawful activity , fearful of that information 's effect upon its <unk> and its recipients . . . . [ W ] e conclude that the answer to this one is in the negative . 
 In <unk> v. Ohio State Bar Association ( 1978 ) , the Court ruled that commercial speech was not protected by the First Amendment as much as other types of speech : 
 We have not discarded the " common @-@ sense " distinction between speech proposing a commercial transaction , which occurs in an area traditionally subject to government regulation , and other varieties of speech . To require a parity of constitutional protection for commercial and noncommercial speech alike could invite a dilution , simply by a leveling process , of the force of the [ First ] Amendment 's guarantee with respect to the latter kind of speech . 
 In Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission ( 1980 ) , the Court clarified what analysis was required before the government could justify regulating commercial speech : 
 Is the expression protected by the First Amendment ? Lawful ? Misleading ? Fraud ? 
 Is the asserted government interest substantial ? 
 Does the regulation directly advance the governmental interest asserted ? 
 Is the regulation more extensive than is necessary to serve that interest ? 
 Six years later , the U.S. Supreme Court , applying the Central Hudson standards in Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico ( 1986 ) , affirmed the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico 's conclusion that Puerto Rico 's Games of Chance Act of 1948 , including the regulations thereunder , was not facially unconstitutional . The lax interpretation of Central Hudson adopted by Posadas was soon restricted under 44 <unk> , Inc. v. Rhode Island ( 1996 ) , when the Court invalidated a Rhode Island law prohibiting the publication of liquor prices . 
 = = = School speech = = = 
 In Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District ( 1969 ) , the Supreme Court extended free speech rights to students in school . The case involved several students who were punished for wearing black armbands to protest the Vietnam War . The Court ruled that the school could not restrict symbolic speech that did not " materially and substantially " interrupt school activities . Justice Abe Fortas wrote : 
 First Amendment rights , applied in light of the special characteristics of the school environment , are available to teachers and students . It can hardly be argued that either students or teachers shed their constitutional rights to freedom of speech or expression at the schoolhouse gate . . . . [ S ] <unk> may not be enclaves of totalitarianism . School officials do not possess absolute authority over their students . Students . . . are possessed of fundamental rights which the State must respect , just as they themselves must respect their obligations to the State . 
 In Healy v. James ( 1972 ) , the Court ruled that Central Connecticut State College 's refusal to recognize a campus chapter of Students for a Democratic Society was unconstitutional , reaffirming Tinker . 
 However , since 1969 the Court has also placed several limitations on Tinker interpretations . In Bethel School District v. Fraser ( 1986 ) , the Court ruled that a student could be punished for his sexual @-@ innuendo @-@ laced speech before a school assembly and , in Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier ( 1988 ) , the Court found that school newspapers enjoyed fewer First Amendment protections and are subject to school censorship . In Morse v. Frederick ( 2007 ) , the Court ruled that schools could , consistent with the First Amendment , restrict student speech at school @-@ sponsored events , even events away from school grounds , if students promote " illegal drug use " . 
 = = = Obscenity = = = 
 The federal government and the states have long been permitted to limit obscenity or pornography . While the Supreme Court has generally refused to give obscenity any protection under the First Amendment , pornography is subject to little regulation . However , the definitions of obscenity and pornography have changed over time . 
 In Rosen v. United States ( 1896 ) , the Supreme Court adopted the same obscenity standard as had been articulated in a famous British case , Regina v. Hicklin ( 1868 ) . The Hicklin test defined material as obscene if it tended " to deprave or corrupt those whose minds are open to such immoral influences , and into whose hands a publication of this sort may fall " . In the early twentieth century , literary works including An American Tragedy ( Theodore Dreiser , 1925 ) and Lady Chatterley 's Lover ( D.H. Lawrence , 1928 ) were banned for obscenity . In the federal district court case United States v. One Book Called Ulysses ( 1933 ) , Judge John M. Woolsey established a new standard to evaluate James Joyce 's novel Ulysses ( 1922 ) , stating that works must be considered in their entirety , rather than declared obscene on the basis of an individual part of the work . 
 The Supreme Court ruled in Roth v. United States ( 1957 ) that the First Amendment did not protect obscenity . It also ruled that the Hicklin test was inappropriate ; instead , the Roth test for obscenity was " whether to the average person , applying contemporary community standards , the dominant theme of the material , taken as a whole , appeals to the prurient interest " . This definition proved hard to apply , however , and in the following decade , members of the Court often reviewed films individually in a court building screening room to determine if they should be considered obscene . Justice Potter Stewart , in <unk> v. Ohio ( 1964 ) , famously stated that , although he could not precisely define pornography , " I know it when I see it " . 
 The Roth test was expanded when the Court decided Miller v. California ( 1973 ) . Under the Miller test , a work is obscene if : 
 ( a ) . . . ‘ the average person , applying contemporary community standards ’ would find the work , as a whole , appeals to the prurient interest . . . ( b ) . . . the work depicts or describes , in a patently offensive way , sexual conduct specifically defined by the applicable state law , and ( c ) . . . the work , taken as a whole , lacks serious literary , artistic , political , or scientific value . 
 Note that " community " standards — not national standards — are applied whether the material appeals to the prurient interest , leaving the question of obscenity to local authorities . Child pornography is not subject to the Miller test , as the Supreme Court decided in New York v. Ferber ( 1982 ) and Osborne v. Ohio ( 1990 ) , ruling that the government 's interest in protecting children from abuse was paramount . 
 Personal possession of obscene material in the home may not be prohibited by law . In Stanley v. Georgia ( 1969 ) , the Court ruled that " [ i ] f the First Amendment means anything , it means that a State has no business telling a man , sitting in his own house , what books he may read or what films he may watch . " However , it is constitutionally permissible for the government to prevent the mailing or sale of obscene items , though they may be viewed only in private . Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition ( 2002 ) further upheld these rights by invalidating the Child Pornography Prevention Act of 1996 , holding that , because the act " [ p ] <unk> [ ed ] child pornography that does not depict an actual child " it was overly broad and unconstitutional under the First Amendment and that : 
 First Amendment freedoms are most in danger when the government seeks to control thought or to justify its laws for that impermissible end . The right to think is the beginning of freedom , and speech must be protected from the government because speech is the beginning of thought . 
 In United States v. Williams ( 2008 ) , the Court upheld the PROTECT Act of 2003 , ruling that prohibiting offers to provide and requests to obtain child pornography did not violate the First Amendment , even if a person charged under the Act did not possess child pornography . 
 = = = Memoirs of convicted criminals = = = 
 In some states , there are Son of Sam laws prohibiting convicted criminals from publishing memoirs for profit . These laws were a response to offers to David Berkowitz to write memoirs about the murders he committed . The Supreme Court struck down a law of this type in New York as a violation of the First Amendment in the case Simon & Schuster v. Crime Victims Board ( 1991 ) . That statute did not prohibit publication of a memoir by a convicted criminal . Instead , it provided that all profits from the book were to be put in escrow for a time . The interest from the escrow account was used to fund the New York State Crime Victims Board – an organization that pays the medical and related bills of victims of crime . Similar laws in other states remain unchallenged . 
 = = = Defamation = = = 
 American tort liability for defamatory speech or publications traces its origins to English common law . For the first two hundred years of American jurisprudence , the basic substance of defamation law continued to resemble that existing in England at the time of the Revolution . An 1898 American legal textbook on defamation provides definitions of libel and slander nearly identical to those given by William Blackstone and Edward Coke . An action of slander required the following : 
 <unk> words , such as those imputing the injured party : is guilty of some offense , suffers from a contagious disease or psychological disorder , is unfit for public office because of moral failings or an inability to discharge his or her duties , or lacks integrity in profession , trade or business ; 
 That the charge must be false ; 
 That the charge must be articulated to a third person , verbally or in writing ; 
 That the words are not subject to legal protection , such as those uttered in Congress ; and 
 That the charge must be motivated by malice . 
 An action of libel required the same five general points as slander , except that it specifically involved the publication of defamatory statements . For certain criminal charges of libel , such as seditious libel , the truth or falsity of the statements was immaterial , as such laws were intended to maintain public support of the government and true statements could damage this support even more than false ones . Instead , libel placed specific emphasis on the result of the publication . <unk> publications tended to " degrade and injure another person " or " bring him into contempt , hatred or ridicule " . 
 Concerns that defamation under common law might be incompatible with the new republican form of government caused early American courts to struggle between William Blackstone 's argument that the punishment of " dangerous or offensive writings . . . [ was ] necessary for the preservation of peace and good order , of government and religion , the only solid foundations of civil liberty " and the argument that the need for a free press guaranteed by the Constitution outweighed the fear of what might be written . Consequently , very few changes were made in the first two centuries after the ratification of the First Amendment . 
 The Supreme Court 's ruling in New York Times Co. v. Sullivan ( 1964 ) fundamentally changed American defamation law . The case redefined the type of " malice " needed to sustain a libel case . Common law malice consisted of " ill @-@ will " or " wickedness " . Now , a public officials seeking to sustain a civil action against a <unk> needed to prove by " clear and convincing evidence " that there was actual malice . The case involved an advertisement published in The New York Times indicating that officials in Montgomery , Alabama had acted violently in suppressing the protests of African @-@ Americans during the civil rights movement . The Montgomery Police Commissioner , L. B. Sullivan , sued the Times for libel , stating that the advertisement damaged his reputation . The Supreme Court unanimously reversed the $ 500 @,@ 000 judgment against the Times . Justice Brennan suggested that public officials may sue for libel only if the publisher published the statements in question with " actual malice " — " knowledge that it was false or with reckless disregard of whether it was false or not . " In sum , the court held that " the First Amendment protects the publication of all statements , even false ones , about the conduct of public officials except when statements are made with actual malice ( with knowledge that they are false or in reckless disregard of their truth or falsity ) . " 
 While actual malice standard applies to public officials and public figures , in Philadelphia Newspapers v. <unk> ( 1988 ) , the Court found that , with regard to private individuals , the First Amendment does " not necessarily force any change in at least some features of the common @-@ law landscape . " In Dun & Bradstreet , Inc. v. <unk> Builders , Inc . ( 1985 ) the Court ruled that " actual malice " need not be shown in cases involving private individuals , holding that " [ i ] n light of the reduced constitutional value of speech involving no matters of public concern . . . the state interest adequately supports awards of presumed and punitive damages — even absent a showing of ' actual malice . ' " In Gertz v. Robert Welch , Inc . ( 1974 ) , the Court ruled that a private individual had to prove actual malice only to be awarded punitive damages , but not to seek actual damages . In Hustler Magazine v. Falwell ( 1988 ) , the Court extended the " actual malice " standard to intentional infliction of emotional distress in a ruling which protected parody , in this case a fake advertisement in Hustler suggesting that evangelist Jerry Falwell 's first sexual experience had been with his mother in an outhouse . Since Falwell was a public figure , the Court ruled that " importance of the free flow of ideas and opinions on matters of public interest and concern " was the paramount concern , and reversed the judgement Falwell had won against Hustler for emotional distress . 
 In Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co . ( 1990 ) , the Court ruled that the First Amendment offers no wholesale exception to defamation law for statements labeled " opinion " , but instead that a statement must be <unk> false ( falsifiable ) before it can be the subject of a libel suit . Nonetheless , it has been argued that Milkovich and other cases effectively provide for an opinion privilege . In consequence a significant number of states have enacted state opinion privilege laws . 
 = = = Private action = = = 
 State constitutions provide free speech protections similar to those of the U.S. Constitution . In a few states , such as California , a state constitution has been interpreted as providing more comprehensive protections than the First Amendment . The Supreme Court has permitted states to extend such enhanced protections , most notably in <unk> Shopping Center v. Robins . In that case , the Court unanimously ruled that while the First Amendment may allow private property owners to prohibit trespass by political speakers and petition @-@ gatherers , California was permitted to restrict property owners whose property is equivalent to a traditional public forum ( often shopping malls and grocery stores ) from enforcing their private property rights to exclude such individuals . However , the Court did maintain that shopping centers could impose " reasonable restrictions on expressive activity " . Subsequently , New Jersey , Colorado , Massachusetts and Puerto Rico courts have adopted the doctrine ; California 's courts have repeatedly reaffirmed it . 
 = = = Freedom of the press = = = 
 The free speech and free press clauses have been interpreted as providing the same protection to speakers as to writers , except for wireless broadcasting which has been given less constitutional protection . The Free Press Clause protects the right of individuals to express themselves through publication and dissemination of information , ideas and opinions without interference , constraint or prosecution by the government . This right was described in <unk> v. Hayes as " a fundamental personal right " that is not confined to newspapers and periodicals . In Lovell v. City of Griffin ( 1938 ) , Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes defined " press " as " every sort of publication which affords a vehicle of information and opinion " . This right has been extended to media including newspapers , books , plays , movies , and video games . While it is an open question whether people who blog or use social media are journalists entitled to protection by media shield laws , they are protected equally by the Free Speech Clause and the Free Press Clause , because both clauses do not distinguish between media businesses and nonprofessional speakers . This is further shown by the Supreme Court consistently refusing to recognize the First Amendment as providing greater protection to the institutional media than to other speakers . For example , in a case involving campaign finance laws the Court rejected the " suggestion that communication by corporate members of the institutional press is entitled to greater constitutional protection than the same communication by " non @-@ institutional @-@ press businesses . 
 A landmark decision for press freedom came in Near v. Minnesota ( 1931 ) , in which the Supreme Court rejected prior restraint ( pre @-@ publication censorship ) . In this case , the Minnesota legislature passed a statute allowing courts to shut down " malicious , scandalous and defamatory newspapers " , allowing a defense of truth only in cases where the truth had been told " with good motives and for justifiable ends " . In a 5 – 4 decision , the Court applied the Free Press Clause to the states , rejecting the statute as unconstitutional . Hughes quoted Madison in the majority decision , writing , " The impairment of the fundamental security of life and property by criminal alliances and official neglect emphasizes the primary need of a vigilant and courageous press " . 
 However , Near also noted an exception , allowing prior restraint in cases such as " publication of sailing dates of transports or the number or location of troops " . This exception was a key point in another landmark case four decades later : New York Times Co. v. United States ( 1971 ) , in which the administration of President Richard Nixon sought to ban the publication of the Pentagon Papers , classified government documents about the Vietnam War secretly copied by analyst Daniel Ellsberg . The Court found , 6 – 3 , that the Nixon administration had not met the heavy burden of proof required for prior restraint . Justice Brennan , drawing on Near in a concurrent opinion , wrote that " only governmental allegation and proof that publication must inevitably , directly , and immediately cause the occurrence of an evil kindred to imperiling the safety of a transport already at sea can support even the issuance of an interim restraining order . " Justices Black and Douglas went still further , writing that prior restraints were never justified . 
 The courts have rarely treated content @-@ based regulation of journalism with any sympathy . In Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo ( 1974 ) , the Court unanimously struck down a state law requiring newspapers criticizing political candidates to publish their responses . The state claimed that the law had been passed to ensure journalistic responsibility . The Supreme Court found that freedom , but not responsibility , is mandated by the First Amendment and so it ruled that the government may not force newspapers to publish that which they do not desire to publish . 
 Content @-@ based regulation of television and radio , however , have been sustained by the Supreme Court in various cases . Since there is a limited number of frequencies for non @-@ cable television and radio stations , the government licenses them to various companies . However , the Supreme Court has ruled that the problem of scarcity does not allow the raising of a First Amendment issue . The government may restrain broadcasters , but only on a content @-@ neutral basis . In Federal Communications Commission v. Pacifica Foundation , the Supreme Court upheld the Federal Communications Commission 's authority to restrict the use of " indecent " material in broadcasting . 
 State governments retain the right to tax newspapers , just as they may tax other commercial products . Generally , however , taxes that focus exclusively on newspapers have been found unconstitutional . In Grosjean v. American Press Co . ( 1936 ) , the Court invalidated a state tax on newspaper advertising revenues , holding that the role of the press in creating " informed public opinion " was vital . Similarly , some taxes that give preferential treatment to the press have been struck down . In Arkansas Writers ' Project v. Ragland ( 1987 ) , for instance , the Court invalidated an Arkansas law exempting " religious , professional , trade and sports journals " from taxation since the law amounted to the regulation of newspaper content . In Leathers v. Medlock ( 1991 ) , the Supreme Court found that states may treat different types of the media differently , such as by taxing cable television , but not newspapers . The Court found that " differential taxation of speakers , even members of the press , does not implicate the First Amendment unless the tax is directed at , or presents the danger of suppressing , particular ideas . " 
 In <unk> v. Hayes ( 1972 ) , the Court ruled that the First Amendment did not give a journalist the right to refuse a subpoena from a grand jury . The issue decided in the case was whether a journalist could refuse to " appear and testify before state and Federal grand juries " basing the refusal on the belief that such appearance and testimony " abridges the freedom of speech and press guaranteed by the First Amendment " . The 5 – 4 decision was that such a protection was not provided by the First Amendment . However , a concurring opinion by Justice Lewis F. Powell , in which he stated that a claim for press privilege " should be judged on its facts by the striking of a proper balance between freedom of the press and the obligation of all citizens to give relevant testimony with respect to criminal conduct . The balance of these vital constitutional and societal interests on a case @-@ by @-@ case basis accords with the tried and traditional way of adjudicating such questions . " , has been frequently cited by lower courts since the decision . 
 = = Petition and assembly = = 
 The Petition Clause protects the right " to petition the government for a redress of grievances " . This includes the right to communicate with government officials , lobbying government officials and petitioning the courts by filing lawsuits with a legal basis . The Petition Clause first came to prominence in the 1830s , when Congress established the gag rule barring anti @-@ slavery petitions from being heard ; the rule was overturned by Congress several years later . Petitions against the Espionage Act of 1917 resulted in imprisonments . The Supreme Court did not rule on either issue . 
 In California Motor Transport Co. v. Trucking Unlimited , 404 U.S. 508 ( 1972 ) , the Supreme Court stated that the right to petition encompass " the approach of citizens or groups of them to administrative agencies ( which are both creatures of the legislature , and arms of the executive ) and to courts , the third branch of Government . Certainly the right to petition extends to all departments of the Government . The right of access to the courts is indeed but one aspect of the right of petition . " Today thus this right encompasses petitions to all three branches of the federal government — the Congress , the executive and the judiciary — and has been extended to the states through incorporation . According to the Supreme Court , " redress of grievances " is to be construed broadly : it includes not solely appeals by the public to the government for the redressing of a grievance in the traditional sense , but also , petitions on behalf of private interests seeking personal gain . The right not only protects demands for " a redress of grievances " but also demands for government action . The petition clause includes according to the Supreme Court the opportunity to institute non @-@ frivolous lawsuits and mobilize popular support to change existing laws in a peaceful manner . 
 In Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri ( 2011 ) , the Supreme Court stated regarding the Free Speech Clause and the Petition Clause : 
 It is not necessary to say that the two Clauses are identical in their mandate or their purpose and effect to acknowledge that the rights of speech and petition share substantial common ground . . . . Both speech and petition are integral to the democratic process , although not necessarily in the same way . The right to petition allows citizens to express their ideas , hopes , and concerns to their government and their elected representatives , whereas the right to speak fosters the public exchange of ideas that is integral to deliberative democracy as well as to the whole realm of ideas and human affairs . Beyond the political sphere , both speech and petition advance personal expression , although the right to petition is generally concerned with expression directed to the government seeking redress of a grievance . 
 The right of assembly was originally distinguished from the right to petition . In United States v. Cruikshank ( 1875 ) , the Supreme Court held that " the right of the people peaceably to assemble for the purpose of petitioning Congress for a redress of grievances , or for anything else connected with the powers or duties of the National Government , is an attribute of national citizenship , and , as such , under protection of , and guaranteed by , the United States . The very idea of a government , republican in form , implies a right on the part of its citizens to meet peaceably for consultation in respect to public affairs and to petition for a redress of grievances . " Justice Morrison Waite 's opinion for the Court carefully distinguished the right to peaceably assemble as a secondary right , while the right to petition was labeled to be a primary right . Later cases , however , paid less attention to these distinctions . 
 In two 1960s decisions collectively known as forming the <unk> @-@ Pennington doctrine , the Court established that the right to petition prohibited the application of antitrust law to statements made by private entities before public bodies : a monopolist may freely go before the city council and encourage the denial of its competitor 's building permit without being subject to Sherman Act liability . 
 = = Freedom of association = = 
 Although the First Amendment does not explicitly mention freedom of association , the Supreme Court ruled , in National Association for the Advancement of Colored People v. Alabama ( 1958 ) , that this freedom was protected by the Amendment and that privacy of membership was an essential part of this freedom . The U.S. Supreme Court decided in Roberts v. United States Jaycees ( 1984 ) that " implicit in the right to engage in activities protected by the First Amendment " is " a corresponding right to associate with others in pursuit of a wide variety of political , social , economic , educational , religious , and cultural ends " . In Roberts the Court held that associations may not exclude people for reasons unrelated to the group 's expression , such as gender . 
 However , in Hurley v. Irish @-@ American Gay , Lesbian , and Bisexual Group of Boston ( 1995 ) , the Court ruled that a group may exclude people from membership if their presence would affect the group 's ability to advocate a particular point of view . Likewise , in Boy Scouts of America v. Dale ( 2000 ) , the Court ruled that a New Jersey law , which forced the Boy Scouts of America to admit an openly gay member , to be an unconstitutional abridgment of the Boy Scouts ' right to free association . 
 = Idlewild and Soak Zone = 
 Idlewild and Soak Zone , commonly known as Idlewild Park or simply Idlewild , is a children 's amusement park situated in the Laurel Highlands near Ligonier , Pennsylvania , United States , about 50 miles ( 80 km ) east of Pittsburgh , along US Route 30 . Founded in 1878 as a campground along the Ligonier Valley Railroad by Thomas Mellon , Idlewild is the oldest amusement park in Pennsylvania and the third oldest operating amusement park in the United States behind Lake <unk> and Cedar Point . The park has won several awards , including from industry publication Amusement Today as the best children 's park in the world . 
 The park was established by the prominent Mellon family in 1878 , and remained family @-@ owned for over 100 years . It expanded greatly throughout the first half of the 20th century , adding rides including a Philadelphia Toboggan Company Rollo Coaster in 1938 , one of the company 's earliest . The park is home to the Ligonier Highland Games , a Scottish athletic and cultural festival that has annually drawn over 10 @,@ 000 spectators . In 1983 , the park was purchased by Kennywood Entertainment Company , which oversaw additional expansion , including an attraction designed and voiced by Fred Rogers based on his television show Mister Rogers ' Neighborhood . Since 2008 , the park , as well as others formerly under Kennywood Entertainment , have been owned by Spanish company Parques <unk> and operated by their American subsidiary Palace Entertainment . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Ligonier Valley Railroad : 1878 – 1952 = = = 
 On April 15 , 1853 , the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania granted a charter for a railroad to haul coal and timber between the towns of Ligonier and Latrobe . For nearly twenty years , Latrobe and Ligonier Rail Road Company performed no work on the railroad , and renewed their charter in 1866 and 1869 . Following an additional renewal in 1871 , the company changed its name to the Ligonier Valley Railroad and acquired a 10 @.@ 3 miles ( 16 @.@ 6 km ) stretch of land . Land grading and bridge construction for the narrow gauge line was mostly completed by 1873 . 
 In 1875 , the partially constructed railway was sold at a sheriff 's sale after the Pennsylvania Railroad , the Latrobe terminus of the line , declined to assume financial responsibility . Thomas Mellon , a retired Court of Common Pleas judge from Allegheny County , purchased the Ligonier Valley Railroad at auction . Mellon had founded the T. Mellon and Sons Bank , and was invested in coal , steel , oil , glassmaking , and other railroad ventures . In an effort to attract passengers , Mellon decided to offer recreational grounds along the route . 
 On May 1 , 1878 , William Darlington , landowner and namesake of the nearby village of Darlington , responded to Mellon 's request to use his land : 
 Dear Sir : 
 In compliance with your request , I will and do hereby agree to grant to the Ligonier Valley Rail Road Company the right and privilege to occupy for picnic purposes or pleasure grounds that portion of land in Ligonier Township , Westmoreland County as follows – the strip or piece of ground lying between the railway and the creek and extending from the old cornfield to <unk> run – also two or three acres on the opposite side of the creek adjoining near the same . Without compensation in the shape of rent for three years from the first of April 1878 provided no timber or other trees are to be cut or injured – the underbrush you may clear out if you wish to do so . 
 Yours respectfully , 
 Wm . M. Darlington 
 The first structure , built that year , was a train depot measuring 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) by 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) . The depot was described as the smallest full @-@ service station in the United States . Initial development of the land included camp sites , an artificial lake for fishing and boating , picnic tables , and a large hall . The railroad provided easy access to the site , attracting visitors from 50 miles ( 80 km ) away in Pittsburgh and the surrounding areas for a getaway in the country . The Ligonier Echo noted that on July 4 , 1890 , the trains to the park were so crowded that the " tops of the coaches were covered with boys . " 
 While the initial lease with Darlington confined the park to between the railroad and the north bank of the Loyalhanna Creek , permission was later granted for construction of a bridge across the river , allowing expansion to the south in the mid @-@ 1880s . Three lakes , Woodland , St. Clair , and Bouquet , were dug between 1880 and 1896 . In 1896 , the park added a T.M. <unk> Company steam carousel in the center of the park . The Pittsburgh @-@ based company was a major manufacturer of carousels and roller coasters . By the end of the 19th century , attractions at the park included a bicycle track around Lake Bouquet , a hiking trail on the lake 's island , fishing in the Loyalhanna Creek , <unk> , and many walks and gardens . The park had dining halls , auditoriums , pavilions , a boathouse , an amphitheater , a bandstand , and athletic facilities . 
 In 1931 , Judge Mellon 's son Richard B. Mellon , brother of Andrew Mellon , and C. C. Macdonald acquired the park under a partnership known as the Idlewild Management Company . The first season under the financial support of Mellon and the management of Macdonald and his family brought electricity to the park , allowing for later operating hours and electric @-@ powered rides , including a three @-@ row Philadelphia Toboggan Company carousel . The park also debuted a den of black bears that year . The bears were across the path from a cage of monkeys , who escaped in 1932 . Park management offered a reward of $ 3 each ( $ 52 each in 2016 ) for the return of the seven monkeys , believing that they had been set loose . R. Z. Macdonald later said that his father , C. C. , was always amused and pleased with the publicity that the escape created , though he never formally accused his father . 
 The Macdonalds sought to maintain the park 's natural beauty , planting 10 @,@ 000 shrubs in the first year , and thousands of trees during the 1930s . In the first few years , the park added a circle swing , a Whip , a miniature railroad , and in 1938 , the Philadelphia Toboggan Company Rollo Coaster . World War II and the resulting rationing forced the park to close in 1943 . Upon reopening in 1946 , the park added the Caterpillar and a small showboat that sailed in Lake Bouquet . 
 = = = Macdonald family : 1952 – 1983 = = = 
 The Macdonald family obtained complete ownership of the park in 1951 . After leaving Idlewild , the Mellon family also abandoned the Ligonier Valley Railroad , in decline after the closing of area coal mines and decreased passenger traffic . The railroad ceased operations in 1952 . Although the park originally depended on the railroad , its closing had no effect . In 1913 , the Lincoln Highway had been established as the first cross @-@ country auto route , stretching from Times Square , New York City , to Lincoln Park , San Francisco . It passed directly by Idlewild on what is now U.S. Route 30 . As automobile traffic to the park increased , several parking lots and a Gulf Oil gas station , a Mellon company , were added in the 1930s . 
 Under the Macdonalds , the park continued to expand . Kiddieland was constructed between 1954 and 1956 , and featured many smaller version of rides meant for children . Some of the rides included miniature boats , a Ferris wheel , <unk> , and pony rides . 
 Clinton " Jack " Macdonald became president of the park in 1957 . In 1959 , Macdonald and Lewis Davidson , a bagpipe director at the Carnegie Institute of Technology , started the Ligonier Highland Games , a Scottish highland games event held at the park . During the same year that he assumed control of the park , Macdonald was appointed as the first commissioner of the Scottish Clan Donald for Pennsylvania . The games , held annually in early September after the park had closed for the summer , became one of the largest and most highly regarded Scottish athletic and cultural competitions in the country . Jack Macdonald said of the Games : " We 're not interested in becoming one of the biggest Games . We just want to be one of the nicest . " 
 The park sustained heavy damage when the remnants of Hurricane Agnes dropped 14 inches ( 360 mm ) of rain on the area in 24 hours in June 1972 . Lake St. Clair and Lake Bouquet , merging in the resulting flood , caused significant damage to the boathouse . The flood lifted and twisted the park 's Loyalhanna Limited Railroad , which required extensive repairs . 
 = = = Kennywood era : 1983 – 2007 = = = 
 On January 27 , 1983 , Kennywood Park Corporation of West Mifflin , Pennsylvania , near Pittsburgh , bought the park from the Macdonald family for a reported price of $ 1 @.@ 8 million . [ 1 ] Ironically both Kennywood and Idlewild were founded as amusement parks by the Mellon family . During the first winter , several changes occurred . Jumpin ' Jungle , a children 's play area , was added . Story Book Forest was no longer run as a separate operation and was merged with the rest of the park . What had been Historic Village was relocated and renamed . 
 As the popularity of <unk> increased , the <unk> Zone was added in 1985 . In 1989 , the park expanded across the Loyalhanna Creek by adding a trolley ride based on Mister Rogers ' Neighborhood , a popular children 's television show . The ride was designed and voiced by children 's entertainer Fred Rogers , a native of Latrobe . The area was expanded the following year to include Raccoon Lagoon , an area for children . A Ferris wheel , Tilt @-@ A @-@ Whirl and a water raft ride were added by the end of the 1980s , along with games , new food stands and restaurants . 
 The 1990s brought the addition of the Wild Mouse , the only Wild Mouse roller coaster designed by Dutch company Vekoma . The roller coaster was built in 1985 and had previously operated at Wiener Prater in Austria and Alton Towers in England , before opening at Idlewild in 1993 . Kennywood continued the Macdonald tradition of offering large @-@ scale entertainment , presenting circuses , lumberjack and acrobatics shows , and stage performances at the new Hillside Theater . A large picnic area with several log pavilions and game fields was added in 1999 . In the early years of the 21st century , additions to the waterpark doubled its size and led to a new name , Idlewild and Soak Zone . 
 = = = Palace Entertainment , since 2008 = = = 
 Kennywood Entertainment , itself an operator of a family @-@ owned park , had acquired other family @-@ owned and operated parks after its purchase of Idlewild in 1983 . Kennywood 's owners rejected offers by larger companies to purchase the group , such as one in 1997 by Premier Parks , the company that acquired the Six Flags franchise a year later . Kennywood refused the Premier offer and others on grounds that the new owners would make too many changes to the existing parks . However , on December 11 , 2007 , Kennywood Entertainment announced that it would sell its parks to the Madrid @-@ based amusement company , Parques <unk> . The fourth- and fifth @-@ generation family ownership of Kennywood ensured that with the transaction all of the company 's parks would experience few changes and that day @-@ to @-@ day park operations would remain local . 
 In December 2009 , Idlewild announced that the Royal <unk> Circus would perform at the park during the 2010 season , for the first time since 1997 . 
 For the 2011 season , the park announced that they would replace their swimming pool — built in 1931 — with a $ 2 million wave pool . The project will be the largest capital improvement undertaken by the park . The pool will be zero @-@ entry to a maximum 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) deep and hold 280 @,@ 600 <unk> . 
 During interim time between the 2013 and 2014 seasons , it was announced that the park had permanently closed their popular attraction , Mr. Rogers ' Neighborhood of Make @-@ Believe . The attraction will be re @-@ themed , in coordination with The Fred Rogers Company to the much more relevant and popular spin @-@ off of the classic children 's program Mr. Rogers ' Neighborhood , Daniel Tiger 's Neighborhood . The re @-@ themed attraction opened for 2015 season . 
 = = = Location = = = 
 The park is situated alongside U.S. Route 30 , also historically known in Pennsylvania as the Lincoln Highway , the first US transcontinental highway . The region surrounding the park is the Laurel Highlands , and the park sits in the foothills of the Laurel Ridge . 
 The region was prominent in the French and Indian War with Fort Ligonier located just 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) away . On November 12 , 1758 , volunteers led by George Washington marched from Ligonier to aid George Mercer and his troops . At night in heavy fog , the two units mistook one another for the enemy and exchanged fire . Thirteen soldiers and one lieutenant were killed . Realizing the mistake , Washington ran amongst both groups , shouting and raising the men 's rifles into the air . Washington later wrote of the incident that he never felt in more danger in his life . Though the location had never been entirely verified , in Images of America : Idlewild , author Jeffrey S. <unk> acknowledges the opinion that the event took place in a section of Idlewild that was previously a wooded area known as the Woodlands . 
 = = Attractions = = 
 = = = Olde Idlewild = = = 
 Olde Idlewild is centered on the park 's Philadelphia Toboggan Company Carousel built in the 1920s and brought to Idlewild in 1931 . The Carousel 's music is provided by two band organs : an Artizan Style D ( fitted with a Wurlitzer roll frame as Wurlitzer rolls are more common than Artizan rolls ) and a Wurlitzer <unk> . The music of these two organs , which are played on a regularly alternating basis , can be heard throughout Olde Idlewild and the lower parking areas . Olde Idlewild contains many of the park 's traditional amusement rides . On the parking lot side of the Merry @-@ Go @-@ Round is the wooden Rollo Coaster , built by Philadelphia Toboggan in 1938 with lumber from the park , using a sawmill built nearby specifically for the project . The American Coaster Enthusiasts named the Rollo Coaster a " Classic Coaster " . Sitting in the trees adjacent to the Loyalhanna Creek is the Wild Mouse , added in 1993 . The Wild Mouse was built by Vekoma and operated at Alton Towers in Staffordshire , England , before being moved to Idlewild in 1993 . The <unk> , along with the Flying Aces added in 2007 , also surround the Merry @-@ Go @-@ Round . 
 Another group of rides in Olde Idlewild is located around the park 's <unk> , added in 1931 . Surrounding the <unk> is the Balloon Race , Paratrooper , Ferris wheel , and Spider . Below the Paratrooper on the north bank of the Loyalhanna are the Whip , built in 1938 , the Super Round Up , and the Tilt @-@ A @-@ Whirl . 
 Olde Idlewild contained a Caterpillar ride until 2013 . Built in 1947 , Idlewild 's model was one of three similar rides still in operation in North America , one of two featuring a working canopy that covers the riders , and the only one that still utilized an undercarriage fan . The ride was removed to be refurbished and returned in the future . 
 = = = <unk> ' Holler = = = 
 In 1976 , the Historic Village was built to commemorate the United States Bicentennial . Modeled after a typical 19th century Western town , the area included a general store , blacksmith and wood shops , sheriff 's office and jail , newspaper office , saloon and restaurant . 
 In 1984 , Historic Village was relocated from near the gates to the center of the park , and renamed <unk> ' Holler . The area contains Confusion Hill , a themed walkthrough tour with optical illusions . The park 's 2 ft ( 610 mm ) narrow gauge Loyalhanna Limited Railroad train ride crosses the Loyalhanna Creek to Raccoon Lagoon and back . The area 's newest rides are the <unk> , a spinning ride modeled like a tornado , and Paul Bunyan 's <unk> ' Toboggan , a log flume ride . 
 = = = Soak Zone = = = 
 The location of the Soak Zone was originally an island known as Flower Island , until part of the surrounding lake was filled in . Under previous names it was called the <unk> Zone and later Dr. Hydro 's Soak Zone . The area originally consisted of just the pool and bathhouse , until slides were first added in 1985 . A raft ride , Rafter 's Run , was added the next year . The water park has since been expanded to include body slides , inner @-@ tube slides , a slide with foam mats , and many features for children , including a miniature pool and Captain Kidd 's Adventure Galley , a play area added in 2006 . The swimming pool was replaced by a wave pool in 2011 . The addition was the park 's single @-@ largest capital improvement . For the 2013 season the park added a lazy river and an expanded beach area . 
 = = = Jumpin ' Jungle = = = 
 Added in 1983 , Jumpin ' Jungle is an interactive play area for both children and adults . The area includes many attractions such as a ball pit , slides , climbing nets , and a suspension bridge . Added in 2008 , Bigfoot 's <unk> gets its name from Westmoreland County 's reputation for the most sightings in Pennsylvania of Bigfoot , an alleged ape @-@ like creature said to inhabit remote forests . 
 = = = Raccoon Lagoon = = = 
 The park 's <unk> area , Raccoon Lagoon , was added in 1989 , after originally opening in a different location in 1954 . The 9 @-@ acre ( 3 @.@ 6 ha ) area devoted to children @-@ oriented rides is one of the largest in the United States . Also in Raccoon Lagoon was Mister Rogers ' Neighborhood of Make @-@ Believe . Built in 1989 , the 3 ft ( 914 mm ) narrow gauge trolley ride was designed specifically for Idlewild by local native Fred Rogers and is based on his popular children 's television show . Prior to the 2014 season , it was announced that the ride would be re @-@ themed in coordination with the Fred Rogers Company to their modern children 's show , Daniel Tiger 's Neighborhood , based on the original series . The newly enhanced attraction , now named the Daniel Tiger 's Neighborhood Trolley Ride , re @-@ opened in 2015 . 
 = = = Story Book Forest = = = 
 Arthur Jennings , who portrayed the clown " Happy <unk> " in the park during the 1950s , was an accomplished engineer who approached park management about creating Story Book Forest , a theme park based on " emotion rather than motion " . Jennings did much of the work himself , including life @-@ sized models of fairy tales . The park , originally separate from Idlewild , opened in 1956 . Story Book Forest featured many attractions such as a pirate ship , a castle , and many live storybook characters . The entrance to the Forest is a giant storybook which reads " Here is the Land of Once Upon a Time ... Step through the pages of this big Story Book ... and visit the people and places every child knows ... and Loves . Here dreams are real ... and so are your Story Book friends . " Now incorporated with the rest of the park , Story Book Forest celebrated its 50th anniversary in 2006 . 
 = = = Ligonier Highland Games = = = 
 The Ligonier Highland Games is a highland games event that takes place in early September . The events primarily take place at Idlewild , while some events also take place in nearby Greensburg . Competitions include heavy athletics such as the caber toss , stone put , and weight and hammer throw . Other competitions in music include highland dancing , solo and band piping , drumming , Scottish fiddling , and Scottish harp . Vendors sell related items such as authentic tartans , bagpipes , and jewellery . While initially attracting crowds of 1 @,@ 200 , the festival now records average attendances near 10 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 Idlewild and Soak Zone is the oldest operating amusement park in Pennsylvania , third oldest in the United States , and twelfth oldest in the world . In 2010 , the park earned the " Golden Ticket " award from trade magazine Amusement Today as the best children 's park in the world . It was recognized again as the best in the category in 2011 , 2012 , and 2013 . The park previously received Golden Tickets for the fifth @-@ best children 's area in 2006 and 2007 and second @-@ best children 's park for the sixth consecutive year in 2009 . The National Amusement Park Historical Association recognized Idlewild as the best park for families in 2010 , 2011 , and 2012 , having previously named it the fourth @-@ best park in 2005 , second in 2006 , fourth again in 2007 and 2008 , and third in 2009 . The park was once named " America 's Most Beautiful Theme Park " . 
 = September 1964 South Vietnamese coup attempt = 
 Before dawn on September 13 , 1964 , the ruling military junta of South Vietnam , led by General Nguyễn Khánh , was threatened by a coup attempt headed by Generals Lâm Văn Phát and Dương Văn Đức , who sent dissident units into the capital Saigon . They captured various key points and announced over national radio the overthrow of the incumbent regime . With the help of the Americans , Khánh was able to rally support and the coup collapsed the next morning without any casualties . 
 In the immediate month leading up the coup , Khánh 's leadership had become increasingly troubled . He had tried to augment his powers by declaring a state of emergency , but this only provoked large @-@ scale protests and riots calling for an end to military rule , with Buddhist activists at the forefront . Fearful of losing power , Khánh began making concessions to the protesters and promised democracy in the near future . He also removed several military officials closely linked to the discriminatory Catholic rule of the slain former President Ngô Đình Diệm ; this response to Buddhist pressure dismayed several Catholic officers , who made a few abortive moves to remove him from power . 
 In part because of pressure from Buddhist protests , Khánh removed the Catholics Phát and Đức from the posts of Interior Minister and IV Corps commander , respectively . They responded with a coup supported by the Catholic @-@ aligned Đại Việt Quốc dân đảng , as well as General Trần Thiện Khiêm , a Catholic who had helped Khánh to power . Having captured the radio station , Phát then made a broadcast promising to revive Diệm 's policies . Khánh managed to evade capture and , during the first stage of the coup , there was little activity as most senior officers failed to support either side . Throughout the day , Khánh gradually rallied more allies and the U.S. remained supportive of his rule and pressured the rebels to give up . With the backing of Air Marshal Nguyễn Cao Kỳ , commander of the Vietnam Air Force , and General Nguyễn Chánh Thi , Khánh was able to force Phát and Đức to capitulate the next morning , September 14 . Đức , Kỳ and Thi then appeared at a media conference where they denied that any coup had taken place and put on a choreographed display of unity , claiming that nobody would be prosecuted over the events . 
 Convinced that Khiêm was involved in the plot , Khánh had him exiled to Washington as ambassador , and eased General Dương Văn Minh out of the political scene , thereby removing the other two nominal members of the ruling triumvirate . However , concerned that Kỳ and Thi had become too powerful , Khánh had Phát and Đức acquitted at their military trial in an attempt to use them as political counterweights . Despite his survival , the coup was seen by the historian George McTurnan Kahin as the start of Khánh 's ultimate political decline . Due to the intervention of Kỳ and Thi , Khánh was now indebted to them , and in an attempt to maintain his power in the face of increasing military opposition , he tried to court support from Buddhist civilian activists , who supported negotiations with the communists to end the Vietnam War . As the Americans were strongly opposed to such policies , relations with Khánh became increasingly strained and he was deposed in February 1965 with US connivance . 
 = = Background = = 
 General Nguyễn Khánh had come to power in January 1964 after surprising the ruling junta of General Dương Văn Minh in a pre @-@ dawn operation , taking control without firing a shot . Because of American pressure , he retained the popular Minh as a token head of state , while holding the real power by controlling the Military Revolutionary Council ( MRC ) . In August , the Vietnam War expanded with the Tonkin Gulf incident , a disputed encounter between North Vietnamese and American naval vessels ; Washington accused the communists of launching an attack in international waters . 
 Khánh saw the tense situation as an opportunity to increase his power . On August 7 , he declared a state of emergency , giving the police the ability to search properties under any circumstances , ban protests and arbitrarily jail " elements considered as dangerous to national security " . He further enacted censorship to stop " the circulation of all publications , documents , and leaflets considered as harmful to public order " . Khánh produced a new constitution , known as the Vũng Tàu Charter , which would have augmented his personal power at the expense of the already @-@ limited Minh . However , this only served to weaken Khánh as large demonstrations and riots in the cities broke out — with the majority Buddhists prominent — calling for an end to the state of emergency and the new constitution , as well as a progression back to civilian rule . 
 Fearing he could be toppled by the intensifying protests , Khánh met with Buddhist leaders . They asked him to repeal the new constitution , reinstate civilian rule , and remove Cần Lao Party — a secret Catholic body used by former President Ngô Đình Diệm to infiltrate and control all aspects of society — members from power , and Khánh agreed . General Trần Thiện Khiêm claimed " Khánh felt there was no choice but to accept since the influence of Trí Quang was so great that he could not only turn the majority of the people against the government but could influence the effectiveness of the armed forces . " Khánh publicly promised to reformulate the Vũng Tàu Charter , allow protests and liberalize the press . This encouraged more demonstrations by activists , and Khánh responded with wider concessions . Under the new arrangements , the new constitution would be repealed , and the MRC would disband . Khánh also promised to create an elected legislature within a year . 
 Many senior officers , particularly the Catholic Generals Khiêm and Nguyễn Văn Thiệu , decried what they viewed as a handing of power to the Buddhist leaders . They tried to remove Khánh in favor of Minh , and recruited many officers to their plot . Khiêm and Thieu sought out US Ambassador Maxwell Taylor for a private endorsement of their plan , but Taylor did not want any more changes in leadership , fearing a corrosive effect on the already @-@ unstable government . This deterred Khiêm 's group from acting on their plans . 
 The division among the generals came to a head at a meeting of the MRC on August 26 – 27 . Khánh said the instability was due to troublemaking by members and supporters of the Catholic @-@ aligned Đại Việt Quốc dân đảng ( Nationalist Party of Greater Vietnam ) , whom he accused of putting partisan plotting ahead of the national interest . Prominent officers associated with the Đại Việt included Thieu and Khiêm . Khiêm blamed Khánh 's weakness in dealing with Buddhist activists for the demonstrations in the cities and the rural losses to the communists . Thieu and another Catholic General Nguyễn Hữu Có called for the replacement of Khánh with Minh , but the latter refused . Minh claimed that Khánh was the only one who would get funding from Washington , so they should support him , prompting Khiêm to angrily say " Obviously , Khánh is a puppet of the US government , and we are tired of being told by the Americans how we should run our internal affairs . " Feeling pressured by the strong condemnations of his colleagues , Khánh promised to resign , but no replacement was agreed upon and another meeting was convened . 
 After more arguing between the senior officers , they agreed that Khánh , Minh , and Khiêm would rule as a triumvirate for two months , until a new civilian government could be formed . However , because of their disunity , the trio did little . Khánh dominated the decision @-@ making and sidelined Khiêm and Minh . The US military commander in Vietnam William Westmoreland deplored the concessions Khánh made to political opponents and lobbied Washington for permission to attack North Vietnam , saying that Khánh could not survive without it . 
 = = Coup = = 
 At the start of September 1964 , General Lâm Văn Phát was dismissed as Interior Minister , while General Dương Văn Đức was about to be removed as IV Corps commander . Both were removed partly due to pressure from Buddhist activists , who accused Khánh of accommodating too many Catholic Diệm supporters in leadership positions . Diệm had tried to use the loyalist Phát to help thwart the November 1963 coup , but the rebels managed to sideline Diệm 's general and execute the president . Disgruntled by their demotions , Phát and Đức launched a coup attempt before dawn on September 13 , having recruited ten army battalions . They gained the support of Colonel Lý <unk> Bá , the head of the 7th Division 's armored section , and Colonel Dương Hiếu Nghĩa , a tank commander who had been one of Diệm 's assassins . It appeared at this stage that the coup was supported by Catholic and Đại Việt elements . Another member of the conspiracy was Colonel Phạm Ngọc Thảo , who while a Catholic , was a communist spy trying to maximize infighting at every possible opportunity . 
 Đức and Phát 's plot was supported during the planning phase by Defense Minister and triumvirate member Khiêm . General Huỳnh Văn Cao , a Catholic and Diệm loyalist while the former president was alive , claimed in a 1972 newspaper interview that Khiêm — by then prime minister — had asked him to join the coup . Cao said he had declined Khiêm 's invitation , mildly mocking him by asking " You 're part of the ' Troika ' now ... won 't you be overthrowing yourself ? " Cao said he had pointed out that political upheaval in Saigon would be a bad idea because Vietnam was prominent during the ongoing US presidential election campaign and negative publicity could lead to a decrease in American public and political support for South Vietnam . 
 Four battalions of rebel troops moved before dawn from the Mekong Delta towards Saigon , using armored personnel carriers and jeeps carrying machine guns . After <unk> several police checkpoints on the edge of the capital with threats of machine @-@ gun and artillery fire , the plotters put rebel sentries in their place to seal off Saigon from incoming or outgoing traffic . They then captured communication facilities in the capital , including the post office , to prevent messages from being sent in or out . As his troops took over the city , Phát sat in a civilian vehicle and placidly said " We 'll be holding a press conference in town this afternoon at 4 p.m. " He said " This is nothing to worry about . Just a little operation against some politicians . " The rebels set up their command post in the Saigon home of General Duong Ngoc Lam , who had been removed from his post as Mayor of Saigon by Khánh . Lam had commanded the Civil Guard during Diệm 's presidency and was one of his trusted supporters . 
 The rebels took over the city without any gunfire , and used the national radio station to make a broadcast . Claiming to represent " The Council for the Liberation of the Nation " , Phát proclaimed a regime change , and accused Khánh of promoting conflict within the nation 's military and political leadership . He promised to capture Khánh and pursue a policy of increased anti @-@ communism , with a stronger government and military . Phát said he would use the ideology and legacy of Diệm to lay the foundation for his new junta . Đức claimed the coup attempt was prompted by " the transfer to the capital of some neutralist elements , and by some pro @-@ communists in the government " . According to the historian George McTurnan Kahin , Phát 's broadcast was " triumphant " and may have prompted senior officers who were neither part of the original conspiracy nor fully loyal to Khánh to conclude that Phát and Đức would not embrace them if they abandoned Khánh . 
 In contrast to Phát 's serene demeanor , his incoming troops prompted devotees at the Catholic cathedral — who were attending mass — to run away in fear . The Buddhists however , made no overt reaction to the pro @-@ Diệm coup , even though the former president had pursued policies that discriminated against them . There was little reaction from most of the military commanders . The Vietnam Air Force commander Air Marshal Nguyễn Cao Kỳ had promised a fortnight earlier to use his aircraft against any coup attempt , but he took no action early in the morning . At the same time , Khiêm and Thieu 's lack of public action was seen as implicit support for the coup , as their criticism of Khánh 's leadership in junta meetings and private attempts to remove him were well @-@ known . A US Embassy report to the State Department during the coup described Thieu and Khiêm as being " so passive that they appear to have been either tacitly supporting or associated with this move by Đức and Phát " . 
 Some time later , Kỳ called in troops serving on Saigon 's outskirts to come to Tan Son Nhut Air Base , the largest in the country and the headquarters of the military . He barricaded the soldiers into defensive positions and vowed a " massacre " if rebels attacked the base . A stand @-@ off ensued between rebel tanks and loyalist troops around the perimeter of the base , but it petered out without any violence after the rebels stepped back . Kỳ had apparently been angered by comments made by a rebel source who claimed that he was part of the coup attempt . Kỳ was also well known for his hawkish attitude and close relations with the American military presence in Vietnam , and US opposition to the putsch was thought to have been quickly conveyed to him . 
 Phát and Đức could not apprehend Khánh , who had escaped the capital and flown to the Central Highlands resort town of Da Lat . Their forces stormed Khánh 's office and captured his duty officers but could not find the junta leader . There was then a lull in the movement of troops and units . One Vietnamese public servant said that " All these preparations are the result of a big misunderstanding on both sides . I don 't think either group will start anything , but both think the other will . " Taylor was on an emergency flight from Honolulu — where he had been in meetings with senior American military figures — back to Saigon and he said the coup " certainly was unannounced and unheralded . " In the mid @-@ afternoon Khánh made a radio broadcast on a loyalist system , condemning the coup and calling on the military to remain loyal , claiming that support for the " rebellious leaders " would play into the hands of the Viet Cong . 
 = = = U.S. intervention = = = 
 Some U.S. advisers serving with units involved in the coup were driven off by rebel officers who did not want interference . The plotters thought the Americans would disapprove of their actions , as Taylor had recently talked of an " upward trend " in the war against the communists , while President Lyndon Johnson praised the " continued progress " against the Viet Cong . During the early hours of the coup , officials in Washington remained guarded in public , saying they were monitoring the situation and calling for calm , without explicitly supporting either side . Despite this , they did hint at a preference for the status quo : " hope that consultations among the leadership will shortly permit the Government to restore the situation in the city to normal " . Behind the scenes , they used the respective American military advisers to lobby unit leaders against participating in the coup . 
 U.S. officials flew after Khánh to encourage him to return to Saigon and reassert his control . The general refused to do so unless the Americans publicly announced their support for him . The Americans then asked Khánh about his plans for the future , but felt that his answers betrayed a lack of direction . After talking to Phát and Đức , they concluded the same , so they decided to back the incumbent and made a press release through the embassy endorsing Khánh . Their decision was augmented by the rebels ' inability to land a decisive blow , making the Americans more favorable to a continuation of Khánh 's rule . The Voice of America broadcast a message emphasizing ongoing U.S. support for Khánh and opposition to the coup . It said the Americans had been monitoring the situation closely and that the incumbent regime was functioning ; it further said : 
 The United States Government fully supports this duly constituted Government . The United States Government deplores any effort to interfere with this Government 's program of convening a supreme national council to reorganize the structure of the Government on lines commanding broad participation by all important elements of the population . 
 At the same time , anonymous U.S. sources told journalists that the coup was concerning even if it failed , due to its destabilizing effects . Khánh also requested to General William Westmoreland , the commander of American forces in Vietnam , that U.S. Marines come to his aid , and called for the Americans to formulate a " counter @-@ plan " for him . Although no U.S. forces made landfall , marines were placed just offshore near Saigon and Da Nang in readiness . 
 = = = Coup collapse = = = 
 The U.S. announcement of support for Khánh helped to deter ARVN officers from joining Phát and Đức , who decided to give up . Westmoreland had spoken to Đức and reported to Washington that he " in no uncertain terms ... informed him [ Đức ] that MACV , the U.S. Mission , and the U.S. Government did not support in any way his move , [ and ] advised that he get his troops moved out of town [ Saigon ] immediately . He said that he understood and thanked me . He seemed to be a shaky and insecure young man . " Đức mistakenly thought that Kỳ and his subordinates would be joining the coup , but he later realized his misjudgement . When he found out he had been tricked into thinking the plotters had great strength , he gave up . According to an anonymous source , Đức was alarmed by Phát 's strong statements during his radio broadcast , which made him reconsider his participation in the coup . 
 Brigadier General Nguyễn Chánh Thi of the 1st Division also supported Khánh . A CIA log of the coup proceedings said Thieu and Khiêm " issued expressions of firm support for Khánh somewhat belatedly " . Kỳ then decided to make a show of force as Phát and Đức began to wilt , and he sent jets to fly low over Saigon and finish off the rebel stand . They circled continuously but never actually fired . He also sent two C @-@ 47s to Vũng Tàu to pick up two companies of South Vietnamese marines who had remained loyal to Khánh . Several more battalions of loyal infantry were transported into Saigon . Phát then withdrew with his forces to Mỹ Tho , the base of the 7th Division . In the early hours of September 14 , before dawn , Kỳ met senior coup leaders after inviting them to Tan Son Nhut and told them to back down , which they did . 
 Loyalist forces regained control of the radio station and broadcast an announcement claiming control and ordering students and public servants to go about their normal lives . In the meantime , air force planes continued to set off flares to show their alertness , and rocket launchers and more weapons were deployed around Tan Son Nhut . Three battalions of paratroopers were brought in to patrol the airfield 's perimeter . 
 = = Media conference = = 
 As the coup collapsed , Kỳ and Đức appeared with other senior officers at a news conference where they proclaimed that the South Vietnamese military was united . They announced a resolution by the armed forces , signed by them and seven others , claiming a united front against corruption . Apart from Kỳ and Đức , the other seven signatories were Thi , General Cao Văn Viên , an airborne brigade commander , the commander of I Corps General Tôn Thất <unk> , the commander of the Marine Brigade General Lê Nguyên Khang , General Nguyen Đức Thang of the General Staff , the commander of the Republic of Vietnam Navy Admiral Chung Tấn Cang , and the commander of the Rangers Colonel Pham Xuan <unk> . 
 The officers claimed the events in the capital were misinterpreted by observers , as " there was no coup " . Kỳ said Khánh was in complete control and that the senior officers involved in the stand @-@ off " have agreed to rejoin their units to fight the Communists " , naming Đức , Phát , Lam and commander of the 7th Division Huynh Van Ton . Đức claimed that the leading officers had agreed : 
 To put an end to attempts of the Viet Cong to seize power in South Vietnam 
 To purge all Viet Cong elements and their " puppets " out of Government agencies and the ranks of the administration 
 To build a unified nation without distinction based on religion 
 To have the Government treat its citizens impartially 
 Đức further commented that fair treatment of citizens was the only way to defeat the communists . When asked if he now supported Khánh , Đức , " looking ill with weariness , if nothing else " , simply nodded in agreement . Kỳ also claimed that no further action would be taken against those who were involved with Đức and Phát 's activities . 
 After Khánh was again secure in Saigon , he said " I am very moved by the spirit of unity shown by the armed forces and population when faced with the threat of internal strife . I commend the patriotism of all the soldiers who knew how to put the higher interests of the nation above all else . " Khánh said he would relinquish power and return to a purely military rule in two months time , but reneged on an earlier explicit promise to guarantee a purely civilian government , simply stating that the new regime would be one " that has the confidence of the entire people " . The Soviet Union said the coup " demonstrated once again on what a rotten foundation Washington 's policy in South Vietnam is based " . 
 = = Arrests = = 
 Despite Kỳ and Đức 's media event , it appeared that Phát and Ton were remaining defiant after returning to the latter 's 7th Division 's headquarters in Mỹ Tho . Ton was apparently still maintaining a hostile political stance , and threatening to break away from the Saigon regime by overseeing the area around Mỹ Tho as a virtual independent state . Ton was reported to have threatened to cut the main highway from Saigon into Mỹ Tho and further south into the rest of the Mekong Delta , although it was thought he had no intention or means of assaulting Saigon militarily . Kỳ said a helicopter had been sent to arrest Ton but that a stand @-@ off had developed . However , on September 16 Khánh had the plotters taken into custody . Đức , the rebel tank commander Nghia , Ton , and Lam were all arrested , followed by Phát , who returned to Saigon to turn himself in . A trial was then scheduled . Khánh removed three of the four corps commanders and six of the nine division commanders for failing to move against Phát and Đức . 
 = = Power shift = = 
 Kỳ and Thi 's role in putting down the coup attempt gave them more leverage in Saigon 's military politics . <unk> to Kỳ , Thi , and the youthful clique of officers dubbed the Young Turks for helping him stay in power , Khánh was now in a weaker position . Kỳ 's group called on Khánh to remove " corrupt , dishonest and counterrevolutionary " officers , civil servants and " <unk> " , and threatened to remove him if he did not enact their proposed reforms , as " the people and the armed forces will be compelled to make a second revolution " . This was interpreted as a thinly veiled warning to Khánh that the younger officers were intent on holding significant power through the military apparatus , contrary to any plans for civilian rule . 
 Kỳ specifically said nine or ten other officers should be dismissed for involvement in the coup , but refused to identify who he had in mind . Some observers accused Kỳ and Thi of deliberately orchestrating or allowing the plot to develop before putting it down in order to embarrass Khánh and allow themselves to gain prominence and prestige on the political stage . In later years , Cao Huy Thuan , a professor and Buddhist activist based in the northern town of Da Nang , claimed that during a meeting with Kỳ and Thi a few days before the coup , the officers had discussed their plans for overthrowing Khánh . Another conspiracy claim was propagated by General Trần Văn Đôn , who conjectured that Khánh had tried to provoke or bait rival generals , such as Khiêm , into revolting against him so he could defeat and remove them from the scene , thereby strengthening himself and boosting his political image . 
 The communists were pleased by the coup , as the South Vietnamese military was wasting its resources and energy on infighting . They did not make any attacks in the days immediately after the coup as they were worried their doing so might galvanize the divided society into action against a common cause . 
 = = Retribution and trial = = 
 Following the coup , Khánh concluded that his triumvirate partner Khiêm had played a major role in fomenting the coup and insisted he be sent out of Saigon . The Americans agreed and Ambassador Taylor organized for Khiêm to be made Saigon 's representative in Washington . Soon after , Thao was dispatched to join Khiêm as his press attaché . During the coup , Minh had remained aloof from the proceedings , angering Khánh and keeping their long @-@ running rivalry going . By the end of October , the Johnson administration had become more supportive of Taylor 's negative opinion of Minh and concluded that US interests would be optimized if Khánh prevailed in the power struggle . As a result , the Americans eventually paid for Minh to go on a " good will tour " so he could be pushed off the political scene without embarrassment . 
 In the middle of October , Phát and 19 others were put on trial in a military court ; observers predicted Phát would be the only one to face the death penalty , and that this would be reduced to a custodial term . Of the accused , 7 were civilians and 13 were military officers . They tried to appear confident and waved to family and friends . Đức told the assembled media the trial was unfair , stating " I believe in the supreme court of conscience " . He then pointed to his subordinate officers and called them " national heroes " . He denied media speculation he had backed down during the coup to avoid being bombed by Kỳ , claiming " I wanted to avoid bloodshed ... I am very proud of my decision " . 
 Phát 's lawyers started by asking for the charges against the conspirators to be dismissed , claiming the rebels had not been captured " red @-@ handed " , but this request was denied . They were more successful in another demand , managing to persuade the five military judges to allow witnesses to be called . The court agreed to their request to compel Khánh , Kỳ and the civilian Deputy Prime Minister Nguyễn Xuân <unk> to appear before the hearing . The accused officers claimed to have only intended to make a show of force , rather than overthrow Khánh . Đức claimed that the objective of his actions was to " emphasize my ideas " and said his actions did not constitute a coup attempt . Đức said that if he was intending to overthrow the government , he would have arrested public servants or military officials and denied having done so . On the other hand , he also admitted to being concerned by Khánh 's policies . Đức said he had decided to end what he regarded as a military protest demonstration when Khánh promised to consider his concerns , and then returned to the IV Corps headquarters in the Mekong Delta . He claimed responsibility for the actions of his subordinate and co @-@ accused , Colonel Ton , who led the 7th Division of IV Corps into Saigon . Ton agreed that Đức had ordered him to move his troops into the capital . During questioning , Đức did not refer to his coup partner Phát . 
 Asked why he had denounced Khánh as a " traitor " in a radio broadcast during the coup attempt , Phát said he had merely " gotten excited " . Phát was asked about the collapse of his coup attempt and he discussed his visit to the American Embassy along with labor union leader Tran Quoc Buu on the evening of September 13 . He said his discussion with Deputy Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson was " not too important " and played down its impact , claiming that Johnson 's perfunctory use of French had limited any talks he would have wanted to have . This was contradicted by Buu , who told journalists that the discussion with Johnson had lasted for around 90 minutes . Of the civilians arrested , Buu was the most prominent . He was accused of involvement in trying to overthrow the regime because he had been involved in the meeting between Phát and Johnson . Buu acknowledged that he organized the meeting but said he was not involved in any plans for a leadership change . He claimed that US Embassy officials had phoned him during the coup to ask him to order his union members to refrain from agitating on industrial relations matters during the physically dangerous period . He said he then offered to arrange a meeting for the Americans with the coup leaders to see if a non @-@ violent solution to the stand @-@ off could be found . Buu said he was not acting in a partial manner and did not listen to Johnson 's discussion with Phát . The Americans agreed with Buu 's claims and privately thought he had been arrested for staging labor union activities and demonstrations unrelated to the military power struggle . 
 One week later , on October 24 , the charges were dropped . Khánh then gave Đức and Phát two months of detention for indiscipline ; their subordinates were incarcerated for shorter periods . According to Kahin , Khánh rigged the military trial so that Đức and Phát were acquitted so they could be used as a Catholic counterweight to the Young Turks faction of Kỳ and Thi , who in Khánh 's eyes had become increasingly strong and ominous . Khánh also tried to build an alliance with the " Da Lat Generals " — so @-@ called as he had put them under house arrest there after toppling them in the January 1964 coup — by recalling them to active roles . 
 On November 14 , Khánh brought back Don as the deputy chief of staff , and installed fellow Da Lat General Tôn Thất Đính as his assistant . However , the Young Turks were cognizant of Khánh 's motives , and continued to pressure him to sideline Don and Dinh in an attempt to gain more power for themselves . For his part , realizing his political base within the junta was precarious , Khánh had to seek more popular support . According to Kahin , " in what was strictly a marriage of convenience " , Khánh had to try to ameliorate the only large civilian political force in South Vietnam , the Buddhist activists , who publicly called for a negotiated end to the war . This was regarded by Kahin as the start of Khánh 's ultimate political downfall , as the Americans were resolutely opposed to any coexistence with the communists and their relations with Khánh declined steadily from then onwards . In December , Khánh and Taylor had an angry exchange after the junta dissolved the consultative High National Council , leading both men to call for the other to leave the country and prompting Khánh to repeatedly denounce the ambassador in the media . Khánh was eventually deposed in February 1965 by Kỳ and Thi with the backing , encouragement and some organizational help from the Americans . 
 = The Boat Race 1974 = 
 The 120th Boat Race took place on 6 April 1974 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . It was won by Oxford who passed the finishing post five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths ahead of Cambridge , in a winning time of 17 minutes 35 seconds , the fastest in the history of the race , beating the existing record set in the 1948 race . It was umpired by Ran Laurie . 
 In the reserve race , Goldie beat Isis , and in the Women 's Boat Race , Cambridge were victorious . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having beaten Oxford by a thirteen lengths in the previous year 's race . Cambridge held the overall lead , with 67 victories to Oxford 's 51 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Up until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 During preparation for the race , both crews were defeated on the Thames by the <unk> Laboratory boat from Imperial College London . Jim Railton , writing in The Times was not impressed : " It has already been well established that there are no top class crews in this ... Boat Race . Each day on the Tideway in the final days of training have simply produced more negatives " . Cambridge also lost twice in short races against their reserve crew Goldie , whom Oxford had defeated at the Reading University Head of the River Race by eight seconds . In appalling conditions , Cambridge won an interrupted race against a Barclays Bank crew . Meanwhile , Oxford defeated a " motley eight " from Tideway Scullers School by four lengths along the full course . Oxford 's finishing coach was Daniel Topolski while Cambridge were guided by British Olympic rower David Jennens , and the race was umpired by Ran Laurie , who had rowed for Cambridge in the 1934 , 1935 and 1936 races . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew was marginally heavier than their opponents , weighing an average of 13 st 5 @.@ 25 lb ( 84 @.@ 7 kg ) , 0 @.@ 25 pounds ( 0 @.@ 1 kg ) per rower more than Oxford . Oxford saw four Blues return to their crew , Nick Tee , Sam Nevin , Dennis Payne and American Olympian David Sawyier , while Cambridge welcomed back two – Ben Duncan and Howard Jacobs . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station . Oxford took an early lead with their stroke Sawyier making a good start . Despite this , by the Mile Post , Oxford were just one @-@ third of a length clear , and while Cambridge 's stroke rate was lower than their Dark Blue opposition , they remained in contention . By Hammersmith Bridge , Oxford held a two @-@ length lead , and despite favourable wind and ride , Cambridge failed to respond . At Chiswick Steps , the lead had extended to four lengths and by Barnes Bridge it was five . Oxford passed the finishing post in a record @-@ breaking time of 17 minutes 35 seconds , breaking the existing record from the 1948 race , five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths clear of the Light Blues . Railton commented : " Tideway records reflect conditions more than comparisons with previous Boat Race crews " but noted " considering the slow conditions ... Oxford 's performance must have been particularly inspired . " The winning time was two seconds faster than the best time over the course , set by Oxford in practice in 1965 , and 15 seconds quicker than the race record , set in the 1948 race by Cambridge . 
 In the reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie beat Oxford 's Isis by five lengths , their seventh consecutive victory . In the 28th running of the Women 's Boat Race , Cambridge triumphed , their eleventh consecutive victory . 
 = Salvatore A. Cotillo = 
 Salvatore Albert Cotillo ( November 19 , 1886 – July 27 , 1939 ) was an Italian @-@ born New York lawyer , Democratic Party politician and judge . Elected in 1912 , he was the first Italian @-@ American to serve in both houses of the New York State Legislature and the first who served as Justice of the New York State Supreme Court . Nominated to the court in the First District , he sat on the bench from 1924 until his death in 1939 . 
 Cotillo was a strong proponent of social and pro @-@ labor legislation . He defended ethnic Italians against the stereotyping by Americans not of Italian descent , but also urged the need for Americanization of the Italian community . As such , he stood between the mores of the Italian ethnic ghetto in East Harlem where he grew up , and the judgment and norms of American society where he made his career . 
 = = From Naples to New York = = 
 Born in Naples , Italy , he came to the United States in 1895 with his parents at the age of nine . His father Francesco Cotillo , had been a caterer in Naples . The family originally came from Avellino ( Montella ) , in the hinterland of Naples . The family settled in East Harlem in East 113th Street among the increasing numbers of Italian immigrants . His father took up catering again and opened a popular pastry and confectionery shop . He has been credited with introducing the Italian ice cream <unk> into the United States . 
 The oldest of four children , the young Salvatore did not speak English and went to Public School 83 and later to DeWitt Clinton High School and Manhattan College . During those formative years he worked in the family 's pastry shop , where intellectuals of the neighborhood gathered in the evening to discuss social and political issues with his father . Those debates gave birth to Cotillo 's early social consciousness that formed the basis of his adult devotion to social reform legislation . The young Cotillo was passionate about baseball and became a New York Giants fan . In return for free tickets he used to clean the stadium seats . 
 In 1911 he completed a law degree from Fordham University and was admitted to the New York State bar in 1912 . As a young attorney Cotillo had to distance himself from the local underworld that incorporated many members of the Camorra from Naples who tried to impose their " services " . When the so @-@ called King of Little Italy , the Camorra boss <unk> Gallucci , was arrested for carrying concealed weapons , Cotillo was asked to testify as a character witness on his behalf , but refused . Cotillo felt that Gallucci looked at others as if they " were either hirelings or payers of tribute . " According to Cotillo " it was a matter of concern in the neighborhood if you were looked down upon by Gallucci . " Despite the temptation of attractive fees , he refused to help men of Gallucci 's disposition to secure gun permits . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 Cotillo 's early law practice included a lot of uncompensated charity for the neighborhood . Apart from a genuine social compassion , Cotillo was also building political alliances that would make it possible for him to use the Italian @-@ American voter power as his Irish @-@ American forerunners in New York were using the power of other immigrant groups . 
 With his father , Cotillo was among the co @-@ founders of a political club called the Tomahawk Democratic Club that took on the Tammany Hall political machine supporting Nicholas J. Hayes , putting forward Henry H. Lazarus as his opponent . The fight was ruthless , with both sides harassing the other 's speakers . Lazarus got beaten in the electoral contest , but Cotillo , supported by the Italian @-@ American vote , made a deal with Hayes that gave Little Italy a political foothold in the city . " I want to help my people , " he said explaining his switch , " and can do so only with the backing of those in power . " 
 In 1913 , at the age of 27 , he became the first Italian @-@ born assemblyman . When Cotillo arrived in the New York State Assembly in Albany that year , the powerful ethnic Irish State Senator " Big Tim " Sullivan observed : " Mark my words , it is the beginning of the Italian era in politics . Watch them . " 
 <unk> would be elected to office from Italian East Harlem between 1912 and 1922 . Raised in the ghetto , he was chosen by the largely Italian neighborhood and continued to depend upon their political support throughout his political career . He was a member of the New York State Assembly ( New York Co . , 28th District ) in 1913 , 1915 and 1916 . He drew support from the Citizens Union and was identified for two notable pieces of legislation ; pensions for widows and the Workmen 's <unk> Law . He advocated for women 's suffrage , gun control , the end of the death penalty and school lunch programs . 
 = = New York senator = = 
 He was a member of the New York State Senate from 1917 to 1923 . He served the 20th District in the 140th and 141st New York State Legislature and represented the 18th District in the 142nd , 143rd , 144th , 145th and 146th New York State Legislatures . In March 1918 , Cotillo opposed the proposed prohibition of alcohol in the state . Although he believed in temperance , he doubted if that would be achieved by prohibition ; he advocated education and not infringing on civil liberties . 
 In May 1918 , he was sent to Italy by President Woodrow Wilson to make a study of the economic conditions of that country during World War I in order to provide information for economic relief programs and encourage the Italians to continue the war effort after the disastrous defeat at Caporetto . As a representative of the Committee on Public Information , he spent most of the year in Italy and won the praise of President Wilson . He also received the decoration of Grand Officer of the Italian Crown from King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy . 
 From mid @-@ June to the end of September of 1918 Cotillo traveled around Italy , meeting officials and politicians , giving interviews to the press and addressing large crowds . His efforts in Italy were reported by the press and Italian language newspapers at home in the U.S .. When he returned to New York , Cotillo had risen from a largely unknown local politician to achieve public stature and become a leader of the Italian community . Based on this experience he wrote the book “ Italy During the World War ” , published in 1922 . 
 = = Social reforms = = 
 Back from Italy and in the New York State Senate , he fought hard for the regulation of informal immigrant banks and banking agents that handled money transfers abroad , an issue of significant importance to his Italian constituency who were often swindled from their remittances to their families in Italy . Cotillo ’ s 1921 banking reform bill , which placed express companies and steamship agencies that transferred money abroad under the supervision of the New York State Banking Department , annoyed powerful interests of such companies as Wells Fargo and the Cunard Lines . He received death threats and offers of bribes to drop the legislation he had introduced in the Senate . During the hearings on Cotillo ’ s bill in March 1921 , a devastating crash of the <unk> Brothers immigrant bank in lower Manhattan left 2 @,@ 000 angry depositors with losses of more than three million dollars . As a result , four bills that regulated the sector were signed into law on May 1 , 1921 . 
 Cotillo was member of the Joint Legislative Committee on Housing , also known as the Lockwood Committee because it was headed by Charles C. Lockwood . The committee investigated renting and building conditions in the City of New York and ended a spate of rent @-@ raising as a result of the housing shortage after World War I. The group found that the housing conditions at the time constituted a serious menace to public health in New York since some 400 @,@ 000 persons were directly affected by the scarcity of affordable dwellings and the poor quality of the existing ones . Later he was the chairman of New York state commission to investigate child welfare , and a member of the Joint Legislative Committee to Investigate Exploitation of Immigrants ( 1923 – 24 ) . 
 As the foremost force on the Child Welfare Commission , concerned with issues of custody , orphanage , child support , and state wardship and institutions , Cotillo pushed a comprehensive reform through the legislature with the support of the social @-@ welfare advocate Sophie Irene Loeb and the Hearst newspapers . His biographer , Nat Ferber , a former Hearst reporter , considered the reform to be " the outstanding achievement of Cotillo 's career " . 
 = = Troublesome relationship with Italian Fascism = = 
 Cotillo was a Grand Master of the Order Sons of Italy in America ( OSIA ) and after World War I actively propagated the nationalist cause of Italian control over Fiume , despite President Wilson 's denial of the Italian claims to the Adriatic port . In the 1920s Cotillo tried to ease the rising tension between Italian @-@ American Fascists and anti @-@ Fascists by taking a stance between the two . In 1923 , he went to Rome to meet Benito Mussolini . He was impressed and described Mussolini as a " commanding element of the highest order " . He vowed to correct the image of Mussolini and Fascism , but also cautioned his Italian @-@ American countrymen saying that the American way was to be preferred above Fascism . 
 Pro @-@ Fascists opposed the assimilation policies of Cotillo , who had become Grand Venerable of the New York State branch of OSIA in 1921 and had started an ambitious English language program as a means for upward mobility of the Italian @-@ American community . According to Cotillo , Fascism as a movement was " out of place in the United States " although it could serve its purpose in Italy . He said that American citizens of Italian origin that were truly engaged in Americanization should reject Fascism as incompatible and un @-@ American . Eventually , he joined Fiorello La Guardia and Luigi Antonini , of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union , in founding an anti @-@ Fascist New York State chapter of OSIA , the Sons of Italy Grand Lodge . Nevertheless , Cotillo was a staunch supporter of the Italian invasion of Ethiopia in 1935 . 
 In October 1938 , Cotillo lobbied Mussolini " for more lenient consideration of the Jewish problem in Italy . " In a letter to Il Duce he tried persuade the Italian dictator that Fascist Italy 's recent anti @-@ Semitic legislation was unwise , and asked to " postpone execution of such drastic action for a reasonable time until an opportunity has been afforded me to appear before you and present the worthy cause because your edict may result in serious consequences in America . " He asked for the repeal of the anti @-@ Jewish laws and warned for a boycott of Italian goods in New York , where , as he wrote , " we live in close interdependent relationship " with Jewish people . 
 = = New York Supreme Court justice = = 
 After the 1922 elections , Cotillo became the chairman of the influential State Senate Judiciary Committee , a sign of his rising authority . The post helped him to get ready for a next step . In 1924 , he was the first Italian @-@ born to become Justice of the New York Supreme Court , First District , where he would he remain until his death . He was elected with the endorsement of the Tammany Hall political machine , many social welfare organizations and organized labor , the Citizen 's Union and several bar organizations . 
 While an immigrant himself and although he had been an ardent defender of the liberal interpretation of the naturalization law for a long time , in 1939 and in the wake of World War II , Cotillo advocated more stringent naturalization methods . Immigrants would be forced to pay the costs of an exhaustive investigation of their qualifications . He argued that there was a " need for more hesitation in the granting of this charter of liberty to each and every applicant without a more thorough search of each and every applicant ’ s capacity to benefit from such a gift . " He also recommended revocation of citizenship when found guilty of fraud or other wrongdoing . 
 Earlier , Cotillo had opposed the anti @-@ immigration restrictions of the Immigration Act of 1924 that significantly limited immigration from Italy . In 1931 , Cotillo protested against unnecessary stringent requirements of a proposed registration law , particularly the requirement of the equivalent of a public school education and the fingerprinting of applicants . A naturalized citizen had the same rights as native @-@ born and fingerprinting would make the foreign applicant feel like a criminal , Cotillo pointed out . He referred to the findings of the Wickersham Commission that the foreign @-@ born committed considerably less crime than native citizens . He also attacked the revocation of citizenship because of evil doing , while a native born was not affected . At the time , Cotillo claimed to have naturalized some 25 @,@ 000 immigrants in the eight years he had been on the bench . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 On July 27 , 1939 , he died following an operation for a chest tumor at Columbia @-@ Presbyterian Medical Center , Manhattan , New York , at the age of 52 . He was survived by his widow , Ida Berthold , and two daughters , Helen Paterno – who had married the son of prominent real estate developer Charles V. Paterno – and Sally Cotillo . More than 3 @,@ 000 people attended his funeral in Saint Patrick 's Cathedral , including New York mayor Fiorello La Guardia , Lieutenant Governor Charles Poletti , District Attorney Thomas E. Dewey and former New York Governor Alfred E. Smith . He was the subject of a biography by Nat Ferber , A New American , published in 1938 . 
 Throughout his life , both as a legislator and judge , he earned a reputation for compassion with the underprivileged and social activism which put that compassion to work . According to New York Governor Alfred E. Smith in his introduction in Cotillo 's biography , Cotillo " introduced a new era in social relations between the immigrant and native or older Americans " . 
 In the obituary of The New York Times , Cotillo was described as " a leader of the Italian Americans in New York " . He defended ethnic Italians against the stereotyping by Americans not of Italian descent , but also urged the need for " Americanization " of the Italian community . As such , he stood between the mores of the Italian ethnic ghetto and the judgment and norms of American society . 
 = Pirates of the Caribbean : Dead Man 's Chest = 
 Pirates of the Caribbean : Dead Man 's Chest is a 2006 American fantasy swashbuckler film and the second installment of the Pirates of the Caribbean film series , following The Curse of the Black Pearl ( 2003 ) . It was directed by Gore Verbinski , written by Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio , and produced by Jerry Bruckheimer . In the film , the wedding of Will Turner ( Orlando Bloom ) and Elizabeth Swann ( Keira Knightley ) is interrupted by Lord Cutler Beckett ( Tom Hollander ) , who wants Turner to acquire the compass of Captain Jack Sparrow ( Johnny Depp ) in a bid to find the Dead Man 's Chest . Sparrow discovers his debt to Davy Jones ( Bill Nighy ) is due . 
 Two sequels to Pirates of the Caribbean : The Curse of the Black Pearl were conceived in 2004 , with Elliott and Rossio developing a story arc that would span both films . Filming took place from February to September 2005 in Palos Verdes , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , Dominica , and The Bahamas , as well as on sets constructed at Walt Disney Studios . It was shot back @-@ to @-@ back with the third film of the series , Pirates of the Caribbean : At World 's End . 
 Dead Man 's Chest was released in the United States on July 7 , 2006 , and received mixed reviews . The film set several records in its first three days , with an opening weekend of $ 136 million in the United States , and it was , at the time , the fastest film ever to gross over $ 1 billion in the worldwide box office . It currently ranks as the eighteenth highest @-@ grossing film of all time worldwide and held the record as the highest @-@ grossing film released by the Walt Disney Studios for nearly six years until it was surpassed by The Avengers ( 2012 ) , although it remains the highest @-@ grossing live @-@ action Walt Disney Pictures release . The film received Academy Award nominations for Best Art Direction , Sound Editing , Sound Mixing , and won the Academy Award for Visual Effects . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The wedding of Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann is interrupted by Lord Cutler Beckett of the East India Trading Company , who has arrest warrants for the couple as well as for Commodore James Norrington , for allowing Captain Jack Sparrow to escape execution . Norrington 's whereabouts are uncertain , as he resigned after his obsessive pursuit of Sparrow resulted in the Navy 's flagship , HMS Dauntless , being destroyed in a typhoon . Elizabeth is imprisoned , but Beckett promises to free her if Will tracks down Jack and brings Beckett Jack 's magic compass which points to whatever the holder wants most . Shortly after , Governor Swann tries to escape Port Royal with Elizabeth but is captured . Elizabeth negotiates with Beckett to let her escape to find the compass herself , and she hides aboard a Scottish merchant vessel , the Edinburgh Trader . 
 On the Black Pearl , Jack reunites with Will ’ s father Bootstrap Bill , who reveals he is a crewman on the Flying Dutchman , captained by Davy Jones , whom Jack previously made a deal with to raise the Pearl from the depths . Jack must join Jones ' crew or be dragged to Davy Jones ' Locker by the monstrous Kraken . Will eventually finds Jack 's crew on an island ruled by cannibals , from which they escape . The crew meet voodoo priestess Tia Dalma ( Naomie Harris ) , who tells them Jones ’ weakness is his heart , locked within the Dead Man ’ s Chest . Locating the Dutchman , Will is shanghaied into service while Jones sends Jack to bring him one @-@ hundred souls so his blood debt can be paid . On the Dutchman , Will meets his father , and learns that the chest 's key is in Jones ' possession . After playing a game of liar 's dice against Davy Jones , Bootstrap helps Will escape with the key , but Jones sends the Kraken after him , sinking the Edinburgh Trader . 
 In Tortuga , Jack hires a new crew , including Elizabeth , and Norrington , now a drunk . All parties arrive on Isla Cruces where the chest is buried but a three @-@ way sword fight breaks out between Jack , Will , and Norrington who all want the heart for their respective goals : Jack wants to call off the Kraken , Will wants to rescue his father , and Norrington wants to regain his life . In the chaos , Jack obtains Jones ' heart and hides it in a jar of dirt , but Norrington secretly steals the heart and runs off pretending to lure away the Dutchman ’ s crew . Jones attacks the Pearl with the Kraken , which devours most of the crew and destroys all but one of the Pearl 's lifeboats , but Jack , who briefly fled , returns and wounds it with a net full of explosives . 
 Jack orders the survivors to abandon ship , but Elizabeth manacles him to the mast so that the crew can escape the Kraken . Jack manages to break free , but is dragged down to the bottom of the sea by the Kraken . Jones discovers his heart is missing and rages . In Port Royal , Norrington approaches Beckett and gives him the heart and Letters of Marque meant for Jack , allowing him back into the navy as well as allowing Beckett to gain control of Davy Jones and the seas . The Pearl ’ s crew take shelter with Tia Dalma , where they all agree to rescue Jack . Tia Dalma introduces the captain that will guide them : the resurrected Captain Barbossa . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Following the success of Pirates of the Caribbean : The Curse of the Black Pearl ( 2003 ) , the cast and crew signed on for two more sequels to be shot back @-@ to @-@ back , a practical decision on Disney 's part to allow more time with the same cast and crew . Writer Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio decided not to make the sequels new adventures featuring the same characters , as with the Indiana Jones and James Bond series , but to retroactively turn The Curse of the Black Pearl into the first of a trilogy . They wanted to explore the reality of what would happen after Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann 's embrace at the end of the first film , and initially considered the Fountain of Youth as the plot device . They settled on introducing Davy Jones , the Flying Dutchman and the Kraken . They also introduced the historical East India Trading Company , who for them represented a counterpoint to the themes of personal freedom represented by pirates . 
 Planning began in June 2004 , and production was much larger than The Curse of the Black Pearl , which was only shot on location in St. Vincent . This time , the sequels would require fully working ships , with a working Black Pearl built over the body of an oil tanker in Bayou La Batre , Alabama . By November , the script was still unfinished as the writers did not want director Gore Verbinski and producer Jerry Bruckheimer to compromise what they had written , so Verbinski worked with James <unk> to storyboard major sequences without need of a script , while Elliott and Rossio wrote a " preparatory " script for the crew to use before they finished the script they were happy with . By January 2005 , with rising costs and no script , Disney threatened to cancel the film , but changed their minds . The writers would accompany the crew on location , feeling that the lateness of their rewrites would improve the spontaneity of the cast 's performances . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on February 28 , 2005 , in Palos Verdes , beginning with Elizabeth 's ruined wedding day . The crew spent the first shooting days at Walt Disney Studios in Los Angeles , including the interiors of the Black Pearl and the Edinburgh Trader which Elizabeth stows away on , before moving to St. Vincent to shoot the scenes in Port Royal and Tortuga . Sets from the previous film were reused , having survived three hurricanes , although the main pier had to be rebuilt as it had collapsed in November . The crew had four tall ships at their disposal to populate the backgrounds , which were painted differently on each side for economy . One of the ships used was the replica of the HMS Bounty used in the 1962 film adaptation of Mutiny on the Bounty . 
 On April 18 , 2005 , the crew began shooting at Dominica , a location Verbinski had selected as he felt it fitted the sense of remoteness he was looking for . However , this was also a problem ; the Dominican government were completely unprepared for the scale of a Hollywood production , as while the 500 @-@ strong crew occupying around 90 % of the roads on the island they had trouble moving around on the underdeveloped surfaces . The weather also alternated between torrential rainstorms and hot temperatures , the latter of which was made worse for the cast who had to wear period clothing . At Dominica , the sequences involving the Pelegosto and the forest segment of the battle on Isla Cruces were shot . Verbinski preferred to use practical props for the giant wheel and bone cage sequences , feeling long close @-@ up shots would help further suspend the audience 's disbelief . Dominica was also used for Tia Dalma 's shack . Filming on the island concluded on May 26 , 2005 . 
 The crew moved to a small island called White Cay in the Bahamas for the beginning and end of the Isla Cruces battle , before production took a break until August , where in Los Angeles the interiors of the Flying Dutchman were shot . On September 18 , 2005 , the crew moved to Grand Bahama Island to shoot ship exteriors , including the working Black Pearl and Flying Dutchman . Filming there was a tumultuous period , starting with the fact that the tank had not actually been finished . The hurricane season caused many pauses in shooting , and Hurricane Wilma damaged many of the <unk> and pumps , though no one was hurt nor were any of the ships destroyed . Filming completed on September 10 , 2005 . 
 = = = Special effects = = = 
 The Flying Dutchman 's crew members were originally conceived by writers Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio as ghosts , but Gore Verbinski disliked this and designed them as physical creatures . Their hierarchy is reflected by how mutated they were : newcomers had low level infections which resemble rosacea , while veterans had full @-@ blown undersea creature attributes . Verbinski wanted to keep them realistic , rejecting a character with a turtle shell , and the animators watched various David Attenborough documentaries to study the movement of sea anemones and mussels . All of the crew are computer @-@ generated , with the exception of Stellan Skarsgård , who played " Bootstrap " Bill Turner . Initially his prosthetics would be augmented with CGI but that was abandoned . Skarsgård spent four hours in the make @-@ up chair and was dubbed " <unk> " on set . 
 Captain Davy Jones had originally been designed with chin growths , before the designers made the move to full @-@ blown tentacles ; the skin of the character incorporates the texture of a coffee @-@ stained Styrofoam cup among other elements . To portray Jones on set , Bill Nighy wore a motion capture tracksuit that meant the animators at Industrial Light & Magic did not have to reshoot the scene in the studio without him or on the motion capture stage . Nighy wore make @-@ up around his eyes and mouth to splice into the computer @-@ generated shots , but the images of his eyes and mouth were not used . Nighy only wore a prosthetic once , with blue @-@ colored tentacles for when Will Turner ( Orlando Bloom ) steals the key to the Dead Man 's Chest from under his " beard " as he sleeps . To create the CG version of the character , the model was closely based on a full @-@ body scan of Nighy , with Jones reflecting his high cheekbones . Animators studied every frame of Nighy 's performance : the actor himself had blessed them by making his performance more quirky than expected , providing endless fun for them . His performance also meant new controls had to be stored . Finally , Jones ' tentacles are mostly a simulation , though at times they were hand @-@ animated when they act as limbs for the character . 
 The Kraken was difficult to animate as it had no real @-@ life reference , until animation director Hal Hickel instructed the crew to watch King Kong vs. Godzilla which had a real octopus crawling over miniatures . On the set , two pipes filled with 30 @,@ 000 pounds of cement were used to crash and split the Edinburgh Trader : Completing the illusion are miniature masts and falling stuntmen shot on a bluescreen stage . The scene where the Kraken spits at Jack Sparrow does not use computer @-@ generated spit : it was real gunge thrown at Johnny Depp . 
 = = Release = = 
 Pirates of the Caribbean : Dead Man 's Chest premiered at Disneyland in California on June 24 , 2006 . It was the first Disney film to use the new computer @-@ generated Walt Disney Pictures production logo , which took a year for the studio to design . Weta Digital was responsible for the logo 's final animated rendering and Mark Mancina was hired to score a new composition of " When You Wish Upon A Star " . The main people responsible for the logo 's rendering are <unk> Parrish and Cameron Smith . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film became available on DVD on December 5 , 2006 , for Region 1 and sold 9 @,@ 498 @,@ 304 units in its first week of sales ( equivalent to $ 174 @,@ 039 @,@ 324 ) . In total it sold 16 @,@ 694 @,@ 937 units , earning $ 320 @,@ 871 @,@ 909 . It was the best @-@ selling DVD of 2006 in terms of units sold and second in terms of sales revenue behind The Chronicles of Narnia : The Lion , the Witch and the Wardrobe . 
 The versions for Regions 2 and 4 had already been released on November 15 , 2006 , and November 20 , 2006 , respectively . The DVD , incompatible with some Region 1 hardware DVD Players due to the use of <unk> Protection , came in single and two @-@ disc versions . Both contained a commentary track with the screenwriters and a gag reel , with the double @-@ disc featuring a video of the film premiere and a number of documentaries , including a full @-@ length documentary entitled " According to the Plan " and eight featurettes . The film was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc on May 22 , 2007 . The film had its UK Television premiere on Boxing Day 2008 on BBC One at 20 : 30 . It was seen by 6 @.@ 8 million viewers according to overnight figures . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critical Reception was mixed . The film scored a 54 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes with an average rating of 6 / 10 . The site 's consensus says " Gone is Depp 's unpredictability and much of the humor and originality of the first movie . " Michael Booth of the Denver Post gave the film three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four , calling it " two hours and 20 minutes of escapism that once again makes the movies safe for guilt @-@ free fun . " Drew McWeeny compared the film to The Empire Strikes Back , and also acclaimed its darkness in its depiction of the crew of the Flying Dutchman and its cliffhanger . The completely computer @-@ generated Davy Jones turned out to be so realistic that some reviewers mistakenly identified Nighy as wearing prosthetic makeup . 
 The New York Times said , " You put down your money – still less than $ 10 in most cities – and in return you get two and a half hours of spirited swashbuckling , and Gore Verbinski has an appropriate sense of mischief , as a well as a gift , nearly equaling those of Peter Jackson and Steven Spielberg , for integrating CGI seamlessly into his cinematic compositions . " Empire magazine gave the film 3 stars saying " Depp is once again an unmitigated joy as Captain Sparrow , delivering another eye @-@ darting , word @-@ slurring turn with some wonderful slapstick flourishes . Indeed , Rossio and Elliot smartly exploit these in some wonderful action set @-@ pieces . " " We don ’ t get the predictable ‘ all friends together on the same quest ’ structure , and there ’ s a surfeit of surprises , crosses and double @-@ crosses and cheeky character beats which stay true to the original ’ s anti @-@ heroic sense of fun . After all , Jack Sparrow is a pirate , a bad guy in a hero ’ s hat , a man driven by self @-@ gain over concern for the greater good , who will run away from a fight and cheat his ‘ friends ’ without a second ’ s thought . " Lord <unk> of MovieWeb said " The second tale of Captain Jack Sparrow is another epic adventure ! " 
 Paul Arendt of the BBC compared it to The Matrix Reloaded , as a complex film that merely led onto the next film . Richard George felt a " better construct of Dead Man 's Chest and At World 's End would have been to take 90 minutes of Chest , mix it with all of End and then cut that film in two . " Alex Billington felt the third film " almost makes the second film in the series obsolete or dulls it down enough that we can accept it in our trilogy DVD collections without ever watching it . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Dead Man 's Chest earned $ 423 @,@ 315 @,@ 812 in the North America and $ 642 @,@ 863 @,@ 913 in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 1 @,@ 066 @,@ 179 @,@ 725 . Worldwide , it ranks as the eighteenth highest @-@ grossing film , the seventh highest @-@ grossing film distributed by Disney , the highest @-@ grossing 2006 film , the highest @-@ grossing film in the Pirates of the Caribbean series , the highest @-@ grossing film to star Johnny Depp and the highest @-@ grossing second installment in a franchise . It is the third film in history to reach the $ 1 @-@ billion @-@ mark worldwide , and it reached the mark in record time ( 63 days ) , a record that has since been surpassed by many films , of which the first was Avatar ( in January 2010 ) . 
 In North America , the film broke many records including the largest <unk> and single @-@ day gross ( $ 55 @.@ 8 million ) , the biggest opening weekend gross ( $ 135 @.@ 6 million ) , the least time to reach $ 100 , $ 200 and $ 300 million and the highest ten @-@ day gross . However , most of them were broken by Spider @-@ Man 3 in May 2007 and The Dark Knight in July 2008 . The film was in first place at the box office for three consecutive weekends . It closed in theaters on December 7 , 2006 , with a $ 423 @.@ 3 million haul . Thus , in North America , it is the fifteenth highest @-@ grossing film , although , adjusted for inflation , the film ranks forty @-@ eight . It is also the highest @-@ grossing 2006 film , the highest @-@ grossing Pirates of the Caribbean film , and the fifth highest @-@ grossing Disney film . The film sold an estimated 64 @,@ 628 @,@ 400 tickets in the US . 
 Outside North America , it is the twenty @-@ first highest @-@ grossing film , the third highest @-@ grossing Pirates film , the eighth highest @-@ grossing Disney film and the highest @-@ grossing film of 2006 . It set opening @-@ weekend records in Russia and the CIS , Ukraine , Finland , Malaysia , Singapore , Greece and Italy . It was on top of the box office outside North America for 9 consecutive weekends and 10 in total . It was the highest @-@ grossing film of 2006 in Australia , Bulgaria , Germany , Japan , the Netherlands , New Zealand , Spain , Sweden and Thailand . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the 79th Academy Awards , visual effects supervisors John Knoll , Hal Hickel , Charles Gibson , and Allen Hall won an Oscar for Best Visual Effects , which was also the first time since 1994 's Forrest Gump that Industrial Light & Magic had received that particular Academy Award . The film was also nominated for Best Art Direction , Sound Editing , and Sound Mixing . 
 The film also won a BAFTA and Satellite award for Best Visual Effects , and six awards from the Visual Effects Society . 
 Other awards won by the film include Choice Movie : Action Adventure , Choice Drama / Action Adventure Movie , Actor for Johnny Depp at the 2006 Teen Choice Awards ; Favorite Movie , Movie Drama , Male Actor for Depp and On @-@ Screen Couple for Depp and Keira Knightley at the 33rd People 's Choice Awards ; Best Movie and Performance for Depp at the 2007 MTV Movie Awards and Best Special Effects at the Saturn Awards , and Favorite Movie at the 2007 Kids ' Choice Awards . 
 It was ranked # 475 on Empire 's 500 Greatest Films . 
 = = Video game = = 
 A video game adaptation of the film was developed by Griptonite Games and Amaze Entertainment and released by Buena Vista Games in June – August 2006 for the PlayStation Portable , Nintendo DS and Game Boy Advance . 
 = Maryland Route 12 = 
 Maryland Route 12 ( MD 12 ) is a state highway on the Eastern Shore in the U.S. state of Maryland . The route runs 30 @.@ 57 mi ( 49 @.@ 20 km ) from the Virginia border south of Stockton , Worcester County , where it continues into Virginia as State Route 679 ( SR 679 ) , north to Main Street in the city of Salisbury in Wicomico County . The route is known as Snow Hill Road for most of its length and passes mostly through areas of woods and farms as well as the communities of Stockton , Girdletree , and Snow Hill . MD 12 intersects several roads including MD 366 in Stockton , U.S. Route 113 ( US 113 ) and US 113 Business ( US 113 Bus . ) in Snow Hill , MD 354 in Indiantown , and US 13 near Salisbury . Portions of MD 12 near Snow Hill and Stockton existed as unnumbered state roads by 1910 . When the first state highways in Maryland were designated by 1927 , MD 12 was assigned to run from Stockton north to Salisbury . By 1940 , the route was extended south to the Virginia border and a small incomplete portion between Snow Hill and Salisbury was finished . A dumbbell interchange is planned at the US 113 intersection ; however , this project is currently on hold . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Worcester County = = = 
 MD 12 heads north from the Virginia border on Snow Hill Road , which is a two @-@ lane undivided road . The road continues south into Virginia as SR 679 ( Fleming Road ) . From the border , the route passes through a mix of woodland and farmland with a few residences in southern Worcester County before reaching Stockton . Here , MD 12 passes by homes and crosses MD 366 ( George Island Landing Road ) . Upon leaving Stockton , the roads heads back into rural areas and passes near the E.A. Vaughn Wildlife Management Area before reaching the residential community of Girdletree . Past Girdletree , the road continues to the east of a tract of the Pocomoke State Forest as it approaches Snow Hill , the county seat of Worcester County . Just south of Snow Hill , the route intersects US 113 ( Worcester Highway ) . 
 Past this intersection , the road enters Snow Hill , where it becomes Church Street , and heads into inhabited areas with some businesses . In the center of town , MD 12 intersects US 113 Bus . ( Market Street ) and turns east to form a concurrency with that route , passing through the downtown area . Within the downtown , the road passes by the Julia A. Purnell Museum and the Worcester County Courthouse . Here , MD 12 turns north to follow Washington Street , crossing the Pocomoke River out of downtown Snow Hill on a drawbridge . From here , the route becomes Snow Hill Road again and turns northwest . The road heads into agricultural areas with some residences before Indiantown , where MD 12 intersects the southern terminus of MD 354 ( <unk> Road ) , which runs north to Willards . Past this intersection , the route turns more to the west and heads through a mix of farmland and woodland with occasional homes . The road turns to the northwest again and runs to the northeast of more tracts of the Pocomoke State Forest . The Pocomoke State Forest is known for its loblolly trees and cypress swamps and is popular with fishing and hunting . 
 = = = Wicomico County = = = 
 MD 12 crosses into Wicomico County , where it continues north through woods and farms with some residences . The route turns northwest again before heading into a mix of residential areas and farm fields on the outskirts of Salisbury . The road comes to a partial cloverleaf interchange with US 13 ( Salisbury Bypass ) , where the route briefly becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway . Past US 13 , MD 12 crosses into Salisbury at the Johnson Road intersection . Here , the route heads north through commercial areas , becoming a six @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane , two southbound travel lanes and one northbound travel lane . In addition , there is one lane in each direction devoted to right turns . At the intersection with College Avenue / <unk> Park Drive , the road narrows to four @-@ lane with each direction consisting of one travel lane and a right @-@ turn lane . This configuration eventually ends and MD 12 becomes a two @-@ lane road again , leaving the corporate limits of Salisbury . Upon entering Salisbury again , the route becomes municipally maintained and continues past a mix of residences and businesses with some industrial establishments . MD 12 crosses over a branch of the Wicomico River near the Salisbury city park , which contains the Salisbury Zoo , before ending at Main Street a short distance to the east of US 13 Bus . ( Salisbury Boulevard ) near downtown Salisbury . 
 MD 12 is a part of the National Highway System as a principal arterial from Nutters Cross Road south of US 13 near Salisbury north to Main Street in Salisbury . 
 = = History = = 
 The portion of MD 12 south of Snow Hill was part of an old post road from the 18th century that ran the length of the Delmarva Peninsula . The section of the state highway north of Snow Hill is the descendant of the Old Snow Hill Road from Salisbury whose original bridge across the Pocomoke River dates to 1878 . The Maryland State Roads Commission designated the highway from Stockton to Snow Hill as one of the original state roads in 1909 . By 1910 , the highway was paved within Stockton , between Snow Hill and Indiantown , and for about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south from the city limit of Salisbury . The highway was paved from Snow Hill to a point north of Girdletree by 1917 . The all @-@ weather road between Snow Hill and Stockton was completed by 1921 . The Snow Hill – Salisbury road was under construction by 1923 . By 1927 , MD 12 had been assigned to the highway despite a 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) gap remaining from just north of the Wicomico – Worcester county line south toward Snow Hill . That gap was filled by 1930 . In addition , MD 12 's present northern terminus at Main Street , including the bridge across the South Prong of the Wicomico River , was constructed in 1928 and 1929 . The highway had previously entered Salisbury along Lincoln Avenue and Division Street . The final portion of MD 12 was completed between Stockton and the Virginia state line by 1933 . In addition , the present bridge across the Pocomoke River was completed in 1932 . MD 12 was widened and straightened from Stockton to Salisbury between 1951 and 1954 . 
 = = Future = = 
 An interchange is planned between MD 12 and US 113 south of Snow Hill in order to improve safety and traffic flow as a follow up to widening US 113 ; however , the project is currently on hold . This proposed interchange is to be a dumbbell interchange , a variation of the diamond interchange with two roundabouts on MD 12 where it intersects the ramps to US 113 . The proposed cost needed to build this interchange is $ 24 @.@ 2 million , which includes engineering , acquisition of land , and the actual construction . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = = Auxiliary route = = 
 MD 12A runs along an unnamed road from MD 12 east to a dead end in Girdletree , Worcester County . The route is 0 @.@ 02 mi ( 0 @.@ 032 km ) long . 
 = Speech @-@ generating device = 
 Speech @-@ generating devices ( SGDs ) , also known as voice output communication aids , are electronic augmentative and alternative communication ( AAC ) systems used to supplement or replace speech or writing for individuals with severe speech impairments , enabling them to verbally communicate their needs . SGDs are important for people who have limited means of interacting verbally , as they allow individuals to become active participants in communication interactions . They are particularly helpful for patients suffering from Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis ( ALS ) but recently have been used for children with predicted speech deficiencies . 
 There are several input and display methods for users of varying abilities to make use of SGDs . Some SGDs have multiple pages of symbols to accommodate a large number of utterances , and thus only a portion of the symbols available are visible at any one time , with the communicator navigating the various pages . Speech @-@ generating devices can produce electronic voice output by using digitized recordings of natural speech or through speech synthesis — which may carry less emotional information but can permit the user to speak novel messages . 
 The content , organization , and updating of the vocabulary on an SGD is influenced by a number of factors , such at the user 's needs and the contexts that the device will be used in . The development of techniques to improve the available vocabulary and rate of speech production is an active research area . Vocabulary items should be of high interest to the user , be frequently applicable , have a range of meanings , and be pragmatic in functionality . 
 There are multiple methods of accessing messages on devices : directly or indirectly , or using specialized access devices — although the specific access method will depend on the skills and abilities of the user . SGD output is typically much slower than speech , although rate enhancement strategies can increase the user 's rate of output , resulting in enhanced efficiency of communication . 
 The first known SGD was prototyped in the mid @-@ 1970s , and rapid progress in hardware and software development has meant that SGD capabilities can now be integrated into devices like smartphones . Notable users of SGDs include Stephen Hawking , Roger Ebert , Tony Proudfoot , and Pete Frates ( founder of the ALS ice bucket challenge ) . 
 Speech @-@ generating systems may be dedicated devices developed solely for AAC , or non @-@ dedicated devices such as computers running additional software to allow them to function as AAC devices . 
 = = Speech @-@ generating device history = = 
 SGDs have their roots in early electronic communication aids . The first such aid was a sip @-@ and @-@ puff typewriter controller named the patient @-@ operated selector mechanism ( POSSUM ) prototyped by Reg Maling in the United Kingdom in 1960 . POSSUM scanned through a set of symbols on an illuminated display . Researchers at Delft University in the Netherlands created the <unk> operated typewriter ( LOT ) in 1970 , which made use of small movements of the head to point a small spot of light at a matrix of characters , each equipped with a photoelectric cell . Although it was commercially unsuccessful , the LOT was well received by its users . 
 During the 1970s and early 1980s , several companies began to emerge that have since become prominent manufacturers of SGDs . Toby Churchill founded Toby Churchill Ltd in 1973 , after losing his speech following encephalitis . In the US , <unk> ( then known as Sentient Systems Technology ) grew out of a student project at Carnegie @-@ Mellon University , created in 1982 to help a young woman with cerebral palsy to communicate . Beginning in the 1980s , improvements in technology led to a greatly increased number , variety , and performance of commercially available communication devices , and a reduction in their size and price . Alternative methods of access such as Target Scanning ( also known as eye pointing ) calibrate the movement of a user 's eyes to direct an SGD to produce the desired speech phase . Scanning , in which alternatives are presented to the user sequentially , became available on communication devices . Speech output possibilities included both digitized and synthesized speech . 
 Rapid progress in hardware and software development continued , including projects funded by the European Community . The first commercially available dynamic screen speech generating devices were developed in the 1990s . Software programs were developed that allowed the computer @-@ based production of communication boards . High @-@ tech devices have continued to become smaller and lighter , while increasing accessibility and capability ; communication devices can be accessed using eye @-@ tracking systems , perform as a computer for word @-@ processing and Internet use , and as an environmental control device for independent access to other equipment such as TV , radio and telephones . 
 Notable individuals who have used AAC devices include Stephen Hawking , Roger Ebert Tony Proudfoot , and Pete Frates . Hawking is unable to speak due to a combination of severe disabilities caused by ALS , and an emergency tracheotomy . He has come to be associated with the unique voice of his particular synthesis equipment . In the past 20 or so years SGD have gained popularity amongst young children with speech deficiencies , such as autism , Down syndrome , and predicted brain damage due to surgery . 
 Starting in the early 2000s , specialist saw the benefit of using SGDs not only for adults but for children , as well . Neuro @-@ linguists found that SGDs were just as effective in helping children who were at risk for temporary language deficits after undergoing brain surgery as it is for patients with ALS . In particular , digitized SGDs have been used as communication aids for pediatric patients during the recovery process . 
 = = Access methods = = 
 There are many methods of accessing messages on devices : directly , indirectly , and with specialized access devices . Direct access methods involve physical contact with the system , by using a keyboard or a touch screen . Users accessing SGDs indirectly and through specialized devices must manipulate an object in order to access the system , such as maneuvering a joystick , head mouse , optical head pointer , light pointer , infrared pointer , or switch access scanner . 
 The specific access method will depend on the skills and abilities of the user . With direct selection a body part , pointer , adapted mouse , joystick , or eye tracking could be used , whereas switch access scanning is often used for indirect selection . Unlike direct selection ( e.g. , typing on a keyboard , touching a screen ) , users of Target Scanning can only make selections when the scanning indicator ( or cursor ) of the electronic device is on the desired choice . Those who are unable to point typically calibrate their eyes to use eye gaze as a way to point and blocking as a way to select desired words and phrases . The speed and pattern of scanning , as well as the way items are selected , are individualized to the physical , visual and cognitive capabilities of the user . 
 = = Message construction = = 
 Augmentative and alternative communication is typically much slower than speech , with users generally producing 8 – 10 words per minute . Rate enhancement strategies can increase the user 's rate of output to around 12 – 15 words per minute , and as a result enhance the efficiency of communication . 
 In any given SGD there may be a large number of vocal expressions that facilitate efficient and effective communication , including greetings , expressing desires , and asking questions . Some SGDs have multiple pages of symbols to accommodate a large number of vocal expressions , and thus only a portion of the symbols available are visible at any one time , with the communicator navigating the various pages . Speech @-@ generating devices generally display a set of selections either using a dynamically changing screen , or a fixed display . 
 There are two main options for increasing the rate of communication for an SGD : encoding and prediction . 
 Encoding permits a user to produce a word , sentence or phrase using only one or two activations of their SGD . Iconic encoding strategies such as Semantic compaction combine sequences of icons ( picture symbols ) to produce words or phrases . In numeric , alpha @-@ numeric , and letter encoding ( also known as <unk> @-@ Expansion ) , words and sentences are coded as sequences of letters and numbers . For example , typing " HH " or " G1 " ( for Greeting 1 ) may retrieve " Hello , how are you ? " . 
 Prediction is a rate enhancement strategy in which the SGD attempts to reduce the number of keystrokes used by predicting the word or phrase being written by the user . The user can then select the correct prediction without needing to write the entire word . Word prediction software may determine the choices to be offered based on their frequency in language , association with other words , past choices of the user , or grammatical suitability . However , users have been shown to produce more words per minute ( using a scanning interface ) with a static keyboard layout than with a predictive grid layout , suggesting that the cognitive overhead of reviewing a new arrangement cancels out the benefits of the predictive layout when using a scanning interface . 
 Some systems , such as Auditory Sciences ' Interact @-@ Voice device , combine Encoding and Prediction into the same system . For example , typing " <unk> " can be an encoded shortcut for " Can you help me find _ _ _ _ " and then the prediction capabilities help the user complete the sentence , such as " Can you help me find my glasses ? " or " Can you help me find my car keys ? " . 
 Another approach to rate @-@ enhancement is Dasher , which uses language models and arithmetic coding to present alternative letter targets on the screen with size relative to their likelihood given the history . 
 The rate of words produced can depend greatly on the conceptual level of the system : the <unk> system , which allows users to choose between large numbers of sentence @-@ level utterances , demonstrated output rates in excess of 60 <unk> . 
 = = Fixed and dynamic display devices = = 
 = = = Fixed display devices = = = 
 Fixed display devices refer to those in which the symbols and items are " fixed " in a particular format ; some sources refer to these as " static " displays . Such display devices have a simpler learning curve than some other devices . 
 Fixed display devices replicate the typical arrangement of low @-@ tech AAC devices ( low @-@ tech is defined as those devices that do not need batteries , electricity or electronics ) , like communication boards . They share some of disadvantages ; for example they are typically restricted to a limited number of symbols and hence messages . It is important to note that with technological advances made in the twenty @-@ first century , fixed @-@ display SGDs are not commonly used anymore . 
 = = = Dynamic display devices = = = 
 Dynamic displays devices are usually also touchscreen <unk> iPads , <unk> Design , <unk> Technology and Words + . devices are the most commonly used Dynamic Display Devices . They typically generate electronically produced visual symbols that , when pressed , change the set of selections that is displayed . The user can change the symbols available using page links to navigate to appropriate pages of vocabulary and messages . The " home " page of a dynamic display device may show symbols related to many different contexts or conversational topics . Pressing any one of these symbols may open a different screen with messages related to that topic . For example , when watching a volleyball game , a user may press the " sport " symbol to open a page with messages relating to sport , then press the symbol showing a scoreboard to utter the phrase " What 's the score ? " . 
 Advantages of dynamic display devices include the availability of a much larger vocabulary , and the ability to see the sentence under construction A further advantage of dynamic display devices is that the underlying operating system is capable of providing options for multiple communication channels , including cell phone , text messaging and e @-@ mail . Work by Linköping University has shown that such email writing practices allowed children who were SGD users to develop new social skills and increase their social participation . 
 = = Output = = 
 The output of a SGD may be digitized and / or synthesized : digitized systems play directly recorded words or phrases while synthesized speech uses text @-@ to @-@ speech software that can carry less emotional information but permits the user to speak novel messages by typing new words . Today , individuals use a combination of recorded messages and text @-@ to @-@ speech techniques on their SGDs . However , some devices are limited to only one type of output . 
 = = = Digitized speech = = = 
 Words , phrases or entire messages can be digitised and stored onto the device for playback to be activated by the user . This process is formally known as Voice Banking . Advantages of recorded speech include that it ( a ) provides natural prosody and speech naturalness for the listener ( e.g. , person of the same age and gender as the AAC user can be selected to record the messages ) , and ( b ) it provides for additional sounds that may be important for the user such as laughing or whistling . Moreover , Digitized SGDs is that they provide a degree of normalcy both for the patient and for their families when they lose their ability to speak on their own . 
 A major disadvantage of using only recorded speech is that users are unable to produce novel messages ; they are limited to the messages pre @-@ recorded into the device . Depending on the device , there may be a limit to the length of the recordings . 
 = = = Synthesized speech = = = 
 SGDs that use synthesized speech apply the phonetic rules of the language to translate the user ’ s message into voice output ( speech synthesis ) . Users have the freedom to create novel words and messages and are not limited to those that have been pre @-@ recorded on their device by others . 
 Smartphones and computers have increased the use of synthesized speech devices through the creation of apps that allow the user to select a from a list of phrases or messages to be spoken in the voice and language that the user has chosen . Apps such as <unk> ! or Assistive Express for iPhone provide a cheap way to use a speech @-@ generating device without having to visit a doctor 's office or learn to use specialized machinery . 
 Synthesized SGDs may allow multiple methods of message creation that can be used individually or in combination : messages can be created from letters , words , phrases , sentences , pictures , or symbols . With synthesized speech there is virtually unlimited storage capacity for messages with few demands on memory space . 
 Synthesized speech engines are available in many languages , and the engine 's parameters , such as speech rate , pitch range , gender , stress patterns , pauses , and pronunciation exceptions can be manipulated by the user . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 = = Selection set and vocabulary = = 
 The selection set of a SGD is the set of all messages , symbols and codes that are available to a person using that device . The content , organisation , and updating of this selection set are areas of active research and are influenced by a number of factors , including the user 's ability , interests and age . The selection set for an AAC system may include words that the user does not know yet – they are included for the user to " grow into " . The content installed on any given SGD may include a large number of preset pages provided by the manufacturer , with a number of additional pages produced by the user or the user 's care team depending on the user 's needs and the contexts that the device will be used in . 
 = = = Initial content selection = = = 
 Researchers <unk> and <unk> list a number of possible sources ( such as family members , friends , teachers , and care staff ) for the selection of initial content for a SGD . A range of sources is required because , in general , one individual would not have the knowledge and experience to generate all the vocal expressions needed in any given environment . For example , parents and therapists might not think to add slang terms , such as " <unk> " . 
 Previous work has analyzed both vocabulary use of typically developing speakers and word use of AAC users to generate content for new AAC devices . Such processes work well for generating a core set of utterances or vocal expressions but are less effective in situations where a particular vocabulary is needed ( for example , terms related directly to a user 's interest in horse riding ) . The term " fringe vocabulary " refers to vocabulary that is specific or unique to the individual 's personal interests or needs . A typical technique to develop fringe vocabulary for a device is to conduct interviews with multiple " informants " : siblings , parents , teachers , co @-@ workers and other involved persons . 
 Other researchers , such as Musselwhite and St. Louis suggest that initial vocabulary items should be of high interest to the user , be frequently applicable , have a range of meanings and be pragmatic in functionality . These criteria have been widely used in the AAC field as an ecological check of SGD content . 
 = = = Automatic content maintenance = = = 
 <unk> and <unk> emphasize that vocabulary selection also involves ongoing vocabulary maintenance ; however , a difficulty in AAC is that users or their carers must program in any new utterances manually ( e.g. names of new friends or personal stories ) and there are no existing commercial solutions for automatically adding content . A number of research approaches have attempted to overcome this difficulty , these range from " inferred input " , such as generating content based on a log of conversation with a user 's friends and family , to data mined from the Internet to find language materials , such as the <unk> Project . Moreover , by making use of <unk> based approaches , a device 's content can be changed based on events that occur to a user during their day . By accessing more of a user 's data , more high @-@ quality messages can be generated at a risk of exposing sensitive user data . For example , by making use of global positioning systems , a device 's content can be changed based on geographical location . 
 = = = Ethical concerns = = = 
 Many recently developed SGDs include performance measurement and analysis tools to help monitor the content used by an individual . This raises concerns about privacy , and some argue that the device user should be involved in the decision to monitor use in this way . Similar concerns have been raised regarding the proposals for devices with automatic content generation , and privacy is increasingly a factor in design of SGDs . As AAC devices are designed to be used in all areas of a user ’ s life , there are sensitive legal , social , and technical issues centred on a wide family of personal data management problems that can be found in contexts of AAC use . For example , SGDs may have to be designed so that they support the user 's right to delete logs of conversations or content that has been added automatically . 
 = = Challenges = = 
 Programming of Dynamic Speech Generating devices is usually done by augmentative communication specialists . Specialists are required to cater to the needs of the patients because the patients usually choose what kinds of words / phrases they want . For example , patients use different phrases based on their age , disability , interests , etc . Therefore , content organization is extremely time consuming . Additionally , SGDs are rarely covered by health insurance companies . As a result , resources are very limited with regards to both funding and staffing . Dr. John Costello of Boston Children ’ s Hospital has been the driving force soliciting donations to keep these program running and well @-@ staffed both within his hospital and in hospitals across the country . 
 = = Producers = = 
 There are relatively few producers of SGDs , although several more companies produce software to give existing devices SGD functionality , and there are some home @-@ built systems . Producers of dedicated devices include Auditory Sciences , <unk> Mayer @-@ Johnson , LC Technologies , <unk> , <unk> <unk> Company , Saltillo Corporation , Talk To Me Technologies , <unk> Design . , <unk> Technology and Words + . Other companies produce software that allow devices like the iPhone , iPad , and Nintendo DS to function as SGDs . 
 = Favorite Girl = 
 " Favorite Girl " is a song by Canadian recording artist , Justin Bieber . The song was written and produced by D 'Mile , and Antea Birchett , Anesha Birchett , and Delisha Thomas also receive writing credits . Bieber debuted the acoustic version of his song in his official YouTube account after American country pop singer Taylor Swift used Bieber 's single " One Time " as background music in one of her video tour diaries . The song was later released exclusively to iTunes as the second promotional single from his debut studio release , My World on November 4 , 2009 . 
 The song is mid @-@ tempo , and merges teen pop and R & B elements . The song debuted at number twelve and twenty @-@ six , in Canada and the United States , respectively . It also charted at number ninety @-@ two Australia , and at numbers seventy @-@ six and twenty @-@ seven in the United Kingdom , and the UK R & B chart , respectively Bieber performed the song on several occasions , most of them being the acoustic version of the song , including as a supporting act on Swift 's Fearless Tour . 
 = = Background = = 
 In August 2009 , country pop singer Taylor Swift used Bieber 's " One Time " as background music and music that she and her friends were dancing to in a tour video diary that she posted on her official YouTube account . In response to Swift using his song , Bieber posted an acoustic rendition of the then never @-@ before heard " Favorite Girl " on his YouTube . When asked about his learning of Swift using his song , Bieber stated , " It was really funny because I heard about it from a fan . I watched it and it was hilarious ! " Bieber and Swift then met in person at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards , and she later invited him to be a special guest on her Fearless Tour when she returned to the United Kingdom . 
 The song was written by Dernst " D 'Mile " Emile II , Antea Birchett , Anesha <unk> , and Delisha Thomas . Emile also has production credits . The song was recorded by Blake <unk> at Icon Studios in Atlanta , Georgia , where Bieber 's career is based . Mixing was done by Dave Pensado and Jaycen @-@ Joshua Fowler , at Larrabee Studios in North Hollywood , California . The song became a popular trending topic on Twitter on the day of its release . " Favorite Girl " be is a teen @-@ pop song , which integrates characteristics of R & B music . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Universal Music Publishing , Ltd . , " Favorite Girl " is set in common time , and has a moderate tempo of 88 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of E minor with Bieber 's vocals spanning from the low @-@ note of G3 to the high @-@ note of B4 . The song follows in the chord progression of C – Em – G 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The song had hot shot debuts and limited stays on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 and Canadian Hot 100 due to the single being released via iTunes only . It debuted in the U.S. at number twenty @-@ six on the week ending November 21 , 2009 , and remained on the chart for two weeks . The same week it debuted at number fifteen in Canada , remaining on the chart for two weeks . The song returned to the Canadian Hot 100 at number ninety @-@ nine on the week ending January 9 , 2009 . In 2010 , the chart also appeared on the UK Singles Chart at seventy @-@ six , and on the UK R & B Chart . 
 = = Performances = = 
 Most Bieber performances of the song are of the acoustic rendition . Bieber originally performed the song for the first time , acoustically , when he appeared for a second time on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on November 3 , 2009 , the same day the song was released to iTunes . Regarding the performance , MTV News praised the song as a " funky , groovy , <unk> jam " . Bieber performed the song on the Fearless Tour , during Winter 2009 while performing at radio station @-@ hosted Jingle Ball concerts , and during a live session with MTV , in which he was named MTV 's Artist of the Week . During the live session with MTV , he performed the song while playing the keyboard . In a review of his acoustic performance of the song at Z100 's 2009 Jingle Ball , Jon Caramanica of The New York Times called it his best performance of the night . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Mars = 
 Mars is the fourth planet from the Sun and the second @-@ smallest planet in the Solar System , after Mercury . Named after the Roman god of war , it is often referred to as the " Red Planet " because the iron oxide prevalent on its surface gives it a reddish appearance . Mars is a terrestrial planet with a thin atmosphere , having surface features reminiscent both of the impact craters of the Moon and the valleys , deserts , and polar ice caps of Earth . 
 The rotational period and seasonal cycles of Mars are likewise similar to those of Earth , as is the tilt that produces the seasons . Mars is the site of Olympus Mons , the largest volcano and second @-@ highest known mountain in the Solar System , and of Valles Marineris , one of the largest canyons in the Solar System . The smooth Borealis basin in the northern hemisphere covers 40 % of the planet and may be a giant impact feature . Mars has two moons , Phobos and Deimos , which are small and irregularly shaped . These may be captured asteroids , similar to <unk> Eureka , a Mars trojan . 
 Until the first successful Mars flyby in 1965 by Mariner 4 , many speculated about the presence of liquid water on the planet 's surface . This was based on observed periodic variations in light and dark patches , particularly in the polar latitudes , which appeared to be seas and continents ; long , dark striations were interpreted by some as irrigation channels for liquid water . These straight line features were later explained as optical illusions , though geological evidence gathered by uncrewed missions suggests that Mars once had large @-@ scale water coverage on its surface at an earlier stage of its existence . In 2005 , radar data revealed the presence of large quantities of water ice at the poles and at mid @-@ latitudes . The Mars rover Spirit sampled chemical compounds containing water molecules in March 2007 . The Phoenix lander directly sampled water ice in shallow Martian soil on July 31 , 2008 . On September 28 , 2015 , NASA announced the presence of briny flowing salt water on the Martian surface . 
 Mars is host to seven functioning spacecraft : five in orbit — 2001 Mars Odyssey , Mars Express , Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter , MAVEN and Mars Orbiter Mission — and two on the surface — Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity and the Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity . Observations by the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter have revealed possible flowing water during the warmest months on Mars . In 2013 , NASA 's Curiosity rover discovered that Mars 's soil contains between 1 @.@ 5 % and 3 % water by mass ( albeit attached to other compounds and thus not freely accessible ) . 
 There are ongoing investigations assessing the past habitability potential of Mars , as well as the possibility of extant life . In situ investigations have been performed by the Viking landers , Spirit and Opportunity rovers , Phoenix lander , and Curiosity rover . Future astrobiology missions are planned , including the Mars 2020 and ExoMars rovers . 
 Mars can easily be seen from Earth with the naked eye , as can its reddish coloring . Its apparent magnitude reaches − 2 @.@ 91 , which is surpassed only by Jupiter , Venus , the Moon , and the Sun . Optical ground @-@ based telescopes are typically limited to resolving features about 300 kilometers ( 190 mi ) across when Earth and Mars are closest because of Earth 's atmosphere . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 Mars is approximately half the diameter of Earth , and its surface area is only slightly less than the total area of Earth 's dry land . Mars is less dense than Earth , having about 15 % of Earth 's volume and 11 % of Earth 's mass , resulting in about 38 % of Earth 's surface gravity . The red @-@ orange appearance of the Martian surface is caused by iron ( III ) oxide , or rust . It can look like butterscotch , and other common surface colors include golden , brown , tan , and greenish , depending on the minerals present . 
 = = = Internal structure = = = 
 Like Earth , Mars has differentiated into a dense metallic core overlaid by less dense materials . Current models of its interior imply a core region about 1 @,@ 794 ± 65 kilometers ( 1 @,@ 115 ± 40 mi ) in radius , consisting primarily of iron and nickel with about 16 – 17 % sulfur . This iron ( II ) sulfide core is thought to be twice as rich in lighter elements than Earth 's core . The core is surrounded by a silicate mantle that formed many of the tectonic and volcanic features on the planet , but it appears to be dormant . Besides silicon and oxygen , the most abundant elements in the Martian crust are iron , magnesium , aluminum , calcium , and potassium . The average thickness of the planet 's crust is about 50 km ( 31 mi ) , with a maximum thickness of 125 km ( 78 mi ) . Earth 's crust , averaging 40 km ( 25 mi ) , is only one third as thick as Mars ' , in ratio to the sizes of the two planets . 
 = = = Surface geology = = = 
 Mars is a terrestrial planet that consists of minerals containing silicon and oxygen , metals , and other elements that typically make up rock . The surface of Mars is primarily composed of tholeiitic basalt , although parts are more silica @-@ rich than typical basalt and may be similar to andesitic rocks on Earth or silica glass . Regions of low albedo show concentrations of plagioclase feldspar , with northern low albedo regions displaying higher than normal concentrations of sheet silicates and high @-@ silicon glass . Parts of the southern highlands include detectable amounts of high @-@ calcium <unk> . Localized concentrations of hematite and olivine have been found . Much of the surface is deeply covered by finely grained iron ( III ) oxide dust . 
 Although Mars has no evidence of a structured global magnetic field , observations show that parts of the planet 's crust have been magnetized , and that alternating polarity reversals of its dipole field have occurred in the past . This <unk> of magnetically susceptible minerals has properties that are similar to the alternating bands found on the ocean floors of Earth . One theory , published in 1999 and re @-@ examined in October 2005 ( with the help of the Mars Global Surveyor ) , is that these bands demonstrate plate tectonics on Mars four billion years ago , before the planetary dynamo ceased to function and the planet 's magnetic field faded away . 
 During the Solar System 's formation , Mars was created as the result of a stochastic process of run @-@ away accretion out of the protoplanetary disk that orbited the Sun . Mars has many distinctive chemical features caused by its position in the Solar System . Elements with comparatively low boiling points , such as chlorine , phosphorus , and sulphur , are much more common on Mars than Earth ; these elements were probably removed from areas closer to the Sun by the young star 's energetic solar wind . 
 After the formation of the planets , all were subjected to the so @-@ called " Late Heavy Bombardment " . About 60 % of the surface of Mars shows a record of impacts from that era , whereas much of the remaining surface is probably underlain by immense impact basins caused by those events . There is evidence of an enormous impact basin in the northern hemisphere of Mars , spanning 10 @,@ 600 by 8 @,@ 500 km ( 6 @,@ 600 by 5 @,@ 300 mi ) , or roughly four times larger than the Moon 's South Pole – Aitken basin , the largest impact basin yet discovered . This theory suggests that Mars was struck by a Pluto @-@ sized body about four billion years ago . The event , thought to be the cause of the Martian hemispheric dichotomy , created the smooth Borealis basin that covers 40 % of the planet . 
 The geological history of Mars can be split into many periods , but the following are the three primary periods : 
 Noachian period ( named after <unk> Terra ) : Formation of the oldest extant surfaces of Mars , 4 @.@ 5 billion years ago to 3 @.@ 5 billion years ago . Noachian age surfaces are scarred by many large impact craters . The Tharsis bulge , a volcanic upland , is thought to have formed during this period , with extensive flooding by liquid water late in the period . 
 Hesperian period ( named after Hesperia Planum ) : 3 @.@ 5 billion years ago to 2 @.@ 9 – 3 @.@ 3 billion years ago . The Hesperian period is marked by the formation of extensive lava plains . 
 Amazonian period ( named after <unk> Planitia ) : 2 @.@ 9 – 3 @.@ 3 billion years ago to present . Amazonian regions have few meteorite impact craters , but are otherwise quite varied . Olympus Mons formed during this period , along with lava flows elsewhere on Mars . 
 Geological activity is still taking place on Mars . The Athabasca Valles is home to sheet @-@ like lava flows up to about 200 Mya . Water flows in the grabens called the Cerberus <unk> occurred less than 20 Mya , indicating equally recent volcanic intrusions . On February 19 , 2008 , images from the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter showed evidence of an avalanche from a 700 m high cliff . 
 = = = Soil = = = 
 The Phoenix lander returned data showing Martian soil to be slightly alkaline and containing elements such as magnesium , sodium , potassium and chlorine . These nutrients are found in gardens on Earth , and they are necessary for growth of plants . Experiments performed by the lander showed that the Martian soil has a basic pH of 7 @.@ 7 , and contains 0 @.@ 6 % of the salt perchlorate . 
 Streaks are common across Mars and new ones appear frequently on steep slopes of craters , troughs , and valleys . The streaks are dark at first and get lighter with age . The streaks can start in a tiny area which then spread out for hundreds of metres . They have been seen to follow the edges of boulders and other obstacles in their path . The commonly accepted theories include that they are dark underlying layers of soil revealed after avalanches of bright dust or dust devils . Several explanations have been put forward , including those that involve water or even the growth of organisms . 
 = = = Hydrology = = = 
 Liquid water cannot exist on the surface of Mars due to low atmospheric pressure , which is about 100 times thinner than Earth 's , except at the lowest elevations for short periods . The two polar ice caps appear to be made largely of water . The volume of water ice in the south polar ice cap , if melted , would be sufficient to cover the entire planetary surface to a depth of 11 meters ( 36 ft ) . A permafrost mantle stretches from the pole to latitudes of about 60 ° . Large quantities of water ice are thought to be trapped within the thick cryosphere of Mars . Radar data from Mars Express and the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter show large quantities of water ice both at the poles ( July 2005 ) and at middle latitudes ( November 2008 ) . The Phoenix lander directly sampled water ice in shallow Martian soil on July 31 , 2008 . 
 <unk> visible on Mars strongly suggest that liquid water has existed on the planet 's surface . Huge linear swathes of scoured ground , known as outflow channels , cut across the surface in around 25 places . These are thought to record erosion which occurred during the catastrophic release of water from subsurface aquifers , though some of these structures have been hypothesized to result from the action of glaciers or lava . One of the larger examples , Ma <unk> Vallis is 700 km ( 430 mi ) long and much bigger than the Grand Canyon with a width of 20 km ( 12 mi ) and a depth of 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) in places . It is thought to have been carved by flowing water early in Mars 's history . The youngest of these channels are thought to have formed as recently as only a few million years ago . Elsewhere , particularly on the oldest areas of the Martian surface , finer @-@ scale , dendritic networks of valleys are spread across significant proportions of the landscape . Features of these valleys and their distribution strongly imply that they were carved by runoff resulting from rain or snow fall in early Mars history . Subsurface water flow and groundwater sapping may play important subsidiary roles in some networks , but precipitation was probably the root cause of the incision in almost all cases . 
 Along crater and canyon walls , there are thousands of features that appear similar to terrestrial gullies . The gullies tend to be in the highlands of the southern hemisphere and to face the Equator ; all are poleward of 30 ° latitude . A number of authors have suggested that their formation process involves liquid water , probably from melting ice , although others have argued for formation mechanisms involving carbon dioxide frost or the movement of dry dust . No partially degraded gullies have formed by weathering and no superimposed impact craters have been observed , indicating that these are young features , possibly still active . Other geological features , such as deltas and alluvial fans preserved in craters , are further evidence for warmer , wetter conditions at an interval or intervals in earlier Mars history . Such conditions necessarily require the widespread presence of crater lakes across a large proportion of the surface , for which there is independent mineralogical , <unk> and geomorphological evidence . 
 Further evidence that liquid water once existed on the surface of Mars comes from the detection of specific minerals such as hematite and goethite , both of which sometimes form in the presence of water . In 2004 , Opportunity detected the mineral jarosite . This forms only in the presence of acidic water , which demonstrates that water once existed on Mars . More recent evidence for liquid water comes from the finding of the mineral gypsum on the surface by NASA 's Mars rover Opportunity in December 2011 . The study leader Francis McCubbin , a planetary scientist at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque looking at <unk> in crystalline minerals from Mars , states that the amount of water in the upper mantle of Mars is equal to or greater than that of Earth at 50 – 300 parts per million of water , which is enough to cover the entire planet to a depth of 200 – 1 @,@ 000 m ( 660 – 3 @,@ 280 ft ) . 
 On March 18 , 2013 , NASA reported evidence from instruments on the Curiosity rover of mineral hydration , likely hydrated calcium sulfate , in several rock samples including the broken fragments of " <unk> " rock and " Sutton <unk> " rock as well as in veins and nodules in other rocks like " Knorr " rock and " Wernicke " rock . Analysis using the rover 's DAN instrument provided evidence of subsurface water , amounting to as much as 4 % water content , down to a depth of 60 cm ( 24 in ) , in the rover 's traverse from the Bradbury Landing site to the Yellowknife Bay area in the Glenelg terrain . On September 28 , 2015 , NASA announced that they had found conclusive evidence of hydrated brine flows on recurring slope lineae , based on spectrometer readings of the darkened areas of slopes . These observations provided confirmation of earlier hypotheses based on timing of formation and rate of growth that these dark streaks resulted from water flowing in the very shallow subsurface . The streaks contain hydrated salts , perchlorates , which have water molecules in their crystal structure . The streaks flow downhill in Martian summer , when the temperature is above – 23 degrees Celsius , and freeze at lower temperatures . 
 Researchers think that much of the low northern plains of the planet were covered with an ocean hundreds of meters deep , though this remains controversial . In March 2015 , scientists stated that such an ocean might have been the size of Earth 's Arctic Ocean . This finding was derived from the ratio of water and deuterium in the modern Martian atmosphere compared to the ratio found on Earth . Eight times as much deuterium was found at Mars than exists on Earth , suggesting that ancient Mars had significantly higher levels of water . Results from the Curiosity rover had previously found a high ratio of deuterium in Gale Crater , though not significantly high enough to suggest the presence of an ocean . Other scientists caution that this new study has not been confirmed , and point out that Martian climate models have not yet shown that the planet was warm enough in the past to support bodies of liquid water . 
 = = = = Polar caps = = = = 
 Mars has two permanent polar ice caps . During a pole 's winter , it lies in continuous darkness , chilling the surface and causing the deposition of 25 – 30 % of the atmosphere into slabs of CO2 ice ( dry ice ) . When the poles are again exposed to sunlight , the frozen CO2 sublimes , creating enormous winds that sweep off the poles as fast as 400 km / h ( 250 mph ) . These seasonal actions transport large amounts of dust and water vapor , giving rise to Earth @-@ like frost and large cirrus clouds . Clouds of water @-@ ice were photographed by the Opportunity rover in 2004 . 
 The polar caps at both poles consist primarily ( 70 % ) of water ice . Frozen carbon dioxide accumulates as a comparatively thin layer about one metre thick on the north cap in the northern winter only , whereas the south cap has a permanent dry ice cover about eight metres thick . This permanent dry ice cover at the south pole is peppered by flat floored , shallow , roughly circular pits , which repeat imaging shows are expanding by meters per year ; this suggests that the permanent CO2 cover over the south pole water ice is degrading over time . The northern polar cap has a diameter of about 1 @,@ 000 km ( 620 mi ) during the northern Mars summer , and contains about 1 @.@ 6 million cubic kilometres ( 380 @,@ 000 cu mi ) of ice , which , if spread evenly on the cap , would be 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) thick . ( This compares to a volume of 2 @.@ 85 million cubic kilometres ( 680 @,@ 000 cu mi ) for the Greenland ice sheet . ) The southern polar cap has a diameter of 350 km ( 220 mi ) and a thickness of 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) . The total volume of ice in the south polar cap plus the adjacent layered deposits has been estimated at 1 @.@ 6 million cubic km . Both polar caps show spiral troughs , which recent analysis of SHARAD ice penetrating radar has shown are a result of katabatic winds that spiral due to the Coriolis Effect . 
 The seasonal frosting of areas near the southern ice cap results in the formation of transparent 1 @-@ metre @-@ thick slabs of dry ice above the ground . With the arrival of spring , sunlight warms the subsurface and pressure from <unk> CO2 builds up under a slab , elevating and ultimately rupturing it . This leads to geyser @-@ like eruptions of CO2 gas mixed with dark basaltic sand or dust . This process is rapid , observed happening in the space of a few days , weeks or months , a rate of change rather unusual in geology – especially for Mars . The gas rushing underneath a slab to the site of a geyser carves a spiderweb @-@ like pattern of radial channels under the ice , the process being the inverted equivalent of an erosion network formed by water draining through a single plughole . 
 = = = Geography and naming of surface features = = = 
 Although better remembered for mapping the Moon , Johann Heinrich Mädler and Wilhelm Beer were the first " <unk> " . They began by establishing that most of Mars 's surface features were permanent and by more precisely determining the planet 's rotation period . In 1840 , Mädler combined ten years of observations and drew the first map of Mars . Rather than giving names to the various markings , Beer and Mädler simply designated them with letters ; Meridian Bay ( Sinus Meridiani ) was thus feature " a " . 
 Today , features on Mars are named from a variety of sources . Albedo features are named for classical mythology . Craters larger than 60 km are named for deceased scientists and writers and others who have contributed to the study of Mars . Craters smaller than 60 km are named for towns and villages of the world with populations of less than 100 @,@ 000 . Large valleys are named for the word " Mars " or " star " in various languages ; small valleys are named for rivers . 
 Large albedo features retain many of the older names , but are often updated to reflect new knowledge of the nature of the features . For example , Nix <unk> ( the snows of Olympus ) has become Olympus Mons ( Mount Olympus ) . The surface of Mars as seen from Earth is divided into two kinds of areas , with differing albedo . The paler plains covered with dust and sand rich in reddish iron oxides were once thought of as Martian " continents " and given names like Arabia Terra ( land of Arabia ) or <unk> Planitia ( Amazonian plain ) . The dark features were thought to be seas , hence their names Mare <unk> , Mare <unk> and Aurorae Sinus . The largest dark feature seen from Earth is Syrtis Major Planum . The permanent northern polar ice cap is named Planum <unk> , whereas the southern cap is called Planum Australe . 
 Mars 's equator is defined by its rotation , but the location of its Prime Meridian was specified , as was Earth 's ( at Greenwich ) , by choice of an arbitrary point ; Mädler and Beer selected a line in 1830 for their first maps of Mars . After the spacecraft Mariner 9 provided extensive imagery of Mars in 1972 , a small crater ( later called Airy @-@ 0 ) , located in the Sinus Meridiani ( " Middle Bay " or " Meridian Bay " ) , was chosen for the definition of 0 @.@ 0 ° longitude to coincide with the original selection . 
 Because Mars has no oceans and hence no " sea level " , a zero @-@ elevation surface had to be selected as a reference level ; this is called the <unk> of Mars , analogous to the terrestrial geoid . Zero altitude was defined by the height at which there is 610 @.@ 5 Pa ( 6 @.@ 105 mbar ) of atmospheric pressure . This pressure corresponds to the triple point of water , and it is about 0 @.@ 6 % of the sea level surface pressure on Earth ( 0 @.@ 006 atm ) . In practice , today this surface is defined directly from satellite gravity measurements . 
 = = = = Map of quadrangles = = = = 
 For mapping purposes , the United States Geological Survey divides the surface of Mars into thirty " quadrangles " , each named for a prominent physiographic feature within that quadrangle . The quadrangles can be seen and explored via the interactive image map below . 
 = = = = Impact topography = = = = 
 The dichotomy of Martian topography is striking : northern plains flattened by lava flows contrast with the southern highlands , pitted and cratered by ancient impacts . Research in 2008 has presented evidence regarding a theory proposed in 1980 postulating that , four billion years ago , the northern hemisphere of Mars was struck by an object one @-@ tenth to two @-@ thirds the size of Earth 's Moon . If validated , this would make the northern hemisphere of Mars the site of an impact crater 10 @,@ 600 by 8 @,@ 500 km ( 6 @,@ 600 by 5 @,@ 300 mi ) in size , or roughly the area of Europe , Asia , and Australia combined , surpassing the South Pole – Aitken basin as the largest impact crater in the Solar System . 
 Mars is scarred by a number of impact craters : a total of 43 @,@ 000 craters with a diameter of 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) or greater have been found . The largest confirmed of these is the Hellas impact basin , a light albedo feature clearly visible from Earth . Due to the smaller mass of Mars , the probability of an object colliding with the planet is about half that of Earth . Mars is located closer to the asteroid belt , so it has an increased chance of being struck by materials from that source . Mars is more likely to be struck by short @-@ period comets , i.e. , those that lie within the orbit of Jupiter . In spite of this , there are far fewer craters on Mars compared with the Moon , because the atmosphere of Mars provides protection against small meteors . Craters can have a morphology that suggests the ground became wet after the meteor impacted . 
 = = = = Volcanoes = = = = 
 The shield volcano Olympus Mons ( Mount Olympus ) is an extinct volcano in the vast upland region Tharsis , which contains several other large volcanoes . Olympus Mons is roughly three times the height of Mount Everest , which in comparison stands at just over 8 @.@ 8 km ( 5 @.@ 5 mi ) . It is either the tallest or second @-@ tallest mountain in the Solar System , depending on how it is measured , with various sources giving figures ranging from about 21 to 27 km ( 13 to 17 mi ) high . 
 = = = = Tectonic sites = = = = 
 The large canyon , Valles Marineris ( Latin for " Mariner Valleys " , also known as <unk> in the old canal maps ) , has a length of 4 @,@ 000 km ( 2 @,@ 500 mi ) and a depth of up to 7 km ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) . The length of Valles Marineris is equivalent to the length of Europe and extends across one @-@ fifth the circumference of Mars . By comparison , the Grand Canyon on Earth is only 446 km ( 277 mi ) long and nearly 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) deep . Valles Marineris was formed due to the swelling of the Tharsis area , which caused the crust in the area of Valles Marineris to collapse . In 2012 , it was proposed that Valles Marineris is not just a graben , but a plate boundary where 150 km ( 93 mi ) of transverse motion has occurred , making Mars a planet with possibly a two @-@ tectonic plate arrangement . 
 = = = = Holes = = = = 
 Images from the Thermal Emission Imaging System ( <unk> ) aboard NASA 's Mars Odyssey orbiter have revealed seven possible cave entrances on the flanks of the volcano <unk> Mons . The caves , named after loved ones of their discoverers , are collectively known as the " seven sisters " . Cave entrances measure from 100 to 252 m ( 328 to 827 ft ) wide and they are estimated to be at least 73 to 96 m ( 240 to 315 ft ) deep . Because light does not reach the floor of most of the caves , it is possible that they extend much deeper than these lower estimates and widen below the surface . " Dena " is the only exception ; its floor is visible and was measured to be 130 m ( 430 ft ) deep . The interiors of these caverns may be protected from micrometeoroids , UV radiation , solar flares and high energy particles that bombard the planet 's surface . 
 = = = Atmosphere = = = 
 Mars lost its magnetosphere 4 billion years ago , possibly because of numerous asteroid strikes , so the solar wind interacts directly with the Martian ionosphere , lowering the atmospheric density by stripping away atoms from the outer layer . Both Mars Global Surveyor and Mars Express have detected ionised atmospheric particles trailing off into space behind Mars , and this atmospheric loss is being studied by the MAVEN orbiter . Compared to Earth , the atmosphere of Mars is quite rarefied . Atmospheric pressure on the surface today ranges from a low of 30 Pa ( 0 @.@ 030 kPa ) on Olympus Mons to over 1 @,@ 155 Pa ( 1 @.@ 155 kPa ) in Hellas Planitia , with a mean pressure at the surface level of 600 Pa ( 0 @.@ 60 kPa ) . The highest atmospheric density on Mars is equal to that found 35 km ( 22 mi ) above Earth 's surface . The resulting mean surface pressure is only 0 @.@ 6 % of that of Earth ( 101 @.@ 3 kPa ) . The scale height of the atmosphere is about 10 @.@ 8 km ( 6 @.@ 7 mi ) , which is higher than Earth 's ( 6 km ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) ) because the surface gravity of Mars is only about 38 % of Earth 's , an effect offset by both the lower temperature and 50 % higher average molecular weight of the atmosphere of Mars . 
 The atmosphere of Mars consists of about 96 % carbon dioxide , 1 @.@ 93 % argon and 1 @.@ 89 % nitrogen along with traces of oxygen and water . The atmosphere is quite dusty , containing particulates about 1 @.@ 5 µm in diameter which give the Martian sky a tawny color when seen from the surface . It may take on a pink hue due to iron oxide particles suspended in it . 
 Methane has been detected in the Martian atmosphere with a mole fraction of about 30 ppb ; it occurs in extended plumes , and the profiles imply that the methane was released from discrete regions . In northern midsummer , the principal plume contained 19 @,@ 000 metric tons of methane , with an estimated source strength of 0 @.@ 6 kilograms per second . The profiles suggest that there may be two local source regions , the first centered near 30 ° N 260 ° W and the second near 0 ° N 310 ° W. It is estimated that Mars must produce 270 tonnes per year of methane . 
 Methane can exist in the Martian atmosphere for only a limited period before it is destroyed — estimates of its lifetime range from 0 @.@ 6 – 4 years . Its presence despite this short lifetime indicates that an active source of the gas must be present . Volcanic activity , cometary impacts , and the presence of methanogenic microbial life forms are among possible sources . Methane could be produced by a non @-@ biological process called serpentinization involving water , carbon dioxide , and the mineral olivine , which is known to be common on Mars . 
 The Curiosity rover , which landed on Mars in August 2012 , is able to make measurements that distinguish between different <unk> of methane , but even if the mission is to determine that microscopic Martian life is the source of the methane , the life forms likely reside far below the surface , outside of the rover 's reach . The first measurements with the <unk> Laser Spectrometer ( TLS ) indicated that there is less than 5 ppb of methane at the landing site at the point of the measurement . On September 19 , 2013 , NASA scientists , from further measurements by Curiosity , reported no detection of atmospheric methane with a measured value of 0 @.@ 18 ± 0 @.@ 67 <unk> corresponding to an upper limit of only 1 @.@ 3 <unk> ( 95 % confidence limit ) and , as a result , conclude that the probability of current methanogenic microbial activity on Mars is reduced . 
 The Mars Orbiter Mission by India is searching for methane in the atmosphere , while the ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter , planned to launch in 2016 , would further study the methane as well as its decomposition products , such as formaldehyde and methanol . 
 On December 16 , 2014 , NASA reported the Curiosity rover detected a " tenfold spike " , likely localized , in the amount of methane in the Martian atmosphere . Sample measurements taken " a dozen times over 20 months " showed increases in late 2013 and early 2014 , averaging " 7 parts of methane per billion in the atmosphere . " Before and after that , readings averaged around one @-@ tenth that level . 
 Ammonia was tentatively detected on Mars by the Mars Express satellite , but with its relatively short lifetime , it is not clear what produced it . Ammonia is not stable in the Martian atmosphere and breaks down after a few hours . One possible source is volcanic activity . 
 = = = = Aurora = = = = 
 In 1994 the European Space Agency 's Mars Express found an ultraviolet glow coming from " magnetic umbrellas " in the southern hemisphere . Mars does not have a global magnetic field which guides charged particles entering the atmosphere . Mars has multiple umbrella @-@ shaped magnetic fields mainly in the southern hemisphere , which are remnants of a global field that decayed billions of years ago . 
 In late December 2014 , NASA 's MAVEN spacecraft detected evidence of widespread auroras in Mars 's northern hemisphere and descended to approximately 20 – 30 degrees North latitude of Mars 's equator . The particles causing the aurora penetrated into the Martian atmosphere , creating auroras below 100 km above the surface , Earth 's auroras range from 100 km to 500 km above the surface . Magnetic fields in the solar wind drape over Mars , into the atmosphere , and the charged particles follow the solar wind magnetic field lines into the atmosphere , causing auroras to occur outside the magnetic umbrellas . 
 On March 18 , 2015 , NASA reported the detection of an aurora that is not fully understood and an unexplained dust cloud in the atmosphere of Mars . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Of all the planets in the Solar System , the seasons of Mars are the most Earth @-@ like , due to the similar tilts of the two planets ' rotational axes . The lengths of the Martian seasons are about twice those of Earth 's because Mars 's greater distance from the Sun leads to the Martian year being about two Earth years long . Martian surface temperatures vary from lows of about − 143 ° C ( − 225 ° F ) at the winter polar caps to highs of up to 35 ° C ( 95 ° F ) in equatorial summer . The wide range in temperatures is due to the thin atmosphere which cannot store much solar heat , the low atmospheric pressure , and the low thermal inertia of Martian soil . The planet is 1 @.@ 52 times as far from the Sun as Earth , resulting in just 43 % of the amount of sunlight . 
 If Mars had an Earth @-@ like orbit , its seasons would be similar to Earth 's because its axial tilt is similar to Earth 's . The comparatively large eccentricity of the Martian orbit has a significant effect . Mars is near perihelion when it is summer in the southern hemisphere and winter in the north , and near aphelion when it is winter in the southern hemisphere and summer in the north . As a result , the seasons in the southern hemisphere are more extreme and the seasons in the northern are milder than would otherwise be the case . The summer temperatures in the south can be up to 30 K ( 30 ° C ; 54 ° F ) warmer than the equivalent summer temperatures in the north . 
 Mars has the largest dust storms in the Solar System . These can vary from a storm over a small area , to gigantic storms that cover the entire planet . They tend to occur when Mars is closest to the Sun , and have been shown to increase the global temperature . 
 = = Orbit and rotation = = 
 Mars 's average distance from the Sun is roughly 230 million kilometres ( 143 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 mi ) , and its orbital period is 687 ( Earth ) days . The solar day ( or sol ) on Mars is only slightly longer than an Earth day : 24 hours , 39 minutes , and 35 @.@ 244 seconds . A Martian year is equal to 1 @.@ <unk> Earth years , or 1 year , 320 days , and 18 @.@ 2 hours . 
 The axial tilt of Mars is 25 @.@ 19 degrees relative to its orbital plane , which is similar to the axial tilt of Earth . As a result , Mars has seasons like Earth , though on Mars , they are nearly twice as long because its orbital period is that much longer . In the present day epoch , the orientation of the north pole of Mars is close to the star Deneb . Mars passed an aphelion in March 2010 and its perihelion in March 2011 . The next aphelion came in February 2012 and the next perihelion came in January 2013 . 
 Mars has a relatively pronounced orbital eccentricity of about 0 @.@ 09 ; of the seven other planets in the Solar System , only Mercury has a larger orbital eccentricity . It is known that in the past , Mars has had a much more circular orbit . At one point , 1 @.@ 35 million Earth years ago , Mars had an eccentricity of roughly 0 @.@ 002 , much less than that of Earth today . Mars 's cycle of eccentricity is 96 @,@ 000 Earth years compared to Earth 's cycle of 100 @,@ 000 years . Mars has a much longer cycle of eccentricity with a period of 2 @.@ 2 million Earth years , and this overshadows the 96 @,@ 000 @-@ year cycle in the eccentricity graphs . For the last 35 @,@ 000 years , the orbit of Mars has been getting slightly more eccentric because of the gravitational effects of the other planets . The closest distance between Earth and Mars will continue to mildly decrease for the next 25 @,@ 000 years . 
 = = Habitability and search for life = = 
 = = = Search for life = = = 
 The current understanding of planetary habitability — the ability of a world to develop environmental conditions favorable to the emergence of life — favors planets that have liquid water on their surface . Most often this requires the orbit of a planet to lie within the habitable zone , which for the Sun extends from just beyond Venus to about the semi @-@ major axis of Mars . During perihelion , Mars dips inside this region , but Mars 's thin ( low @-@ pressure ) atmosphere prevents liquid water from existing over large regions for extended periods . The past flow of liquid water demonstrates the planet 's potential for habitability . Recent evidence has suggested that any water on the Martian surface may have been too salty and acidic to support regular terrestrial life . 
 The lack of a magnetosphere and the extremely thin atmosphere of Mars are a challenge : the planet has little heat transfer across its surface , poor insulation against bombardment of the solar wind and insufficient atmospheric pressure to retain water in a liquid form ( water instead sublimes to a gaseous state ) . Mars is nearly , or perhaps totally , geologically dead ; the end of volcanic activity has apparently stopped the recycling of chemicals and minerals between the surface and interior of the planet . 
 Evidence suggests that the planet was once significantly more habitable than it is today , but whether living organisms ever existed there remains unknown . The Viking probes of the mid @-@ 1970s carried experiments designed to detect microorganisms in Martian soil at their respective landing sites and had positive results , including a temporary increase of CO2 production on exposure to water and nutrients . This sign of life was later disputed by scientists , resulting in a continuing debate , with NASA scientist Gilbert Levin asserting that Viking may have found life . A re @-@ analysis of the Viking data , in light of modern knowledge of extremophile forms of life , has suggested that the Viking tests were not sophisticated enough to detect these forms of life . The tests could even have killed a ( hypothetical ) life form . Tests conducted by the Phoenix Mars lander have shown that the soil has a alkaline pH and it contains magnesium , sodium , potassium and chloride . The soil nutrients may be able to support life , but life would still have to be shielded from the intense ultraviolet light . A recent analysis of martian meteorite <unk> found 0 @.@ 6 ppm ClO4 − , 1 @.@ 4 ppm ClO3 − , and 16 ppm NO3 − , most likely of martian origin . The ClO3 − suggests presence of other highly oxidizing <unk> such as <unk> − or ClO , produced both by UV oxidation of Cl and X @-@ ray radiolysis of ClO4 − . Thus only highly refractory and / or well @-@ protected ( sub @-@ surface ) organics or life forms are likely to survive . A 2014 analysis of the Phoenix <unk> showed that the Ca ( ClO4 ) 2 in the Phoenix soil has not interacted with liquid water of any form , perhaps for as long as 600 Myr . If it had , the highly soluble Ca ( ClO4 ) 2 in contact with liquid water would have formed only CaSO4 . This suggests a severely arid environment , with minimal or no liquid water interaction . 
 Scientists have proposed that carbonate globules found in meteorite <unk> , which is thought to have originated from Mars , could be fossilized microbes extant on Mars when the meteorite was blasted from the Martian surface by a meteor strike some 15 million years ago . This proposal has been met with skepticism , and an exclusively inorganic origin for the shapes has been proposed . 
 Small quantities of methane and formaldehyde detected by Mars orbiters are both claimed to be possible evidence for life , as these chemical compounds would quickly break down in the Martian atmosphere . Alternatively , these compounds may instead be replenished by volcanic or other geological means , such as serpentinization . 
 Impact glass , formed by the impact of meteors , which on Earth can preserve signs of life , has been found on the surface of the impact craters on Mars . Likewise , the glass in impact craters on Mars could have preserved signs of life if life existed at the site . 
 = = Moons = = 
 Mars has two relatively small natural moons , Phobos ( about 22 km ( 14 mi ) in diameter ) and Deimos ( about 12 km ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) in diameter ) , which orbit close to the planet . Asteroid capture is a long @-@ favored theory , but their origin remains uncertain . Both satellites were discovered in 1877 by Asaph Hall ; they are named after the characters Phobos ( panic / fear ) and Deimos ( terror / dread ) , who , in Greek mythology , accompanied their father Ares , god of war , into battle . Mars was the Roman counterpart of Ares . In modern Greek , though , the planet retains its ancient name Ares ( Aris : <unk> ) . 
 From the surface of Mars , the motions of Phobos and Deimos appear different from that of the Moon . Phobos rises in the west , sets in the east , and rises again in just 11 hours . Deimos , being only just outside synchronous orbit – where the orbital period would match the planet 's period of rotation – rises as expected in the east but slowly . Despite the 30 @-@ hour orbit of Deimos , 2 @.@ 7 days elapse between its rise and set for an equatorial observer , as it slowly falls behind the rotation of Mars . 
 Because the orbit of Phobos is below synchronous altitude , the tidal forces from the planet Mars are gradually lowering its orbit . In about 50 million years , it could either crash into Mars 's surface or break up into a ring structure around the planet . 
 The origin of the two moons is not well understood . Their low albedo and carbonaceous chondrite composition have been regarded as similar to asteroids , supporting the capture theory . The unstable orbit of Phobos would seem to point towards a relatively recent capture . But both have circular orbits , near the equator , which is unusual for captured objects and the required capture dynamics are complex . Accretion early in the history of Mars is plausible , but would not account for a composition resembling asteroids rather than Mars itself , if that is confirmed . 
 A third possibility is the involvement of a third body or a type of impact disruption . More @-@ recent lines of evidence for Phobos having a highly porous interior , and suggesting a composition containing mainly phyllosilicates and other minerals known from Mars , point toward an origin of Phobos from material ejected by an impact on Mars that <unk> in Martian orbit , similar to the prevailing theory for the origin of Earth 's moon . Although the <unk> spectra of the moons of Mars resemble those of outer @-@ belt asteroids , the thermal infrared spectra of Phobos are reported to be inconsistent with chondrites of any class . 
 Mars may have moons smaller than 50 to 100 metres ( 160 to 330 ft ) in diameter , and a dust ring is predicted to exist between Phobos and Deimos . 
 = = Exploration = = 
 Dozens of <unk> spacecraft , including orbiters , landers , and rovers , have been sent to Mars by the Soviet Union , the United States , Europe , and India to study the planet 's surface , climate , and geology . Presently , information is being relayed from seven active probes on or in @-@ orbit around Mars , including five orbiters and two rovers . This includes 2001 Mars Odyssey , Mars Express , Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter ( MRO ) , MAVEN , Mars Orbiter Mission , Opportunity , and Curiosity . The public can request MRO images of Mars via the <unk> program . 
 The Mars Science Laboratory , named Curiosity , launched on November 26 , 2011 , and reached Mars on August 6 , 2012 UTC . It is larger and more advanced than the Mars Exploration Rovers , with a movement rate up to 90 m ( 300 ft ) per hour . Experiments include a laser chemical sampler that can deduce the make @-@ up of rocks at a distance of 7 m ( 23 ft ) . On February 10 , 2013 , the Curiosity rover obtained the first deep rock samples ever taken from another planetary body , using its on @-@ board drill . 
 On September 24 , 2014 , Mars Orbiter Mission ( MOM ) , launched by the Indian Space Research Organisation , reached Mars orbit . ISRO launched MOM on November 5 , 2013 , with the aim of analyzing the Martian atmosphere and topography . The Mars Orbiter Mission used a Hohmann transfer orbit to escape Earth 's gravitational influence and catapult into a nine @-@ month @-@ long voyage to Mars . The mission is the first successful Asian interplanetary mission . 
 = = = Future = = = 
 Planned for March 2016 is the launch of the InSight lander , together with two identical <unk> that will fly by Mars and provide landing telemetry . The lander and <unk> are planned to arrive at Mars in September 2016 . 
 The European Space Agency , in collaboration with Roscosmos , will deploy the ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter and Schiaparelli lander in 2016 , and the ExoMars rover in 2018 . NASA plans to launch its Mars 2020 astrobiology rover in 2020 . 
 The United Arab Emirates ' Mars Hope orbiter is planned for launch in 2020 , reaching Mars orbit in 2021 . The probe will make a global study of the Martian atmosphere . 
 Several plans for a human mission to Mars have been proposed throughout the 20th century and into the 21st century , but no active plan has an arrival date sooner than 2025 . 
 = = Astronomy on Mars = = 
 With the existence of various orbiters , landers , and rovers , it is possible to do astronomy from Mars . Although Mars 's moon Phobos appears about one third the angular diameter of the full moon on Earth , Deimos appears more or less star @-@ like and appears only slightly brighter than Venus does from Earth . 
 There are various phenomena , well @-@ known on Earth , that have been observed on Mars , such as meteors and auroras . A transit of Earth as seen from Mars will occur on November 10 , 2084 . There are transits of Mercury and transits of Venus , and the moons Phobos and Deimos are of sufficiently small angular diameter that their partial " eclipses " of the Sun are best considered transits ( see Transit of Deimos from Mars ) . 
 On October 19 , 2014 , Comet Siding Spring passed extremely close to Mars , so close that the coma may have enveloped Mars . 
 = = Viewing = = 
 Because the orbit of Mars is eccentric , its apparent magnitude at opposition from the Sun can range from − 3 @.@ 0 to − 1 @.@ 4 . The minimum brightness is magnitude + 1 @.@ 6 when the planet is in conjunction with the Sun . Mars usually appears distinctly yellow , orange , or red ; the actual color of Mars is closer to butterscotch , and the redness seen is just dust in the planet 's atmosphere . NASA 's Spirit rover has taken pictures of a greenish @-@ brown , mud @-@ colored landscape with blue @-@ grey rocks and patches of light red sand . When farthest away from Earth , it is more than seven times farther away than when it is closest . When least favorably positioned , it can be lost in the Sun 's glare for months at a time . At its most favorable times — at 15- or 17 @-@ year intervals , and always between late July and late September — a lot of surface detail can be seen with a telescope . Especially noticeable , even at low magnification , are the polar ice caps . 
 As Mars approaches opposition , it begins a period of retrograde motion , which means it will appear to move backwards in a looping motion with respect to the background stars . The duration of this retrograde motion lasts for about 72 days , and Mars reaches its peak luminosity in the middle of this motion . 
 = = = Closest approaches = = = 
 = = = = Relative = = = = 
 The point at which Mars 's geocentric longitude is 180 ° different from the Sun 's is known as opposition , which is near the time of closest approach to Earth . The time of opposition can occur as much as 8 @.@ 5 days away from the closest approach . The distance at close approach varies between about 54 and about 103 million km due to the planets ' elliptical orbits , which causes comparable variation in angular size . The last Mars opposition occurred on April 8 , 2014 at a distance of about 93 million km . The next Mars opposition occurs on May 22 , 2016 at a distance of 76 million km . The average time between the successive oppositions of Mars , its synodic period , is 780 days but the number of days between the dates of successive oppositions can range from 764 to 812 . 
 As Mars approaches opposition it begins a period of retrograde motion , which makes it appear to move backwards in a looping motion relative to the background stars . The duration of this retrograde motion is about 72 days . 
 = = = = Absolute , around the present time = = = = 
 Mars made its closest approach to Earth and maximum apparent brightness in nearly 60 @,@ 000 years , 55 @,@ 758 @,@ 006 km ( 0 @.@ <unk> AU ; 34 @,@ 646 @,@ 419 mi ) , magnitude − 2 @.@ 88 , on August 27 , 2003 at 9 : 51 : 13 UT . This occurred when Mars was one day from opposition and about three days from its perihelion , making it particularly easy to see from Earth . The last time it came so close is estimated to have been on September 12 , 57 617 BC , the next time being in 2287 . This record approach was only slightly closer than other recent close approaches . For instance , the minimum distance on August 22 , 1924 was 0 @.@ <unk> AU , and the minimum distance on August 24 , <unk> will be 0 @.@ <unk> AU . 
 = = Historical observations = = 
 The history of observations of Mars is marked by the oppositions of Mars , when the planet is closest to Earth and hence is most easily visible , which occur every couple of years . Even more notable are the perihelic oppositions of Mars , which occur every 15 or 17 years and are distinguished because Mars is close to perihelion , making it even closer to Earth . 
 = = = Ancient and medieval observations = = = 
 The existence of Mars as a wandering object in the night sky was recorded by the ancient Egyptian astronomers and by 1534 BCE they were familiar with the retrograde motion of the planet . By the period of the Neo @-@ Babylonian Empire , the Babylonian astronomers were making regular records of the positions of the planets and systematic observations of their behavior . For Mars , they knew that the planet made 37 synodic periods , or 42 circuits of the zodiac , every 79 years . They invented arithmetic methods for making minor corrections to the predicted positions of the planets . 
 In the fourth century BCE , Aristotle noted that Mars disappeared behind the Moon during an occultation , indicating the planet was farther away . Ptolemy , a Greek living in Alexandria , attempted to address the problem of the orbital motion of Mars . Ptolemy 's model and his collective work on astronomy was presented in the multi @-@ volume collection Almagest , which became the authoritative treatise on Western astronomy for the next fourteen centuries . Literature from ancient China confirms that Mars was known by Chinese astronomers by no later than the fourth century BCE . In the fifth century CE , the Indian astronomical text Surya Siddhanta estimated the diameter of Mars . In the East Asian cultures , Mars is traditionally referred to as the " fire star " ( <unk> ) , based on the Five elements . 
 During the seventeenth century , Tycho Brahe measured the diurnal parallax of Mars that Johannes Kepler used to make a preliminary calculation of the relative distance to the planet . When the telescope became available , the diurnal parallax of Mars was again measured in an effort to determine the Sun @-@ Earth distance . This was first performed by Giovanni Domenico Cassini in 1672 . The early parallax measurements were hampered by the quality of the instruments . The only occultation of Mars by Venus observed was that of October 13 , 1590 , seen by Michael Maestlin at Heidelberg . In 1610 , Mars was viewed by Galileo Galilei , who was first to see it via telescope . The first person to draw a map of Mars that displayed any terrain features was the Dutch astronomer Christiaan Huygens . 
 = = = Martian " canals " = = = 
 By the 19th century , the resolution of telescopes reached a level sufficient for surface features to be identified . A perihelic opposition of Mars occurred on September 5 , 1877 . In that year , Italian astronomer Giovanni Schiaparelli used a 22 cm ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) telescope in Milan to help produce the first detailed map of Mars . These maps notably contained features he called canali , which were later shown to be an optical illusion . These canali were supposedly long , straight lines on the surface of Mars , to which he gave names of famous rivers on Earth . His term , which means " channels " or " grooves " , was popularly mistranslated in English as " canals " . 
 Influenced by the observations , the orientalist Percival Lowell founded an observatory which had 30 and 45 cm ( 12 and 18 in ) telescopes . The observatory was used for the exploration of Mars during the last good opportunity in 1894 and the following less favorable oppositions . He published several books on Mars and life on the planet , which had a great influence on the public . The canali were independently found by other astronomers , like Henri Joseph <unk> and Louis <unk> in Nice , using one of the largest telescopes of that time . 
 The seasonal changes ( consisting of the diminishing of the polar caps and the dark areas formed during Martian summer ) in combination with the canals lead to speculation about life on Mars , and it was a long @-@ held belief that Mars contained vast seas and vegetation . The telescope never reached the resolution required to give proof to any speculations . As bigger telescopes were used , fewer long , straight canali were observed . During an observation in 1909 by Flammarion with an 84 cm ( 33 in ) telescope , irregular patterns were observed , but no canali were seen . 
 Even in the 1960s articles were published on Martian biology , putting aside explanations other than life for the seasonal changes on Mars . Detailed scenarios for the metabolism and chemical cycles for a functional ecosystem have been published . 
 = = = Spacecraft visitation = = = 
 Once spacecraft visited the planet during NASA 's Mariner missions in the 1960s and 70s these concepts were radically broken . The results of the Viking life @-@ detection experiments aided an intermission in which the hypothesis of a hostile , dead planet was generally accepted . 
 Mariner 9 and Viking allowed better maps of Mars to be made using the data from these missions , and another major leap forward was the Mars Global Surveyor mission , launched in 1996 and operated until late 2006 , that allowed complete , extremely detailed maps of the Martian topography , magnetic field and surface minerals to be obtained . These maps are available online ; for example , at Google Mars . Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter and Mars Express continued exploring with new instruments , and supporting lander missions . NASA provides two online tools : Mars Trek , which provides visualizations of the planet using data from 50 years of exploration , and Experience Curiosity , which simulates traveling on Mars in 3 @-@ D with Curiosity . 
 = = In culture = = 
 Mars is named after the Roman god of war . In different cultures , Mars represents masculinity and youth . Its symbol , a circle with an arrow pointing out to the upper right , is used as a symbol for the male gender . 
 The many failures in Mars exploration probes resulted in a satirical counter @-@ culture blaming the failures on an Earth @-@ Mars " Bermuda Triangle " , a " Mars Curse " , or a " Great Galactic Ghoul " that feeds on Martian spacecraft . 
 = = = Intelligent " Martians " = = = 
 The fashionable idea that Mars was populated by intelligent Martians exploded in the late 19th century . Schiaparelli 's " canali " observations combined with Percival Lowell 's books on the subject put forward the standard notion of a planet that was a drying , cooling , dying world with ancient civilizations constructing irrigation works . 
 Many other observations and proclamations by notable personalities added to what has been termed " Mars Fever " . In 1899 while investigating atmospheric radio noise using his receivers in his Colorado Springs lab , inventor Nikola Tesla observed repetitive signals that he later surmised might have been radio communications coming from another planet , possibly Mars . In a 1901 interview Tesla said : 
 It was some time afterward when the thought flashed upon my mind that the disturbances I had observed might be due to an intelligent control . Although I could not decipher their meaning , it was impossible for me to think of them as having been entirely accidental . The feeling is constantly growing on me that I had been the first to hear the greeting of one planet to another . 
 Tesla 's theories gained support from Lord Kelvin who , while visiting the United States in 1902 , was reported to have said that he thought Tesla had picked up Martian signals being sent to the United States . Kelvin " emphatically " denied this report shortly before departing America : " What I really said was that the inhabitants of Mars , if there are any , were doubtless able to see New York , particularly the glare of the electricity . " 
 In a New York Times article in 1901 , Edward Charles Pickering , director of the Harvard College Observatory , said that they had received a telegram from Lowell Observatory in Arizona that seemed to confirm that Mars was trying to communicate with Earth . 
 Early in December 1900 , we received from Lowell Observatory in Arizona a telegram that a shaft of light had been seen to project from Mars ( the Lowell observatory makes a specialty of Mars ) lasting seventy minutes . I wired these facts to Europe and sent out <unk> copies through this country . The observer there is a careful , reliable man and there is no reason to doubt that the light existed . It was given as from a well @-@ known geographical point on Mars . That was all . Now the story has gone the world over . In Europe it is stated that I have been in communication with Mars , and all sorts of exaggerations have spring up . Whatever the light was , we have no means of knowing . Whether it had intelligence or not , no one can say . It is absolutely inexplicable . 
 Pickering later proposed creating a set of mirrors in Texas , intended to signal Martians . 
 In recent decades , the high @-@ resolution mapping of the surface of Mars , culminating in Mars Global Surveyor , revealed no artifacts of habitation by " intelligent " life , but pseudoscientific speculation about intelligent life on Mars continues from commentators such as Richard C. Hoagland . Reminiscent of the canali controversy , these speculations are based on small scale features perceived in the spacecraft images , such as ' pyramids ' and the ' Face on Mars ' . Planetary astronomer Carl Sagan wrote : 
 Mars has become a kind of mythic arena onto which we have projected our Earthly hopes and fears . 
 The depiction of Mars in fiction has been stimulated by its dramatic red color and by nineteenth century scientific speculations that its surface conditions might support not just life but intelligent life . Thus originated a large number of science fiction scenarios , among which is H. G. Wells ' The War of the Worlds , published in 1898 , in which Martians seek to escape their dying planet by invading Earth . 
 Influential works included Ray Bradbury 's The Martian Chronicles , in which human explorers accidentally destroy a Martian civilization , Edgar Rice Burroughs ' Barsoom series , C. S. Lewis ' novel Out of the Silent Planet ( 1938 ) , and a number of Robert A. Heinlein stories before the mid @-@ sixties . 
 Jonathan Swift made reference to the moons of Mars , about 150 years before their actual discovery by Asaph Hall , detailing reasonably accurate descriptions of their orbits , in the 19th chapter of his novel Gulliver 's Travels . 
 A comic figure of an intelligent Martian , Marvin the Martian , appeared on television in 1948 as a character in the Looney Tunes animated cartoons of Warner Brothers , and has continued as part of popular culture to the present . In the 1950s , TV shows such as I Love Lucy made light of the popular belief in life on Mars ; for example , when Lucy and Ethel were hired to portray Martians landing on the top of the Empire State Building as a publicity stunt for an upcoming movie . 
 After the Mariner and Viking spacecraft had returned pictures of Mars as it really is , an apparently lifeless and canal @-@ less world , these ideas about Mars had to be abandoned , and a vogue for accurate , realist depictions of human colonies on Mars developed , the best known of which may be Kim Stanley Robinson 's Mars trilogy . Pseudo @-@ scientific speculations about the Face on Mars and other enigmatic landmarks spotted by space probes have meant that ancient civilizations continue to be a popular theme in science fiction , especially in film . 
 The theme of a Martian colony that fights for independence from Earth is a major plot element in the novels of Greg Bear as well as the movie Total Recall ( based on a short story by Philip K. Dick ) and the television series Babylon 5 . Video games use this element , including Red Faction and the Zone of the Enders series . Mars ( and its moons ) were the setting for the popular Doom video game franchise and the later Martian Gothic . 
 = Britney / Brittany = 
 " Britney / Brittany " is the second episode of the second season of the American television series Glee , and the twenty @-@ fourth episode overall . Written and directed by series creator Ryan Murphy , it premiered on the Fox network on September 28 , 2010 , and pays tribute to Britney Spears . Glee club member Brittany S. Pierce ( Heather Morris ) experiences an anesthesia @-@ induced hallucination in which she recreates iconic Spears moments , and comes to self @-@ realization , and several club members follow suit . Co @-@ captains Rachel ( Lea Michele ) and Finn ( Cory Monteith ) experience difficulties in their relationship , and club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) becomes jealous of guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury 's ( Jayma Mays ) new boyfriend , Dr. Carl Howell ( John Stamos ) . 
 Following the first season episode " The Power of Madonna " , which served as an homage to Madonna , Murphy planned two tribute episodes for Glee 's second season , of which " Britney / Brittany " is the first . He was approached by Spears about using her songs , and deemed her one of the most important female musicians of the decade , having inspired many of the show 's young cast to pursue musical careers . Spears makes several cameos in the episode , appearing in the students ' dream sequences . " Britney / Brittany " was also intended as a showcase for Morris , whose character was originally a background character on the show , but was promoted to a series regular after her character proved to be a fan favorite . 
 The episode features seven musical performances , six of which were released as singles . It was watched by 13 @.@ 51 million American viewers , Glee 's third largest audience ever , and attracted mixed reviews from critics . <unk> of The A.V. Club criticized its slightness of plot and incongruous musical numbers ; however , James Poniewozik of Time praised the episode for embracing its fantasy nature . Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack was dismayed by the close recreations of Spears videos , preferring Glee 's more original interpretations of its cover versions , yet MTV 's Aly Semigran felt that the performance of " I 'm a Slave 4 U " was one of the best sequences in the show 's history . Michele 's rendition of " ... Baby One More Time " attracted negative reviews , though her performance of Paramore 's " The Only Exception " was generally well received . Spears ' cameo received mixed reviews , with even those critics who received it favorably expressing relief that she did not appear for longer . Morris ' performance attracted critical praise , particularly for her dancing skills . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) attempts to set New Directions an easy listening adult contemporary assignment , but Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) informs them there is a Facebook group petitioning the club to perform a Britney Spears number at the McKinley High homecoming assembly . Will refuses , stating that Spears is a bad role model . He is supported by club member Brittany ( Heather Morris ) , who reveals that her full name is Brittany Susan Pierce and as such she has always been dismayed that she will never be as successful as the similarly named pop star . 
 Will then discusses Spears with school guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) . While in her office , he meets her new boyfriend , dentist Carl Howell ( John Stamos ) , who offers to talk to the glee club about dental hygiene . A plaque test reveals that Brittany , Rachel ( Lea Michele ) and Artie ( Kevin McHale ) all require dental work . When Brittany is put under general anesthesia so Carl can fill her cavities , she experiences a hallucination in which she performs Spears ' " I 'm a Slave 4 U " . She later returns to Carl 's practice with her friend Santana ( Naya Rivera ) and they share a hallucination in which they duet on " Me Against the Music " . Brittany feels empowered by the encounter , and begins to act more assertively in glee club . 
 Rachel feels threatened by her boyfriend Finn 's ( Cory Monteith ) desire to re @-@ join the school football team , fearing that their relationship will not work if he becomes popular again . After visiting the dentist and experiencing her own hallucination , in which she performs " ... Baby One More Time " , Rachel begins dressing more provocatively . Her new look is received positively and cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) finds school blogger Jacob Ben Israel ( Josh Sussman ) masturbating to a video of Rachel in the library . Rachel relents and encourages Finn to re @-@ join the team . Artie 's dental visit results in a hallucination of " Stronger " in which he is also a member of the football team . Football coach Shannon Beiste ( Dot @-@ Marie Jones ) accepts both Finn and Artie , despite the fact Artie is in a wheelchair . Rachel becomes jealous of the attention Finn is receiving now that he is back on the team and to test Finn 's fidelity , she has his ex @-@ girlfriend Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) attempt to seduce him . She is relieved when Finn turns Quinn down , and sings Paramore 's " The Only Exception " to him in apology . 
 Advised by Emma to relax , Will learns that Carl recently purchased a new Chevrolet Corvette and buys one for himself . He is confronted by his ex @-@ wife Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) , who insists that he return it and cease wasting their savings . Seeing the positive effect Spears has had on the glee club members , Will relents and allows them to perform a Bob Fosse @-@ inspired rendition of " Toxic " at the homecoming assembly , joining them on stage in an effort to impress Emma . When multiple students , including Jacob and Lauren Zizes ( Ashley Fink ) , become sexually aroused by the performance , Sue sets off the fire alarm and has the student body evacuate the auditorium . She later threatens to sue Will after being injured in the stampede . Emma tells Will to stop trying to be someone he is not , and he returns his new car . He also tells the club they will not be performing any more Spears numbers . 
 = = Production = = 
 During the first season of Glee , the show paid tribute to Madonna with the episode " The Power of Madonna " . Murphy planned two tribute episodes for the second season : " Britney / Brittany " , and a second , originally planned to air after Super Bowl XLV in February 2011 . Many of the show 's young cast members were inspired to pursue musical careers by Spears . Murphy stated that it was Spears ' idea for Glee to use her songs , explaining : " I think she loves what the show 's about , paying tribute to pop culture in a very loving , respectful , kind way . She responded to that . " He described Spears as " arguably the most important female [ musician ] other than Lady Gaga in the last 10 years , " commenting that the episode is not only concerned with her music , but also her public image . 
 In May 2010 , Morrison told US Weekly that he hoped no Spears songs would be performed on Glee . Based on his comments , Murphy had Morrison 's character Will spend the episode resisting his students ' desire to perform her songs . Will 's storyline featuring a Chevrolet Corvette involved product placement for the Chevrolet division of General Motors , who became an advertiser and event sponsor for Glee prior to its 2009 launch . 
 The cast received their scripts for the episode on July 26 , 2010 , and Murphy began directing it on August 2 , 2010 . Spears filmed her guest starring scenes on August 18 and 19 , 2010 . Murphy commented that : " At the heart of it , it 's a show designed to show off the skills of Heather Morris " . Prior to appearing in Glee , Morris was a back @-@ up dancer for Beyoncé Knowles . She was originally hired as a choreographer to teach cast members Colfer and Jenna Ushkowitz the " Single Ladies " dance . A week later , she was cast as cheerleader Brittany . Morris had a recurring role throughout the first season , and was promoted to a series regular for season two . At the 2010 Television Critics Association Summer Press Tour , Murphy stated that Brittany would have " big storylines " in the new season , as viewers want to know more about her . 
 Stamos makes his first Glee appearance in " Britney / Brittany " playing Carl Howell , a dentist and Emma 's love @-@ interest . Other recurring characters who appear in the episode are glee club member Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) , Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) , Coach Shannon Beiste ( Jones ) , school reporter Jacob Ben Israel ( Sussman ) , cheerleader Becky Jackson ( Lauren Potter ) , school bullies Dave Karofsky ( Max Adler ) and Azimio ( James Earl ) and student Lauren Zizes ( Fink ) . So You Think You Can Dance contestant Mark Kanemura appears as a backing dancer . 
 = = Music = = 
 The episode featured cover versions of five Spears songs , two of which were performed by Morris . " Stronger " , " ... Baby One More Time " , " Toxic " , " I 'm a Slave 4 U " , and " Me Against the Music " ( featuring Madonna ) were covered . " The Only Exception " by Paramore and " Sailing " by Christopher Cross were also performed . All songs except " Sailing " were released as singles , available for download , and all songs except " I 'm a Slave 4 U " , " ... Baby One More Time " , and " Sailing " are included on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 4 . Both Spears and Paramore 's Hayley Williams praised the episode via the social networking website Twitter , approving of the use of their songs . All singles managed to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 , selling 406 @,@ 000 downloads collectively . The cast 's cover of " Toxic " charted as the highest of the six , at number sixteen with 109 @,@ 000 downloads . 
 Tim Stack of Entertainment Weekly felt that the performances of " I 'm a Slave 4 U " and " Me Against the Music " fell flat , opining that Glee 's best musical numbers are the ones which twist , rather than imitate the original versions . Though he praised Morris ' dancing , he felt the episode revealed her to be " not a standout vocalist . " Conversely , Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone enjoyed the direct recreations of iconic Spears moments in " I 'm a Slave 4 U " , and MTV 's Aly Semigran called it one of the best sequences in the show 's history . Futterman was also impressed by the " Me Against the Music " recreation , highlighting the way it played on the ambiguous Brittany / Santana relationship , complimenting Morris ' dancing and Rivera 's vocals . 
 Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal criticized Michele 's rendition of " ... Baby One More Time " , writing , " Her earnestness , her adoring look and her intelligent voice bumps up against the breathless sound of breathy pop . It 's like a YouTube spoof , an opera singer trying to make a barmaid 's ditty on Oktoberfest more appealing — by shedding her clothes . " Futterman was left wanting by the number , feeling that " the tune lost all of its scandalous sexuality with Rachel 's octaves @-@ higher singing . " 
 Stack deemed " Stronger " his favorite performance of the episode , as well as the best incorporation of Spears ' music , as the song served Artie 's storyline . He praised the increased use of McHale as a vocalist in the second season , enjoying his soulful voice . Flandez also enjoyed " Stronger " , appreciating the twist of having males sing a feminist empowerment song . Semigran wrote that it was " Toxic " which provided the best Spears cover of the episode , commenting that it " took on its own fresh sound all while honoring the original " . She disapproved of " The Only Exception " as the closing song , feeling that the use of another Spears song such as " Everytime " would have been more appropriate . However , Flandez called Michele 's Paramore rendition " suitably earnest " , Futterman described it as " gorgeous and tender " , and Stack felt it served as a " nice , emotional capper " to the episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 During its original broadcast , " Britney / Brittany " was watched by 13 @.@ 51 million American viewers . It drew Glee 's second largest audience to date behind " Hell @-@ O " , which was watched by 13 @.@ 66 million viewers in April 2010 , following a four @-@ month hiatus . Viewership was up 1 @.@ 06 million over the previous episode , " Audition " , 0 @.@ 5 million over the Madonna tribute episode " The Power of Madonna " , and 2 @.@ 1 million over the Lady Gaga @-@ themed episode " Theatricality " . The episode attained Glee 's series high rating to date in the 18 – 49 demographic , with a 5 @.@ 9 / 17 Nielsen rating / share — it was subsequently beaten by " The Sue Sylvester Shuffle " , which aired on February 6 , 2011 , immediately following the Super Bowl , and was watched by 26 @.@ 8 million viewers and garnered an 11 @.@ 1 / 29 rating / share — also making it the highest @-@ rated show on the night of broadcast . " Britney / Brittany " was Fox 's highest @-@ rated live @-@ action comedy episode of the fall in eight years among adults 18 – 49 , and nine years among total viewers . It was the first time in seventeen years that the highest @-@ rated entertainment show of premiere week grew in its second week among adults 18 – 49 and total viewers . In Canada , the episode was the most @-@ watched show of the night , attaining 2 @.@ 4 million viewers . In the 18 – 49 demographic , it was up 18 % on " Audition " , and outperformed No Ordinary Family , its closest competitor in the 8 : 00 p.m. timeslot , by 73 % . In Australia , the episode was watched by 1 @.@ 171 million viewers , making Glee the seventh most @-@ watched show of the night . In the UK , the episode was watched by 3 @.@ 068 million viewers ( 2 @.@ 634 million on E4 , and 451 @,@ 000 on E4 + 1 ) , becoming the most @-@ watched show on E4 and E4 + 1 for the week , and the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week , as well as the most @-@ watched episode of the series at the time , and the first episode of the entire series to draw over 3 million viewers . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Britney / Brittany " received mixed reviews from critics . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club graded the episode " D + " , commenting that it was " what people who say Glee is awful are talking about when they say Glee is awful . " He criticized the lack of plot and coherence in the musical numbers , feeling that storyline and character arcs were ignored in favor of showcasing Spears covers . Stack described the episode as a " monumental television event , " ; however , he also expressed his lingering sense of " slight disappointment . " While he enjoyed the episode overall , Stack wrote that Spears ' songs felt forced into the storyline , and that the episode was neither as iconic nor as exhilarating as Glee 's Madonna tribute . The Parents Television Council slammed the episode , accusing the presentation of Spears as a " symbol of empowerment and self @-@ esteem " problematic , observing that the young audience " basically witnessed an endorsement of narcotics abuse , public masturbation , and school @-@ sanctioned burlesque . " 
 James Poniewozik of Time , who disliked the Madonna episode , was " pleasantly surprised " by " Britney / Brittany . " He deemed it one of the funniest and most entertaining episodes of the series , crediting Morris ' performance and the " fortunately limited " Spears cameos . Responding to criticism of the episode , Poniewozik conceded that the storylines were slender and Spears remakes dominated the episode , however felt that unlike " The Power of Madonna , " it worked because " it owned its slightness : it kept the videos ( and Britney 's appearances ) where they belonged as fantasy . " Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle described the episode as brilliant , and felt that presenting the Spears performances as a series of unrelated hallucinations was " an inspired choice . " IGN 's Robert Canning rated " Britney / Brittany " 8 / 10 , signifying an " Impressive " episode . He described it as fun , but close to being " too much of a gimmick , " with incongruous song choices . 
 VanDerWerff deemed Spears ' cameo " totally useless , " criticizing the singer 's " flat , listless dialogue . " Lisa de Moraes of The Washington Post graded her cameo a " C , " commenting " at least she didn 't have to try to be funny " as in her How I Met Your Mother guest @-@ spot . Flandez was disappointed that Spears did not appear for longer , yet he concluded that given the acting demonstrated in her 2002 film Crossroads , it was better that the pop star did not . Conversely , Jenna Mullins of E ! Online appreciated the fact that Spears did not appear as a background character , writing that she is " best when she is playing herself " , Stack felt her appearances were well @-@ handled , " with a nice level of restraint , " and Canning felt they were kept to a " perfect minimum . " 
 Morris ' performance attracted critical praise , with de Moraes calling " Britney / Brittany " a " great showcase " for the actress , praising her " spectacular dance moves " and " deadpan flare " . In his otherwise negative review , VanDerWerff deemed Morris " hysterical throughout " and the cast 's best dancer . He stated , " Murphy seems intent on running this character into the ground , but Morris isn 't going to have her stop being funny without a fight . " Mullins observed , " When Ryan Murphy said this episode was a celebration of Heather , he wasn 't kidding " , commending her musical performances . Canning was initially concerned that the episode would diminish Morris ' appeal by elevating her from a background role , but was ultimately pleased that it managed to retain her " fan favorite " secondary character status . 
 = Banksia epica = 
 Banksia epica is a shrub that grows on the south coast of Western Australia . A spreading bush with wedge @-@ shaped serrated leaves and large creamy @-@ yellow flower spikes , it grows up to 3 ½ metres ( 11 ½ ft ) high . It is known only from two isolated populations in the remote south east of the state , near the western edge of the Great Australian Bight . Both populations occur among coastal heath on cliff @-@ top dunes of siliceous sand . 
 One of the most recently described Banksia species , it was probably seen by Edward John Eyre in 1841 , but was not collected until 1973 , and was only recognised as a distinct species in 1988 . There has been very little research on the species since then , so knowledge of its ecology and cultivation potential is limited . It is placed in Banksia ser . Cyrtostylis , alongside its close relative , the well @-@ known and widely cultivated B. media ( southern plains banksia ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banksia epica grows as a spreading bushy shrub with many branches , from 30 centimetres to 3 ½ metres ( 1 – 11 ½ ft ) tall . It has grey , fissured bark , and dark green , wedge @-@ shaped leaves , 1 ½ to 5 centimetres ( ½ – 2 in ) long and 6 to 15 millimetres ( 1 ⁄ 8 – 2 ⁄ 3 in ) wide , with serrated margins . 
 Flowers occur in Banksia 's characteristic " flower spike " , an inflorescence made up of hundreds of pairs of flowers densely packed in a spiral round a woody axis . B. epica 's flower spike is yellow or cream @-@ yellow in colour , cylindrical , 9 to 17 centimetres ( 3 ½ – 6 ½ inches ) tall and around 6 centimetres ( 2 ½ inches ) in diameter . In bud , it may have green @-@ grey or brownish pollen presenters , not unlike B. robur ( swamp banksia ) . Each flower consists of a tubular perianth made up of four fused tepals , and one long wiry style . Characteristic of its taxonomic section , the styles of B. epica are straight rather than hooked . The style ends are initially trapped inside the upper perianth parts , but break free at anthesis . The fruiting structure is a stout woody " cone " embedded with up to 50 follicles ; old withered flower parts persist on the " cones " , giving them a hairy appearance . The follicles have an attractive purple hue . 
 Banksia epica is similar in appearance to its close relative B. media , from which it differs in having slightly shorter leaves and larger flowers . In addition , the persistent flower parts on B. epica 's fruiting structures are curled and point upwards , whereas they are straight and point downwards on B. media . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 = = = Discovery and naming = = = 
 The first European to see B. epica was probably Edward John Eyre , the first explorer of the area , who recorded " stunted specimens " of Banksia as he was nearing the western edge of the Great Australian Bight on 1 May 1841 : 
 " One circumstance in our route to @-@ day cheered me greatly , and led me shortly to expect some important and decisive change in the character and formation of the country . It was the appearance for the first time of the Banksia , a shrub which I had never before found to the westward of Spencer 's Gulf , but which I knew to abound in the vicinity of King George 's Sound , and that description of country generally . Those only who have looked out with the eagerness and anxiety of a person in my situation , to note any change in the vegetation or physical appearance of a country , can appreciate the degree of satisfaction with which I recognised and welcomed the first appearance of the Banksia . Isolated as it was amidst the scrub , and insignificant as the stunted specimens were that I first met with , they led to an inference that I could not be mistaken in , and added , in a tenfold degree , to the interest and expectation with which every mile of our route had now become invested . " 
 Eyre is thought to have been passing through the Toolinna Cove sand patch at the time of writing . B. epica and B. media are the only Banksia species that occur at that location , and both have a form and habit that accords with Eyre 's description . As he did not collect specimens , it is impossible to determine what species he saw . 
 The first herbarium collection of B. epica was not made until October 1973 , when Ernest Charles Nelson visited Toolinna Cove to collect specimens for a taxonomic revision of Adenanthos . Nelson was stimulated to make that revision from an interest in the problem of disjunct plant distributions in southern Australia , and therefore collected specimens of a range of plant species . On 22 October , he collected a specimen of B. epica in old flower , but incorrectly identified it as B. media , and later lodged it in the herbarium at Canberra under that name . 
 In 1985 , two volunteer field collectors for The Banksia Atlas project , John and <unk> Falconer of Esperance , became convinced that there were three Banksia species rather than two at Point Culver . Returning to the locality on 9 January 1986 , they collected leaves and old flowers of what they thought was an undescribed species . The specimens did indeed suggest that a new species had been discovered , but they were not sufficient for formal publication . Early in May the following year , John Falconer drove over 2000 kilometres on unsealed tracks from Warburton to Point Culver and back again , in order to collect fresh flowers and fruit of the purported new species . Alex George then began preparing a formal description of the species . During his research , he discovered that Nelson 's Toolinna Cove specimen was also referable to the undescribed species . In the absence of any genuine B. media specimens from Toolinna Cova , George inferred that only B. epica occurred there , and that Eyre must have sighted B. epica in 1841 . In 1988 , he published a formal description of the species , naming it Banksia epica in reference to the two " epic " journeys of Eyre and Falconer . Thus the species ' full name is Banksia epica <unk> It was later established that both B. epica and B. media occur at Toolinna Cove . 
 = = = Infrageneric placement = = = 
 George placed B. epica in B. subg . Banksia , because its inflorescences are typical Banksia flower spikes ; B. sect . Banksia because of its straight styles ; and B. ser . Cyrtostylis because it has slender flowers . He considered its closest relatives to be B. praemorsa ( cut @-@ leaf banksia ) and B. media , both of which have shorter flowers and smaller pollen @-@ presenters than B. epica . In addition , B. praemorsa differs in having a hairless perianth , and B. media has larger , more undulate leaves . 
 In 1996 , Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published the results of a cladistic analysis of morphological characters of Banksia . They retained George 's subgenera and many of his series , but discarded his sections . George 's B. ser . Cyrtostylis was found to be " widely polyphyletic " , as six of the fourteen taxa in that series occurred singly in locations throughout Thiele and Ladiges ' cladogram . The remaining eight formed a clade that further resolved into two subclades , with B. epica appeared in one of them : 
 Thiele and Ladiges preferred to give series rank to the subclades , rather than the entire clade , so they transferred the taxa of the second clade into B. ser . Ochraceae , retaining only the taxa of the first clade in B. ser . Cyrtostylis . B. epica 's placement under Thiele and Ladiges ' arrangement may be summarised as follows : 
 Banksia 
 B. subg . Isostylis ( 3 species ) 
 B. elegans ( incertae sedis ) 
 B. subg . Banksia 
 B. ser . Tetragonae ( 4 species ) 
 B. ser . <unk> ( 1 species ) 
 B. ser . Banksia ( 2 subseries , 12 species ) 
 B. baueri ( incertae sedis ) 
 B. lullfitzii ( incertae sedis ) 
 B. attenuata ( incertae sedis ) 
 B. ashbyi ( incertae sedis ) 
 B. coccinea ( incertae sedis ) 
 B. ser . Prostratae ( 8 species ) 
 B. ser . Cyrtostylis 
 B. pilostylis 
 B. media 
 B. epica 
 B. praemorsa 
 B. ser . Ochraceae ( 3 species , 2 subspecies ) 
 B. ser . Grandes ( 2 species ) 
 B. ser . Salicinae ( 2 series , 11 species , 4 subspecies ) 
 B. ser . Spicigerae ( 3 series , 7 species , 6 varieties ) 
 B. ser . Quercinae ( 2 species ) 
 B. ser . Dryandroideae ( 1 species ) 
 B. ser . Abietinae ( 4 subseries , 15 species , 8 varieties ) 
 The arrangement of Thiele and Ladiges was not accepted by George , and was discarded in his 1999 revision . Under George 's 1999 arrangement , B. epica 's placement was as follows : 
 Banksia 
 B. subg . Banksia 
 B. sect . Banksia 
 B. ser . Salicinae ( 11 species , 7 subspecies ) 
 B. ser . Grandes ( 2 species ) 
 B. ser . Banksia ( 8 species ) 
 B. ser . Crocinae ( 4 species ) 
 B. ser . Prostratae ( 6 species , 3 varieties ) 
 B. ser . Cyrtostylis 
 B. media 
 B. praemorsa 
 B. epica 
 B. pilostylis 
 B. attenuata 
 B. ashbyi 
 B. <unk> 
 B. audax 
 B. lullfitzii 
 B. elderiana 
 B. laevigata ( 2 subspecies ) 
 B. elegans 
 B. lindleyana 
 B. ser . Tetragonae ( 3 species ) 
 B. ser . Bauerinae ( 1 species ) 
 B. ser . Quercinae ( 2 species ) 
 B. sect . Coccinea ( 1 species ) 
 B. sect . Oncostylis ( 4 series , 22 species , 4 subspecies , 11 varieties ) 
 B. subg . Isostylis ( 3 species ) 
 Since 1998 , Austin Mast has been publishing results of ongoing cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for the subtribe Banksiinae . His analyses suggest a phylogeny that is rather different from previous taxonomic arrangements . With respect to B. epica , however , Mast 's results accord closely with the arrangement of Thiele and Ladiges , placing it in a polytomous clade corresponding exactly with Thiele and Ladiges ' B. ser . Cyrtostylis . 
 Early in 2007 Mast and Thiele initiated a rearrangement by transferring Dryandra to Banksia , and publishing B. subg . Spathulatae for the species having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons ; in this way they also redefined the autonym B. subg . Banksia . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. epica is placed in B. subg . Banksia . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Banksia epica is known only from two populations in eastern parts of the Esperance Plains region of the South West Botanical Province , near the western edge of the Great Australian Bight . The main population occurs about 30 kilometres ( 20 mi ) west of Point Culver ; there were over 2000 plants there when surveyed in June 1989 . A smaller population occurs about 70 kilometres ( 45 mi ) further east at Toolinna Cove ; when surveyed in August 1991 , this locality had around 350 plants . This latter population represents the easternmost limit of the western Banksia species ; east of Toolinna Cove no Banksia species occurs for over 900 kilometres ( 550 mi ) . 
 In both localities , B. epica occurs among heath on cliff @-@ top dunes of deep , white siliceous sand over limestone . It co @-@ occurs with B. media in both localities , and B. praemorsa is also present at Point Culver . Toolinna Cove sand is somewhat alkaline , making B. epica and B. media the only Banksia species that grow in alkaline soil . 
 These two localities are unusual in having cliff @-@ top dunes of siliceous sand : cliff @-@ top dunes are an unusual topographic formation , and nearly all soil in the area is calcareous . As Banksia species are intolerant of calcareous soils , and are not adapted to long range seed dispersal , the two populations of B. epica appear to be reproductively isolated . Nelson has suggested that there was once a continuous strip of siliceous sand along the coast , providing an extensive and unfragmented habitat for B. epica ; rises in the sea level had submerged this strip , leaving only the cliff @-@ top dunes as suitable habitat . The fact that the resultant isolated populations have not perceptibly <unk> since then suggests that the species has been fragmented for only a short time , perhaps only since the Last Glacial Maximum . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Pollinators of B. epica include Phylidonyris novaehollandiae ( New Holland honeyeater ) and Acanthiza <unk> ( yellow @-@ rumped thornbill ) . No other pollinators have been recorded , but the species is poorly surveyed , and studies of other Banksia species have consistently indicated a wide range of invertebrate and vertebrate pollinators . For example , a survey of the closely related and co @-@ occurring B. media found that " honeyeater birds and marsupial nectarivores were abundant in the study area and most carried the pollen of Banksia media while it flowered . … Self @-@ pollination and pollination by insects clearly also play major roles in seed production . " 
 Like most other Proteaceae , B. epica has proteoid roots , roots with dense clusters of short lateral rootlets that form a mat in the soil just below the leaf litter . These enhance solubilisation of nutrients , allowing nutrient uptake in low @-@ nutrient soils such as the phosphorus @-@ deficient native soils of Australia . The species lacks a lignotuber , so is thought to be killed by fire . Like most Banksia species , however , it is adapted to release its aerial seed bank following a bushfire , so populations regenerate rapidly . It is highly susceptible to Phytophthora cinnamomi dieback . 
 Because so few populations are known , B. epica has been listed on the Department of Environment and Conservation 's Declared Rare and Priority Flora List as " Priority Two – Poorly Known Taxa " " ; and as <unk> under the ROTAP system ( rare but not currently endangered or vulnerable , and having a range less than 100 km ) . It is not considered to be under threat , however , because both known populations occur within the <unk> Nature Reserve , and are undisturbed and healthy . Furthermore , the area in which it occurs is poorly surveyed , so it is possible that other populations exist . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 B. epica is fairly new to cultivation . Kevin Collins of the Banksia Farm in Albany , Western Australia is said to have pioneered its cultivation , growing it in loamy clay or sandy gravel . It showed good tolerance for alkaline soils in those conditions , and has also succeeded in sandy , alkaline soil near the coast between Mandurah and Kwinana . The Australian National Botanic Gardens in Canberra has also had some success in cultivating the species . Seeds were sown in February 1996 , and planted out in November 1997 ; seedlings planted into sections without good drainage died , but two seedlings that were planted into a section with excellent drainage were about a metre tall by 2002 , and flowering prolifically . 
 Propagation is by seed or cuttings . Seeds do not require any treatment , and take 14 to 49 days to germinate . In the absence of further information specific to B. epica , George recommends that cultivated plants be treated as for B. media and B. praemorsa , both of which require a sunny position in well drained soil , and tolerate only light pruning not below the green foliage . 
 = Agent Carter ( TV series ) = 
 Marvel 's Agent Carter , or simply Agent Carter , is an American television series created for ABC by Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeely , inspired by the 2011 film Captain America : The First Avenger , and the 2013 Marvel One @-@ Shot short film of the same name . It is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) , sharing continuity with the films and other television series of the franchise . The series was produced by ABC Studios , Marvel Television , and F & B Fazekas & Butters , with Tara Butters , Michele Fazekas , and Chris Dingess serving as showrunners . 
 The series features the Marvel Comics character Peggy Carter , with Hayley Atwell reprising her role from the film series and One @-@ Shot , as she must balance life as a secret agent with that of a single woman in 1940s America . Development on a series inspired by the Agent Carter short film had begun by September 2013 , with Atwell 's involvement confirmed in January 2014 . That May , ABC bypassed a pilot , ordering the show straight to series , with James D 'Arcy , Chad Michael Murray , and Enver Gjokaj starring alongside Atwell ; they are joined by Shea Whigham for the first season . The series introduces the origins of several characters and storylines from MCU films , while other characters from the films also appear . 
 The first season , consisting of eight episodes , originally aired from January 6 to February 24 , 2015 , while the second season , consisting of 10 episodes , originally aired from January 19 to March 1 , 2016 . Both seasons aired during mid @-@ season breaks of Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Despite a positive critical response , the series saw steadily decreasing @-@ to @-@ low viewership , and on May 12 , 2016 , ABC canceled Agent Carter . 
 = = Premise = = 
 The first season takes place in 1946 , with Peggy Carter having to balance the routine office work she does for the Strategic Scientific Reserve ( SSR ) in New York City with secretly assisting Howard Stark , who finds himself framed for supplying deadly weapons to enemies of the United States . Carter is assisted by Stark 's butler , Edwin Jarvis , to find those responsible and dispose of the weapons . In the second season , Carter moves from New York City to Los Angeles to deal with the threats of the new Atomic Age by the Secret Empire in the aftermath of World War II , gaining new friends , a new home , and a potential new love interest . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 Hayley Atwell as Peggy Carter : 
 An SSR agent originally stuck doing administrative work . Atwell said it was " thrilling " to explore " the backdrop of this male @-@ dominated world , where women are still in the workforce , unspoken for and struggling to find a place outside the home " and how it affects Carter . Butters has said that Carter 's " superpower is the fact that other people underestimate her . And she often uses that to her advantage , because she doesn 't have <unk> . " Speaking about the influence that the apparent death of Steve Rogers has on Carter , Atwell explained that " It 's only been a year and she 's grieving him and I think what keeps her going is he was the greatest person she ever knew — even before he took the serum and became Captain America . She knew his character and she saw a kindred spirit in him . So I think she 's grieving the loss of him but she 's also determined to make sure that his work wasn 't in vain . That gives her a tremendous amount of determination to carry on despite the obstacles that she comes across . " Gabriella Graves portrays a young Carter . 
 James D 'Arcy as Edwin Jarvis : 
 Howard Stark 's butler and ally to Carter , who will eventually be a tutor to Tony Stark and inspire his J.A.R.V.I.S. artificial intelligence . Atwell referred to Carter 's relationship with Jarvis as the series ' " comic relief " , and said " I think , from her point of view , she doesn 't need any help . But she needs someone who is in contact with Howard to help kind of run this mission . So they have this very witty banter back and forth ... They both have that wit and that satire . Their language is a game of chess " . Fazekas , explaining the introduction and development of Jarvis in the series , stated that " Some of it has come from the comics and some of it we 've developed ourselves . Some of it is influenced by James D 'Arcy himself and his strengths . " D 'Arcy was initially nervous about portraying Jarvis 's comedic side , given his history of " predominantly play [ ing ] psychopaths " . He did not study Paul Bettany 's performance as J.A.R.V.I.S. when approaching the character . 
 Chad Michael Murray as Jack Thompson : 
 A war veteran and agent with the SSR , described as chauvinistic and " chest @-@ puffing " . Murray compared the character to Indiana Jones , and stated that " he 's working his way up to become the head of the SSR . His goal in life is to just be great at his job . So he has a large chip on his shoulder , which gives him an attitude . " Murray also noted that , unlike his character on One Tree Hill , Thompson does not serve as the " moral compass " , which meant that he wouldn 't be " confined to a box " and would instead be allowed to " really play things up and do what 's unexpected " . For the second season , Thompson is made chief of the East Coast SSR office . 
 Enver Gjokaj as Daniel Sousa : 
 A war veteran who is an agent with the SSR and experiences prejudice due to his crippled leg , allowing him to relate to Carter . " He was a soldier , and he had been very active all his life , and now he has to figure out how to use his brains , how to try to be smart , " Gjokaj explained of the character . " He accepts his injury , he accepts his compromised status in society ... Peggy says , ‘ Forget this . I 'm Peggy Carter . I 'm going to do something else . ’ I think that 's the difference between the two of them . " Considering a potentially romantic relationship between Sousa and Carter , Gjokaj said , " I think there ’ s definitely a situation where ... if she hadn 't dated Captain America , he might ask her out for a drink . It ’ s like if your new girlfriend dated Ryan Gosling . It ’ s going to make you sweat a bit . " For the second season , Sousa is made chief of the West Coast SSR office . 
 Shea Whigham as Roger Dooley : 
 The SSR chief who oversees agents Carter , Thompson , and Sousa , until he dies to save his fellow SSR agents at the end of season one . Unlike many of the other agents , Whigham believes that Dooley does respect Carter , saying " I think he likes her . I think he cares deeply . I 'm not sure that he can always show that , but I think you 'll see that he cares deeply about Carter . And these are things that keep him up at night , as well as the other boys , when I send them out on missions . " The character was always intended to die during the first season 's penultimate episode , to help build stakes for the series given that " everyone knows Peggy lives " , so from the beginning Whigham was only hired for the seven required episodes . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = = Season 1 ( 2015 ) = = = 
 = = = Season 2 ( 2016 ) = = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 A potential Agent Carter series was initially brought up in July 2013 by Louis D 'Esposito , after a screening of his Agent Carter One @-@ Shot at San Diego Comic @-@ Con. By September , Marvel Television was developing a series inspired by the short film , featuring Peggy Carter , and was in search of a writer for the series . In January 2014 , ABC Entertainment Group president Paul Lee confirmed that the show was in development , and revealed that Tara Butters and Michele Fazekas would act as the series ' showrunners . Chris Dingess also serves as a showrunner . In March 2014 , Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeely , writers of the Captain America films , stated that they envisioned the series , which had not yet been greenlit , as a limited series of approximately 13 episodes . By April 2014 , there were indications that the series would be ordered straight to series , bypassing a pilot order , and would air between the late 2014 and early 2015 portions of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , if that series got a second season renewal . 
 On May 8 , 2014 , ABC officially ordered the series for eight episodes , with executive producers Butters , Fazekas , Markus , McFeely , Dingess , Kevin Feige , Louis D 'Esposito , Alan Fine , Joe Quesada , Stan Lee , and Jeph Loeb . The series was renewed for a second season on May 7 , 2015 , of 10 episodes . In March 2016 , Fazekas noted that the producers felt " bad " about the chances for a third season due to the series ' low viewership , adding she " would love to see it live on , even if it ’ s in some other form , digital or whatever . I doubt that there ’ s a Netflix play for it . " She also added that ABC wanted some sort of conclusion to the series , and so the writers and producers would find a way to conclude the lingering plot threads in some form if the series was not renewed . On May 12 , 2016 , ABC canceled the series . 
 Atwell had stated on potential further seasons , " We think that there could be more to come .... the [ second season ] finale doesn ’ t suggest that that ’ s it and they live happily ever after ; that ’ s the end . We know that ’ s not the case . They ’ ve done it in a very clever way which wraps up and that gives the audience a very satisfying conclusion but they ’ re not quite finishing it and leaving it there . " On the location for a third season , Fazekas stated that moving the series to London had been a possibility , an idea that creators Markus and McFeely had early on . Fazekas added , " you can put the show anywhere , because it ’ s spies . [ The location is ] all going to be determined by what story we want to tell . I loved [ Los Angeles ] . I loved how it looked , I loved how it looked on Peggy . We would be very happy to do another L.A. season , but we ’ re not married to it . " Fazekas also said that seeds for a third season had been planted all throughout the second , and that the end of the second season , with someone shooting Thompson and taking the M. Carter file , was " very much tied to a third season arc " , with the shooter and their reason for taking the file already determined . Atwell added that the third season would have gone " further back into [ Carter 's ] past ” while having " a possible kind of twist ... into something to do with [ her ] family . " She also added that more insight would have been provided on Carter 's brother , Michael . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Markus and McFeely stated in March 2014 that the series would be set in 1946 initially , occurring in the middle of the timeline established in the One @-@ Shot , and would focus on one case for Carter . Additional seasons would then advance a year and examine a new case . Despite working on Captain America : Civil War at the same time , Markus and McFeely remained involved with the series after writing the first script . The showrunners turned to several different influences outside of Marvel in developing the series , including Raiders of the Lost Ark , L.A. Confidential , and the works of author James Ellroy . Elaborating on deviating from the comics , Fazekas said , for example , " if we 're using a minor character or a bad guy from an old comic book , we don 't have to adhere to what that character was in that comic book from 1945 . Because there are so many different iterations of a specific character , you can 't be true to every single one . " 
 On the time periods the series could potentially explore following the first season and leading to the character seen in Captain America : The Winter Soldier , Atwell said , " I think the great thing about the fact that I ’ ve already played her at the end of her life means that we know ... That ’ s what ’ s great about the situation we have now , is that we have an opportunity , if the show does go into second and third and fourth and fifth [ seasons ] , we know that we can explore all of these aspects of her character because we know she lives such a long life and she ’ s had a fulfilled life . I think what ’ s going to start happening in Season 1 is seeds are going to be planted as to what happens in her personal life — and yet it ’ s still open to the possibility of new men coming into her life , deepening relationships with the men that we discover in Season 1 . Obviously , the era is 1946 but in the second , third , fourth , fifth season — if it goes onto that — we can explore different time periods . We can explore the late forties , the early fifties , the sixties , the seventies , the eighties , up until present day , so it ’ s very exciting because of that . " However , Butters clarified that future seasons would likely stay in the same time period , possibly changing location to a place like Hollywood or Europe , in order to stick to a pre @-@ S.H.I.E.L.D. setting to avoid competing with Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. This was the case with the second season , which moved the series to 1947 Los Angeles . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Atwell , who portrayed Carter in Captain America : The First Avenger , Captain America : The Winter Soldier , and the Agent Carter short film , expressed interest in returning as the character in October 2013 , before Lee confirmed her involvement in January 2014 . That August , Chad Michael Murray and Enver Gjokaj were cast as SSR agents Jack Thompson and Daniel Sousa , respectively , while James D 'Arcy was cast the next month as Edwin Jarvis , the character who would eventually inspire the artificial intelligence J.A.R.V.I.S. from the MCU films . Shea Whigham was also cast , as SSR chief Roger Dooley . Atwell , D 'Arcy , Gjokaj , and Murray returned for the second season . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 = = = = Costumes = = = = 
 The costume designer for the series is Giovanna Ottobre @-@ Melton , who felt comfortable with the series ' period setting after spending months researching American styles in the 1940s for the 2013 television series Mob City . She noted that " many comic books were all blended by the color , style , and fabrics " from 1940s New York . Due to the large amount of action in the series , fabrics " with the feel and texture of the 1940s " had to be sourced in large quantities , to allow for the creation of four , five , or more of each costume . Ottobre @-@ Melton 's process " for each episode , [ is to ] read the script first , and then search for historic photos that relate to what the episode is about . Afterwards I chose the fabrics , and then begin to design the outfits . " 
 = = = = Props = = = = 
 When creating the gadgets for the series , the writers noted the need to combine the period setting with the influence of Howard Stark , who opens the door to " things that are fantastic for the time period " . They worked closely with the props department to develop technology that appears " both retro and futuristic at the same time " , with Fazekas explaining that the goal was to avoid a science fiction look , so the fantastical aspects were reserved solely for function while the aesthetic was kept within the realms of that time period . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming for the series took place in Los Angeles , with the story 's location shifting from New York City to Los Angeles with the second season to capitalize on this . Gabriel Beristain , cinematographer for the One @-@ Shot and the first season of the series , used a combination of modern digital technology and traditional analog techniques to replicate the feel of classic films that are set in the 1940s , but to also have the convenience and consistency of modern technology , such as using the Arri Alexa digital camera , along with Leica Lenses and silk @-@ stocking diffusion nets . Edward J. Pei took over as cinematographer for the second season . Stunt coordinator Casey O 'Neill , who also worked on the One @-@ Shot and Captain America : The Winter Soldier , incorporated the specific fighting styles of the characters , such as the more " CIA @-@ trained " fighting of Carter or the more acrobatic , " Black Widow " -inspired style of antagonist Dottie Underwood . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Sheena Duggal serves as visual effect supervisor , returning in the same capacity from the Agent Carter One @-@ Shot , with the visual effects for the series created by Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) , Base FX , and later DNeg TV . Duggal worked closest with ILM , who coordinated with Base and DNeg to ensure a " seamless workflow " . The majority of the series ' visual effects work focuses on set extensions to depict the period setting , as well as the more fantastical aspects such as Howard Stark 's inventions , or Zero Matter and Jason Wilkes ' intangibility in the second season . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 In June 2014 , Christopher Lennertz , who composed the music for the Agent Carter One @-@ Shot , talked about potentially working on the series , saying , D 'Esposito " told me last summer at Comic @-@ Con that there was a possibility this was going to become a series . And he said that if he was going to be involved , he wanted me to be involved , too . " In September 2014 , Lennertz officially signed on to compose for the series . Lennertz combined all the different style elements of the show in the music , such as mixing jazz and period elements , with orchestra and electronic elements . Lennertz said , the music is " always done from a sense of being sort of in control and savvy and clever , rather than just being strong or just having a superpower or sort of being so much further along than anybody else physically . Part of it was just trying to make it that she ’ s just smarter than everybody else . She ’ s got such command over so many of these situations , and that was the most important thing was to give her that personality . " A soundtrack album for the first season was released on iTunes on December 11 , 2015 , and the single " Whatcha Gonna Do ( It 's Up to You ) " from the second season was released on March 18 , 2016 . 
 = = = Marvel Cinematic Universe tie @-@ ins = = = 
 Because Carter originates from the films , Marvel Studios co @-@ presidents Feige and D 'Esposito " are very invested in this and they 've been really collaborative and very generous with their world " . Markus , talking about the series ' place in the greater architecture of the MCU , later said " you really only need to drop the tiniest bit of hint and its connected . You don ’ t have to go , " Howard Stark 's wearing the same pants that Tony wears ! " ... Everything is enhanced just by the knowledge that its all connected . " Butters said , " We always want to feel like you see us as a piece of [ the MCU ] . But because of our time period , we kind of are on our own a little bit . " 
 In July 2014 , Fazekas talked about how the series would relate to the One @-@ Shot , saying , " The short really is the basis for the series . [ Carter ] ' s working at SSR , post @-@ war ... If you think of the short as sort of the end of the series , the series would be leading up to that moment where she gets assigned to S.H.I.E.L.D. " Markus reiterated this in January 2015 , but added that " we all agree and understand that [ keeping continuity with the short is ] going to get tougher if we continue " making the series . The first season introduces the origins of the Black Widow and Winter Soldier programs , which both appear in several MCU films , while the second season shows the discovery of the Darkforce ( known as Zero Matter in the series ) , which previously appeared in Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. and has ties to Doctor Strange . 
 = = Release = = 
