 The O Street Market redevelopment received a setback in November 2007 when the District of Columbia Zoning Commission demanded that the development reduce the height of the new buildings to 90 feet ( 27 m ) from 110 feet ( 34 m ) and refused to reconsider its decision . Local residents denounced the zoning board 's actions , which they perceived as imperiling redevelopment of their poverty @-@ stricken neighborhood . After Roadside met the height requirements by removing penthouse apartments , the zoning commission approved the project in late March 2008 . The project received its final approvals from the Historic Preservation Review Board and the D.C. Office of Planning in April and May 2008 . 
 By mid @-@ summer 2008 , the cost of the project had grown to $ 325 million . Now named " CityMarket at O " , the nine @-@ story development included over 600 units of housing , a 200 @-@ room hotel , retail space , and a new Giant supermarket almost doubling the size of the existing store . Mayor Adrian Fenty announced the city government would provide $ 35 million in tax increment financing ( TIF ) and plans were made to break ground in late 2009 . The city also contributed $ 1 million toward the construction of the rent @-@ controlled apartments for low @-@ income residents , and $ 1 @.@ 5 million in pre @-@ development grants . Rising costs and delays pushed the project 's cost higher , and by the time the city council acted , the city 's TIF commitment had risen to $ 46 @.@ 5 million . 
 The official CityMarket groundbreaking ceremony was held September 1 , 2010 . The Department of Housing and Urban Development ( HUD ) provided a $ 117 million loan for the development and the Obama administration chose CityMarket at O as one of 14 nationwide projects to receive expedited permitting and environmental reviews in order to provide hundreds of infrastructure jobs . The Giant Food store closed and was razed in mid @-@ 2011 , and Cambria Suites agreed to operate the hotel in October . The project was designed by Shalom <unk> Associates and built by Clark Construction . 
 The new development opened in stages beginning in 2013 . The 90 @-@ unit low @-@ income senior housing apartment complex opened on August 21 , 2013 , and the 555 @-@ unit luxury apartment building was occupied on November 4 . The apartment buildings offered a combined 86 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 8 @,@ 000 m2 ) of retail space . The new Giant opened on November 21 , 2013 . The 72 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 6 @,@ 700 m2 ) grocery store includes a cafe and bar built into the O Street Market 's historic tower . In the middle of the store , arches utilizing some of the original brickwork designate the former location of the market 's exterior wall . Progressive Grocer , an industry trade journal , gave an award for best overall design to the new Giant Food store in 2014 . In 2015 , CityMarket at O was a winner of the Urban Land Institute 's Global Awards for Excellence competition . The 182 @-@ room Cambria Suites hotel opened in May 2014 . The final phase of the development , 880 P , is a 142 @-@ unit apartment building under construction and expected to be completed in 2017 . 
 = = Original design = = 
 O Street Market previously consisted of between 12 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 1 @,@ 100 m2 ) and 12 @,@ 500 sq ft ( 1 @,@ 160 m2 ) on the main level and a 4 @,@ 500 sq ft ( 420 m2 ) basement . The facade of the original one @-@ story , rectangular brick building is 95 ft ( 29 m ) wide and 150 ft ( 46 m ) long . The most distinctive feature of this Gothic Revival section is the square tower on the northwest corner of 7th and O Streets NW . A gable roof and a monitor run the length of the remaining portion of the original facade . Including the tower , there are six bays on the 7th Street facade and five on the O Street facade . On the 7th Street facade , each bay features a pair of doors and transom windows . The bays on the O Street facade also have double doors and transom windows , except for the central bay , which projects and features a large window . The second and fourth bay transom windows on the O Street facade are surmounted by double @-@ hung windows . 
 The tower is crowned with a large pyramidal roof and dormers . On each street @-@ facing facade of the tower there are two sets of doors with large transom windows . Each set of doors is framed by columns topped with cast iron foliate capitals . The columns support a projection that features decorative brickwork and a segmental arch . The windows on the second level of the tower are surmounted by a decorative wood panel and corbelled cornice . 
 = Ben Franklin ( The Office ) = 
 " Ben Franklin " is the fifteenth episode of the third season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's forty @-@ third episode overall . Written by Mindy Kaling , who also acts in the show as Kelly Kapoor , and directed by Randall Einhorn , the episode first aired in the United States on February 1 , 2007 on NBC . " Ben Franklin " received 5 @.@ 0 / 13 in the ages 18 – 49 demographic of the Nielsen ratings , and was watched by an estimated audience of 10 @.@ 1 million viewers , and the episode received mixed reviews among critics . 
 In the episode , the employees from the office prepare for Phyllis 's wedding . Michael , acting under advice from Todd , instructs Dwight to hire a stripper for the men and delegates Jim to hire one for the women . While Dwight hires a stripper , Jim ends up hiring a Ben Franklin impersonator instead . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The office plays host to a bridal shower for Phyllis Lapin ( Phyllis Smith ) while Bob Vance 's ( Robert R. Shafer ) bachelor party is held in the warehouse . Todd Packer ( David Koechner ) convinces Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) that it is okay to hire a stripper for the bachelor party if he also gets a male stripper for the bridal shower . Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) is tired at work because he has been having many " late @-@ night talks " with Karen Filippelli ( Rashida Jones ) after she learned that he still has feelings for Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) . 
 Michael delegates the work of finding the two strippers to Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) and Jim . Dwight asks Jim if he prefers either a redhead or a brunette , and Jim responds " blonde " while Pam and Karen ( redhead and brunette respectively ) look over Jim and then at each other for a quick second . While Dwight locates a stripper named Elizabeth ( Jackie Debatin ) for Bob Vance 's party , Jim orders an educational Benjamin Franklin impersonator ( Andrew Daly ) as a joke . Pam and Karen have fun gently heckling the impersonator . During a talking head interview Dwight reveals that Jim has told him that the impersonator is the real Ben Franklin . Dwight says he 's " 99 % sure " the impersonator is not the real Ben Franklin but ask questions to the impersonator that he believes only the real Ben Franklin would know . However , because the impersonator is an historian and studied the life of Ben Franklin , he answers each question correctly without hesitation , much to Dwight 's anger and disbelief . In the break room , Pam and Karen share an awkward conversation about Jim and Pam 's kiss . 
 At the bachelor party , Bob Vance refuses a lap dance , so Michael volunteers . Before the stripper is able to perform the lap dance , Michael brings the show to an abrupt close , unwilling to do what he considers cheating on Jan Levenson ( Melora Hardin ) . Pam and Jim have an understated confrontation in the break room , which ends with Pam asking Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) to set her up with some of his friends from business school in front of a visibly shocked and seemingly upset Jim . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Ben Franklin " was the second episode of the series directed by Randall Einhorn . Einhorn had previously directed " Initiation " , as well as the summer spin @-@ off webisodes " The Accountants " . " Ben Franklin " was written by Mindy Kaling , who acts on the show as customer service representative Kelly Kapoor . The episode was the sixth of the series written by Kaling . 
 Jackie Debatin , who appeared in " Ben Franklin " as Elizabeth , is used to playing strippers and hookers . Debatin had previously been a stripper on Friends , a stripper on That ' 70s Show , a stripper on Two and a Half Men , a madam on Veronica Mars , and a call girl on Boston Legal . In an interview , Debatin said playing Elizabeth was " probably the best experience I have had in TV work " , because the cast and crew were " down to earth , fun , grateful to be there " . Although actor Andrew Daly , who played Gordon the Ben Franklin impersonator , had already known John Krasinski , Angela Kinsey , B. J. Novak and Kate Flannery , he said that The Office cast and crew " could not have been more welcoming to me . " Daly especially liked it when the actors " depart [ ed ] from the script and improvised a little . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Ben Franklin " received 5 @.@ 0 / 13 in the ages 18 – 49 demographic of the Nielsen ratings . This means that five percent of all households with an 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old living in it watched the episode , and 13 percent had their television tuned to the channel at any point . The episode was watched by an estimated audience of 10 @.@ 1 million viewers . " Ben Franklin " is one of only a handful of other episodes of The Office to reach over 10 million viewers , the others being the show 's pilot episode , " The Injury , " " Traveling Salesmen , " " The Return , " and " Stress Relief , " of which the latter reached over 20 million viewers . 
 " Ben Franklin " received mixed , but mostly good , reviews from critics . IGN 's Brian Zoromski wrote that " The Office was in truly excellent form this week . " Zoromski went on to credit the " great progression " in the Jim @-@ Pam @-@ Karen love triangle and Michael being " his completely inept self " as parts of the episode that made it " one of the best Office episodes this season " . Michael Sciannamea of TV Squad was less enthusiastic about the episode , writing that although it was " solid " , " not much happened here other than the Jim @-@ Karen @-@ Pam triangle . " Abby West , of Entertainment Weekly , praised the love triangle , saying " The Pam / Karen confrontation was as uncomfortable as I could possibly hope for . It 's so gratifying to see Pam 's armor cracking . " West also praised the work of the supporting cast . 
 = Mother Knows Best ( song ) = 
 " Mother Knows Best " is a song written by composer Alan Menken and lyricist Glenn Slater for Walt Disney Pictures ' 50th animated feature film Tangled ( 2010 ) . Appearing on the film 's soundtrack Tangled : Original Soundtrack ( 2010 ) , " Mother Knows Best " is a Broadway and musical theatre @-@ inspired pop and jazz ballad recorded by American actress and singer Donna Murphy in her role as the film 's villain , Mother Gothel . Lyrically incorporating a series of passive @-@ aggressive insults , the song serves as Gothel 's attempt to frighten Rapunzel into remaining in the tower despite of her constant request to see the floating lanterns so that she may continue to exploit her hair 's regenerating abilities in order to remain youthful . The song is later reprised in a more sinister , vengeful tone by Gothel after Rapunzel openly defies her for the first time . 
 Menken and Slater deliberately wrote " Mother Knows Best " in the style of an old @-@ fashioned musical theatre song after the directors specifically requested one . Musically , the song is in direct contrast to the more pop @-@ oriented singer @-@ songwriter motif of Rapunzel 's music , which are performed by pop singer Mandy Moore . Meanwhile , Murphy recorded " Mother Knows Best " by imagining Gothel as someone who enjoys being in the spotlight . 
 Often cited as the film 's best song , " Mother Knows Best " has garnered widespread acclaim from both film and music critics alike , who identified it as a notable standout amid an otherwise unimpressive track list by complimenting its melody , humor and darkness . Murphy 's vocal performance has also been lauded , with critics voicing their preference towards it over Moore 's , while comparing it to the likes of actresses Patti LuPone and Julie Andrews . Additionally , the song has drawn comparisons to the work of Broadway composer and lyricist Stephen Sondheim , as well as songs from the musical Les Misérables and Disney 's own The Hunchback of Notre Dame ( 1996 ) , the latter of which Menken himself had also worked on as a composer . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Mother Knows Best " was written by composer Alan Menken and lyricist Glenn Slater . Menken and Slater wrote " Mother Knows Best " as a musical theater @-@ oriented song at the behest of the directors , who specifically asked the songwriters to provide the film with " a musical theatre moment " . Menken was initially concerned that the song would not be appropriate for the film 's soundtrack due to its different genre . While Menken conceived the majority of Tangled 's music in the style of a singer @-@ songwriter similar to the work of Canadian musician Joni Mitchell , the composer envisioned Gothel 's songs as " classic " Broadway . Before writing the song , Menken and Slater first researched appropriate moments in the film in which its main characters could possibly perform , observing that " Mother Knows Best " " flows directly out of the conflict between " Mother Gothel and Rapunzel . 
 Menken revealed that he had observed similarities between Gothel and Claude Frollo , another Disney villain for whom he had written songs while working as a composer on The Hunchback of Notre Dame ( 1996 ) . Menken described Gothel as " a scary piece of work " while " Frollo is a much more sophisticated villain , but easier to understand ... than Mother Gothel " , whose relationship with Rapunzel is more manipulative than the Frollo @-@ Quasimodo dynamic . While writing " Mother Knows Best " , Menken was briefly concerned that " there [ would ] be a rash of children trying to kill their parents after they ’ ve seen the movie . " According to directors Byron Howard and Nathan Greno , one of the song 's lines , " getting kind of chubby " , was lifted from an interview the directors had held with several female Disney employees , in which they asked them to describe their relationships with their mothers . Menken revealed that " Mother Knows Best " is a song with which he had ultimately become " very pleased . " 
 Primarily a Broadway actress , Donna Murphy had never voiced an animated character prior to Tangled , and decided to audition for the role spontaneously . Because the film is a musical , all potential voice actors were required to audition a song of their choice ; Murphy auditioned the song " Children Will Listen " from the musical Into the Woods . Menken said that Murphy , with whom the composer himself had previously worked on his musical Little Shop of Horrors , " brought musical theater expertise " to the song . Because of the actress ' extensive Broadway and musical theatre background , Menken and the directors were open to her ideas and suggestions about Gothel 's music , on one occasion suggesting an alternate arrangement of " Mother Knows Best " . Murphy envisioned her character as an entertainer , describing her as " somebody who envisions herself periodically being hit with a spotlight " , which ultimately influenced her performance on " Mother Knows Best " . The New York Post writer Lou Lumenick felt that , as songwriters , Menken and Slater had given the film 's " real showstopper " to Murphy . The Korea Times reported that it was only after animator Jin Kim heard " Mother Knows Best " for the first time that he conceived a " 1940s Hollywood screen siren motif " for Gothel 's appearance and personality . 
 = = Context , sequence and analysis = = 
 A " big " musical number , " Mother Knows Best " begins within the first fifteen minutes of Tangled during the film 's first act when , on the eve of her eighteenth birthday , Rapunzel finally summons enough courage to ask Gothel for permission to travel and see the floating lanterns in person . Gothel , whose eternal youth and beauty solely relies on the safety and protection of Rapunzel 's magical hair , denies this request by sarcastically reminding her that " mother knows best , " warning her ward that " the world is full of wicked people who want to steal her hair 's magic , " while explaining to her that it 's " for her own good , " claiming to only want to protect her . At one point during the scene , Gothel actually contradicts herself ; Teena Elizabeth of <unk> observed , " Gothel has no intentions of letting her go . Though Mother Gothel sings , ' soon , but not yet , ' but ironically later says , ' Rapunzel will never leave the tower ever . ' " Writing for the Tulsa World , Michael Smith observed that Gothel uses the song " as her lie / rationale for keeping the girl safe ( holding her hostage ) from those who might steal her for their own hair @-@ inspired profit schemes . " Amid Amidi of Cartoon Brew felt that the scene is both funny and scary , citing Gothel 's " theatrical gestures " and " claustrophobia @-@ inducing stark black backgrounds " as examples of both . " cementing [ the ] character 's ruthlessness , " Gothel ultimately orders Rapunzel to promise never to ask permission to leave the tower again . Moviefone 's William Goss cited the musical number as an example of " fear @-@ mongering , " which has been defined by Dictionary.com as " a person who creates or spreads alarming news . " Jennie Punter of The Globe and Mail penned , " Mother Knows Best hilariously convey [ s ] the fear and guilt that have kept Rapunzel in the tower of her own free will . " In her book Marvels & Tales , author Kendra Magnusson observed that , during the " Mother Knows Best " musical sequence , " the manipulation of Rapunzel 's hair leaves the heroine 's body wrenched in one moment and bound up in it the next " , depicting that , while Rapunzel 's hair can be used to defend herself , " it is simultaneously a liability " and can just as well be used to harm her . 
 A writer for Disney.com observed , " The creepiness of this song lies in the fact that the very untrustworthy Mother Gothel is positioning herself as a helpful figure to Rapunzel . " Brian Galindo of BuzzFeed wrote that the song , its purpose having been summarized by Curt Holman of Creative Loafing as " simply to manipulate Rapunzel into staying at home , " " perfectly disguises Mother Gothel 's true motives . " According to Simon Miraudo of Quickflix , Gothel craftily uses the song to guilt trip Rapunzel " into staying in the tower ... frightened into imagining the horrors that lay outside her door . " In her book How Fairy Tales Live Happily Ever After : ( Analyzing ) the Art of Adapting Fairy Tales , author Conny Eisfeld observed that " Mother Knows Best " emphasizes Gothel 's " status of superiority " , in spite of the fact that " her existence solely depend [ s ] on Rapunzel . " Bitch identified Gothel as an abusive mother , writing , " she is manipulative , dishonest , and dedicated to undermining her daughter 's independence . This is shown consistently through all her appearances in the film , but comes out clearly very early indeed , with the song ' Mother Knows Best ' . Critics have often identified the sequence as one of the film 's darkest and edgiest moments . Acknowledging the song 's " extremely dark undertone " , Anthony Falco of Film Class Junkies wrote , " This song rues in the fact that a child is impressionable ; Rapunzel believes that Mother Gothel has the best intentions , but obviously , the evil witch is using the princess for her own gains . Falco continued , " The audience knows what Gothel wants with Rapunzel , but the fact that we are unable to protect the naïve princess results in further hatred for the witch . " Falco also concluded that Gothel 's " sinister reprise at the end of Tangled allows for these horrifying undertones to emerge , which makes ' Mother Knows Best ' one of the most sinister villain songs in the Disney library . " Similarly , Elissa Smith of Paper Droids wrote that while the audience is fully aware of Gothel 's evil intentions , Rapunzel is denied " the outsider 's point of view . " Glen Chapman of Den of Geek wrote that the scene " strikes a balance between melodic and narrative sophistication , as well as being equal parts sweet and sinister . " Gothel later reprises the song " in indelible fashion . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 According to the song 's official sheet music , which has been published by Walt Disney Music Publishing at Musicnotes.com , " Mother Knows Best " is a " brash , " upbeat Broadway musical @-@ inspired show tune written in the key of F major at a moderate tempo of 66 beats per minute , performed " with rubato . " At a total length of three minutes and ten seconds – the second @-@ longest song on the film 's soundtrack , behind " I See the Light " – Io9 author Meredith Woerner described the ballad as a " twisted song about " a mother " sheltering her fake daughter from the real world so she can live forever . " According to Tom Charity of CNN , " Mother Knows Best " is a " grand , theatrical number " with both jazz and pop influences . Michael Smith of the Tulsa World referred to the song as " a bouncy little <unk> . " Musically , " Mother Knows Best " is an " insidious show @-@ stopper " that utilizes a " cautionary " melody , with one critic identifying it as a " drag – anthem . " Sharing similar sentiments , Variety 's Justin Chang called the song an " authoritarian anthem . " Describing " Mother Knows Best " as a " fiery number " , Andrew L. Urban of Urban Cinefile wrote that the song 's music and lyrics are " as theatrical as is [ its ] character . " According to Anthony Quinn of The Independent , " Mother Knows Best " is a " creepy @-@ funny ode to self @-@ interest . " Joe Williams of the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch described the song as a " Broadway @-@ targeted tune " with " a mercenary undertone . " On the song 's subtle darkness , Filmtracks.com wrote that its " lovely romantic melody and instrumentation is betrayed by its absolutely evil lyrics . " 
 Lyrically , the song mentions all " the evils out to get Rapunzel " and is essentially about manipulating ones ' daughter . Featuring " Mommie Dearest @-@ style passive @-@ aggressive <unk> , " The song begins with Murphy speaking , " You want to go outside ? Why , Rapunzel ! " , and features the lyric " skip the drama , stay with mama , " one of the song 's most memorable , according to Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times . As Gothel , Murphy lists several things for Rapunzel to fear , such as ruffians , thugs , poison ivy , quicksand , cannibals , snakes and the plague , in an attempt to deter her from leaving . Teena Elizabeth of <unk> also observed that at one point the song contradicts itself , with its lyrics first implying that Rapunzel that can leave " soon , but not yet " , only to eventually conclude , " Rapunzel will never leave the tower ever . " Brian Galindo of BuzzFeed cited " don 't ever ask to leave this tower again " as the song 's " most villainous lyric . " John Roebuck of <unk> observed that the song 's lyrics are essentially " Snide remarks on [ Gothel 's ] stolen daughter 's appearance and abilities ... disguised as a mothers concern . " Writing for Slant Magazine , Christian Blauvelt felt that the song 's lyrics were similar to those of " Out There " from Disney 's The Hunchback of Notre Dame ( 1996 ) , specifically Judge Claude Frollo 's verse . Both " Mother Knows Best " and " Out There " , in fact , were composed by Menken . Also comparing the song to Menken 's previous work , AllMusic 's James Christopher Monger wrote that " Mother Knows Best " is " cut from the same pop cloth as all of the late 20th / early 21st century Disney offerings . " 
 Murphy 's vocal range on the song spans roughly two octaves , from the low note of F3 to the high note of C5 . According to James Kendrick of <unk> Entertainment Portal , the song provides the actress with an opportunity " to stretch her Broadway vocal chops . " Writing for Little White Lies , Georgie Hobbs opined that Murphy " performs ... Mother Knows Best ... with a schizophrenic frenzy " , comparing the song to the work of Broadway composer and lyricist Stephen Sondheim , while Jeff Bayer of The Scorecard Review compared it to " Master of the House " from the musical Les Misérables . Meanwhile , Dan Kois of The Village Voice compared the song to Sondheim 's musical Gypsy . Norman Wilner of Now wrote that Murphy 's " clear , " " belted @-@ out , " " powerhouse " vocal performance , which according to Marjorie Baumgarten of The Austin Chronicle " drip [ s ] with sarcasm and biting wit , " reminded him of Broadway actress and singer Patti LuPone . Meanwhile , Tim Robey of The Daily Telegraph likened Murphy 's performance to actress and singer Julie Andrews , describing it jokingly as " Julie @-@ Andrews @-@ on @-@ stimulants . " According to Bitch , the song 's reprise " features far darker harmonies and a slightly revised melody as compared to the original rendition of the song . " Additionally , the reprise serves as a " dark twist on the original performance with a much more ominous sound in both the singing and the orchestration . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Mother Knows Best " has garnered universal acclaim from both film and music critics , several of whom were rather unimpressed with the majority of the film 's songs but admitted to having enjoyed " Mother Knows Best " . Writing for The Blade , Kirk Baird opined that most of the songs " aren 't particularly memorable " , except for " Mother Knows Best " . Likewise , Lindsey Ward of Canoe.ca wrote , " the musical numbers aren 't the best things in Tangled -- the exception being ' Mother Knows Best ' , a brash track that scene @-@ stealing Tony @-@ winner Murphy alone turns into a giant spectacle with her voice " , describing it as " a powerful force to be reckoned with . " Acknowledging that , initially , " The songs ... don 't sound on first hearing like top @-@ drawer Menken " , Richard Corliss of Time highlighted " Mother Knows Best " , describing it as " a pot of poisoned honey . " Similarly , Anthony Quinn of The Independent wrote , " The songs are no great shakes ... apart from ' Mother Knows Best ' . " Michael Smith , writing for the Tulsa World , felt that the song 's darkness " remind [ s ] of the nasty bits of the original Grimm 's fairy tale and give [ s ] Tangled a bitter balance for the sugar and spice moments . " Mal Vincent of The Virginian @-@ Pilot described the song as " a good villain entry . " Critics have continuously cited " Mother Knows Best " as the film 's best song . The Scotsman hailed it as Tangled 's " finest song . " Similarly , Nigel Andrews of the Financial Times acknowledged " Mother Knows Best " as one of Tangled 's " best tunes , " while Georgie Hobbs of Little White Lies identified it as the film 's " standout " , deeming it " worthy of the very best of [ Stephen ] Sondheim 's crazed heroines . " Likewise , Ken Hanke of the Mountain Xpress highlighted " Mother Knows Best " as the " standout " song surrounded by " passable ones . " Calling the song one of the film 's " potential Broadway showstoppers " , Steve Persall of the Tampa Bay Times described " Mother Knows Best " as " a knockout . " Also singling out the track as the film 's " finest number " , Dan Kois of The Village Voice called it " a Mama Rose – worthy tune . " Similarly , Andrea Gronvall of the Chicago Tribune felt that " Mother Knows Best " was one of the more memorable songs of the film , calling it " show @-@ stopping " , and feeling that " Murphy channel [ ed ] all the monstrous smothering power of Mama Rose in Gypsy . " 
 Murphy 's " scene @-@ stealing " vocal performance has been met with largely enthusiastic reviews , which Filmtracks.com felt was " more accomplished " than Mandy Moore 's . Rolling Stone film critic Peter Travers hailed it as " comic bliss with a sting in its tail . " 7x7 's Rossiter Drake called the actress ' " vocal prowess ... a welcome revelation , " while Hannah Goodwin of Christian Broadcasting Network described it as " wonderful . " The Austin Chronicle 's Marjorie Baumgarten praised Murphy for " bring [ ing ] stage showmanship to her musical interludes as Mother Gothel . " Tom Charity of CNN complimented the actress for " <unk> [ ing ] Menken 's grand , theatrical number ' Mother Knows Best ' for the showstopper it deserves to be . " Writing for CNN 's <unk> , Julie <unk> simply described her performance as " exceptional . " GamesRadar 's Jonathan Crocker wrote , " Donna Murphy 's vocal performance as the vain , villainous fake @-@ matriarch is marvellous [ sic ] " , continuing , " her belted @-@ out rendition of ' Mother Knows Best ' is easily the film 's top musical number . " Opining that " Mother Knows Best " is " belted out wonderfully by Murphy " , Linda Cook of the Quad @-@ City Times concluded that the actress " makes the purchase of the soundtrack worthwhile by itself . " Christian Blauvelt of Slant Magazine wrote , " If a couple of Menken 's songs feel less than soaring , it 's due only to the limited pop @-@ star vocals of Mandy Moore as Rapunzel " , concluding , " when Broadway vet Murphy takes to scaling Menken 's octave @-@ climbing melodies like a vocal escalator , it 's a different story . " Sandie Angulo Chen of Common Sense Media wrote that Murphy 's vocals are " on fabulous display in the amazing number ' Mother Knows Best ' . " William Goss of Moviefone said , " Mother Knows Best " is " belted out perfectly " by Murphy . In review of the film 's soundtrack , AllMusic critic James Christopher Monger observed that both Murphy and Moore " take on the lion 's share of the work , and ... deliver the goods . " 
 In one of the song 's rare mixed reviews , Wesley Morris of The Boston Globe enjoyed the song itself but felt that it was unnecessary and melodramatic , writing , " The movie doesn 't need [ songs ] , for one thing . For another , their archness ( Gothel sings with a forearm to her forehead ) suggests that the filmmakers want to have it both ways — to be sincere and to sneer . " James Berardinelli of ReelViews gave the song a negative review , feeling that it was equally as unmemorable as the other tracks and writing , " It 's hard to imagine someone humming ... ' Mother Knows Best ' when leaving the theater . " 
 Io9 ranked the song 11th on the website 's list of " The 36 Greatest Supervillain Musical Numbers of All Time . " BuzzFeed ranked " Mother Knows Best " 12th on its list of " The 12 Greatest Disney Villain Songs " . Disney.com awarded the song a score of six out of 10 , complimenting Murphy 's " amazing singing voice and showmanship . " The lyric " mother knows best " was recognized and quoted in the book The Quotable Mom : Appreciation from the Greatest Minds in History by <unk> . 
 = Seltaeb = 
 Seltaeb was a company set up in 1963 , by Nicky Byrne ( né Douglas Anthony Nicholas Byrne ) to exclusively look after merchandising interests on behalf of Brian Epstein , who managed NEMS Enterprises and The Beatles : John Lennon , Paul McCartney , George Harrison , and Ringo Starr . 
 Directly prior to The Beatles ' first American visit , Brian Epstein wanted someone to manage the escalating volume of merchandising requests that NEMS found itself unable to cope with , and asked his lawyer , David Jacobs , to oversee this task . Jacobs knew Nicky Byrne and asked him if he would be interested in taking over the merchandising subdivision from NEMS altogether , paying NEMS a commission . Byrne accepted the offer subject to a 90 % rate , leaving only 10 % for the Beatles and NEMS combined . Completely unaware of the potential market that existed , particularly in America , Epstein agreed to the deal , and subsequently lost The Beatles an estimated $ 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in possible income . 
 In December 1963 Byrne took over the control of Stramsact in the UK , and then set up Seltaeb ( Beatles spelt backwards ) in the USA . Epstein was able to renegotiate a more favourable commission of 49 % in August 1964 , but then became embroiled in a three @-@ year court battle with Byrne regarding payment of monies due , during which time potential sponsors lost interest . In August 1967 Epstein died , from what was ruled an accidental overdose of a prescribed drug . Jacobs was found hanged in his garage on 15 December 1968 . Byrne later retired to the Bahamas . 
 = = Merchandising = = 
 Before the Beatles achieved nationwide success in Britain , Epstein had permitted a small company ( run by his cousins , and which initially catered only to fan club members ) to produce Beatles ' sweaters for 30 shillings and badges for six pence , eventually selling 15 @,@ 000 sweaters and 50 @,@ 000 badges as the Beatles ' popularity grew . When Beatlemania stormed the UK in 1963 , Epstein was besieged by novelty goods companies wanting to use The Beatles ' name and images on plastic guitars , drums , disc racks , badges , belts and a huge variety of assorted merchandise . Epstein was adamant that the Beatles would not directly endorse any product , but through NEMS Enterprises he would grant discretionary licences to companies who were able to produce a quality product at a fair price , although many companies were already selling products without a licence . 
 When NEMS was swamped with offers of endorsements from America following the success of " I Want To Hold Your Hand " , Epstein , who was usually meticulous in matters involving the Beatles , decided to delegate this responsibility as he felt it was distracting him from his main task of managing his expanding roster of artists . He then asked Jacobs , his London @-@ based , Hove @-@ living celebrity lawyer ( Jacobs 's other clients included Marlene Dietrich , Diana Dors , Judy Garland , Liberace and Laurence Harvey ) to appoint someone specifically to take over the assignment and gave Jacobs power of attorney in the matter . Jacobs at first handed the daily management of this to his chief clerk , Edward Marke , but it transpired that Marke knew almost nothing about the merchandising business , and so Jacobs was forced to look elsewhere . 
 Jacobs knew of a Chelsea socialite , a 37 @-@ year @-@ old divorcé called Nicky Byrne , and when encountering him at a friend 's cocktail party offered him the project , saying that " Brian [ Epstein ] has made a terrible mess out of this [ merchandising ] . " Byrne , who has said he had been " sitting around doing nothing for half of 1963 " was an ex @-@ Horse Guard trooper and amateur racing driver . He had also previously been involved in music publishing , clothes design , theatre production , managing the Condor club in London , and was also known as being a part of a group of people who called themselves " The King 's Road Rats " . He had not had any previous experience of merchandising or managing a large business . 
 Byrne was at first reluctant but later agreed , and delivered the merchandising contract to Jacobs 's office on 4 December 1963 , leaving blank the percentages . Jacobs asked Byrne what percentage rate he should write down to which Byrne ambiguously replied : " Oh , look , just put in 10 % . " A typical percentage would have been 75 % or 80 % for NEMS , and Byrne expected Epstein would begin to negotiate . However , the contract came back initialled ( meaning Epstein had read it ) and signed by Epstein and Jacobs . Jacobs 's advice to Epstein was , " 10 % is better than nothing " . This lapse of shrewdness set the scene for what would later become a legal battleground which deprived the Beatles and Brian Epstein of such large sums of money they would have easily overshadowed any royalties they would receive in the medium term from the sale of records . Byrne later said : " They couldn 't wait to get somebody else to do this , because they were in a mess themselves . " Epstein would later realise that he had made a colossal error of judgment , as Byrne charged 10 % commission to the merchandisers for a licence ( receiving $ 10 out of every hundred ) and then giving 10 % of that to NEMS , which was $ 1 . 
 Byrne controlled two companies : Stramsact in the UK and Europe , and Seltaeb in the USA . He invited five friends to become partners — four of whom were unknown to either Jacobs or Epstein — with each investing around $ 1 @,@ 600 . They were : Mark Warman , Simon Miller @-@ Munday , John Fenton ( a business acquaintance of Jacobs ) Peregrine Eliot ( heir to the ninth Earl of St Germans ) and Malcolm Evans ( not to be confused with Mal Evans , the Beatles ' roadie ) . 
 During the first Beatles ' flight to America Epstein was offered numerous samples of products by merchandisers who required a licence to be allowed to sell them such as clocks , pens , plastic wigs , bracelets , and games . Epstein rejected all of them ; directing the merchandisers to Byrne instead , who was already in New York ensconced in The Drake Hotel on Park Avenue at 56th Street . Byrne rented expensive offices on Fifth Avenue , hiring two limousines ( on 24 @-@ hour standby ) and a helicopter to fly clients to and from the airport , insisting that only the presidents of merchandising companies were allowed to talk directly with him , or with his partner , Lord Eliot , who helped to promote the company name with use of his title . Eliot would later recall going to the Seltaeb office once or twice a week to draw $ 1 @,@ 000 from petty cash . 
 The Wall Street Journal predicted that American teenagers would spend $ 50 million during 1964 , on wigs , dolls , egg cups , T @-@ shirts , sweatshirts and narrow @-@ legged pants , and the New York Times wrote that the Reliance Manufacturing Company 's factories were " smoking night and day ... to meet demand " , and had already sold products valued at the retail value of $ 2 @.@ 5 million . The Reliant Shirt Corporation paid $ 100 @,@ 000 for a licence and sold over a million Beatle T @-@ shirts in three days , <unk> Toys had produced 100 @,@ 000 Beatles ' dolls and had orders for another 500 @,@ 000 , and the Lowell Toy Corporation were selling Beatle wigs faster than they could produce them , at more than 35 @,@ 000 per day . 
 Seltaeb licensed over 150 different items internationally : Beatle dolls , scarves , mugs , bath water , wigs , T @-@ shirts , bubble gum , liquorice , empty cans of " Beatle Breath " , badges , and many more . The badges had " Seltaeb 1964 Chicago Made in USA " on one side , and " Green Duck Co . , Chicago Made in USA " on the other . ( The Green Duck metal stamping company was based at 1520 West Montana , Chicago , operating from 1906 until the late 1960s , making election badges for politicians , as well as memorial spoons ) . American businessmen saw The Beatles ' merchandising as the " biggest marketing opportunity since Walt Disney created Mickey Mouse " . The Columbia Pictures Corporation offered to buy Byrne 's share in the companies for $ 500 @,@ 000 , with the incentives that the money would be paid into a low @-@ tax offshore bank account in the Bahamas , Byrne and his partners would retain 50 % control of the companies , and Ferrari cars would be given free to every partner , but Byrne turned down the offer . 
 = = = <unk> and court cases = = = 
 Byrne passed on the first cheque for $ 9 @,@ 700 to Epstein , who was impressed , but after innocently asking how much out of the amount Byrne was owed , was told , " Nothing Brian , that 's your 10 % " . Byrne then went on to describe the massive amount of interest he was getting from companies across the USA . Epstein was horrified , realising he had made an appalling error by accepting such a small percentage , and decided he could never tell The Beatles . He immediately instructed Jacobs to re @-@ negotiate the contract with Byrne , which was finally achieved seven months later , in August 1964 , which raised the royalty to 49 % . 
 In The Times on 9 December 1964 , it was reported that Eliot was suing Byrne for damages of $ 1 million . Eliot accused Byrne of spending $ 150 @,@ 000 for his " personal comfort and benefit " , over some months . The suit also accused Byrne of charging hotel bills to Seltaeb , which were as much as $ 19 @,@ 000 every week for girlfriends , and also opening " charge accounts for them in Fifth Avenue shops " . Eliot also alleged that Byrne had hired a chauffeur for $ 700 a week and had withheld $ 55 @,@ 000 in royalties to NEMS , after which NEMS had said they would cancel the agreement between the two companies unless monies were forthcoming . Byrne denied all the charges , but admitted he had hired a chauffeur , as he was not familiar with the streets of New York . A supreme court judge reserved his decision . 
 Epstein accused Seltaeb of not accounting properly , and cancelled its power to grant licences , which started a counter @-@ lawsuit by Byrne against Epstein 's New York accountant , Walter Hofer , asking for $ 5 @,@ 168 @,@ 000 in damages . Epstein then instructed NEMS employees to deal directly with American companies , so Byrne instigated court proceedings , which took three years to settle , as it entailed 39 individual claims against NEMS . Byrne won the case , and Epstein paid the court costs and legal bills himself , although the judgement was later vacated ; meaning to cancel it , or render it null and void . Due to the legal battle , Woolworth 's , J. C. Penney , and other companies refused to finalise any merchandising agreements , cancelling orders worth $ 78 million . The court case and its effect was estimated to have lost NEMS and The Beatles approximately $ 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Maximus Enterprises = = 
 Epstein later launched Maximus Enterprises Ltd . , to try to capitalise on the merchandising boom , but as so many companies had withdrawn their interest in the wake of the Seltaeb fiasco , and Lennon had angered America 's bible belt with his remark suggesting that The Beatles were " more popular than Jesus " , the opportunity had passed . Epstein feared that the Beatles would not renew their contracts with him — due to expire in the Autumn of 1967 — if they discovered the truth about Seltaeb . Epstein 's problems with Seltaeb would remain with him until his death on 27 August 1967 , from what was ruled an accidental overdose of a prescribed drug . Many investors had also missed out on massive profits following the cancelling of contracts , and Byrne would later claim of having received two mysterious phone calls foretelling of Epstein 's death . Jacobs was found hanged in his garage on 15 December 1968 . Days before his death Jacobs had asked for police protection , telling a private detective , " I 'm in terrible trouble , they 're all after me , " and going on to list six well @-@ known showbusiness people . Byrne retired to the Bahamas on his yacht , later moving to the Trowbridge area of Wiltshire . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 At the time , very few managers of pop groups knew about the income music merchandising could generate , as very few artists survived long enough in the pop domain to be a viable investment . As far as Epstein was concerned it was merely good public relations , and any revenue that arose from the sale of Beatles @-@ endorsed products was regarded as merely extra money that supplemented the Beatles ' individual incomes from live performances and record sales . Epstein had not recognised an industry which had grossed $ 20 million for Elvis Presley in 1957 alone . Alistair Taylor ( Epstein 's assistant ) later admitted that financial mistakes were made : " We did our best ; some people have said it wasn 't good enough . That 's easy to say with 20 / 20 hindsight but remember that there were no rules . We were making it up as we went along . " 
 In America Epstein had met the well @-@ known divorce lawyer , Nat Weiss , whom Epstein later asked to take over the merchandising affairs of the Beatles and NEMS . Weiss would later state , " The reality is that the Beatles never saw a penny out of the merchandising ... Tens of millions of dollars went down the drain because of the way the whole thing was mishandled . Even after the judgement was vacated , you could smell the smoke from the ashes , that 's how badly they had been burned . " Beatles ' memorabilia , licensed by Seltaeb , is still sold at Beatles ' conventions and on the internet . 
 Lennon said years later : " On the business end he [ Epstein ] ripped us off on the Seltaeb thing . " McCartney also said : " He [ Epstein ] looked to his dad for business advice , and his dad knew how to run a furniture store in Liverpool . " Richard <unk> later wrote about the financial mistakes made by The Beatles themselves in The Longest Cocktail Party : An Insider 's Diary of The Beatles , Their Million @-@ dollar Apple Empire and Its Wild Rise and Fall . 
 = Two Bad Neighbors = 
 " Two Bad Neighbors " is the 13th episode of The Simpsons ' seventh season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 14 , 1996 . In the episode , the Simpson family is having a garage sale . Right when the sale gets moving , George H. W. Bush , the 41st President of the United States , voiced in the episode by Harry Shearer , upstages Homer by moving in across the street , and Homer develops a grudge against George . After George gives Bart a spanking , Homer starts a prank war , which escalates into a one @-@ on @-@ one confrontation that results in the Bushes leaving Springfield . 
 The episode was written by Ken Keeler and directed by Wesley Archer . It was inspired by the animosity towards the show by the Bushes from earlier in the series ' run . It features cultural references to the 1959 TV Series Dennis the Menace , and Cheap Trick 's 1979 song " Dream Police " . Since airing , the episode has received positive reviews from fans and television critics , and Vanity Fair named it the fifth best episode of the show . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 9 , and was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Evergreen Terrace is holding a street @-@ wide rummage sale in Springfield . As Homer dances on the tables selling the items ( upstaging Ned Flanders in the process ) , there is a diversion : the empty house across the street is being moved into . It is occupied by former President George H. W. Bush and his wife Barbara , and Homer takes an instant disliking toward George for getting more attention from the neighbors and hanging out with his friends . After Ned Flanders and his family came over to visit the Bushes as George takes a liking to Ned , Bart decides to visit , and Barbara takes a liking to him . However , Bart 's habit of calling adults by their first names and his overall annoying attitude irritates George . Eventually , after Bart accidentally shreds George 's newly typed memoirs , the former President takes Bart across his knee and spanks him . Upon learning this , an outraged Homer confronts George , demanding an apology for spanking Bart , but Bush refuses and instead demands Homer to apologize . Both men vow to make trouble for each other , despite that Barbara suggests to George that he should apologize to Homer . 
 First , Homer sends bottle rockets at George 's window , and George puts up a banner on his house saying " Two Bad Neighbors " , in reference to Bart and Homer ( but is forced to remove it when other neighbors interpret it as an act of self @-@ abnegation ) . Homer then glues a rainbow @-@ colored wig on his opponent 's head just before he is to give an important speech to a local club after he places cardboard cutouts of his sons , George Bush Jr. and Jeb Bush on his front yard to trick him . George retaliates by destroying the Simpsons ' lawn with his car . Despite Barbara and Marge urging their husbands to stop , the confrontation continues . Homer and Bart are just making their way through the sewers to release locusts ( from Edmund Scientific ) in George 's house when George spots them and climbs down . Homer demands , once again , that Bush apologize for spanking Bart , but George refuses , demanding that Bart apologize for destroying his memoirs , something that Homer becomes aware of just now but still refuses to apologize . As Homer and George begin fighting , Bart releases the locusts , which promptly attack George . 
 At the same time , former Soviet Premier Mikhail Gorbachev arrives at the mansion to bring a housewarming present for the Bush family . He later finds Homer and George busting out of the sewers , fighting , until George recognizes Gorbachev . Finally having enough , Barbara forces George to apologize to Homer for spanking Bart , and he does so in front of Gorbachev ( much to his humiliation ) , leaving Homer to finally happily taunt George . Believing that the neighborhood is not worth living in , George decides to sell the house to Gerald Ford , another former President as he and Barbara leave Springfield for good . Ford invites Homer to watch a football game with beer and <unk> at his house . The two quickly get off to a good start , sharing common ground . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The show had a feud with the Bushes that eventually led to the idea for this episode . In the October 1 , 1990 , edition of People , Barbara Bush called The Simpsons " the dumbest thing [ she ] had ever seen " which had led to the writers sending a letter to Bush where they posed as Marge Simpson . Bush immediately sent a reply in which she apologized . 
 On January 27 , 1992 , then @-@ current President George H. W. Bush made a speech during his re @-@ election campaign that reignited the feud between The Simpsons and the Bushes . At that point , family values were the cornerstone of Bush 's campaign platform , to which effect he gave the following speech at the National Religious Broadcasters ' convention in Washington , D.C. : " We are going to keep on trying to strengthen the American family , to make American families a lot more like the Waltons and a lot less like the Simpsons " . The next broadcast of The Simpsons was a rerun of " Stark Raving Dad " on January 30 , 1992 . It included a new opening , which was a response to Bush 's speech . The scene begins in the Simpsons ' living room . Homer , Patty and Selma sit on the couch . Bart and Lisa are sprawled on the carpet . They all stare at the television and watch Bush 's speech . After Bush 's statement , Bart replies " Hey , we 're just like the Waltons . We 're praying for an end to the Depression too . " 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Bill Oakley , who was a writer on The Simpsons at the time , came up with the idea for " Two Bad Neighbors " two years before the production began . Oakley got the inspiration for the episode after the feud between the Bushes and the Simpson family , and two years later when he and Josh Weinstein became showrunners of The Simpsons , they assigned Ken Keeler to write it . Oakley said that Bill Clinton had been President of the United States for several years at the point when the episode went into production , so the feud had " faded off into oblivion " . The staff therefore thought it would be funny if the two parties encountered each other again . 
 Weinstein said that the episode is often misunderstood . Many audiences expected a political satire , while the writers made special effort to keep the parody apolitical . Oakley stresses that " it 's not a political attack , it 's a personal attack ! " , and instead of criticizing Bush for his policies , the episode instead pokes fun at his " crotchetiness " . Oakley considered the episode to lack many " zany " jokes common for the show at that time , and described the episode as a companion piece to the season eight episode " Homer 's Enemy " , in that a realistic character ( Frank Grimes in that case ) is placed in the unrealistic Simpsons universe and juxtaposed alongside Homer , creating conflict . 
 In an interview with the Simpsons fan site NoHomers.net , Weinstein was asked if there had been any stories that he had come up with that did not make it into the show , to which he replied : " The great thing about The Simpsons is that we pretty much were able to get away with everything , so there weren 't any episodes we really wanted to do that we couldn 't do . Even the crazy high @-@ concept ones like ' Two Bad Neighbors ' and ' Homer 's Enemy ' we managed to put on the air because honestly there were no network execs there to stop us . " 
 At the end of the episode , Gerald Ford moves into the house across the street after Bush leaves . When originally conceived , Richard Nixon was going to move in instead , though this was changed to Bob Dole following Nixon 's death . The writers then decided it would be funnier if it were Ford since they believed he was the politician who best represented Homer . Keeler 's first draft also included a musical number in the style of Tom Lehrer 's satirical recordings , although this ended up being cut . 
 The episode features the first appearance of Disco Stu , who became a recurring character in the series . Stu was originally designed as a withered , old John Travolta @-@ esque figure and was to be voiced by repeat guest star Phil Hartman . However , when the animators remodeled the character , Hartman was not available to dub the voice and so Hank Azaria took over the role . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 " Two Bad Neighbors " originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 14 , 1996 . The episode was selected for release in a 2000 video collection of selected political episodes of the show , titled : The Simpsons Political Party . The episode appeared on the second volume of the collection , together with the episode " Duffless " from season four . The episode was included in The Simpsons season 7 DVD set , which was released on December 13 , 2005 . Keeler , Oakley and Weinstein participated in the DVD 's audio commentary , alongside Matt Groening and the director of the episode , Wes Archer . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The relationship between Bart and George is a homage to the United States television series Dennis the Menace from 1959 , with the Bushes standing in for Dennis ' elderly neighbors , the Wilsons . In response to George spanking Bart , Grandpa says : " Big deal ! When I was a pup , we got spanked by Presidents till the cows came home . Grover Cleveland spanked me on two non @-@ consecutive occasions , " referring to Grover Cleveland , the only president to have served two non @-@ consecutive terms in office . When Homer and Bart hand out fliers for the upcoming garage sale , Apu Nahasapeemapetilon is seen washing his car while singing Cheap Trick 's 1979 song " Dream Police " . Homer 's song at the rummage sale is set to the tune of the songs " Big Spender " and " Stayin ' Alive " . The threat by Bush to Homer , " I 'll ruin you like a Japanese banquet ! " refers to the George H. W. Bush vomiting incident in which Bush , reportedly sick with the 24 hour flu , threw up on the lap of , then @-@ Prime Minister of Japan , Kiichi Miyazawa , the banquet 's host , before fainting . Gerald Ford 's public image is referenced at the end of the episode when he and Homer find that they share common ground , and they then both trip while walking toward the former 's house . Ford acquired a reputation as a clumsy , likable and simple @-@ minded Everyman ( similar to Homer ) , highlighted by an incident in 1975 when he tripped while exiting the presidential jet in Austria , which was then famously and repetitively parodied on Saturday Night Live . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Two Bad Neighbors " finished 52nd in the ratings for the week of January 7 to January 14 , 1996 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 9 . The episode was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following the Post Game NFC Championship . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from fans and television critics . It was named by Vanity Fair 's John Ortved as the show 's fifth best episode . Ortved said , " While the Simpsons people have always claimed <unk> in their satire , the show is , after all , hardly right @-@ leaning , and it is hard to miss how gleefully the former President is mocked here . " Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the UK authors of I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , wrote : " Very strange , this episode takes The Simpsons into a whole new dimension of political satire . The lampooning of a single public figure is a startling move . Works much better for Americans , we 're told " . 
 Dave Foster of DVD Times said : " Once again showing the mischievous relationship Bart and Homer share their pranks and the inevitable confrontations with George Bush Senior are as hilarious as they are implausible and frequent , but there is much to love about this episode in which the writers think out loud and paint The Simpsons and its characters as Bush once did . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson enjoyed the episode and said that it " offers the kind of episode that only The Simpsons could pull off well . The idea of bringing a president to live in Springfield is high @-@ concept to say the least , and it could – and probably should – have bombed . However , the silliness works well and turns this into a great show . " John Thorpe of Central Michigan Life named it the second best episode of the show , and Rich Weir of AskMen.com named it the ninth best episode . 
 = Falling Down ( Selena Gomez & the Scene song ) = 
 " Falling Down " is a song recorded by American pop @-@ rock band Selena Gomez & the Scene for their debut studio album , Kiss & Tell ( 2009 ) . It was released on August 25 , 2009 through Hollywood Records as the lead single from the album . The song was written by Ted Bruner and Trey Vittetoe , both of whom produced the track ; Gina Schock of The Go @-@ Go 's also receives writing credit . Musically , " Falling Down " is an uptempo track that features elements of pop , rock , and electro rock music , and contains heavy usage of synths . Its lyrics see Gomez ridiculing life in Hollywood and fame , though can also be interpreted to speak of a romantic relationship . The song was released in select territories , receiving no official release in European territories . 
 Upon its release , " Falling Down " received mixed to positive reviews from critics , receiving praise for being " catchy " and for Gomez 's " sassy " vocal delivery . The song became the band 's first chart entry on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , where it peaked at number 82 . It became a top twenty hit in Japan , becoming the group 's highest charting effort to date in the country . " Falling Down " went on to sell over 500 @,@ 000 copies in the United States alone . The accompanying music video premiered on August 28 , 2009 through Disney Channel . The video featured Gomez and her band performing the song on a round black stage , and features various shots of Gomez in a photo shoot and singing the song without the band . 
 " Falling Down " was promoted through a number of live performances , including the ninth season of Dancing with the Stars . The performance received a mixed reaction , with Gomez receiving criticism for her vocal ability . It was featured on the set list of all three of the band 's tours , including Selena Gomez & the Scene : Live in Concert ( 2009 @-@ 10 ) , the A Year Without Rain Tour ( 2010 @-@ 11 ) , and the We Own the Night Tour ( 2011 @-@ 12 ) . It appears on Gomez 's solo compilation album , For You ( 2014 ) , along with other songs performed by the band . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following a string of soundtrack appearances and original recordings for the Disney Channel , Selena Gomez signed a five album contract with Hollywood Records on her sixteenth birthday . Inspired by acts such as Paramore and Forever the Sickest Kids , Gomez opted to form a band rather than release music as a solo artist . Work on the album began in 2008 , with Gomez reportedly considering up to one @-@ hundred songs for the album . Having previously worked with Hollywood Records artist Miley Cyrus , Ted Bruner was enlisted to work on the project . Gina Schock , who rose to fame as a member of The Go @-@ Go 's , served as an inspiration for Gomez , and worked on numerous songs for the record . Bruner and Schock , alongside Trey Vittetoe , co @-@ wrote " Falling Down " for Gomez and her band . Bruner and Vittetoe produced the song together . Gomez personally confirmed on August 13 via her official Twitter account that the lyrics to " Falling Down " would premiere through Radio Disney on August 21 , 2009 . The single was released for digital download in the United States and Canada on August 25 , 2009 . It received a digital release in Australia on September 25 , 2009 . The song received no official release in European territories . 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 " Falling Down " is a rock song which derives into the electro rock genre that features " aggressive " guitar and drum lines powered by " <unk> " synths . Bill Lamb of About.com noted that the song seemed to be influenced by Avril Lavigne . Robert Copsey of Digital Spy said the song sounded " suspiciously similar to Pink 's ' U + Ur Hand ' . " The song is set in common time , and has a tempo of 140 beats per minute . It is written in the key of D minor , and Gomez 's vocals span from the low note of A3 to high note of D5 . It follows the chord progression Dm – C – Dm @-@ C. Bill Lamb of About.com gave the single 4 out of 5 stars , calling the song " catchy " and commending Gomez 's " sassy " vocals and its lyrics . Lamb also noted that " The mix leaves in Gomez ' [ sic ] occasional breathless delivery that only conveys more immediacy for the song . " A CBBC reviewer complimented the song 's " catchy lyrics " , stating " you will have them in your head for days ! " Rob Perez of <unk> called the track one of the best on the album . Robert Copsey of Digital Spy said the song and its lyrics sounded " uninspired . " 
 Lyrically , " Falling Down " is said to be in regards to accusations of wrongdoing and has a sense of longing for a non @-@ benefiting relationship . However in an interview , Gomez stated , during an interview that the song ultimately is a ridicule of the Hollywood life and fame , that was the meaning behind " Smile for the camera , ' cause they 're all about to trash ya . " Gomez further elaborated on the concept of the song on an interview with Just Jared Jr . , saying , 
 It 's basically about Hollywood and what people think about it and essentially how plastic it is sometimes . It 's fun and I think girls can relate to it somewhat , for me it was because of Hollywood but it can really relate to a mean girl , an ex @-@ boyfriend , to whoever . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The song debuted on the 12 September 2009 edition of the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 93 . It later peaked at number 82 . It became the band 's first charting single in the United States . In the same week , " Falling Down " also appeared on the Canadian Hot 100 , debuting at number 69 . It spent two weeks on the chart , falling to 82 in its second week . It re @-@ entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 92 for the week ending 9 January 2010 . The song managed to peak at number 11 on the Australian Hitseekers Singles Chart . On the Japan Hot 100 " Falling Down " debuted at number 24 on the week dated 6 March 2010 . A week later , it peaked at 15 on the chart . As of July 2015 , the song has sold 576 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video to " Falling Down " , directed by Chris Dooley , was first seen on Disney Channel , succeeding Wizards of Waverly Place : The Movie on 28 August 2009 . It became available for purchase on iTunes the next day . 
 The music video commences with shots of Gomez singing the first lines , " whoa , whoa " , and bright lights shining upon her ; she is wearing a gray shirt , black tights and boots and has long brown hair . Then , the rest of the band , composed of four male members , is seen as Gomez dances and nods her head . The background in the music video is a large projection of patterned geometrical figures that constantly alter to divergent colors . Gomez is then seen in a " photo shoot @-@ like " set wearing a white shirt and a zebra @-@ patterned skirt . As the video progresses Gomez and the rest of the band are seen singing , dancing , playing instruments and using props . Gomez holds a mirror and plastic roses , which she then throws away , in conjunction to the song 's lines . The video ends with Gomez taking a quick bow while still holding her microphone . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Gomez & the Scene first performed the song live on the ninth season of Dancing with the Stars . During the performance , professional dancers Derek Hough and Karina Smirnoff danced to the song . Tamara Brooks of Zap2it commented " The song 's catchy but Selena doesn 't look entirely comfortable on stage to me . It 's very ... rehearsed . But the dancing was <unk> . " Additionally , they performed the song at numerous concerts in 2009 and 2010 , including their House of Blues Tour , the Kiss & Tell Tour and their Fairs & Festivals tour . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Falling Down " — 3 : 05 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Lead vocals : Selena Gomez 
 Songwriters : Ted Bruner , Trey Vittetoe , Gina Schock 
 Production : Ted Bruner , Trey Vittetoe 
 Mixing : Clif Norrell 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Caspar David Friedrich = 
 Caspar David Friedrich ( 5 September 1774 – 7 May 1840 ) was a 19th @-@ century German Romantic landscape painter , generally considered the most important German artist of his generation . He is best known for his mid @-@ period allegorical landscapes which typically feature contemplative figures silhouetted against night skies , morning mists , barren trees or Gothic ruins . His primary interest as an artist was the contemplation of nature , and his often symbolic and anti @-@ classical work seeks to convey a subjective , emotional response to the natural world . Friedrich 's paintings characteristically set a human presence in diminished perspective amid expansive landscapes , reducing the figures to a scale that , according to the art historian Christopher John Murray , directs " the viewer 's gaze towards their metaphysical dimension " . 
 Friedrich was born in the Pomeranian town of Greifswald at the Baltic Sea , where he began his studies in art as a young man . He studied in Copenhagen until 1798 , before settling in Dresden . He came of age during a period when , across Europe , a growing disillusionment with materialistic society was giving rise to a new appreciation of spirituality . This shift in ideals was often expressed through a reevaluation of the natural world , as artists such as Friedrich , J. M. W. Turner ( 1775 – 1851 ) and John Constable ( 1776 – 1837 ) sought to depict nature as a " divine creation , to be set against the artifice of human civilization " . 
 Friedrich 's work brought him renown early in his career , and contemporaries such as the French sculptor David d 'Angers ( 1788 – 1856 ) spoke of him as a man who had discovered " the tragedy of landscape " . Nevertheless , his work fell from favour during his later years , and he died in obscurity , and in the words of the art historian Philip Miller , " half mad " . As Germany moved towards modernisation in the late 19th century , a new sense of urgency characterised its art , and Friedrich 's contemplative depictions of stillness came to be seen as the products of a bygone age . The early 20th century brought a renewed appreciation of his work , beginning in 1906 with an exhibition of thirty @-@ two of his paintings and sculptures in Berlin . By the 1920s his paintings had been discovered by the Expressionists , and in the 1930s and early 1940s Surrealists and <unk> frequently drew ideas from his work . The rise of Nazism in the early 1930s again saw a resurgence in Friedrich 's popularity , but this was followed by a sharp decline as his paintings were , by association with the Nazi movement , interpreted as having a nationalistic aspect . It was not until the late 1970s that Friedrich regained his reputation as an icon of the German Romantic movement and a painter of international importance . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early years and family = = = 
 Caspar David Friedrich was born on 5 September 1774 , in Greifswald , Swedish Pomerania , on the Baltic coast of Germany . The sixth of ten children , he was brought up in the strict Lutheran creed of his father Adolf Gottlieb Friedrich , a candle @-@ maker and soap boiler . Records of the family 's financial circumstances are contradictory ; while some sources indicate the children were privately tutored , others record that they were raised in relative poverty . Caspar David was familiar with death from an early age . His mother , Sophie Dorothea <unk> , died in 1781 when he was just seven . A year later , his sister Elisabeth died , while a second sister , Maria , succumbed to typhus in 1791 . Arguably the greatest tragedy of his childhood was the 1787 death of his brother Johann Christoffer : at the age of thirteen , Caspar David witnessed his younger brother fall through the ice of a frozen lake and drown . Some accounts suggest that Johann Christoffer perished while trying to rescue Caspar David , who was also in danger on the ice . 
 Friedrich began his formal study of art in 1790 as a private student of artist Johann Gottfried Quistorp at the University of Greifswald in his home city , at which the art department is now named Caspar @-@ David @-@ Friedrich @-@ Institut in his honour . Quistorp took his students on outdoor drawing excursions ; as a result , Friedrich was encouraged to sketch from life at an early age . Through Quistorp , Friedrich met and was subsequently influenced by the theologian Ludwig Gotthard <unk> , who taught that nature was a revelation of God . Quistorp introduced Friedrich to the work of the German 17th @-@ century artist Adam <unk> , whose works often included religious subjects dominated by landscape , and nocturnal subjects . During this period he also studied literature and aesthetics with Swedish professor Thomas <unk> . Four years later Friedrich entered the prestigious Academy of Copenhagen , where he began his education by making copies of casts from antique sculptures before proceeding to drawing from life . Living in Copenhagen afforded the young painter access to the Royal Picture Gallery 's collection of 17th @-@ century Dutch landscape painting . At the Academy he studied under teachers such as Christian August Lorentzen and the landscape painter Jens Juel . These artists were inspired by the Sturm und Drang movement and represented a midpoint between the dramatic intensity and expressive manner of the budding Romantic aesthetic and the waning neo @-@ classical ideal . Mood was paramount , and influence was drawn from such sources as the Icelandic legend of Edda , the poems of Ossian and Norse mythology . 
 Friedrich settled permanently in Dresden in 1798 . During this early period , he experimented in printmaking with etchings and designs for woodcuts which his furniture @-@ maker brother cut . By 1804 he had produced 18 etchings and four woodcuts ; they were apparently made in small numbers and only distributed to friends . Despite these forays into other media , he gravitated toward working primarily with ink , watercolour and <unk> . With the exception of a few early pieces , such as Landscape with Temple in Ruins ( 1797 ) , he did not work extensively with oils until his reputation was more established . Landscapes were his preferred subject , inspired by frequent trips , beginning in 1801 , to the Baltic coast , Bohemia , the Krkonoše and the Harz Mountains . Mostly based on the landscapes of northern Germany , his paintings depict woods , hills , harbors , morning mists and other light effects based on a close observation of nature . These works were modeled on sketches and studies of scenic spots , such as the cliffs on Rügen , the surroundings of Dresden and the river Elbe . He executed his studies almost exclusively in pencil , even providing topographical information , yet the subtle atmospheric effects characteristic of Friedrich 's mid @-@ period paintings were rendered from memory . These effects took their strength from the depiction of light , and of the illumination of sun and moon on clouds and water : optical phenomena peculiar to the Baltic coast that had never before been painted with such an emphasis . 
 = = = Move to Dresden = = = 
 Friedrich established his reputation as an artist when he won a prize in 1805 at the Weimar competition organised by the writer , poet , and dramatist Johann Wolfgang von Goethe . At the time , the Weimar competition tended to draw mediocre and now long @-@ forgotten artists presenting derivative mixtures of neo @-@ classical and pseudo @-@ Greek styles . The poor quality of the entries began to prove damaging to Goethe 's reputation , so when Friedrich entered two sepia drawings — Procession at Dawn and Fisher @-@ Folk by the Sea — the poet responded enthusiastically and wrote , " We must praise the artist 's resourcefulness in this picture fairly . The drawing is well done , the procession is ingenious and appropriate ... his treatment combines a great deal of firmness , diligence and neatness ... the ingenious watercolour ... is also worthy of praise . " 
 Friedrich completed the first of his major paintings in 1807 , at the age of 34 . The Cross in the Mountains , today known as the <unk> Altar ( Galerie Neue Meister , Dresden ) , is an altarpiece panel commissioned by the Countess of Thun for her family 's chapel in <unk> , Bohemia . It was to be one of the few commissions the artist received . The altar panel depicts a <unk> , or a gilded cross , in profile at the top of a mountain , alone , and surrounded by German and Austrian pine trees . The cross reaches the highest point in the pictorial plane but is presented from an oblique and a distant viewpoint . Nature dominates the scene and for the first time in Christian art , an altarpiece showcases a landscape . According to the art historian Linda Siegel , the design of the altarpiece is the " logical climax of many earlier drawings of his which depicted a cross in nature 's world . " 
 The work was first exhibited on Christmas Day , 1808 . Although it was generally coldly received , it was nevertheless Friedrich 's first painting to receive wide publicity . The artist 's friends publicly defended the work , while art critic Basilius von <unk> published a lengthy article rejecting Friedrich 's use of landscape in such a context ; he wrote that it would be " a veritable presumption , if landscape painting were to sneak into the church and creep onto the altar " . <unk> fundamentally challenged the concept that pure landscape painting could convey explicit meaning . Friedrich responded with a programme describing his intentions . In his 1809 commentary on the painting , he compared the rays of the evening sun to the light of the Holy Father . The sinking of the sun suggests that the era when God revealed himself directly to man has passed . This statement marked the only time Friedrich recorded a detailed interpretation of his own work . 
 Friedrich was elected a member of the Berlin Academy in 1810 following the purchase of two of his paintings by the Prussian Crown Prince . Yet in 1816 , he sought to distance himself from Prussian authority , and that June applied for Saxon citizenship . The move was unexpected by his friends , as the Saxon government of the time was pro @-@ French , while Friedrich 's paintings to date were seen as generally patriotic and distinctly anti @-@ French . Nevertheless , with the aid of his Dresden @-@ based friend Graf <unk> von <unk> , Friedrich attained not only citizenship , but in 1818 , a place in the Saxon Academy as a member with a yearly dividend of 150 thalers . Although he hoped to receive a full Professorship , it was never awarded him as , according to the German Library of Information , " it was felt that his painting was too personal , his point of view too individual to serve as a fruitful example to students . " Politics too may have played a role in the stalling of his career : Friedrich 's decidedly Germanic choice of subject and costuming frequently clashed with the prevailing pro @-@ French attitudes of the time . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 On 21 January 1818 , Friedrich married Caroline <unk> , the twenty @-@ five @-@ year @-@ old daughter of a dyer from Dresden . The couple had three children , with their first , Emma , arriving in 1820 . Physiologist and painter Carl Gustav Carus notes in his biographical essays that marriage did not impact significantly on either Friedrich 's life or personality , yet his canvasses from this period , including Chalk Cliffs on Rügen — painted after his honeymoon — display a new sense of levity , while his palette is brighter and less austere . Human figures appear with increasing frequency in the paintings of this period , which Siegel interprets as a reflection that " the importance of human life , particularly his family , now occupies his thoughts more and more , and his friends , his wife , and his townspeople appear as frequent subjects in his art . " 
 Around this time , the artist found support from two sources in Russia . In 1820 , Grand Duke Nikolai Pavlovich , at the behest of his wife Alexandra Feodorovna , visited Friedrich 's studio and returned to Saint Petersburg with a number of his paintings . The exchange marked the beginning of a patronage that continued for many years . Not long thereafter , the poet Vasily Zhukovsky , tutor to Alexander II , met Friedrich in 1821 and found in him a kindred spirit . For decades Zhukovsky helped Friedrich both by purchasing his work himself and by recommending his art to the royal family ; his assistance toward the end of Friedrich 's career proved invaluable to the ailing and impoverished artist . Zhukovsky remarked that his friend 's paintings " please us by their precision , each of them awakening a memory in our mind . " 
 Friedrich was acquainted with Philipp Otto Runge ( 1777 – 1810 ) , another leading German painter of the Romantic period . He was also a friend of Georg Friedrich <unk> ( 1785 – 1847 ) , who painted him at work in his unadorned studio , and of the Norwegian painter Johan Christian Clausen Dahl ( 1788 – 1857 ) . Dahl was close to Friedrich during the artist 's final years , and he expressed dismay that to the art @-@ buying public , Friedrich 's pictures were only " curiosities " . While the poet Zhukovsky appreciated Friedrich 's psychological themes , Dahl praised the descriptive quality of Friedrich 's landscapes , commenting that " artists and connoisseurs saw in Friedrich 's art only a kind of mystic , because they themselves were only looking out for the mystic ... They did not see Friedrich 's faithful and conscientious study of nature in everything he represented " . 
 During this period Friedrich frequently sketched memorial monuments and sculptures for mausoleums , reflecting his obsession with death and the afterlife ; he even created designs for some of the funerary art in Dresden 's cemeteries . Some of these works were lost in the fire that destroyed Munich 's Glass Palace ( 1931 ) and later in the 1945 bombing of Dresden . 
 = = = Later life and death = = = 
 Friedrich 's reputation steadily declined over the final fifteen years of his life . As the ideals of early Romanticism passed from fashion , he came to be viewed as an eccentric and melancholy character , out of touch with the times . Gradually his patrons fell away . By 1820 , he was living as a recluse and was described by friends as the " most solitary of the solitary " . Towards the end of his life he lived in relative poverty and was increasingly dependent on the charity of friends . He became isolated and spent long periods of the day and night walking alone through woods and fields , often beginning his strolls before sunrise . 
 In June 1835 , Friedrich suffered his first stroke , which left him with minor limb paralysis and greatly reduced his ability to paint . As a result , he was unable to work in oil ; instead he was limited to watercolour , sepia and reworking older compositions . 
 Although his vision remained strong , he had lost the full strength of his hand . Yet he was able to produce a final ' black painting ' , Seashore by Moonlight ( 1835 – 36 ) , described by Vaughan as the " darkest of all his shorelines , in which richness of tonality compensates for the lack of his former finesse " . 
 Symbols of death appeared in his other work from this period . Soon after his stroke , the Russian royal family purchased a number of his earlier works , and the proceeds allowed him to travel to Teplitz — in today 's Czech Republic — to recover . 
 During the mid @-@ 1830s , Friedrich began a series of portraits and he returned to observing himself in nature . As the art historian William Vaughan has observed , however , " He can see himself as a man greatly changed . He is no longer the upright , supportive figure that appeared in Two Men Contemplating the Moon in 1819 . He is old and stiff ... he moves with a stoop " . 
 By 1838 , he was capable only of working in a small format . He and his family were living in poverty and grew increasingly dependent for support on the charity of friends . 
 Friedrich died in Dresden on 7 May 1840 , and was buried in Dresden 's Trinitatis @-@ Friedhof ( Trinity Cemetery ) east of the city centre ( the entrance to which he had painted some 15 years earlier ) . The simple flat gravestone lies north @-@ west of the central roundel within the main avenue . 
 By the time of his death , his reputation and fame were waning , and his passing was little noticed within the artistic community . His artwork had certainly been acknowledged during his lifetime , but not widely . While the close study of landscape and an emphasis on the spiritual elements of nature were commonplace in contemporary art , his work was too original and personal to be well understood . By 1838 , his work no longer sold or received attention from critics ; the Romantic movement had been moving away from the early idealism that the artist had helped found . 
 After his death , Carl Gustav Carus wrote a series of articles which paid tribute to Friedrich 's transformation of the conventions of landscape painting . However , Carus ' articles placed Friedrich firmly in his time , and did not place the artist within a continuing tradition . Only one of his paintings had been reproduced as a print , and that was produced in very few copies . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Landscape and the sublime = = = 
 The visualisation and portrayal of landscape in an entirely new manner was Friedrich 's key innovation . He sought not just to explore the blissful enjoyment of a beautiful view , as in the classic conception , but rather to examine an instant of sublimity , a reunion with the spiritual self through the contemplation of nature . Friedrich was instrumental in transforming landscape in art from a backdrop subordinated to human drama to a self @-@ contained emotive subject . Friedrich 's paintings commonly employed the Rückenfigur — a person seen from behind , contemplating the view . The viewer is encouraged to place himself in the position of the Rückenfigur , by which means he experiences the sublime potential of nature , understanding that the scene is as perceived and idealised by a human . Friedrich created the notion of a landscape full of romantic feeling — die <unk> <unk> . His art details a wide range of geographical features , such as rock coasts , forests , and mountain scenes . He often used the landscape to express religious themes . During his time , most of the best @-@ known paintings were viewed as expressions of a religious mysticism . 
 Friedrich said , " The artist should paint not only what he sees before him , but also what he sees within him . If , however , he sees nothing within him , then he should also refrain from painting that which he sees before him . Otherwise , his pictures will be like those folding screens behind which one expects to find only the sick or the dead . " Expansive skies , storms , mist , forests , ruins and crosses bearing witness to the presence of God are frequent elements in Friedrich 's landscapes . Though death finds symbolic expression in boats that move away from shore — a Charon @-@ like motif — and in the poplar tree , it is referenced more directly in paintings like The Abbey in the Oakwood ( 1808 – 10 ) , in which monks carry a coffin past an open grave , toward a cross , and through the portal of a church in ruins . 
 He was one of the first artists to portray winter landscapes in which the land is rendered as stark and dead . Friedrich 's winter scenes are solemn and still — according to the art historian Hermann <unk> , Friedrich painted winter scenes in which " no man has yet set his foot . The theme of nearly all the older winter pictures had been less winter itself than life in winter . In the 16th and 17th centuries , it was thought impossible to leave out such motifs as the crowd of skaters , the wanderer ... It was Friedrich who first felt the wholly detached and distinctive features of a natural life . Instead of many tones , he sought the one ; and so , in his landscape , he subordinated the composite chord into one single basic note " . 
 Bare oak trees and tree stumps , such as those in Raven Tree ( c . 1822 ) , Man and Woman Contemplating the Moon ( c . 1833 ) , and Willow Bush under a Setting Sun ( c . 1835 ) , are recurring elements of Friedrich 's paintings , symbolizing death . Countering the sense of despair are Friedrich 's symbols for redemption : the cross and the clearing sky promise eternal life , and the slender moon suggests hope and the growing closeness of Christ . In his paintings of the sea , anchors often appear on the shore , also indicating a spiritual hope . German literature scholar Alice <unk> finds in Friedrich 's painting a temporality — an evocation of the passage of time — that is rarely highlighted in the visual arts . For example , in The Abbey in the Oakwood , the movement of the monks away from the open grave and toward the cross and the horizon imparts Friedrich 's message that the final destination of man 's life lies beyond the grave . 
 With dawn and dusk constituting prominent themes of his landscapes , Friedrich 's own later years were characterized by a growing pessimism . His work becomes darker , revealing a fearsome monumentality . The Wreck of the Hope — also known as The Polar Sea or The Sea of Ice ( 1823 – 24 ) — perhaps best summarizes Friedrich 's ideas and aims at this point , though in such a radical way that the painting was not well received . Completed in 1824 , it depicted a grim subject , a shipwreck in the Arctic Ocean ; " the image he produced , with its grinding slabs of travertine @-@ colored floe ice chewing up a wooden ship , goes beyond documentary into allegory : the frail bark of human aspiration crushed by the world 's immense and glacial indifference . " 
 Friedrich 's written commentary on aesthetics was limited to a collection of aphorisms set down in 1830 , in which he explained the need for the artist to match natural observation with an introspective scrutiny of his own personality . His best @-@ known remark advises the artist to " close your bodily eye so that you may see your picture first with the spiritual eye . Then bring to the light of day that which you have seen in the darkness so that it may react upon others from the outside inwards . " He rejected the overreaching portrayals of nature in its " totality " , as found in the work of contemporary painters like Adrian Ludwig Richter ( 1803 – 84 ) and Joseph Anton Koch ( 1768 – 1839 ) . 
 = = = Loneliness and death = = = 
 Both Friedrich 's life and art have at times been perceived by some to have been marked with an overwhelming sense of loneliness . Art historians and some of his contemporaries attribute such interpretations to the losses suffered during his youth to the bleak outlook of his adulthood , while Friedrich 's pale and withdrawn appearance helped reinforce the popular notion of the " taciturn man from the North " . 
 Friedrich suffered depressive episodes in 1799 , 1803 – 1805 , <unk> , in 1816 and between 1824 and 1826 . There are noticeable thematic shifts in the works he produced during these episodes , which see the emergence of such motifs and symbols as vultures , owls , graveyards and ruins . From 1826 these motifs became a permanent feature of his output , while his use of color became more dark and muted . Carus wrote in 1929 that Friedrich " is surrounded by a thick , gloomy cloud of spiritual uncertainty " , though the noted art historian and curator Hubertus Gassner disagrees with such notions , seeing in Friedrich 's work a positive and life @-@ affirming subtext inspired by Freemasonry and religion . 
 = = = Germanic folklore = = = 
 Reflecting Friedrich 's patriotism and resentment during the 1813 French occupation of the dominion of Pomerania , motifs from German folklore became increasingly prominent in his work . An anti @-@ French German nationalist , Friedrich used motifs from his native landscape to celebrate Germanic culture , customs and mythology . He was impressed by the anti @-@ Napoleonic poetry of Ernst Moritz Arndt and Theodor Körner , and the patriotic literature of Adam Müller and Heinrich von Kleist . Moved by the deaths of three friends killed in battle against France , as well as by Kleist 's 1808 drama Die <unk> , Friedrich undertook a number of paintings in which he intended to convey political symbols solely by means of the landscape — a first in the history of art . 
 In Old Heroes ' Graves ( 1812 ) , a dilapidated monument inscribed " Arminius " invokes the Germanic chieftain , a symbol of nationalism , while the four tombs of fallen heroes are slightly ajar , freeing their spirits for eternity . Two French soldiers appear as small figures before a cave , lower and deep in a grotto surrounded by rock , as if farther from heaven . A second political painting , Fir Forest with the French Dragoon and the Raven ( c . 1813 ) , depicts a lost French soldier dwarfed by a dense forest , while on a tree stump a raven is perched — a prophet of doom , symbolizing the anticipated defeat of France . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 Alongside other Romantic painters , Friedrich helped position landscape painting as a major genre within Western art . Of his contemporaries , Friedrich 's style most influenced the painting of Johan Christian Dahl ( 1788 – 1857 ) . Among later generations , Arnold Böcklin ( 1827 – 1901 ) was strongly influenced by his work , and the substantial presence of Friedrich 's works in Russian collections influenced many Russian painters , in particular <unk> Kuindzhi ( c . 1842 – 1910 ) and Ivan <unk> ( 1832 – 98 ) . Friedrich 's spirituality anticipated American painters such as Albert Pinkham Ryder ( 1847 – 1917 ) , Ralph Blakelock ( 1847 – 1919 ) , the painters of the Hudson River School and the New England <unk> . 
 At the turn of the 20th century , Friedrich was rediscovered by the Norwegian art historian Andreas Aubert ( 1851 – 1913 ) , whose writing initiated modern Friedrich scholarship , and by the Symbolist painters , who valued his visionary and allegorical landscapes . The Norwegian Symbolist Edvard Munch ( 1863 – 1944 ) would have seen Friedrich 's work during a visit to Berlin in the 1880s . Munch 's 1899 print The Lonely Ones echoes Friedrich 's Rückenfigur ( back figure ) , although in Munch 's work the focus has shifted away from the broad landscape and toward the sense of dislocation between the two melancholy figures in the foreground . 
 Friedrich 's landscapes exercised a strong influence on the work of German artist Max Ernst ( 1891 – 1976 ) , and as a result other Surrealists came to view Friedrich as a precursor to their movement . In 1934 , the Belgian painter René Magritte ( 1898 – 1967 ) paid tribute in his work The Human Condition , which directly echoes motifs from Friedrich 's art in its questioning of perception and the role of the viewer . A few years later , the Surrealist journal <unk> featured Friedrich in a 1939 article by critic Marie <unk> , thereby exposing his work to a far wider circle of artists . The influence of The Wreck of Hope ( or The Sea of Ice ) is evident in the 1940 – 41 painting <unk> Meer by Paul Nash ( 1889 – 1946 ) , a fervent admirer of Ernst . Friedrich 's work has been cited as an inspiration by other major 20th @-@ century artists , including Mark Rothko ( 1903 – 70 ) , Gerhard Richter ( b . 1932 ) , Gotthard <unk> and Anselm Kiefer ( b . 1945 ) . Friedrich 's Romantic paintings have also been singled out by writer Samuel Beckett ( 1906 – 89 ) , who , standing before Man and Woman Contemplating the Moon , said " This was the source of Waiting for Godot , you know . " 
 In his 1961 article " The Abstract Sublime " , originally published in ARTnews , the art historian Robert Rosenblum drew comparisons between the Romantic landscape paintings of both Friedrich and Turner with the Abstract Expressionist paintings of Mark Rothko . Rosenblum specifically describes Friedrich 's 1809 painting The Monk by the Sea , Turner 's The Evening Star and Rothko 's 1954 Light , Earth and Blue as revealing affinities of vision and feeling . According to Rosenblum , " Rothko , like Friedrich and Turner , places us on the threshold of those shapeless infinities discussed by the aestheticians of the Sublime . The tiny monk in the Friedrich and the fisher in the Turner establish a poignant contrast between the infinite vastness of a pantheistic God and the infinite smallness of His creatures . In the abstract language of Rothko , such literal detail — a bridge of empathy between the real spectator and the presentation of a transcendental landscape — is no longer necessary ; we ourselves are the monk before the sea , standing silently and contemplatively before these huge and soundless pictures as if we were looking at a sunset or a moonlit night . " 
 = = = Critical opinion = = = 
 Until 1890 , and especially after his friends had died , Friedrich 's work lay in near @-@ oblivion for decades . Yet , by 1890 , the symbolism in his work began to ring true with the artistic mood of the day , especially in central Europe . However , despite a renewed interest and an acknowledgment of his originality , his lack of regard for " painterly effect " and thinly rendered surfaces jarred with the theories of the time . 
 During the 1930s , Friedrich 's work was used in the promotion of Nazi ideology , which attempted to fit the Romantic artist within the nationalistic Blut und Boden . It took decades for Friedrich 's reputation to recover from this association with Nazism . His reliance on symbolism and the fact that his work fell outside the narrow definitions of modernism contributed to his fall from favour . In 1949 , art historian Kenneth Clark wrote that Friedrich " worked in the frigid technique of his time , which could hardly inspire a school of modern painting " , and suggested that the artist was trying to express in painting what is best left to poetry . Clark 's dismissal of Friedrich reflected the damage the artist 's reputation sustained during the late 1930s . 
 Friedrich 's reputation suffered further damage when his imagery was adopted by a number of Hollywood directors , such as Walt Disney , built on the work of such German cinema masters as Fritz Lang and F. W. Murnau , within the horror and fantasy genres . His rehabilitation was slow , but enhanced through the writings of such critics and scholars as Werner Hofmann , Helmut <unk> @-@ <unk> and Sigrid Hinz , who successfully rejected and rebutted the political associations ascribed to his work , and placed it within a purely art @-@ historical context . By the 1970s , he was again being exhibited in major galleries across the world , as he found favour with a new generation of critics and art historians . 
 Today , his international reputation is well established . He is a national icon in his native Germany , and highly regarded by art historians and art connoisseurs across the Western World . He is generally viewed as a figure of great psychological complexity , and according to Vaughan , " a believer who struggled with doubt , a <unk> of beauty haunted by darkness . In the end , he transcends interpretation , reaching across cultures through the compelling appeal of his imagery . He has truly emerged as a butterfly — hopefully one that will never again disappear from our sight " . 
 = = Work = = 
 Friedrich was a prolific artist who produced more than 500 attributed works . In line with the Romantic ideals of his time , he intended his paintings to function as pure aesthetic statements , so he was cautious that the titles given to his work were not overly descriptive or evocative . It is likely that some of today 's more literal titles , such as The Stages of Life , were not given by the artist himself , but were instead adopted during one of the revivals of interest in Friedrich . Complications arise when dating Friedrich 's work , in part because he often did not directly name or date his canvases . He kept a carefully detailed notebook on his output , however , which has been used by scholars to tie paintings to their completion dates . 
 = Northover Projector = 
 The Projector , 2 @.@ 5 inch — more commonly known as the Northover Projector — was an ad hoc anti @-@ tank weapon used by the British Army and Home Guard during the Second World War . With a German invasion of Great Britain seeming likely after the defeat in the Battle of France , most available weaponry was diverted to the regular British Army , leaving the Home Guard short on supplies , particularly anti @-@ tank weaponry . The Northover Projector was designed by a Home Guard officer named Robert Harry Northover to act as a makeshift anti @-@ tank weapon , and was put into production in 1940 following a demonstration to the Prime Minister , Winston Churchill . 
 The weapon consisted of a hollow metal tube attached to a tripod , with a rudimentary breech at one end . Rounds were fired with the use of black powder ignited by a standard musket percussion cap , and it had an effective range of between 100 and 150 yards . Although it was cheap and easy to manufacture , it did have several problems ; it was difficult to move and the No. 76 Special Incendiary Grenades it used as one type of ammunition had a tendency to break inside the breech , damaging the weapon and injuring the crew . Production began in late 1940 , and by the beginning of 1943 nearly 19 @,@ 000 were in service . Like many obsolete Home Guard weapons , it was eventually replaced by other weapons , such as the 2 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank gun . 
 = = Development = = 
 With the end of the Battle of France and the evacuation of the British Expeditionary Force from the port of Dunkirk between 26 May and 4 June 1940 , a German invasion of Great Britain seemed likely . However , the British Army was not well @-@ equipped to defend the country in such an event ; in the weeks after the Dunkirk evacuation it could only field twenty @-@ seven divisions . The Army was particularly short of anti @-@ tank guns , 840 of which had been left behind in France , leaving only 167 available in Britain ; ammunition was so scarce for the remaining guns that regulations forbade even a single round being used for training purposes . 
 Given these shortcomings , any modern weapons that were available were allocated to the British Army , and the Home Guard was forced to supplement the meagre amount of outdated weapons and ammunition they had with ad hoc weapons . One such weapon was the Northover Projector , the invention of Major Robert Harry Northover . Northover , an officer in the Home Guard , designed it to be an easily manufactured and cheap anti @-@ tank weapon , costing just under £ 10 to produce , excluding the required tripod . The Major wrote directly to the Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , with his design and arranged for Churchill to attend a demonstration of the Northover Projector . The Prime Minister approved of the weapon and gave it his personal endorsement , ordering in October 1940 that the weapon be mass @-@ produced on a scale of one for every Home Guard platoon . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Northover Projector — which was officially labelled the " Projector , 2 @.@ 5 inch " by the War Office — was formed of a hollow metal tube , resembling a drain pipe , mounted on top of a cast @-@ iron tripod . It weighed approximately 27 @.@ 2 kilograms . A simple breech was attached to one end of the tube , and rounds were fired from the Projector with a small quantity of black powder ignited by a " top hat " copper cap as used in muzzle loading rifles < Curtis ( <unk> ) 2014 > ; any recoil from the weapon was absorbed by the legs of the tripod , which were also hollow . It had a maximum range of approximately 300 yards but was accurate only to between 100 and 150 yards Home Guard units often added their own modifications to the weapon , which included mounting it on carriages or even the sidecars of motorcycles . It was served by a crew of three . Ammunition for the weapon consisted of the No. 76 Special Incendiary Grenade , a glass bottle " containing a phosphorus mixture which burst into livid flames , giving off quantities of suffocating smoke upon exposure to the air " , as well as normal hand and rifle grenades . 
 The Projector had a number of defects . It was difficult to move , the tripod had the tendency to damage itself if it was dropped , and its discharge pressure has been described as " feeble . " The phosphorus grenades exhibited a number of faults when used in the Projector ; they could often explode inside the weapon if too much black powder were added , or fall short if too little were used , or even fail to explode . They could also break inside the barrel when fired which often led to the weapon being damaged and its crew injured . Even when fired properly , the Projector gave off a large cloud of smoke which could take up to a minute to clear and revealed the weapon 's position . Bishop argues that its anti @-@ tank abilities would have been ' doubtful ' when it fired hand and rifle grenades , although he considers that the phosphorus grenades might have been more successful . To make handling easier , a lighter version of the weapon , the Northover Projector Mk 2 was developed in 1941 , but few were produced . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 The Northover Projector was issued to both Home Guard and regular British Army units , and by August , 1941 over 8 @,@ 000 Northover Projectors were in service . This number had increased to 18 @,@ 919 by the beginning of 1943 . Initial reactions to the Northover Projector were varied , with a number of Home Guard volunteers uncertain about the weapon 's unusual design , and some officers never accepted that it could be useful . However , most Home Guard units came to accept the weapon and have confidence in it , aided by large amounts of what Mackenzie terms " War Office propaganda " which cited the positive qualities of the weapon , such as its simplicity of use , ease of manufacture and low maintenance requirements . It was , as one Home Guard volunteer put it , " something to be accepted gratefully until something better arrived . " Like many of the obsolete weapons designed for the Home Guard , the Northover Projector was only taken out of service when it could be replaced with " marginally less ineffective " weapons provided by the Army , such as the 2 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank gun . 
 = = = Official documents = = = 
 The Northover Projector . Tank Hunting and Destruction , Military Training Manual No 42 , Amendment No. 1 , Appendix F. War Office . December 1940 . 
 = Aries ( constellation ) = 
 Aries is one of the constellations of the zodiac . It is located in the northern celestial hemisphere between Pisces to the west and Taurus to the east . The name Aries is Latin for ram , and its symbol is ( Unicode <unk> ) , representing a ram 's horns . It is one of the 48 constellations described by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy , and remains one of the 88 modern constellations . It is a mid @-@ sized constellation , ranking 39th overall size , with an area of 441 square degrees ( 1 @.@ 1 % of the celestial sphere ) . 
 Although Aries came to represent specifically the ram whose fleece became the Golden Fleece of Ancient Greek mythology , it has represented a ram since late Babylonian times . Before that , the stars of Aries formed a farmhand . Different cultures have incorporated the stars of Aries into different constellations including twin inspectors in China and a porpoise in the Marshall Islands . Aries is a relatively dim constellation , possessing only four bright stars : Hamal ( Alpha Arietis , second magnitude ) , Sheratan ( Beta Arietis , third magnitude ) , Mesarthim ( Gamma Arietis , fourth magnitude ) , and 41 Arietis ( also fourth magnitude ) . The few deep @-@ sky objects within the constellation are quite faint and include several pairs of interacting galaxies . Several meteor showers appear to radiate from Aries , including the Daytime Arietids and the Epsilon Arietids . 
 = = History and mythology = = 
 Aries is now recognized as an official constellation , albeit as a specific region of the sky , by the International Astronomical Union . It was originally defined in ancient texts as a specific pattern of stars , and has remained a constellation since ancient times ; it now includes the ancient pattern as well as the surrounding stars . In the description of the Babylonian zodiac given in the clay tablets known as the MUL.APIN , the constellation now known as Aries was the final station along the ecliptic . The MUL.APIN was a comprehensive table of the risings and settings of stars , which likely served as an agricultural calendar . Modern @-@ day Aries was known as <unk> , " The Agrarian Worker " or " The Hired Man " . Although likely compiled in the 12th or 11th century BC , the MUL.APIN reflects a tradition which marks the Pleiades as the vernal equinox , which was the case with some precision at the beginning of the Middle Bronze Age . The earliest identifiable reference to Aries as a distinct constellation comes from the boundary stones that date from 1350 to 1000 BC . On several boundary stones , a zodiacal ram figure is distinct from the other characters present . The shift in identification from the constellation as the Agrarian Worker to the Ram likely occurred in later Babylonian tradition because of its growing association with Dumuzi the Shepherd . By the time the MUL.APIN was created — by 1000 BC — modern Aries was identified with both Dumuzi 's ram and a hired laborer . The exact timing of this shift is difficult to determine due to the lack of images of Aries or other ram figures . 
 In ancient Egyptian astronomy , Aries was associated with the god Amon @-@ Ra , who was depicted as a man with a ram 's head and represented fertility and creativity . Because it was the location of the vernal equinox , it was called the " Indicator of the Reborn Sun " . During the times of the year when Aries was prominent , priests would process statues of Amon @-@ Ra to temples , a practice that was modified by Persian astronomers centuries later . Aries acquired the title of " Lord of the Head " in Egypt , referring to its symbolic and mythological importance . 
 Aries was not fully accepted as a constellation until classical times . In Hellenistic astrology , the constellation of Aries is associated with the golden ram of Greek mythology that rescued Phrixos and Helle on orders from Hermes , taking him to the land of Colchis . Phrixos and Helle were the son and daughter of King Athamas and his first wife Nephele . The king 's second wife , Ino , was jealous and wished to kill his children . To accomplish this , she induced a famine in Boeotia , then falsified a message from the Oracle of Delphi that said Phrixos must be sacrificed to end the famine . Athamas was about to sacrifice his son atop Mount <unk> when Aries , sent by Nephele , arrived . Helle fell off of Aries 's back in flight and drowned in the Dardanelles , also called the Hellespont in her honor . After arriving , Phrixos sacrificed the ram to Zeus and gave the Fleece to <unk> of Colchis , who rewarded him with an engagement to his daughter <unk> . <unk> hung its skin in a sacred place where it became known as the Golden Fleece and was guarded by a dragon . In a later myth , this Golden Fleece was stolen by Jason and the Argonauts . 
 Historically , Aries has been depicted as a crouched , wingless ram with its head turned towards Taurus . Ptolemy asserted in his Almagest that Hipparchus depicted Alpha Arietis as the ram 's muzzle , though Ptolemy did not include it in his constellation figure . Instead , it was listed as an " unformed star " , and denoted as " the star over the head " . John Flamsteed , in his Atlas Coelestis , followed Ptolemy 's description by mapping it above the figure 's head . Flamsteed followed the general convention of maps by depicting Aries lying down . Astrologically , Aries has been associated with the head and its humors . It was strongly associated with Mars , both the planet and the god . It was considered to govern Western Europe and Syria , and to indicate a strong temper in a person . 
 The First Point of Aries , the location of the vernal equinox , is named for the constellation . This is because the Sun crossed the celestial equator from south to north in Aries more than two millennia ago . Hipparchus defined it in 130 <unk> as a point south of Gamma Arietis . Because of the precession of the equinoxes , the First Point of Aries has since moved into Pisces and will move into Aquarius by around 2600 AD . The Sun now appears in Aries from late April through mid May , though the constellation is still associated with the beginning of spring . 
 Medieval Muslim astronomers depicted Aries in various ways . Astronomers like al @-@ Sufi saw the constellation as a ram , modeled on the precedent of Ptolemy . However , some Islamic celestial globes depicted Aries as a nondescript four @-@ legged animal with what may be antlers instead of horns . Some early Bedouin observers saw a ram elsewhere in the sky ; this constellation featured the Pleiades as the ram 's tail . The generally accepted Arabic formation of Aries consisted of thirteen stars in a figure along with five " unformed " stars , four of which were over the animal 's hindquarters and one of which was the disputed star over Aries 's head . Al @-@ Sufi 's depiction differed from both other Arab astronomers ' and Flamsteed 's , in that his Aries was running and looking behind itself . 
 The obsolete constellations introduced in Aries ( Musca Borealis , Lilium , Vespa , and Apes ) have all been composed of the northern stars . Musca Borealis was created from the stars 33 Arietis , 35 Arietis , 39 Arietis , and 41 Arietis . In 1612 , Petrus Plancius introduced Apes , a constellation representing a bee . In 1624 , the same stars were used by Jakob <unk> to create a constellation called Vespa , representing a wasp . In 1679 Augustin Royer used these stars for his constellation Lilium , representing the fleur @-@ de @-@ lis . None of these constellation became widely accepted . Johann Hevelius renamed the constellation " Musca " in 1690 in his Firmamentum Sobiescianum . To differentiate it from Musca , the southern fly , it was later renamed Musca Borealis but it did not gain acceptance and its stars were ultimately officially reabsorbed into Aries . 
 In 1922 , the International Astronomical Union defined its recommended three @-@ letter abbreviation , " Ari " . The official boundaries of Aries were defined in 1930 by Eugène Delporte as a polygon of 12 segments . Its right ascension is between 1h <unk> and 3h <unk> and its declination is between 10 @.@ 36 ° and 31 @.@ 22 ° in the equatorial coordinate system . 
 = = = In non @-@ Western astronomy = = = 
 In traditional Chinese astronomy , stars from Aries were used in several constellations . The brightest stars — Alpha , Beta , and Gamma Arietis — formed a constellation called Lou , variously translated as " bond " , " lasso " , and " sickle " , which was associated with the ritual sacrifice of cattle . This name was shared by the 16th lunar mansion , the location of the full moon closest to the autumnal equinox . The lunar mansion represented the area where animals were gathered before sacrifice around that time . This constellation has also been associated with harvest @-@ time as it could represent a woman carrying a basket of food on her head . 35 , 39 , and 41 Arietis were part of a constellation called Wei , which represented a fat abdomen and was the namesake of the 17th lunar mansion , which represented granaries . Delta and Zeta Arietis were a part of the constellation <unk> , thought to represent the Emperor 's hunting partner . <unk> ( Tso @-@ kang ) , a constellation depicting a marsh and pond inspector , was composed of Mu , Nu , Omicron , Pi , and Sigma Arietis . He was accompanied by <unk> @-@ kang , a constellation depicting an official in charge of pasture distribution . 
 In a similar system to the Chinese , the first lunar mansion in Hindu astronomy was called " <unk> " , after the traditional names for Beta and Gamma Arietis , the <unk> . Because the Hindu new year began with the vernal equinox , the Rig Veda contains over 50 new @-@ year 's related hymns to the twins , making them some of the most prominent characters in the work . Aries itself was known as " Aja " and " Mesha " . In Hebrew astronomy Aries was named " <unk> " ; it signified either Simeon or Gad , and generally symbolizes the " Lamb of the World " . The neighboring Syrians named the constellation " <unk> " , and the bordering Turks named it " <unk> " . Half a world away , in the Marshall Islands , several stars from Aries were incorporated into a constellation depicting a porpoise , along with stars from Cassiopeia , Andromeda , and Triangulum . Alpha , Beta , and Gamma Arietis formed the head of the porpoise , while stars from Andromeda formed the body and the bright stars of Cassiopeia formed the tail . Other Polynesian peoples recognized Aries as a constellation . The Marquesas islanders called it Na @-@ <unk> @-@ ka ; the Māori constellation <unk> may correspond to modern Aries as well . In indigenous Peruvian astronomy , a constellation with most of the same stars as Aries existed . It was called the " Market Moon " and the " Kneeling Terrace " , as a reminder for when to hold the annual harvest festival , <unk> Huay . 
 = = Notable features = = 
 = = = Stars = = = 
 Aries has three prominent stars forming an asterism , designated Alpha , Beta , and Gamma Arietis by Johann Bayer . All three are commonly used for navigation . There is also one other star above the fourth magnitude , 41 Arietis. α Arietis , called Hamal , is the brightest star in Aries . Its traditional name is derived from the Arabic word for " lamb " or " head of the ram " ( ras al @-@ hamal ) , which references Aries 's mythological background . With a spectral class of K2 and a luminosity class of III , it is an orange giant with an apparent visual magnitude of 2 @.@ 00 , which lies 66 light @-@ years from Earth . Hamal has a luminosity of 96 L ☉ and its absolute magnitude is − 0 @.@ 1 . 
 β Arietis , also known as Sheratan , is a blue @-@ white star with an apparent visual magnitude of 2 @.@ 64 . Its traditional name is derived from " <unk> " , the Arabic word for " the two signs " , referring to both Beta and Gamma Arietis in their position as heralds of the vernal equinox . The two stars were known to the Bedouin as " <unk> al @-@ hamal " , " horns of the ram " . It is 59 light @-@ years from Earth . It has a luminosity of 11 L ☉ and its absolute magnitude is 2 @.@ 1 . It is a spectroscopic binary star , one in which the companion star is only known through analysis of the spectra . The spectral class of the primary is A5 . Hermann Carl Vogel determined that Sheratan was a spectroscopic binary in 1903 ; its orbit was determined by Hans Ludendorff in 1907 . It has since been studied for its eccentric orbit . 
 γ Arietis , with a common name of Mesarthim , is a binary star with two white @-@ hued components , located in a rich field of magnitude 8 – 12 stars . Its traditional name has conflicting derivations . It may be derived from a corruption of " al @-@ <unk> " , the Arabic word meaning " pair " or a word for " fat ram " . However , it may also come from the Sanskrit for " first star of Aries " or the Hebrew for " ministerial servants " , both of which are unusual languages of origin for star names . Along with Beta Arietis , it was known to the Bedouin as " <unk> al @-@ hamal " . The primary is of magnitude 4 @.@ 59 and the secondary is of magnitude 4 @.@ 68 . The system is 164 light @-@ years from Earth . The two components are separated by 7 @.@ 8 arcseconds , and the system as a whole has an apparent magnitude of 3 @.@ 9 . The primary has a luminosity of 60 L ☉ and the secondary has a luminosity of 56 L ☉ ; the primary is an A @-@ type star with an absolute magnitude of 0 @.@ 2 and the secondary is a B9 @-@ type star with an absolute magnitude of 0 @.@ 4 . The angle between the two components is 1 ° . Mesarthim was discovered to be a double star by Robert Hooke in 1664 , one of the earliest such telescopic discoveries . The primary , <unk> Arietis , is an Alpha ² Canum Venaticorum variable star that has a range of 0 @.@ 02 magnitudes and a period of 2 @.@ 607 days . It is unusual because of its strong silicon emission lines . 
 The constellation is home to several double stars , including Epsilon , Lambda , and Pi Arietis. ε Arietis is a binary star with two white components . The primary is of magnitude 5 @.@ 2 and the secondary is of magnitude 5 @.@ 5 . The system is 290 light @-@ years from Earth . Its overall magnitude is 4 @.@ 63 , and the primary has an absolute magnitude of 1 @.@ 4 . Its spectral class is A2 . The two components are separated by 1 @.@ 5 <unk> λ Arietis is a wide double star with a white @-@ hued primary and a yellow @-@ hued secondary . The primary is of magnitude 4 @.@ 8 and the secondary is of magnitude 7 @.@ 3 . The primary is 129 light @-@ years from Earth . It has an absolute magnitude of 1 @.@ 7 and a spectral class of F0 . The two components are separated by 36 arcseconds at an angle of 50 ° ; the two stars are located 0 @.@ 5 ° east of 7 Arietis. π Arietis is a close binary star with a blue @-@ white primary and a white secondary . The primary is of magnitude 5 @.@ 3 and the secondary is of magnitude 8 @.@ 5 . The primary is 776 light @-@ years from Earth . The primary itself is a wide double star with a separation of 25 @.@ 2 arcseconds ; the tertiary has a magnitude of 10 @.@ 8 . The primary and secondary are separated by 3 @.@ 2 arcseconds . 
 Most of the other stars in Aries visible to the naked eye have magnitudes between 3 and 5 @.@ δ Ari , called <unk> , is a star of magnitude 4 @.@ 35 , 170 light @-@ years away . It has an absolute magnitude of − 0 @.@ 1 and a spectral class of <unk> ζ Arietis is a star of magnitude 4 @.@ 89 , 263 light @-@ years away . Its spectral class is A0 and its absolute magnitude is 0 @.@ 0 . 14 Arietis is a star of magnitude 4 @.@ 98 , 288 light @-@ years away . Its spectral class is F2 and its absolute magnitude is 0 @.@ 6 . 39 Arietis is a similar star of magnitude 4 @.@ 51 , 172 light @-@ years away . Its spectral class is K1 and its absolute magnitude is 0 @.@ 0 . 35 Arietis is a dim star of magnitude 4 @.@ 55 , 343 light @-@ years away . Its spectral class is B3 and its absolute magnitude is − 1 @.@ 7 . 41 Arietis , known both as c Arietis and Nair al <unk> , is a brighter star of magnitude 3 @.@ 63 , 165 light @-@ years away . Its spectral class is B8 and it has a luminosity of 105 L ☉ . Its absolute magnitude is − 0 @.@ 2 . 53 Arietis is a runaway star of magnitude 6 @.@ 09 , 815 light @-@ years away . Its spectral class is B2 . It was likely ejected from the Orion Nebula approximately five million years ago , possibly due to supernovae . Finally , <unk> 's Star is the closest star to Earth in Aries . It is a brown dwarf of magnitude 15 @.@ 14 and spectral class <unk> With a proper motion of 5 @.@ 1 arcseconds per year , it is the 24th closest star to Earth overall . 
 Aries has its share of variable stars , including R and U Arietis , Mira @-@ type variable stars , and T Arietis , a semi @-@ regular variable star . R Arietis is a Mira variable star that ranges in magnitude from a minimum of 13 @.@ 7 to a maximum of 7 @.@ 4 with a period of 186 @.@ 8 days . It is 4 @,@ 080 light @-@ years away . U Arietis is another Mira variable star that ranges in magnitude from a minimum of 15 @.@ 2 to a maximum of 7 @.@ 2 with a period of 371 @.@ 1 days . T Arietis is a semiregular variable star that ranges in magnitude from a minimum of 11 @.@ 3 to a maximum of 7 @.@ 5 with a period of 317 days . It is 1 @,@ 630 light @-@ years away . One particularly interesting variable in Aries is SX Arietis , a rotating variable star considered to be the prototype of its class , helium variable stars . SX Arietis stars have very prominent emission lines of Helium I and Silicon III . They are normally main @-@ sequence <unk> — <unk> stars , and their variations are not usually visible to the naked eye . Therefore , they are observed <unk> , usually having periods that fit in the course of one night . Similar to Alpha ² Canum Venaticorum variables , SX Arietis stars have periodic changes in their light and magnetic field , which correspond to the periodic rotation ; they differ from the Alpha ² Canum Venaticorum variables in their higher temperature . There are between 39 and 49 SX Arietis variable stars currently known ; ten are noted as being " uncertain " in the General Catalog of Variable Stars . 
 = = = Deep @-@ sky objects = = = 
 The few deep @-@ sky objects in Aries are very dim . Nevertheless , several scientifically interesting galaxies lie within its borders ; it has spiral , elliptical , and interacting galaxies . 
 NGC 772 is a spiral galaxy with an integrated magnitude of 10 @.@ 3 , located southeast of β Arietis and 15 arcminutes west of 15 Arietis . It is a relatively bright galaxy and shows obvious nebulosity and ellipticity in an amateur telescope . It is 7 @.@ 2 by 4 @.@ 2 arcminutes , meaning that its surface brightness , magnitude 13 @.@ 6 , is significantly lower than its integrated magnitude . NGC 772 is a class SA ( s ) b galaxy , which means that it is an unbarred spiral galaxy without a ring that possesses a somewhat prominent bulge and spiral arms that are wound somewhat tightly . The main arm , on the northwest side of the galaxy , is home to many star forming regions ; this is due to previous gravitational interactions with other galaxies . NGC 772 has a small companion galaxy , NGC 770 , that is about 113 @,@ 000 light @-@ years away from the larger galaxy . The two galaxies together are also classified as Arp 78 in the Arp peculiar galaxy catalog . NGC 772 has a diameter of 240 @,@ 000 light @-@ years and the system is 114 million light @-@ years from Earth . Another spiral galaxy in Aries is NGC 673 , a face @-@ on class SAB ( s ) c galaxy . It is a weakly barred spiral galaxy with loosely wound arms . It has no ring and a faint bulge and is 2 @.@ 5 by 1 @.@ 9 arcminutes . It has two primary arms with fragments located farther from the core . 171 @,@ 000 light @-@ years in diameter , NGC 673 is 235 million light @-@ years from Earth . 
 NGC 678 and NGC 680 are a pair of galaxies in Aries that are only about 200 @,@ 000 light @-@ years apart . Part of the NGC 691 group of galaxies , both are at a distance of approximately 130 million light @-@ years . NGC 678 is an edge @-@ on spiral galaxy that is 4 @.@ 5 by 0 @.@ 8 arcminutes . NGC 680 , an elliptical galaxy with an asymmetrical boundary , is the brighter of the two at magnitude 12 @.@ 9 ; NGC 678 has a magnitude of 13 @.@ 35 . Both galaxies have bright cores , but NGC 678 is the larger galaxy at a diameter of 171 @,@ 000 light @-@ years ; NGC 680 has a diameter of 72 @,@ 000 light @-@ years . NGC 678 is further distinguished by its prominent dust lane . NGC 691 itself is a spiral galaxy slightly inclined to our line of sight . It has multiple spiral arms and a bright core . Because it is so diffuse , it has a low surface brightness . It has a diameter of 126 @,@ 000 light @-@ years and is 124 million light @-@ years away . NGC 877 is the brightest member of an 8 @-@ galaxy group that also includes NGC 870 , NGC 871 , and NGC 876 , with a magnitude of 12 @.@ 53 . It is 2 @.@ 4 by 1 @.@ 8 arcminutes and is 178 million light @-@ years away with a diameter of 124 @,@ 000 light @-@ years . Its companion is NGC 876 , which is about 103 @,@ 000 light @-@ years from the core of NGC 877 . They are interacting gravitationally , as they are connected by a faint stream of gas and dust . Arp 276 is a different pair of interacting galaxies in Aries , consisting of NGC 935 and IC 1801 . 
 NGC 821 is an E6 elliptical galaxy . It is unusual because it has hints of an early spiral structure , which is normally only found in lenticular and spiral galaxies . NGC 821 is 2 @.@ 6 by 2 @.@ 0 arcminutes and has a visual magnitude of 11 @.@ 3 . Its diameter is 61 @,@ 000 light @-@ years and it is 80 million light @-@ years away . Another unusual galaxy in Aries is Segue 2 . Segue 2 is a dwarf galaxy that is a satellite galaxy of the Milky Way , recently discovered to be a potential relic of the epoch of reionization . 
 = = = Meteor showers = = = 
 Aries is home to several meteor showers . The Daytime <unk> meteor shower is one of the strongest meteor showers that occurs during the day , lasting from 22 May to 2 July . It is an annual shower associated with the Marsden group of comets that peaks on 7 June with a maximum zenithal hourly rate of 54 meteors . Its parent body may be the asteroid Icarus . The meteors are sometimes visible before dawn , because the radiant is 32 degrees away from the Sun . They usually appear at a rate of 1 – 2 per hour as " <unk> " , meteors that last several seconds and often begin at the horizon . Because most of the Daytime Arietids are not visible to the naked eye , they are observed in the radio spectrum . This is possible because of the ionized gas they leave in their wake . Other meteor showers radiate from Aries during the day ; these include the Daytime Epsilon Arietids and the Northern and Southern Daytime May Arietids . The Jodrell Bank Observatory discovered the Daytime Arietids in 1947 when James Hey and G. S. Stewart adapted the World War II @-@ era radar systems for meteor observations . 
 The Delta Arietids are another meteor shower radiating from Aries . Peaking on 9 December with a low peak rate , the shower lasts from 8 December to 14 January , with the highest rates visible from 8 to 14 December . The average Delta <unk> meteor is very slow , with an average velocity of 13 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 2 mi ) per second . However , this shower sometimes produces bright fireballs . This meteor shower has northern and southern components , both of which are likely associated with 1990 HA , a near @-@ Earth asteroid . 
 The Autumn Arietids also radiate from Aries . The shower lasts from 7 September to 27 October and peaks on 9 October . Its peak rate is low . The Epsilon Arietids appear from 12 to 23 October . Other meteor showers radiating from Aries include the October Delta Arietids , Daytime Epsilon Arietids , Daytime May Arietids , Sigma Arietids , Nu Arietids , and Beta Arietids . The Sigma Arietids , a class IV meteor shower , are visible from 12 to 19 October , with a maximum zenithal hourly rate of less than two meteors per hour on 19 October . 
 = = = Planetary systems = = = 
 Aries contains several stars with extrasolar planets . HIP <unk> , a G5 type star , is orbited by three giant planets ( those more than ten times the mass of Earth ) . HD <unk> , like HIP <unk> , is a G @-@ type main sequence star , slightly larger than the Sun , with two orbiting planets . One planet is 2 @.@ 3 times the mass of Jupiter , and the other is 1 @.@ 57 times the mass of Jupiter . HD <unk> is a G0 type star , approximately the size of the Sun , with one orbiting planet . The planet , discovered in 2002 , has a mass 1 @.@ 07 times that of Jupiter and orbits every 500 days . 
 = Phases and Stages = 
 Phases and Stages is a 1974 album by Willie Nelson , which followed the moderate success of his first Atlantic Records release , Shotgun Willie . Nelson met producer Jerry Wexler at a party where Nelson sang songs from an unreleased album he had recorded in 1972 . The single " Phases and Stages " was originally recorded the same year . Nelson re @-@ recorded the album at Muscle Shoals Sound Studios in two days and Wexler produced it . 
 The album narrates the story of a divorce . Side one tells the woman 's story and side two the man 's . Released on March 1974 , the album peaked at number 34 on Billboard 's Top Country Albums and the single " Bloody Mary Morning " reached number 17 on Billboard 's Country singles . Despite the chart positions attained by the album , and its singles , Atlantic Records closed their Country music division in September 1974 . 
 = = Background and Recording = = 
 In 1972 , Nelson signed a recording contract with the Country Music division of Atlantic Records and Jerry Wexler , who gave him greater creative control than his previous contract . Nelson met Wexler at a party in Harlan Howard 's house , where he sang the songs he wrote for an album . Nelson recorded his first album for Atlantic Records , Shotgun Willie , in 1972 . Shotgun Willie , produced by Arif Mardin and Wexler , marked a change of style in Nelson 's music . Nelson stated that recording the album had " ... cleared his throat " . 
 The single " Phases and Stages " was first released in 1972 . Nelson had previously recorded the album Phases and Stages in Nashville , Tennessee . In 1973 , Nelson re @-@ recorded the songs in two days at Muscle Shoals Sound Studio for Atlantic Records with musicians Fred Carter , Jr . , David Hood , Barry Beckett , Jimmy Johnson , Pete Carr and Roger Hawkins . Atlantic Records ' executives criticized Wexler 's decision to record in Muscle Shoals instead of Nashville , Tennessee . Wexler later stated : " They said Muscle Shoals was too R & B for Willie . I said Willie was too R & B for Nashville . " 
 = = Concept = = 
 The album became one of the first concept albums in country music . The theme of the songs centers in divorce , narrated from both viewpoints . The one of the woman is narrated on side one ; while the man 's on side two . The recurrent song " Phases and Stages " is repeated throughout the album , introducing several other songs . 
 The album begins with " Phases and Stages / Washing the Dishes " , with the woman tired of caring for her unfaithful husband , emphasizing her domestic chores . This is followed by " Phases and Stages / Walkin ' " where , after consideration , she leaves her husband at night , saying " Walkin ' is better than runnin ' away , and <unk> ' ain 't no good at all " . In " Pretend I Never Happened " , she advises him to forget her and continue with his life . In " Sister 's Coming Home / Down at the Corner Beer Joint " , her younger sister describes the woman moving back home and sleeping late . Eventually , she overcomes her grief and begins a social life at the corner beer joint , representing her liberation with the lyrics " ( she 's ) dancin ' on a hardwood floor , her jeans fit a little bit tighter than they did before " . The final song of side one depicts the woman falling in love again but reluctant to admit it because she fears that her story will be repeated . 
 The second side of the album begins with " Bloody Mary Morning " , with the male narrator ordering drinks on a flight from Los Angeles , California to Houston , Texas after his wife unexpectedly left him , with " the smog and haze reminding me of how I feel " . In " Phases and Stages / No Love Around " he recalls dragging in at sunrise after another night of carousing : " I come home last Saturday morning , I come home and found you gone . " In the sad " I Still Can 't Believe You 're Gone " , the man realizes the vast impact on his life of her leaving . " It 's Not Supposed to Be That Way " reflects his inability to accept the situation and his grief , but still in a self @-@ centered way . In " Heaven and Hell " , the man expresses his ambivalence about living without his wife , with the lyric : " Sometimes it 's heaven , sometimes it 's hell , and sometimes I don 't even know . " The final track is " Phases and Stages / Pick Up the Tempo / Phases and Stages " , in which the man reveals his inability to change his character , and accepts his nature and its consequences . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The album was released in March 1974 . It peaked at number 34 in Billboard 's Top Country Albums and number 187 in Billboard 's Top LPs & Tapes . The single " Bloody Mary Morning " peaked at number 17 , and its follow @-@ up , " I Still Can 't Believe You 're Gone " , peaked at number 51 in Billboard 's Country singles . Despite the moderate success of Nelson 's singles , Atlantic Records ' executives were unhappy with Nelson 's style , and closed their Country Music division in September 1974 . Wexler protested to Ahmet and Nesuhi Ertegun , arguing that Atlantic had Willie Nelson . The Ertegun brothers replied " Willie Who ? Go ahead and close it . " Following the division 's closure , Wexler resigned . The album sold 400 @,@ 000 copies , and Nelson was released from his Atlantic contract , prompting Columbia Records ' executives to offer Nelson a contract giving him complete creative control of his works . Wexler later described Phases and Stages and Shotgun Willie as " ... generally viewed as having set Willie on a new path ... it was the coalescing of his audience , where the rednecks and the hippies came together . And to this day , that 's Willie 's audience . " 
 Rolling Stone wrote : " ( Nelson ) seems to understand an unloved woman better than any dozen articles from Ms. ( magazine ) . The fact that Nelson can fashion a believable scenario with such sparseness is a tribute to his ability to turn experience into good music . Phases And Stages , his best work to date , now seems to call out for the filmmaker who can turn good music into good cinema " . Texas Monthly described the album as : " ... a compassionate account of dissolution of marriage , which gave extremely sensitive male and female viewpoints " . 
 Billboard wrote : " Nelson 's unfettered voice honestly portrays his songs of love and lament " . Critic Robert Christgau wrote : " Nelson 's combination of soft @-@ spoken off @-@ key and battered honky @-@ tonk matches the bare , responsive country music Jerry Wexler has gotten out of the Muscle Shoals regulars . " Newsweek wrote : " In Phases and stages ( Nelson ) looked far beyond country music 's traditional shore of self pity toward a clear vision of real life country divorce " . 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine wrote for Allmusic : " ... the deceptively relaxed arrangements , including the occasional strings , not only highlight Nelson 's clever eclecticism , but they also heighten the emotional impact of the album . [ ... ] As a result , this is not just one of Willie Nelson 's best records , but one of the great concept albums overall " . 
 = = LP track listing = = 
 All songs written by Willie Nelson . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The musicians and recording personnel included : 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Jim Moran = 
 James Patrick Moran Jr . ( born May 16 , 1945 ) , known as Jim Moran , is a former U.S. Representative for Virginia 's 8th congressional district in Northern Virginia , including the cities of Falls Church and Alexandria , all of Arlington County , and a portion of Fairfax County . Congressman Moran served from 1991 to 2015 , and is a member of the Democratic Party . 
 Moran was the mayor of Alexandria , Virginia from 1985 to 1990 , when he resigned to run for Congress . He defeated Republican incumbent Stanford Parris in the general election on November 6 , 1990 , and was sworn in the following January . He is of Irish descent , and is the son of professional football player James Patrick Moran Sr. and the brother of former Democratic Party of Virginia Chairman Brian Moran . 
 Moran announced on January 15 , 2014 , that he would retire from Congress at the end of his term . Moran is currently a professor of practice in the School of Public and International Affairs in the College of Architecture and Urban Studies at Virginia Tech . 
 = = Early life , education , and business career = = 
 Moran , the eldest of seven children , was born in Buffalo , New York , and grew up in Natick , Massachusetts , a suburb of Boston . His parents were Dorothy ( née Dwyer ) and James Moran Sr. , a professional football player for the Boston Redskins in 1935 and 1936 ; outside of football he worked as a probation officer . Both his father and mother were Roosevelt Democrats and supporters of the New Deal . Moran attended Marian High School in Framingham , Massachusetts . 
 Moran played college football on an athletic scholarship at the College of the Holy Cross , where his father had been a football star in the early 1930s . Moran was awarded a B.A. in economics in 1967 . In 1970 he received a Master of Public Administration from the University of Pittsburgh . After college , Moran followed his father 's footstep to become an amateur boxer , and during a campaign in 1992 , he admitted that he had used marijuana during his early twenties . After a brief career as a stockbroker and graduate school attendance , Moran moved to Washington , D.C. 
 = = Early political career = = 
 He worked for five years at the Department of Health , Education , and Welfare , as a budget officer , then became a senior specialist for budgetary and fiscal policy at the Library of Congress . His final position , from 1976 to 1979 , was on the staff of U.S. Senate Committee on Appropriations . 
 In 1979 , Moran was elected to the Alexandria , Virginia , City Council . He was deputy mayor from 1982 until his resignation in 1984 as part of a nolo contendere plea bargain to a misdemeanor conflict of interest charge , which courts later erased . The incident stemmed from charges that Moran had used money from a political action committee to rent a tuxedo and buy Christmas cards ; both of which were later judged by the Commonwealth Attorney to " fit the definition of constituent services " , and were dismissed . 
 In 1985 , Moran was elected Mayor of Alexandria . He was reelected in 1988 , and resigned after he was elected to Congress in November 1990 . 
 = = U.S. House of Representatives = = 
 = = = Elections = = = 
 In 1990 , Moran first won election to the United States House of Representatives , defeating five @-@ term Republican incumbent Stan Parris . During the campaign , Parris , referring to the issue of the Gulf War , said , " The only three people I know who support Saddam Hussein 's position are <unk> <unk> , Yasser Arafat , and Jim Moran . " Moran angrily responded by saying that Parris was " a deceitful , fatuous jerk " , and that he wanted " to break his nose " . Moran 's well @-@ financed campaign also focused on Parris ' opposition to abortion . Moran upset Parris , winning by 7 @.@ 1 percent . He was sworn into office in January 1991 . 
 In the next two elections , Moran faced Republican lawyer Kyle McSlarrow . During the 1992 campaign , McSlarrow accused Moran of " lying to the public " . Moran responded by portraying McSlarrow as a drug abuser , referring to the candidate 's admitted use of cocaine and marijuana while at the University of Virginia . Moran compared McSlarrow to Parris , saying that Parris had " [ t ] en times more integrity than McSlarrow . He didn 't create lies . " Moran defeated McSlarrow with 56 percent of the vote . 
 In 1994 , Moran 's daughter Dorothy was suffering from an inoperable brain tumor . During the campaign , neither Moran or McSlarrow used the negative tactics of two years earlier . On his campaign strategy that election , McSlarrow said " It would not be a community service to shut down this campaign , but I probably will not talk much about Moran . " Moran was reelected with 59 percent of the vote . 
 In 1998 and 2000 , Moran faced Republican and flat tax advocate <unk> H. Miller . In the 1998 campaign Miller accused Moran of flip @-@ flopping in his support of President Bill Clinton , after Moran , who had been a vocal supporter of the Clinton White House , voted in favor of opening an impeachment inquiry following the Monica Lewinsky scandal . 
 In 2002 , Moran defeated Republican S. C. Tate and Independent R. V. <unk> . 
 In June 2004 , Moran , for the first time since his election in 1990 , had a Democratic opponent in a primary . Moran defeated Alexandria attorney Andrew M. Rosenberg , 59 % to 41 % . In November , he defeated Republican Lisa Marie Cheney . 
 In 2006 , Moran defeated Republican challenger T. M. <unk> and Independent J. T. <unk> . 
 In 2008 , Moran again had a primary challenger ; he won with 86 % of the vote . In the general election , Moran faced Republican Mark Ellmore and Independent Green Ron Fisher . He won with 68 percent of the vote to Elmore 's 30 percent . 
 In November 2009 Ellmore announced he would again challenge Moran , but dropped out of the race four months later . In the June 2010 Republican primary , attorney Matthew Berry narrowly lost to retired U.S. Army Colonel J. Patrick Murray , after a last @-@ minute mailing attacking Berry 's homosexuality . Fisher again was on the ballot . During the campaign , Moran was criticized by military advocacy groups and conservatives for saying , at a local Democratic committee meeting , that Murray had not " served or performed any kind of public service " . Moran responded by commending Murray 's military service , while saying that he used the phrase in relation to Murray not having engaged in " local civic engagement " and not having served in local office . In November 2010 , Moran was re @-@ elected to an eleventh term with 61 % of the vote . 
 In 2012 , Moran faced another primary challenger from Navy veteran Bruce Shuttleworth . A controversy erupted when the Democratic Party of Virginia disqualified Shuttleworth , saying he had fallen 17 signatures short of the 1 @,@ 000 threshold required . Shuttleworth cried foul and filed a federal lawsuit ; the party then allowed Shuttleworth on the ballot . Moran went on to win by a sizable margin . In November , Moran defeated Republican J. Patrick Murray , Independent Jason J. Howell , and Independent Green Janet Murphy , winning 64 % of the vote . 
 = = = Tenure = = = 
 Moran represented Virginia 's 8th congressional district , an area in Northern Virginia that is just across the Potomac River from Washington , D.C. ; the district includes Arlington county , and the cities of Alexandria , Falls Church and parts of Fairfax . The redistricting that followed the 2000 census also gave Moran a portion of Reston , Virginia . His district is located in the Dulles Technology Corridor and is the home of many federal defense contractors as well as a significant number of those who work in the information technology industry . Many federal employees also reside within the district , mostly due to its proximity to Washington and because the United States Department of Defense and various other agencies are headquartered there . 
 During the mid nineties , Moran co @-@ founded and later co @-@ chaired the New Democrat Coalition , a coalition of Democratic lawmakers who consider themselves to be moderates with regard to commerce , budgeting , and economic legislation , but vote as liberals on social issues . Moran was also a member of the Congressional Progressive Caucus ( CPC ) , the largest caucus operating within the Democratic caucus , which works to advance progressive issues and opinions . He joined the caucus prior to the 111th Congress . 
 = = = = 1990s = = = = 
 In 1995 , Moran and California Republican Duke Cunningham had to be restrained by the Capitol Police after a shoving match on the house floor over President Bill Clinton 's decision to send U.S. troops to Bosnia . " I thought he had been bullying too many people for too long , and I told him so , " Moran recalled . " He said he didn 't mean to be so accusatory ... After that , he would bring me candy from California . " Moran said that after the encounter he found Cunningham crying in the cloakroom . 
 During the final years of the Clinton administration , Moran was critical of the President : In 1998 , during the Monica Lewinsky scandal , Moran was one of only 31 House Democrats to support launching a formal impeachment inquiry into President Bill Clinton . He told Time magazine that " This whole sordid mess is just too tawdry and tedious and embarrassing ... It 's like a novel that just became too full of juicy parts and bizarre , sleazy characters . " Moran is also reported to have told First Lady Hillary Clinton that if she had been his sister , he would have punched her husband in the nose . Moran eventually decided not to vote for impeachment , explaining that Clinton had not compromised the country 's security , and that he still respected him for what he had accomplished as President . Moran proposed a resolution demanding that Clinton confess to a pattern of " dishonest and illegal conduct " surrounding his sexual involvement with Monica Lewinsky . 
 = = = = 2000s = = = = 
 Moran was voted High Technology Legislator of the Year by the Information Technology Industry Council and was voted into the American Electronics Association Hall of Fame for his work on avoiding the Year 2000 crisis and his support of the IT Industry and defense contractors in Northern Virginia . He cosponsored failed bills in 2005 to provide the District of Columbia with a House seat and to prohibit slaughter of horses . 
 On April 28 , 2006 , Moran , along with four other members of Congress ( the now @-@ deceased Rep. Tom Lantos of California , Sheila Jackson Lee of Texas , and James McGovern and John Olver of Massachusetts ) , and six other activists , were arrested for disorderly conduct in front of the Sudanese embassy in Washington , D.C. , and spent 45 minutes in a jail cell before being released . They were protesting the alleged role of Sudan 's government in ethnic cleansing in Darfur . According to the San Francisco Chronicle , " Their protest and civil disobedience was designed to embarrass the military dictatorship 's ongoing genocide of its non @-@ Arab citizens . " 
 The day after the Virginia Tech Massacre in 2007 , Moran told a local radio station that the Federal Assault Weapons Ban should be reinstated and blamed the National Rifle Association , which he accused of getting a " free ride " , and President George W. Bush for blocking gun control legislation . He further warned that if gun control legislation was not passed , then shootings such as the one at Virginia Tech will happen " time and time again . " He later dismissed charges that he was <unk> the shooting , telling Politico that " as a legislator , your immediate reaction is to think something could be done to avoid this . I don 't know why the idea of figuring out how to avoid it is a political partisan issue . " 
 Shortly before the June 2008 Virginia Democratic primary , Moran endorsed Senator Barack Obama of Illinois for the presidency over New York Senator and former First Lady Hillary Clinton . Explaining his endorsement , he told a local newspaper that the long @-@ term goal of closing Alexandria 's coal @-@ fired power plant would be more attainable under Obama than under Clinton . Obama won the Virginia primary , and carried the state when he won the general election in November . 
 In May 2009 , Moran introduced a bill that would restrict broadcast advertisements for erectile dysfunction or male enhancement medication . He said that such ads were indecent and should be prohibited on radio and television between the hours of 6 am and 10 pm , in accordance with Federal Communications Commission policy . Later that year , Moran and former presidential candidate and former Governor of Vermont Howard Dean held a town hall meeting on the issue of health care at South Lakes High School in Reston , Virginia . The meeting was interrupted several times by protesters , most notably pro @-@ life activist Randall Terry , who , along with about half a dozen supporters , caused such a commotion that he had to be escorted out by police . The incident was replayed several times over the next few weeks on television as an example of the tension at town halls that fall . 
 In February 2010 , on the House floor , Moran called for the repeal of Don 't Ask , Don 't Tell , the military policy of discharging soldiers on active duty who are openly homosexual . He spoke about a letter penned by a gay soldier who was then serving in the Afghanistan War , who had " learned that a fellow soldier was also gay , only after he was killed by an IED in Iraq . The partner of the deceased soldier wrote the unit to say how much the victim had loved the military ; how they were the only family he had ever known ... This immutable human trait , sexual orientation , like the color of one 's skin , does not affect one ’ s integrity , their honor , our commitment to their country . Soldiers serving their country in combat should not have their sacrifices compounded by having to struggle with an antiquated Don ’ t ask , don ’ t tell policy . Let 's do the right and honorable thing and repeal this policy . " 
 As a member of the House Appropriations Committee , Moran worked to allocate federal funding to projects in Northern Virginia , usually in the technology and defense industries . He also assisted in authorizing the replacement of the Woodrow Wilson Memorial Bridge , a bridge between Alexandria , Virginia , and Prince George 's County , Maryland , which had gained a reputation over the years among Northern Virginia residents as the site of numerous rush @-@ hour traffic jams . 
 On March 9 , 2010 , Moran was named to succeed Norm Dicks of Washington as the chairman of the House Interior and Environment Appropriations Subcommittee . The chairmanship gave Moran authority over appropriations to the Department of the Interior , the Bureau of Indian Affairs , and the National Endowment for the Arts ; among other things . Moran said he was excited to be able to play a role in protecting the environment and conserving natural resources . 
 = = = = 2010s = = = = 
 Moran became the ranking member of the subcommittee after the Democratic Party lost control of the House of Representatives following the November 2010 elections . 
 After President Obama 's 2011 State of the Union Address , Moran was interviewed by <unk> , an Arab television network . During the interview , he said , " a lot of people in [ the United States of America ] ... don 't want to be governed by an African @-@ American " and that the Democrats lost seats in the 2010 election for " the same reason the Civil War happened in the United States ... the Southern states , particularly the slaveholding states , didn 't want to see a president who was opposed to slavery . " The remarks received national media attention . The Washington Post 's Jennifer Rubin said the remarks were " beyond <unk> " and " obnoxious " . 
 On March 16 , 2012 , Moran was arrested outside the Sudanese embassy in Washington , DC , at a protest against human rights abuses perpetrated by the Sudanese government , specifically bombings in the Nuba Mountains and refusal to allow humanitarian aid organizations access to refugees . He was charged with disorderly conduct and released , along with George Clooney and several others . 
 On March 27 , 2012 , Moran introduced the <unk> Educators Act that would implement a five @-@ year pilot program allowing public schools to partner with colleges , universities , and non @-@ profit organizations to promote teaching skills for educators working with high functioning students with autism . “ This legislation is the product of a grassroots effort by parents , instructors , school officials and caring communities , ” he said . “ Autism Spectrum Disorders are being diagnosed at an exploding rate . We have a responsibility to do everything in our power to provide the best education for our children . ” 
 In 2012 , Moran was recognized as a " Problem Solver " by the bipartisan grassroots organization No Labels for " continued willingness to work across the aisle and find common ground with members of the opposite party on important issues . His attitude is what Congress needs more of . 
 Moran joined Virginia <unk> Gerry Connolly and Bobby Scott in asking Attorney General Eric Holder for a Department of Justice investigation into allegations of voter fraud in Virginia following charges that a contractor to the Republican Party of Virginia was caught discarding completed voter registration forms in a Harrisonburg , Virginia dumpster . Shortly thereafter , conservative activist James O 'Keefe released a video alleging involvement by Moran 's son in a voting fraud discussion ; see # Voter fraud allegations below . 
 Moran occasionally appeared on MSNBC , usually on Hardball with Chris Matthews and The Ed Show . 
 = = = Committee assignments = = = 
 Committee on Appropriations 
 Subcommittee on Defense 
 Subcommittee on Interior , Environment , and Related Agencies ( Ranking Member ) 
 = = = Caucus memberships = = = 
 LGBT Equality Caucus 
 Congressional Progressive Caucus 
 New Democrat Coalition ( co @-@ founder ) 
 Animal Protection Caucus ( co @-@ Chair ) 
 Sudan Caucus 
 Sportsmen 's Caucus 
 International Conservation Caucus 
 Congressional Arts Caucus 
 Congressional Bike Caucus 
 Safe Climate Caucus 
 Crohn 's and Colitis Caucus ( co @-@ Chair ) 
 = = Political positions = = 
 = = = Social issues = = = 
 Moran voted against the Defense of Marriage Act , the Federal Marriage Amendment , and was in favor of repealing the military 's Don 't Ask , Don 't Tell policy . He also supported gun control , voting for the Brady Bill and supporting a reinstatement of the Federal Assault Weapons Ban . At different times he voted to ban flag @-@ burning and partial @-@ birth abortions , though he reversed his positions on both issues . On education , he expressed support for the public education system , universal pre @-@ kindergarten , and full funding for the No Child Left Behind program . Moran was given a 100 % rating by the NARAL and 0 % by the National Right to Life Committee , indicating a pro @-@ choice voting record . He also voted to expand research of embryonic stem cells and to allow minors to go across state lines to receive abortions . 
 On immigration , Moran supported a pathway to citizenship for illegal immigrants and did not support decreasing the number of legal immigrants allowed into the country or the enforcement of federal immigration laws by state and local police . He was a cosponsor of the Comprehensive Immigration Reform ASAP Act of 2009 ( <unk> ) , which the House did not pass . He was given an overall immigration reduction grade of D by <unk> . The American Immigration Lawyers Association scored him as having voted 31 times for the organization 's position and 7 times against the organization 's position . 
 In September 2009 , Moran was one of 75 members of the House of Representatives to vote no on a bill to eliminate any federal funds going to community organizer ACORN . 
 = = = Federal employees = = = 
 Moran introduced and supported legislation to increase benefits and pay for federal workers , in part due to the Federal Government ’ s large presence within the 8th District – 114 @,@ 000 federal employees work within its bounds . He introduced a bill signed into law that allows <unk> employees to buy back credit from a lapse in federal service toward annuity payments , with the goal of attracting individuals from the private sector back to public service . Moran also authored a law that allows a federal worker ’ s unused sick leave to count toward their annuity . In the 112th Congress , he also spoke against attempts by Republicans to cut back the size of the federal workforce . 
 = = = Environment = = = 
 Moran listed the environment as one of his top issues , citing his high marks from the League of Conservation Voters and the Sierra Club . He used his positions as a member of the Appropriations Committee and as chairman of the Interior Appropriations Subcommittee to allocate federal funding for hiking trails and wildlife reserves in his district . 
 He also voted to ban logging on federal lands . He criticized the United States Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) for inaction on climate change , saying that " EPA had a historic opportunity to tackle head @-@ on one of the greatest threats to our existence — global warming . Instead they balked under pressure from the administration , concluding the problem is so complex and controversial that it cannot be resolved . " He also endorsed and voted for the Clean Air Act and said that global warming is an important issue to him . In 2010 , Moran also expressed discontent with President Barack Obama 's decision to allow oil drilling off the coast of the United States . 
 = = = Economy , budget , and taxes = = = 
 Moran often broke with his party on economic issues . For example , he supported Dominican Republic @-@ Central America Free Trade Agreement ( CAFTA ) and other free trade agreements , harsher bankruptcy laws , and increased restrictions on the right to bring class action suits . 
 He voted for the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 and the Troubled Asset Relief Program ( TARP ) Reform and Accountability Act . He supported pay @-@ as @-@ you @-@ go budgeting and believed " that the American government needs to strive to build up a surplus when possible , so that there are funds to support and sustain our country during tough financial times . " Moran called former President George W. Bush " <unk> irresponsible . " 
 Moran said he supported the redistribution of wealth , saying in November 2008 that " We have been guided by a Republican administration who believes in this simplistic notion that people who have wealth are entitled to keep it and they have an antipathy towards the means of redistributing wealth . " He also said on his website that the recession was largely " a result of the imbalance in the distribution of wealth over the last eight years and an absence of oversight and accountability . " 
 = = = Social programs = = = 
 Moran called Social Security " a safe , stable , and dependable source of financial assistance for retirees and their families , " and strongly opposes privatizing Social Security , saying that it would " cripple the system " . It was his position that any changes to the current system must " promote its long @-@ term solvency without disrupting the core principles on which the program was founded . " 
 Moran expressed support for Universal Healthcare and more specifically the public health insurance option , saying at a town hall meeting in Reston , Virginia , in August 2009 that " It could do the most to bring down long @-@ term medical costs and to adequately insure every American . " Moran ultimately voted for the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , which passed and was signed into law in March 2010 . 
 = = = Defense = = = 
 Moran voted against authorizing the Iraq War in 2002 and did not support the troop increase for the Afghanistan War proposed by President Barack Obama in 2009 , saying first that he appreciated Obama 's " careful consideration regarding the U.S. ' s engagement in Afghanistan " , but later defining the issues on which he and the President disagreed : 
 " Our security concern is Al @-@ Qaeda , not the Taliban . Eight years ago we went into Afghanistan to eliminate al @-@ Qaeda and the “ safe haven ” that Afghanistan ’ s Taliban were providing the terrorist group responsible for the 9 / 11 attacks . Al @-@ Qaeda has no significant presence today in all of Afghanistan .... Instead of increasing our troop presence , the U.S. should limit its mission in Afghanistan to securing strategic Afghan population centers with the troops currently on the ground . " 
 = = = = Comments prior to the invasion of Iraq = = = = 
 Prior to the 2003 invasion of Iraq , Moran told an anti @-@ war audience in Reston , Virginia , that if " it were not for the strong support of the Jewish community for this war with Iraq , we would not be doing this . The leaders of the Jewish community are influential enough that they could change the direction of where this is going , and I think they should " . This brought criticism from many of his own party , including , among others , Senate Democratic Leader Tom Daschle and Senator Joe Lieberman . Nancy Pelosi , who was House Minority Leader at the time , remarked that " Moran 's comments have no place in the Democratic Party . " 
 Moran apologized for the remarks , saying that " I should not have singled out the Jewish community and regret giving any impression that its members are somehow responsible for the course of action being pursued by the administration , or are somehow behind an impending war ... What I was trying to say is that if more organizations in this country , including religious groups , were more outspoken against war , then I do not think we would be pursuing war as an option . " 
 = = = BRAC = = = 
 Moran voted against BRAC 2005 which would move over 20 @,@ 000 workers to Ft . Belvoir . The Army later decided to relocate approximately 6 @,@ 400 Department of Defense workers to the Mark Center building in Alexandria . Moran opposed the selection of the Mark Center saying “ I 'm very disappointed ... It belonged at the Springfield site . " Moran blocked federal funding for an HOV ramp directly to the Mark Center citing the impact upon Winkler Preserve . 
 At Moran ’ s request , DoD ultimately delayed moving all workers to the Mark Center by one year . To help prevent gridlock , Moran got $ 20 million in short- and mid @-@ term road improvements and a parking limit at the Mark Center of approximately 2 @,@ 000 cars Moran also got $ 180 million to widen route 1 for the new Ft . Belvoir Hospital , an effort Sen. Webb called “ a tribute to Congressman Moran 's persistence . ” 
 = = = Animal rights = = = 
 Moran was in favor of stronger prohibitions against animal fighting . He sponsored legislation to penalize those who " knowingly attend animal fights and allow minors to attend . " He sponsored legislation limiting federal funding for horse slaughter inspection plants , effectively preventing the practice . In the past he promoted reinstating a five @-@ year ban on slaughtering horses for food , noting that " horses hold an important place in our nation 's history and culture ... they deserve to be cared for , not killed for foreign consumption . " Moran in the past promoted safer keeping and treatment of exotic animals used in circus performances . In October 2014 , Moran received the Lord Houghton Award from Cruelty Free International for his service and contribution to animal welfare . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Moran does not support granting statehood to the District of Columbia . However , he voted to allow Washington , D.C. , to send a voting representative to the United States Congress . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = MBNA loan = = = 
 Moran 's support for harsher bankruptcy law provisions and sponsorship of stricter bankruptcy legislation brought allegations in 2002 that his support came in return for financial favors by financial institutions which could benefit from such laws . In January 1998 , one month before he introduced the legislation , credit card bank MBNA advocated that it would restrict the ability of consumer debtors to declare bankruptcy . Moran received a $ 447 @,@ 000 debt consolidation loan at over 10 % interest rate . 
 The Lieutenant Governor of Virginia at the time , Tim Kaine , joined Republican lawmakers in calling for a House Ethics Committee investigation into the loan , saying that Moran had made " an error in judgment " by accepting it . In his own defense , Moran said that the timing of the legislation 's introduction was coincidental and had nothing to do with the loan . MBNA spokesman Brian <unk> said that the bank had offered the mortgage package not knowing that Moran was a member of Congress , and that the loan " made good business sense " because with the mortgage loan , " we improved our position by getting security for an unsecured loan .... He had credit cards with us , he was having financial difficulties ; this put him in a better position to be able to pay us back from a cash @-@ flow standpoint . " 
 = = = PMA group = = = 
 The House Ethics Committee investigated several members of the House Defense Appropriations Subcommittee , including Moran , Peter J. <unk> , Norm Dicks , Marcy <unk> and the late John Murtha , who was the chairman at the time , for a conflict of interest in the allocation of the government contracts to clients of the PMA Group , which donated nearly a million dollars to Moran 's political action committee , as well as a significant amount of money to the gubernatorial campaign of Moran 's younger brother , Brian . Moran said that he was unaware of " who made donations " , and " how much they gave " , and therefore was not affected by the donations when allocating the funding . 
 In February 2010 , the panel cleared Moran and the others , saying that they violated no laws . The panel concluded , as part of its 305 @-@ page report , that " simply because a member sponsors an earmark for an entity that also happens to be a campaign contributor ... does not support a claim that a member 's actions are being influenced by campaign contributions " . After PMA 's founder , Paul <unk> , plead guilty in September 2010 to six years of campaign finance fraud , Moran said that he would not return the $ 177 @,@ 700 in PMA Group @-@ related donations that he received from 1990 to 2010 . 
 = = = Insider trading = = = 
 In November 2011 , author Peter Schweizer published a book , Throw Them All Out , which included an allegation that Moran used information he got from a September 16 , 2008 briefing , in which Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson and Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke warned of an impending financial crisis , for his stock market activity : 
 " September 17 , 2008 , was by far Moran ’ s most active trading day of the year . He dumped shares in Goldman Sachs , General Dynamics , Franklin Resources , <unk> Corporation , <unk> , Edison International , Electronic Arts , DirecTV , Conoco , Procter & Gamble , AT & T , Apple , CVS , Cisco , Chubb , and a dozen more companies . " 
 Schweizer alleged that Moran made more than 90 trades that day . Moran defended himself by citing that the trades were made in the midst of the Great Recession and that all one had to do was turn on the television to see that stock prices were dropping fast . 
 = = = Voter fraud allegations = = = 
 On October 24 , 2012 a video was released showing Patrick B. Moran , the Congressman 's son and a field director with his father 's campaign , discussing a plan to cast fraudulent ballots proposed to him by someone who posed as a fervent supporter of the campaign . In response to the person 's suggestion about trying to cast votes in the names of 100 inactive voters , Patrick Moran attempted to discourage the scheme , but also discussed the practical difficulties of forging documentation such as utility bills . The person he was speaking with was actually a conservative activist with James O 'Keefe 's Project Veritas , and was secretly recording the conversation . Patrick Moran resigned from the campaign , saying he didn 't want to be a distraction during the election , and stating , " at no point have I , or will I ever endorse any sort of illegal or unethical behavior . At no point did I take this person seriously . He struck me as being unstable and joking , and for only that reason did I humor him . In hindsight , I should have immediately walked away , making it clear that there is no place in the electoral process for even the suggestion of illegal behavior , joking or not . " 
 The following day , the Arlington County Police Department opened a criminal probe into the matter . Two days after the video was released , the Virginia State Board of Elections asked Attorney General of Virginia Ken Cuccinelli to investigate Moran 's campaign for voter fraud . On January 31 , 2013 , Arlington County announced that the investigation , by its police department in collaboration with the Offices of the Virginia Attorney General and the Arlington County Commonwealth ’ s Attorney , had concluded and that no charges would be brought . The County stated : " Patrick Moran and the Jim Moran for Congress campaign provided full cooperation throughout the investigation . Despite repeated attempts to involve the party responsible for producing the video , they failed to provide any assistance . " 
 = = Later career = = 
 In February 2015 , Moran joined <unk> , Will , and Emery law firm in Washington , DC as a Senior Legislative Advisor . 
 Virginia Tech announced in April 2016 that Moran had joined the School of Public and International Affairs as professor of practice . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Moran has been married at least twice . His second wife , Mary Howard Moran , filed for divorce in 1999 , one day after an argument at the couple 's Alexandria home which resulted in a visit by the police . The Congressman provided his own divorce papers a few months later , and in 2003 the couple officially separated . He remarried in 2004 to real estate developer <unk> Bennett . In December 2010 , Moran and Bennett announced they were separating . 
 Moran is the father of four children . One of his children is Patrick B. Moran , who once worked as a field director for his campaign , who resigned when allegations of voter fraud surfaced . Moran 's son , Patrick , later in 2012 , pleaded guilty to simple assault after being arrested after an incident with his girlfriend in front of a Columbia Heights bar on December 1 . He was sentenced to probation . Another one of his children is Dorothy , who was diagnosed with an inoperable brain tumor during her father 's campaign for reelection against Kyle McSlarrow in 1994 . It was said at the time that she had only a twenty percent chance of living to age five , but after almost two years of chemotherapy and herbal therapies she was designated cancer free . 
 His brother , Brian Moran , is a former member of the Virginia House of Delegates , and the head of the Virginia Democratic Party between early 2011 and December 2012 . He was an unsuccessful primary candidate for Governor of Virginia in the 2009 election . 
 = Maryland Route 68 = 
 Maryland Route 68 ( MD 68 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . The state highway runs 18 @.@ 50 miles ( 29 @.@ 77 km ) from U.S. Route 40 ( US 40 ) in Clear Spring east to US 40 Alternate in Boonsboro . MD 68 crosses central Washington County to the south of Hagerstown , connecting Clear Spring and Boonsboro with Williamsport , where the highway runs concurrently with MD 63 . A small segment of MD 68 west of Boonsboro was constructed around 1920 , using as part of the route two early 19th @-@ century stone bridges . The remainder of the highway between Boonsboro and Williamsport was constructed in the second half of the 1920s . MD 68 was extended west from Williamsport to Clear Spring in the mid @-@ 1950s . The state highway was relocated south of Williamsport for the construction of Interstate 81 ( I @-@ 81 ) in the mid @-@ 1960s . Since the early 1990s , I @-@ 68 has also existed in Washington County ; signs on I @-@ 70 aim to avoid confusion between I @-@ 68 and MD 68 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 68 begins at an intersection with US 40 ( Cumberland Street ) in the town of Clear Spring . The state highway heads south as Mill Street through a commercial area . MD 68 's name changes to Clear Spring Road after leaving the town limits . The state highway meets I @-@ 70 ( Eisenhower Memorial Highway ) at a diamond interchange , then heads southeast through farmland , where the highway crosses Little Conococheague Creek . MD 68 intersects the eastern end of MD 56 ( Big Pool Road ) shortly before passing through the village of <unk> . The state highway intersects CSX 's Lurgan Subdivision rail line and passes between industrial properties , then crosses Conococheague Creek and enters the town of Williamsport . MD 68 is municipally maintained within the town , where the highway follows Conococheague Street south through an intersection with US 11 ( Potomac Street ) . At this intersection , MD 63 joins MD 68 in a concurrency to continue through the Williamsport Historic District . The two highways leave the town limits at their diamond interchange with I @-@ 81 ( Maryland Veterans Memorial Highway ) , through which the roadway temporarily expands to a four @-@ lane divided highway . 
 MD 68 's name changes to Lappans Road south of Williamsport . MD 63 ( Spielman Road ) splits south from MD 68 at the same intersection as Governor Lane Boulevard , which serves an industrial park . MD 68 crosses over the Winchester and Western Railroad and curves to the east , then resumes heading southeast after intersecting the eastern end of Kendle Road . The state highway heads southeast through farmland and intersects MD 632 ( Downsville Pike ) . The road intersects Norfolk Southern Railway 's Hagerstown District at @-@ grade and crosses St. James Run in the hamlet of St. James . MD 68 intersects MD 65 ( Sharpsburg Pike ) in the hamlet of Lappans , where the highway passes St. Mark 's Episcopal Church . The state highway passes through the hamlet of <unk> and passes Devils Backbone County Park as the highway follows Antietam Creek for a short distance . MD 68 crosses over the creek on a narrow stone bridge , then makes a sharp turn to the south to continue following the forested valley of the creek . The state highway crosses over Beaver Creek on a one @-@ lane stone bridge before leaving the creek valley . MD 68 continues southeast through farmland and the hamlet of Millpoint before reaching its eastern terminus at US 40 Alternate ( Main Street ) on the northern edge of the town of Boonsboro . 
 = = History = = 
 The first section of MD 68 , from Lappans to Millpoint near Boonsboro , was constructed in 1920 . This segment made use of a pair of stone arch bridges over Antietam Creek and Beaver Creek constructed in 1833 and 1824 , respectively . These bridges remain open to traffic as part of MD 68 . MD 68 was extended east from Millpoint to Boonsboro in 1925 . Construction of MD 68 from Williamsport to Lappans began in 1926 , with a section complete from Williamsport to the Cumberland Valley Railroad ( now Winchester and Western Railroad ) by 1927 . The last section of the Williamsport – Lappans Road was completed in 1930 . The state highway 's western terminus was originally US 11 in Williamsport , within which MD 68 followed Artizan Street south to Sunset Avenue at the southern town limit . Artizan Street continued south as MD 63 and MD 68 followed Sunset Avenue southeast toward Lappans . Clear Spring Road remained a county highway until MD 68 was extended west to Clear Spring in 1956 . 
 MD 68 was relocated south of Williamsport , replacing Sunset Avenue and what is now Kendle Road , in 1965 . The state highway was relocated for a grade separation of the Cumberland Valley Railroad and to tie into an interchange with I @-@ 81 and the south end of Conococheague Street . MD 63 joined MD 68 in a concurrency along Conococheague Street north to US 11 . The new alignment of MD 68 and MD 63 was built as a four @-@ lane divided highway around the interchange with I @-@ 81 , which originally only contained ramps to and from the direction of West Virginia when the interchange opened with the completion of I @-@ 81 in 1966 . That interchange was completed with ramps to and from Hagerstown between 1981 and 1989 . Since the completion of I @-@ 68 in 1991 , the Interstate and state @-@ numbered highways with the same number have co @-@ existed separated by 17 miles ( 27 km ) on I @-@ 70 . Multiple signs on westbound I @-@ 70 in advance of the Interstate 's interchange with MD 68 advise motorists that I @-@ 68 and MD 68 are not the same highway and remind them to remain on I @-@ 70 to access I @-@ 68 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in Washington County . 
 = Mr. Bean = 
 Mr. Bean is a British sitcom created by Rowan Atkinson and Richard Curtis , and starring Atkinson in the title role . Atkinson co @-@ wrote all fifteen episodes with either Curtis , Robin Driscoll , or both , with Ben Elton co @-@ writing the pilot . Thirteen of the episodes were broadcast on ITV , from the pilot on 1 January 1990 , until " Goodnight Mr. Bean " on 31 October 1995 . A clip show , " The Best Bits of Mr. Bean " , was broadcast on 15 December 1995 , and one episode , " Hair by Mr. Bean of London " , was not broadcast until 2006 on Nickelodeon . 
 Based on a character originally developed by Atkinson while he was studying for his master 's degree at Oxford University , the series follows the exploits of Mr. Bean , described by Atkinson as " a child in a grown man 's body " , in solving various problems presented by everyday tasks and often causing disruption in the process . Bean rarely speaks , and the largely physical humour of the series is derived from his interactions with other people and his unusual solutions to situations . The series was influenced by physical performers such as Jacques Tati and comic actors from silent films . 
 During its five @-@ year run , the series gained large UK audience figures , including 18 @.@ 74 million for the 1991 episode " The Trouble with Mr. Bean " . The series has received a number of international awards , including the Rose d 'Or . The show has been sold in 245 territories worldwide and has inspired an animated cartoon spin @-@ off , two feature films , and an appearance at the London 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony . 
 = = Background and influences = = 
 The character of Mr. Bean was developed while Atkinson was studying for his master 's degree in electrical engineering at Queen 's College , Oxford . A sketch featuring the character was performed at the Edinburgh Fringe in the early 1980s . A similar character called Robert Box , played by Atkinson , appeared in the one @-@ off 1979 ITV sitcom Canned Laughter , which also featured routines used in the film Bean ( 1997 ) . 
 One of Bean 's earliest appearances occurred at the " Just for Laughs " comedy festival in Montreal , Quebec , Canada , in 1987 . When programme co @-@ ordinators were scheduling Atkinson into the festival programme , Atkinson insisted that he perform on the French @-@ speaking bill rather than the English @-@ speaking programme . Having no French dialogue in his act at all , programme co @-@ ordinators could not understand why Atkinson wanted to perform on the French bill . As it turned out , Atkinson 's act at the festival was a test platform for the Mr. Bean character , and Atkinson wanted to see how the silent character 's physical comedy would fare on an international stage with a non @-@ English speaking audience . 
 The character 's name was not decided until after the first programme had been produced ; a number of other vegetable @-@ influenced names , such as " Mr. Cauliflower " , were explored . Atkinson cited the earlier comedy character Monsieur Hulot , created by French comedian and director Jacques Tati , as an influence on the character . Stylistically , Mr. Bean is also very similar to early silent films , relying purely upon physical comedy , with Mr. Bean speaking very little dialogue ( although like other live @-@ action TV series of the time , it features a laugh track ) . This has allowed the series to be sold worldwide without any significant changes to dialogue . In November 2012 , Atkinson told The Daily Telegraph of his intentions to retire the character , stating that " someone in their 50s being childlike becomes a little sad . " 
 = = Characters and recurring props = = 
 = = = Mr. Bean = = = 
 The title character , played by Rowan Atkinson , is a childish buffoon who brings various unusual schemes and contrivances to everyday tasks . He lives alone at the address of Flat 2 , 12 Arbour Road , Highbury , and is almost always seen in his trademark tweed jacket and a skinny red tie . He also usually wears a digital calculator watch . Mr. Bean rarely speaks , and when he does , it is generally only a few mumbled words which are in a comically low @-@ pitched voice . His first name ( he names himself " Bean " to others ) and profession , if any , are never mentioned . In the first film adaptation , " Mr. " appears on his passport in the " first name " field , and he is shown employed as a guard at London 's National Gallery . In Mr. Bean 's Holiday , however , his name is listed on his passport as " Rowan " , the actor 's first name . 
 Mr. Bean often seems unaware of basic aspects of the way the world works , and the programme usually features his attempts at what would normally be considered simple tasks , such as going swimming , using a television set , redecorating , or going to church . The humour largely comes from his original ( and often absurd ) solutions to problems and his total disregard for others when solving them , his pettiness , and occasional malevolence . 
 At the beginning of episode two onwards , Mr. Bean falls from the sky in a beam of light , accompanied by a choir singing Ecce homo qui est faba ( " Behold the man who is a bean " ) , recorded by Southwark Cathedral Choir in 1990 . These opening sequences were initially in black and white in episodes two and three , and were intended by the producers to show his status as an " ordinary man cast into the spotlight " . However , later episodes showed Mr. Bean dropping from the night sky in a deserted London street against the backdrop of St Paul 's Cathedral . At the end of episodes three and six he is also shown being sucked right back up into the sky in the respective background scenes ( black scene in episode 3 and street scene in episode 6 ) . Atkinson has acknowledged that Bean " has a slightly alien aspect to him " . In the animated series ( episode , " Double Trouble " ) he is taken inside a spacecraft with " aliens " who look exactly like him and even have their own <unk> toys . In an obvious homage , the aliens send him back home in a beam of light and music similar to the opening of the original Mr. Bean series . Whether Bean is an extraterrestrial is not clear . 
 = = = Irma Gobb = = = 
 Mr. Bean 's girlfriend , Irma Gobb ( played by Matilda Ziegler ) , appears in three episodes . In " The Curse of Mr. Bean " and " Mr. Bean Goes to Town " , the character is simply credited as " the girlfriend " . She is treated relatively <unk> by Bean , who appears to regard her more as a friend and companion than as a love interest . However , he does become jealous when she dances with another man at a disco in " Mr. Bean Goes to Town " , and she certainly expects him to propose to her on Christmas Day in " Merry Christmas , Mr. Bean " ; his failure to do so results in her leaving him for good . The character does not appear in any subsequent episodes ; however , she later appears in the animated series . The spin @-@ off book Mr. Bean 's Diary ( 1993 ) states that Mr. Bean met Irma Gobb at a local library . Ziegler has also played a waitress , a mother and a policewoman . 
 In the Comic Relief extra " Torvill and Bean " , Bean is accompanied by a female companion portrayed by Sophie Thompson , whose overall appearance resembles Gobb 's . 
 = = = Teddy = = = 
 Teddy is Mr. Bean 's teddy bear and perhaps Mr. Bean 's best friend . The little brown bear is a knitted oddity with button eyes and sausage @-@ shaped limbs , which invariably end up broken in half or in various other states of destruction and <unk> . Although Teddy is inanimate , Mr. Bean often pretends it is alive . For example , when Mr. Bean <unk> Teddy , he snaps his fingers and the bear 's head falls backwards as if it had fallen asleep instantly ( Bean used his finger to prop Teddy 's head up ) . Mr. Bean behaves as if the bear is real , buying it a Christmas present or trying not to wake it in the mornings . The bear is often privy to Mr. Bean 's various schemes and doubles as a tool or other items in emergencies ; it has been decapitated ( " Mr. Bean in Room 426 " ) , used as his paint brush ( " Do @-@ It @-@ Yourself Mr. Bean " ) , and shrunk in the wash ( " Tee Off , Mr. Bean " ) . Teddy is also Mr. Bean 's " pet " in " Hair by Mr. Bean of London " and is used to win a pet show . 
 The Teddy used in filming sits in the windscreen of the replica of Mr. Bean 's mini that is on display at the National Motor Museum . Over the years , Teddy has undergone several changes . When it debuted on " The Trouble with Mr. Bean " , it had a smaller head . Two episodes later , its head reached its current size , but its " eyes " were not present until Bean placed gold thumb tacks on its face . The " eyes " have since been replaced with two small white buttons sewn over Teddy 's face , giving it a distinct image . 
 = = = Mr Bean 's car = = = 
 Mr. Bean 's car , a 1976 British Leyland Mini 1000 , developed its own character of sorts over the series and was central to several antics , such as Mr. Bean 's getting dressed in it , driving while sitting in an armchair strapped to the roof , starting it with a number of locks and keys , or attempting to avoid a car park fee by driving out through the entrance . 
 At first , it was an orange 1969 BMC Mini MK II ( registration RNT <unk> ) , but this was destroyed in an off @-@ screen crash at the end of the first episode . From then on , the car was a 1976 model ( registration <unk> <unk> ) , Austin Citron Green in colour with a matte black bonnet . 
 The Mini also had a number of innovative security measures . For example , Bean uses a bolt @-@ latch and padlock , rather than the lock fitted to the car , and removes the steering wheel instead of the key . These formed a running joke in several episodes , and at one point deterred a car thief . However , after changing parking spaces with an identical mini ( registration ACW <unk> ) in " Back to School Mr. Bean " , his car is crushed by a tank . Fortunately for Bean , his padlock survives , and he hurries off to " carjack " another automobile with the same colour scheme . 
 The Mini re @-@ appeared as a character in the animated Mr. Bean cartoons ( registration STE <unk> ) and in the film Mr. Bean 's Holiday , with the registration <unk> <unk> . Also seen is a left hand drive version of his Mini , owned by the character Sabine . For the feature film Bean ( 1997 ) , a sequence involving the Mini driving through Harrod 's Department Store was shot , but this was not included in the final cut . 
 After filming ended , one of the original Minis was sold to <unk> Kars to be hired for various events . It was then temporarily displayed as a major attraction at the Rover Group 's museum . In 1997 , it was purchased by the Cars of the Stars Motor Museum and was on display for a while , but is no longer there , having been sold , it went to America . BMW Germany has built a replica , and another replica — the one used to promote the animated series — is on display at National Motor Museum , Beaulieu . 
 = = = = The Reliant = = = = 
 Starting with the first episode , Mr. Bean has a long @-@ running feud with the unseen driver of a light blue Reliant Regal <unk> III ( registration GRA <unk> ) , which will usually get turned over , crashed out of its parking space , and so forth by Mr. Bean in his Mini , who is usually oblivious to the results . These mishaps became a running joke throughout the series . In " Tee Off , Mr. Bean " , Bean is hitchhiking and the Reliant pulls over for him , but Bean , who recognises the car , pretends to not see it , until it leaves . 
 The Reliant reappears in the animated series , again victimised by Mr Bean in his Mini . In the animated series episode , " Young Bean " , the identity of the Reliant driver is revealed for the first time ( albeit shown in a flashback as a child ) . 
 = = = Other characters = = = 
 Although Mr. Bean is the only significant character in the programme , others appear , usually as foils for his various antics . Other than his girlfriend there are more characters in each episode . However , several notable British actors and comedians appear alongside Atkinson in sketches as various one @-@ off supporting characters , including Owen Brenman , Richard Briers , Angus Deayton , Stephen Frost , Nick Hancock , Christopher Ryan , Paul Bown , Caroline Quentin , Danny La Rue , Roger Lloyd @-@ Pack , David Schneider and Richard Wilson . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 All 14 episodes of Mr. Bean were produced by Tiger Aspect Productions . Additionally , the character has been used in one @-@ off sketches , guest appearances and television commercials in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Music = = 
 Mr. Bean features a choral theme tune in the key of C major written by Howard Goodall and performed by the Choir of Southwark Cathedral ( later Christ Church Cathedral , Oxford ) . The words sung during the title sequences are in Latin : 
 Ecce homo qui est faba – " Behold the man who is a bean " ( sung at beginning ) 
 Finis parte <unk> – " End of part one " ( sung before the advertisement break ) 
 Pars secunda – " Part two " ( sung after the advertisement break ) 
 Vale homo qui est faba – " Farewell , man who is a bean " ( sung at end ) 
 The theme was later released on Goodall 's album Choral Works . Goodall also wrote an accompanying music track for many episodes . The first episode of Mr. Bean did not feature the choral theme tune , but instead an up @-@ beat instrumental piece , also composed by Howard Goodall , which was more an incidental tune than a theme . It was used while Bean drove between locations intimidating the blue Reliant , and as such , was sometimes heard in later episodes whenever Bean 's nemesis is seen . The instrumental of the theme tune was used in animated Mr. Bean in the series finale " Double Trouble " . 
 In the episode " Tee Off , Mr. Bean " , Howard Goodall 's choral theme tune for another Richard Curtis comedy , The Vicar of Dibley , is heard playing on a car stereo . In Merry Christmas , Mr. Bean , while playing with Queen 's Royal Guards figurines and the nativity set , he hums " The British Grenadiers " , which was quoted in the theme to Blackadder Goes Forth . 
 Mr. Bean appears in a music video made for the 1991 Comic Relief fund raising single by Hale and Pace called The <unk> . Mr. Bean also appeared in the music video for Boyzone 's single Picture of You in 1997 . The song was featured on the soundtrack to the first Bean movie . 
 Mr. Bean also made a Comic Relief record in 1992 . This was ( I Want To Be ) Elected and was credited to " Mr. Bean and Smear Campaign featuring Bruce Dickinson " . This was a cover of an Alice Cooper song and reached number 9 in the UK singles chart . 
 = = Awards = = 
 The first episode won the Golden Rose , as well as two other major prizes at the 1991 Rose d 'Or Light Entertainment Festival in Montreux . In the UK , the episode " The Curse of Mr. Bean " was nominated for a number of BAFTA awards ; " Best Light Entertainment Programme " in 1991 , " Best Comedy " ( Programme or Series ) in 1991 , and Atkinson was nominated three times for " Best Light Entertainment Performance " in 1991 and 1994 . 
 = = Spin @-@ offs = = 
 = = = The animated series = = = 
 Bean was revived in a 2002 – 04 animated cartoon series , again featuring little dialogue , with most being either little soundbites or mumbling . The series , which consist of 63 episodes ( with 2 segments each ) , expanded the number of additional characters , featuring Bean 's unpleasant landlady , Mrs. Wicket , and her evil one @-@ eyed cat , Scrapper . 
 Atkinson reprised his role as Bean , and all animated Bean actions are taken from Atkinson himself . Other characters ' voices are provided by Jon Glover , Rupert Degas , Gary Martin and Lorelei King . In October 2000 , it was reported that Mr. Bean would become animated , which was initially to be targeted at adults . In February 2001 , the series was officially announced , with it premièring shortly afterwards . 
 Mr. Bean 's Wacky World , a video game based on the animated series , was released on 14 December 2007 and was a third @-@ person platformer . The games were released on PAL only for Playstation 2 , Nintendo DS , and Nintendo Wii . 
 Several official Mr Bean games have been released , including Mr Bean - Around the World and Mr Bean - Flying Teddy . Both are available on the Apple App Store , Google Play and Amazon Marketplace . 
 = = = Film adaptations = = = 
 Two films featuring Bean have been released . The first , Bean : The Ultimate Disaster Movie , was directed by Mel Smith and released in 1997 , with Atkinson reprising his title role . This broke from the program 's tradition by using a subplot with more developed characters — instead of being the sole centre of attention , Bean here interacted with a suburban Californian family he stayed with while overseeing the transfer of Whistler 's Mother to a Los Angeles art gallery . The film grossed over US $ 250 million globally ( $ 45 million in the USA ) on a budget estimated at $ 22 million . 
 In February 2001 , an unproduced script outline for a Mr. Bean movie set in Australia was rumoured to have been developed by screenwriter Richard Curtis . 
 In March 2005 , news broke out that a second Bean film , Mr. Bean 's Holiday , was in development , with Atkinson reprising his title role . The film had been through several changes of name during its development , including Bean 2 and French Bean . Filming began on 15 May 2006 and began post @-@ production in October 2006 . It was released in the United Kingdom on 30 March 2007 . 
 On 17 July 2007 , the North American premiere was held in Montreal , Quebec , Canada , at the Just for Laughs festival ; the launching pad for the Mr. Bean character 20 years earlier . The film was then released nationwide in North America on 24 August 2007 . The film follows Bean on an eventful journey across France for a holiday in the French Riviera , which after a number of misfortunes culminates in an unscheduled screening of his video diary at the Cannes Film Festival . 
 The film was at some stage considered for being to be the last live @-@ action appearance of the character , however Rowan Atkinson later played Mr. Bean in the London 2012 Olympic Opening Ceremony , and in 2016 stated that he would never retire the character . 
 It was directed by Steve <unk> and grossed nearly US $ 230 million globally ( $ 33 million in the United States ) . 
 = = = The London 2012 Olympic opening ceremony = = = 
 The character ( as represented by Atkinson ) plays a single note on a synthesiser in the performance of " Chariots of Fire " , during the 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony . Instead of his usual brown tweed sports jacket , he wears white tie and tails like the other musicians around him . 
 During his performance , he becomes bored with playing the same note repeatedly on the synthesiser and gets jealous of the more interesting part being played on the grand piano . Still bored , he takes out his mobile phone and takes a picture of himself , looking chuffed . He then sneezes in a comical fashion and tries to retrieve his handkerchief from his bag behind him . He finds that he cannot reach it and has to keep playing the note with his umbrella to retrieve it . When he finally blows his nose , he throws his handkerchief into the grand piano . He then falls asleep continuing to play the note . 
 A dream sequence of the opening scene of the film Chariots of Fire , shows the characters running across a beach , except Mr. Bean is running with them . He begins to fall behind , until he hails a car to overtake all the others . Bean is now running in front , and another runner tries to overtake Bean but is tripped by him . Bean crosses the line with elation , and then he wakes up . 
 The rest of the orchestra had stopped playing while he continued his one recurring note . Realising this , and with encouragement from conductor Simon Rattle , he plays an extended flourish and lastly touches a note that makes a flatulent sound , then stops . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Two books were released related to the original series : Mr. Bean 's Diary in 1992 and Mr. Bean 's Pocket Diary in 1994 . The two books have identical content and differ only in the format in which they are printed . The content of both is a template diary with handwritten content scrawled in by Mr. Bean . They provide some additional information on the setting : for example , they establish that Mr. Bean lives in Highbury and rents his flat from a landlady named Mrs. Wicket . 
 They confirm the name of Mr. Bean 's girlfriend as " Irma Gobb " , and also give the name of the other man she actually dances with in Mr. Bean Goes to Town ( Giles Gummer ) . An additional book called Mr. Bean 's Diary was released in 2002 to accompany the animated series ; this book was also graded as a children 's reader . 
 = = Other appearances = = 
 Rowan Atkinson has appeared in character as Bean in many normally factual television broadcasts , sometimes as a publicity stunt to promote a new episode , DVD or film . 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 = = = Commercials = = = 
 = = Home media = = 
 The series was available on a number of Thames Television VHS compilations . In the United Kingdom ( Region 2 ) , episodes of Mr. Bean were released on a yearly basis by Universal Pictures UK from 2004 . The complete collection is now available , including the two feature films and other extras . The episodes were released on VHS by A & E Home Video in the United States in the 1990s . In the United States ( Region 1 ) , the complete series has been available since 2003 on A & E Home Video as " The Whole Bean " . The documentary " The Story of Mr. Bean " is edited on both the UK and USA DVD sets : It was originally 52 minutes when broadcast on TV . However , it is 48 minutes on the UK DVD while only 40 on the American DVD . Most notably , in the UK version , the section detailing " The Tall Guy " has humorous clips from the film removed . The American DVD features the same edits as the British DVD but is also missing comments by Burt Reynolds on the set of Bean , comments by Jeff Goldblum , some clips from the show Mr. Bean and many others . 
 The record @-@ selling UK videos were withdrawn shortly before the release of Bean , and DVDs were released on an annual basis as of 2004 . 
 In August 2009 an official YouTube channel was launched featuring content from the live action and animated series . 
 The series was re @-@ released by Shout Factory in North America on 24 March 2015 on DVD , to coincide with its 25th anniversary . This set contains digitally remastered episodes ( similar to the 2010 British release ) , the 40 minute " The Story of Mr. Bean " , additional scenes : " Turkey Weight , " " Armchair Sale , " " Marching " & " Playing With Matches " , " Bus Stop " and " Library " sketches , a trailer for " Mr. Bean : The Animated Series " , and " The Best Bits of Mr. Bean " , a 72 @-@ minute clip show . 
 = = = VHS format = = = 
 = = = DVD format = = = 
 Volumes 
 Best of Mr. Bean 
 = = = DVD re @-@ release = = = 
 Mr. Bean : The Whole Bean was re @-@ released on 24 March 2015 on DVD digitally re @-@ mastered to coincide with the series ' 25th anniversary . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 The sale of Mr Bean worldwide has enabled his character to secure a place in the popular culture of several countries . Notably , a number of public figures have been compared to the character , usually as an insult . Tony Blair , then @-@ Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , was identified by Homer Simpson as " Mr. Bean " when his cartoon form greeted the Simpsons to the United Kingdom in an episode of the eponymous programme , allegedly demonstrating the stereotypical view of the British by Americans . 
 Arthur Batchelor , one of the Royal Navy captives held by Iran during the 2007 Iranian seizure of Royal Navy personnel , has stated that some of his captors had mocked him calling him " Mr. Bean " . 
 NRL Referee Sean Hampstead is regularly nicknamed " Mr. Bean " in nationally broadcast commentary by Australian television / radio personality Ray Warren as a result of his similar appearance . 
 In 2007 , Vincent Cable , the acting leader of the Liberal Democrats , described the recent decline in Prime Minister Gordon Brown 's fortunes as his " remarkable transformation in the last few weeks from Stalin to Mr. Bean " . 
 The former Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero is often mocked in his own country for his facial resemblance to Mr. Bean , and a computer hacker broke into Spain 's official website for its presidency of the European Union , inserting the character on the front page of the website . <unk> have also compared Zapatero to Mr. Bean when discussing government policies that are deemed to have been unsuccessful . 
 Several of the visual jokes in the series have been used as experiments on the Discovery Channel 's MythBusters series . In episode 52 – " Mind Control " , the idea of painting a room with a stick of explosives ( Firework , or other ) placed in a paint can , as in the episode " Do @-@ It @-@ Yourself Mr. Bean " , was tested and deemed impossible , as adequate coverage was not achieved . 
 An image of Mr. Bean has also been used as an internet meme usually accompanied by the statement , " if you know what I mean . " 
 Though Rowan Atkinson is not typecast to characters like Mr. Bean , he has played similar characters in other works , such as Enrico in the 2001 film Rat Race . 
 In Tetsuo Hara and <unk> 's manga <unk> no Ken , a parody of Mr. Bean can be found in a minor character appearing in chapter 45 , contained in vol . 5 . In it , a barman identical to Mr. Bean tends the main character Kenshiro Kasumi , for comic relief . 
 In the video game Resident Evil 2 , during the opening sequence in the streets of Raccoon City , Mr. Bean 's British Leyland Mini 1000 can be seen parked against a barricade . 
 Mr. Bean has also been influential on later series , such as The World of Lee Evans . 
 Private Eye magazine features a cartoon strip , The Adventures of Mr <unk> , in which British Labour party leader Ed Miliband is drawn as Bean . 
 Rowan Atkinson performed as this character at the Opening Ceremony of the 2012 Olympics during " Chariots of Fire " with the London Symphony Orchestra . 
 The image of Mr. Bean is employed on the cybercrime website " Mr. Bin . " 
 = Lord Hugh Seymour = 
 Vice @-@ Admiral Lord Hugh Seymour ( 29 April 1759 – 11 September 1801 ) was a senior British Royal Navy officer of the late 18th century who was the fifth son of Francis Seymour @-@ Conway , 1st Marquess of Hertford and became known for being both a prominent society figure and a highly competent naval officer . He served during the American Revolutionary and French Revolutionary Wars and later in his career performed a period of shore duty on the Admiralty board . 
 Seymour maintained a reputation as a courageous and innovative officer : he was awarded a commemorative medal for his actions at the battle of the Glorious First of June and is credited with introducing epaulettes to Royal Navy uniforms as a method of indicating rank to non @-@ English speaking allies . In his youth he formed close personal friendships with fellow officer John Willett Payne and George , Prince of Wales , through association with whom he gained a reputation as a rake . His marriage in 1785 , made at the insistence of his family as an antidote to his dissolution , was brought about through royal connections and proved very successful . During his lifetime he also held several seats as a member of parliament in the Parliament of Great Britain , although he did not pursue an active political career . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Hugh Seymour was born in 1759 into one of the wealthiest families in England , as the fifth son of Francis Seymour @-@ Conway , 1st Marquess of Hertford , and his wife Isabella Fitzroy ( Hugh retained the surname " Seymour @-@ Conway " until his father 's death in 1794 , at which point he shortened it to Seymour ) . He was initially educated at Bracken 's Academy in Greenwich , where he met lifelong friend John Willett Payne , before joining the Navy at age 11 at his own insistence . Seymour became a captain 's servant on the yacht William & Mary , and two years later moved to HMS Pearl under his relation Captain John Leveson @-@ Gower , stationed off Newfoundland . After several short commissions , including service in the West Indies under George Rodney , Seymour was attached to HMS Alarm as a midshipman in the Mediterranean . Apart from a brief spell in HMS Trident , Seymour remained on her for several years , becoming a lieutenant in 1776 . By 1776 the American Revolutionary War was underway , and Seymour continued in Alarm until he was made a commander in 1778 , taking command of the xebec HMS Minorca . 
 In 1779 , Seymour was promoted once more , making post captain in HMS Porcupine and serving in command of HMS Diana , HMS Ambuscade and HMS Latona , all in the Channel Fleet . The only major operation in which he participated during the period was the conclusion of the Great Siege of Gibraltar , when Latona was attached to Lord Howe 's fleet that relieved the fortress . During this service , Seymour was repeatedly engaged in scouting the Franco @-@ Spanish fleet in Algeciras , a task made difficult by bad weather and the erratic movements of the enemy . During much of the operation , Captain Roger Curtis was stationed aboard Latona to facilitate communicate between Howe and the Governor of Gibraltar . The effort to relieve and resupply the fortress was a complete success and Latona was sent back to Britain with dispatches , although Seymour remained in Gibraltar . 
 Following the Peace of Paris in 1783 , Seymour took a house in London with his brother Lord George Seymour and John Willett Payne . The three men became notorious socialites , joining the Prince of Wales on many of his drinking exploits across London : Seymour remained close friends with Prince George for the rest of his life . Seymour , already known for his good looks , good manners , height and martial bearing , rapidly gained a reputation for dissolution . In 1785 however , Seymour married Lady Anne Horatia Waldegrave , daughter of Earl Waldegrave and Maria Walpole ( later Duchess of Gloucester ) at the insistence of his family in a successful attempt to curtail his social activities . It was at this time that Seymour made his first foray into politics , becoming MP for Newport on the Isle of Wight before relinquishing the post two years later . In 1788 he became MP for Tregony , but in 1790 he switched to become MP for Wendover . Seymour remained in this position until 1796 when he changed his seat to Portsmouth , in which he remained until his death . He did not serve as an active politician in any of these positions , preferring his navy career to his political one . 
 = = French Revolutionary Wars = = 
 In the Spanish armament of 1790 , Seymour was called to service in command of the ship of the line HMS Canada , opening his commission with a cruise off the Isle of Wight . Passing through shallow water , Seymour ordered the use of a lead line to measure the depth ahead , but was accidentally struck in the head by the lead weight while soundings were being taken . Although little immediate damage seemed to have been caused , during the firing of a salute several days later Seymour suddenly suffered a severely adverse reaction and had to be taken ashore for emergency medical treatment . The head injury rendered him unable to endure any loud noises or bright lights and for the next three years he lived as an invalid at his country estate in Hambleton . By 1793 he was sufficiently recovered to return to service , and escorted Lord Hood to the Mediterranean in HMS Leviathan . There Hood led the occupation , defence and ultimate withdrawal from Toulon during the Republican siege of the city . Following the collapse of the city 's defences , Seymour was sent back to England with dispatches but returned shortly afterward to convoy Leviathan back to Britain . 
 Transferred to the Channel Fleet , Leviathan was attached to service under Lord Howe and served with him during the Atlantic campaign of May 1794 alongside John Willett Payne , captain of HMS Russell . The campaign culminated in the Glorious First of June , when a French fleet was defeated by Howe 's innovative tactics , but was ultimately successful in protecting a large grain convoy from the United States . Seymour 's command of Leviathan was vitally important in the victory , the ship fighting at the initial engagement of the 28 May and seeing extensive action during the battle itself . Seymour was one of only a few of Howe 's commanders to successfully close with the French line , although he was unable to break through it . Leviathan then engaged closely with America , which she reduced to a battered wreck in a duel that lasted two hours . Leviathan was also badly damaged , having taken fire from Éole and Trajan during the fighting . At Howe 's order , Seymour then left America ( which was later captured ) and joined the reformed fleet that held off a French counter @-@ attack in the latter stages of the battle . In the aftermath of the action , Seymour was one of the captains marked out for praise , being presented with a medal commemorating his service during the engagement . Leviathan had suffered 11 killed and 32 wounded in the engagement . 
 In 1795 , Seymour moved to the recently captured HMS Sans Pareil and soon became a rear @-@ admiral , engaging the French at the Battle of Groix . During the action , Seymour managed to bring his ship to the head of the British line pursuing the French fleet and engaged the Formidable and Tigre . Both ships were captured in heavy fighting , and Sans Pareil suffered ten killed and two wounded during the exchange . In 1796 , Seymour was employed in the search for the French fleet which attempted and failed to invade Ireland , but Sans Pareil was badly damaged in a collision with HMS Prince during the campaign and had to be decommissioned for extensive repairs . In April 1797 , Seymour returned to sea with a small squadron of six ships searching the Eastern Atlantic for a Spanish treasure convoy . Although the convoy was eventually seized by a force sent by Lord St. Vincent , Seymour had covered over 5 @,@ 000 miles in his fruitless search . 
 = = Admiralty service and death = = 
 Seymour had joined the Admiralty in 1795 , becoming a Lord of the Admiralty and participating in much of the work the Admiralty board performed between 1795 and 1798 , interposing his periods on land with brief sea commissions . In 1799 , Seymour became a vice @-@ admiral and joined the squadron blockading Brest for the next year , being involved in a minor operation against Basque Roads . 
 In 1799 Seymour was sent to the West Indies as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Jamaica Station . In August he led the naval squadron in the capture of Suriname in his flagship Prince of Wales . 
 However , in 1800 he fell ill , contracting Yellow Fever . He was sent to sea by his doctors in an attempt to regain his health but died aboard HMS Tisiphone in September 1801 . 
 Seymour 's body was returned to Britain aboard HMS Pickle and joined that of his wife , who had died in Bristol a few days before her husband 's death . His extensive estates were dispersed amongst his seven children , of whom six survived him : 
 Adm. of the Flt . Sir George Seymour ( 1787 – 1870 ) 
 Lt @-@ Col. Hugh Henry John Seymour ( 1790 – 1821 ) 
 Col. Sir Horace Beauchamp Seymour ( 1791 – 1851 ) 
 William John Richard Seymour ( 1793 – 1801 ) 
 Frederick Charles William Seymour ( 1 February 1797 – 7 December 1856 ) , married Lady Mary Gordon ( d . 13 June 1825 ) , daughter of George Gordon , 9th Marquess of Huntly on 15 April 1822 , and Lady Augusta Hervey ( d . 17 March 1880 ) , daughter of Frederick Hervey , 1st Marquess of Bristol on 18 September 1832 
 Horatia Maria Frances Seymour ( d . 26 August 1853 ) , married John Philip Morier in 1814 
 Mary Georgiana Seymour ( d . 30 October 1848 ) , married George Dawson @-@ Damer in 1825 
 Seymour 's death was widely mourned among his contemporaries , Lord St. Vincent once describing him as " an excellent officer " . His service had been energetic and characterised by innovation and invention : he developed a new system of fitting topmasts and was also credited with making epaulettes standard among Royal Navy officers , following his difficulties in convincing French Royalists at the Siege of Toulon that he was a British officer , due to his unimpressive uniform . 
 = = Namesakes = = 
 The Royal Navy has named two ships after Seymour . The first HMS Seymour was a destroyer leader launched in 1916 and sold in 1930 which saw service during World War I. The second , HMS Seymour ( <unk> ) , was a frigate in commission from 1943 to 1946 that served during World War II . 
 <unk> Island , or Isla <unk> , is a small island of the Galápagos Islands . Also known as South Seymour ( named after Lord Hugh Seymour ) 
 = Rhythm game = 
 Rhythm game or rhythm action is a genre of music @-@ themed action video game that challenges a player 's sense of rhythm . Games in the genre typically focus on dance or the simulated performance of musical instruments , and require players to press buttons in a sequence dictated on the screen . Doing so causes the game 's protagonist or avatar to dance or to play their instrument correctly , which increases the player 's score . Many rhythm games include multiplayer modes in which players compete for the highest score or cooperate as a simulated musical ensemble . While conventional control pads may be used as input devices , rhythm games often feature novel game controllers that emulate musical instruments . Certain dance @-@ based games require the player to physically dance on a mat , with pressure @-@ sensitive pads acting as the input device . 
 The 1996 title PaRappa the Rapper has been deemed the first influential rhythm game , whose basic template formed the core of subsequent games in the genre . In 1997 , Konami 's Beatmania sparked an emergent market for rhythm games in Japan . The company 's music division , Bemani , released a series of music @-@ based games over the next several years . The most successful of these was the 1998 dance mat game Dance Dance Revolution , which was the only Bemani title to achieve large @-@ scale success outside Japan , and would see numerous imitations of the game from other publishers . 
 Other Japanese games , particularly Guitar Freaks , led to development of Guitar Hero and Rock Band series that used instrument @-@ shaped controllers to mimic the playing of actual instruments . Spurred by the inclusion of popular rock music , the two series revitalized the rhythm genre in the Western Market , significantly expanded the console video game market and its demographics . The games provided a new source of revenue for the artists whose music appeared on the soundtracks . The later release of Rock Band 3 as well as the even later Rocksmith would allow players to play the songs using a real electric guitar . By 2008 , rhythm games were considered to be one of the most popular video game genres , behind other action games . However , by 2009 , the market was saturated by spin @-@ offs from the core titles , which led to a nearly 50 % drop in revenue for music game publishers ; within a few years , both series announced they would be taking a hiatus from future titles . 
 Despite these setbacks , the rhythm game market continues to expand , introducing a number of danced @-@ based games like Just Dance and Dance Central that incorporate the use of motion controllers and camera @-@ based controls like the Kinect . Existing games also continue to thrive on new business models , such as the reliance on downloadable content to provide songs to players . The introduction of the new generation of console hardware has also spurred return of Guitar Hero and Rock Band titles in late 2015 . 
 = = Definition and game design = = 
 Rhythm game , or rhythm action , is a subgenre of action game that challenges a player 's sense of rhythm . The genre includes dance games such as Dance Dance Revolution and music @-@ based games such as Donkey Konga and Guitar Hero . Games in the genre challenge the player to press buttons at precise times : the screen shows which button the player is required to press , and the game awards points both for accuracy and for synchronization with the beat . The genre also includes games that measure rhythm and pitch , in order to test a player 's singing ability , and games that challenge the player to control their volume by measuring how hard they press each button . While songs can be sight read , players usually practice to master more difficult songs and settings . Certain rhythm games offer a challenge similar to that of Simon says , in that the player must watch , remember , and repeat complex sequences of button @-@ presses . Rhythm @-@ action can take a minigame format with some games blending rhythm with other genres or entirely comprising minigame collections . 
 In some rhythm games , the screen displays an avatar who performs in reaction to the player 's controller inputs . However , these graphical responses are usually in the background , and the avatar is more important to spectators than it is to the player . In single @-@ player modes , the player 's avatar competes against a computer @-@ controlled opponent , while multiplayer modes allow two player @-@ controlled avatars to compete head @-@ to @-@ head . The popularity of rhythm games has created a market for speciality input devices . These include controllers that emulate musical instruments , such as guitars , drums , or maracas . A dance mat , for use in dancing games , requires the player to step on pressure @-@ sensitive pads . However , most rhythm games also support more conventional input devices , such as control pads . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins and popularity in Japan ( 1970s – 2000 ) = = = 
 The rhythm game genre has roots in the electronic game Simon , invented in 1978 by Ralph Baer ( who created the Magnavox Odyssey ) and Howard Morrison . The game originated the " call and response " mechanic used by later rhythm video games , in which players take turns repeating increasingly complicated sequences of button presses . Human Entertainment 's Dance Aerobics was released in 1987 , and allows players to create music by stepping on Nintendo 's Power Pad peripheral for the NES video game console . The 1996 title PaRappa the Rapper has been credited as the first true rhythm game , and as one of the first music @-@ based games in general . It requires players to press buttons in the order that they appear on the screen , a basic mechanic that formed the core of future rhythm games . The success of PaRappa the Rapper sparked the popularity of the music game genre . In 1997 , Konami released the DJ @-@ themed rhythm game Beatmania in Japanese arcades . Its arcade cabinet features buttons similar to those of a musical keyboard , and a rubber pad that emulates a vinyl record . Beatmania was a surprise hit , inspiring Konami 's Games and Music Division to change its name to Bemani in honor of the game , and to begin experimenting with other rhythm game concepts . Its successes include GuitarFreaks , which features a guitar @-@ shaped controller , and 1998 's Pop 'n Music , a game similar to Beatmania in which multiple colorful buttons must be pressed . While the GuitarFreaks franchise continues to receive new arcade releases in Japan , it was never strongly marketed outside of the country . This allowed Red Octane and Harmonix to capitalize on the formula in 2005 with the Western @-@ targeted Guitar Hero . In general , few Japanese arcade rhythm games were exported abroad because of the cost of producing the peripherals and the resulting increases in retail prices . The 1999 Bemani title <unk> featured a drum kit controller , and could be linked with GuitarFreaks for simulated jam sessions . Similarly , this concept was later appropriated by Harmonix for their game Rock Band . 
 Dance Dance Revolution , released in 1998 , is a rhythm game in which players dance on pressure @-@ sensitive pads in an order dictated by on @-@ screen instructions . The game was highly successful both in and outside Japan , unlike games such as GuitarFreaks , <unk> and Beatmania , though the latter had some success in Europe . Released the same year , Enix 's Bust a Groove features a similar focus on dancing but employs a more conventional input method . The game contains competitive one @-@ on @-@ one battles , and grants the player more freedom than typical rhythm games . 
 <unk> @-@ Sha , the creators of PaRappa the Rapper , released <unk> @-@ Ribbon in 1999 . It eschews instrument @-@ shaped controllers ; instead , players maneuver the protagonist through an obstacle course by pressing buttons at correct times . The game 's levels are generated by the background music , which players may change by inserting audio CDs . While it was praised for its unique style and artistry , <unk> @-@ Ribbon 's simple vector graphics proved difficult to market , and the game was never released in North America . Sega 's Samba de Amigo , released in arcades in 1999 and on the Dreamcast in 2000 , features maraca @-@ shaped , motion sensitive controllers . The game allows for two @-@ player gameplay , provides a spectacle for onlookers and allows players to socialise while gaming . In 2000 , Taiko no Tatsujin combined traditional Japanese drums with contemporary pop music , and became highly successful in Japanese arcades . The game was later released on consoles in the West as Taiko Drum Master , and the franchise continues to receive new installments in Japan . Gitaroo Man featured a guitar @-@ playing protagonist four years before the release of Guitar Hero , though the game employed a conventional rather than guitar @-@ shaped controller . Gitaroo Man 's creator , Keiichi Yano , later created <unk> ! <unk> ! <unk> , a rhythm game for the Nintendo DS that utilizes the handheld 's touchscreen features . It became a highly demanded import title , which led to the release of an altered version of the game in the West — Elite Beat Agents — and a sequel in Japan . 
 = = = Popularity in the West ( 2001 – 2004 ) = = = 
 Harmonix was formed in 1995 from a computer music group at MIT . Beginning in 1998 , the company developed music games inspired by PaRappa the Rapper . In 2001 , the company released Frequency , which puts the player in control of multiple instrument tracks . Ryan Davis of GameSpot wrote that the game provides a greater sense of creative freedom than earlier rhythm titles . Frequency was critically acclaimed ; however , marketing was made difficult by the game 's abstract style , which removed the player 's ability to perform for onlookers . In 2003 , Harmonix followed up Frequency with the similar Amplitude . The company later released more socially driven , karaoke @-@ themed music games in Karaoke Revolution and SingStar ( 2003 and 2004 , respectively ) . Donkey Konga , a GameCube title developed by Namco and released in 2003 , achieved widespread success by leveraging Nintendo 's Donkey Kong brand . 
 = = = Peripheral @-@ based games ( 2005 – 2013 ) = = = 
 In 2005 , Harmonix and the small publisher RedOctane released Guitar Hero , a game inspired by Bemani 's GuitarFreaks . However , instead of the Japanese pop that comprises the earlier title 's soundtrack , Guitar Hero features Western rock music . The game reinvigorated the rhythm genre , which had stagnated because of a flood of Dance Dance Revolution sequels and imitations . Guitar Hero spawned several sequels , and the franchise overall earned more than $ 1 billion , with the third installment ranking as the best selling game in North America in 2007 . Harmonix followed Guitar Hero with the Rock Band franchise , which also earned over $ 1 billion . Rock Band titles support multiple instrument controllers and cooperative multiplayer , allowing players to play as a full band . The Guitar Hero franchise followed suit with the band @-@ oriented , Neversoft @-@ developed Guitar Hero World Tour . Guitar Hero installments based on specific bands , such as Metallica and Aerosmith , were also published . Additional songs for Guitar Hero and Rock Band were made available for purchase via the Internet , which generated further revenue . Artists whose work is featured in the games receive royalties , and the increased publicity in turn generates further sales of their music . The success of the Guitar Hero and Rock Band franchises widened the console video game market and its demographics , and the popularity of the genre drove increased sales of consoles . In 2008 , it was reported that music games had become the second most popular video game genre ( behind action ) in the United States , with 53 % of players being female . At its height in 2008 , music games represented about 18 % of the video game market . 
 Video game industry analysts considered 2009 to be a critical year for rhythm games , and they believed that it would allow them to gauge the future success of the genre . Both the Guitar Hero and Rock Band franchises were expanded , and they received entries for handheld gaming devices and mobile phones . Specialized titles that targeted specific genres and demographics , such as Band Hero for pop music and Lego Rock Band for younger players , were released . Sales of music games were down in the first half of the year . This decline was attributed to fewer purchases of instrument controllers ; it was assumed that players had already bought such controllers and were reusing them . While analysts had expected that United States sales of Guitar Hero 5 and The Beatles : Rock Band would be high — close to or exceeding one million units each in the first month of their release — sales only reached roughly half of those projections . The failure to meet sales projections was partly attributed to the impact of the late @-@ 2000s recession on the video game industry ; Harmonix 's CEO Alex <unk> considered that at the time , both Guitar Hero and Rock Band were the most expensive video games on the market . Analysts also considered it to be a sign of market saturation . Further contributing to the decline was genre stagnation ; the franchises retained the same basic gameplay over several iterations , giving consumers less incentive to buy additional titles . Harmonix CEO Alex Rigopulos felt that the aggressive competition between the Rock Band and Guitar Hero brands on the belief that the market could only support one franchise also contributed to the decline of these games . As a result , analysts lowered their expectations for future music games ; for example , projections of first quarter U.S. sales of DJ Hero , a Guitar Hero " spin @-@ off " , were reduced from 1 @.@ 6 million units to only 600 @,@ 000 . Sales of rhythm games , which totalled $ 1 @.@ 47 billion in 2008 , reached only $ 700 million in 2009 . Analysts predicted that the market would settle at the same " healthy " $ 500 – 600 million level of the Call of Duty series . Wedbush Securities analyst Michael Pachter concluded that the saturation of the rhythm game market accounted for one @-@ third of the industry 's 12 % sales decline in 2009 . 
 The fallout of the weakening rhythm game market affected game developers , publishers and distributors . Companies in the latter two categories believed that most consumers would own at least one set of instrument controllers by 2010 , which would increase the importance of software and downloadable content sales . Activision scaled back its 2010 Guitar Hero release schedule to just two games , reducing the number of SKUs from 25 in 2009 to 10 in 2010 . The company closed several in @-@ house developers , including RedOctane , Neversoft 's Guitar Hero division , and Underground Development . Viacom , which had paid Harmonix $ 150 million following the success of Rock Band in 2007 , began seeking a " substantial " refund on that investment after weak sales in 2009 . Viacom also sought to negotiate new deals with music publishers to reduce the costs of the Rock Band series ' licensed music . Ultimately , the company began to seek a buyer for Harmonix during the third quarter of 2010 . 
 In 2010 , rhythm game developers included new features in their products . For example , Rock Band 3 and Power Gig : Rise of the <unk> support guitar controllers with strings , and both contain modes that teach players accurate fingering . Despite this new content , sales of music games faltered in 2010 . Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock and DJ Hero 2 sold only 86 @,@ 000 and 59 @,@ 000 copies , respectively , in North America during their first week on the market . This was in sharp contrast to Guitar Hero III , which had sold nearly 1 @.@ 4 million units in its first week in 2008 . Through October 2010 , music games achieved net sales of around $ 200 million , one @-@ fifth of the genre 's revenue during the same period in 2008 . Analysts believed that the market likely would not break $ 400 million in revenue by the end of the year . End year sales were less than $ 300 million . 
 By the end of 2010 , the rhythm market was considered " well past its prime " , and developers shifted their focus to downloadable content and potential integration with motion control systems . In late 2010 , Viacom sold Harmonix to an investment @-@ backed group and allowed it to continue developing Rock Band and Dance Central . Citing the downturn in rhythm games , Activision shuttered their Guitar Hero division in February 2011 . Analysts suggested that the market for peripheral @-@ based rhythm games may remain stagnant for three to five years , after which sales could <unk> because of digital distribution models or the release of new video game consoles . However , by 2013 , the era of peripheral @-@ based music games was considered at an end , as Harmonix announced that it would cease regular updates of Rock Band downloadable content on April 2 , 2013 as the company shifts to newer games . 
 = = = Future directions ( 2010 – present ) = = = 
 With the introduction of motion controllers for the Xbox 360 ( Kinect ) and the PlayStation 3 ( PlayStation Move ) in 2010 and 2011 , some analysts stated that the rhythm market would <unk> thanks to <unk> and band @-@ based games that use platform @-@ agnostic controllers . Dance games such as Just Dance , Dance Central and Michael Jackson : The Game were based on the new motion sensing technology . Industry pundits believe that , because sales of peripheral @-@ based music games are lagging and the popularity of pop music is surging , dance @-@ based games will continue to thrive . Dance games such as Just Dance and Dance Central boosted the rhythm genre 's late @-@ 2010 sales ; the latter was the top @-@ selling game for the Kinect in North America in November 2010 . Both games helped the genre increase its sales by 38 % over November 2009 , according to NPD . Harmonix is expected to post more than $ 100 million in profit for 2011 buoyed by sales of Dance Central and downloadable content for the game , according to Bloomberg . Just Dance overcame a poor critical reception to topple Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 2 's best @-@ seller status , while Just Dance 2 ( 2010 ) became the best selling non @-@ Nintendo game for the Wii . The Just Dance series competed with top action franchises for sales . Tap Tap Revenge , the first installment of the iPhone rhythm series Tap Tap , was the platform 's most downloaded game in 2008 . The Tap Tap franchise ultimately generated 15 million downloads and received a Guinness World Record as the " most popular iPhone game series " . 
 Over the course of 2014 , the phenomenon of indie games produced several variations of the genre . The game Jungle Rumble uses a mechanic where players drum on a touch screen to control the game . Different rhythms correspond with different verbs to control entities in an RTS like environment . The game Crypt of the <unk> uses a mechanic where the player controls the main character in sync with the soundtrack 's beat . 
 Harmonix returned to its core rhythm games in 2014 . In 2014 , it successfully funded a Kickstarter to produce a remake of the PS2 title , Amplitude for the PlayStation 3 and 4 , with release expected in 2015 . Further , in March 2015 , the company announced Rock Band 4 to be released later in the same year , with plans to keep the game as a platform with continued free and paid updates and downloadable content , while refocusing on the core social and music enjoyment of the game . Activision also announced Guitar Hero Live , slated for late 2015 , which rebuilds the game from the ground up , keeping the core mechanics but using a 3 @-@ button with dual position controller , and using recorded footage of a rock concert taken from the lead guitarist 's perspective to increase immersion . 
 = = Health and education = = 
 Rhythm games have been used for health purposes . For example , research has found that dancing games dramatically increase energy expenditure over that of traditional video games , and that they burn more calories than walking on a treadmill . Scientists have further suggested that , due to the large amount of time children spend playing video games and watching television , games that involve physical activity could be used to combat obesity . Studies have found that playing Dance Dance Revolution can provide an aerobic workout , in terms of a sufficiently intense heart rate , but not the minimum levels of VO2 max . Based on successful preliminary studies , West Virginia , which has one of the highest rates of obesity and its attendant diseases in the US , introduced Dance Dance Revolution into its schools ' physical education classes . According to The New York Times , more than " several hundred schools in at least 10 states " have used Dance Dance Revolution ( along with In the Groove ) in their curricula . Plans have been made to increase the number into the thousands in an effort to mitigate the country 's obesity epidemic . Arnold Schwarzenegger , former Governor of California , was a noted proponent of the game 's use in schools . In Japan , celebrities reported losing weight after playing Dance Dance Revolution , which drove sales of the game 's home console version . Bemani 's testers also found themselves losing weight while working on the game . There is further anecdotal evidence that these games aid weight loss , though the University of Michigan Health System has cautioned that dance games and other <unk> should only be a starting point towards traditional sports , which are more effective . Dance games have also been used in rehabilitation and fall @-@ prevention programs for elderly patients , using customised , slower versions of existing games and mats . Researchers have further experimented with prototypes of games allowing wider and more realistic stepping than the tapping actions found in commercial dance games . 
 Guitar Hero games have been used alongside physical therapy to help recovering stroke patients , because of the multiple limb coordination that the titles require . Blondie drummer Clem Burke has worked with researchers at the University of Chichester and the University of Gloucestershire to determine how games like Guitar Hero can address issues of " child and adult obesity , autism , stroke patients and health and mental well @-@ being in the workplace " . Researchers at Johns Hopkins University have used Guitar Hero III and its controller to help amputee patients , and to develop new prosthetic limbs for these patients . Researchers at University of Nevada , Reno modified a haptic feedback glove to work with the Guitar Hero freeware clone Frets on Fire , resulting in Blind Hero , a music game for visually impaired players that is played with only touch and audio . MIT students collaborated with the government of Singapore and a professor at the National University of Singapore to create <unk> , a game which allows both blind and sighted gamers to play together . Guitar Hero was used as part of a Trent University youth sleep study , which showed that , in general , players who played a song were better at it twelve hours later if that period included normal sleep . 
 Guitar Hero and Rock Band have introduced people to rock music and inspired them to learn how to play the guitar . A study by Youth Music found that 2 @.@ 5 million out of 12 million children in the United Kingdom have begun learning how to play real instruments after playing music video games such as Guitar Hero . The group believes that these video games can be incorporated into music educational programs . Guitar teachers in the US have reported an increase in students who cite Guitar Hero as their inspiration to start learning . On the other hand , industry professionals , such the inventor of the <unk> practice tool , have expressed scepticism over the game 's educational value . There is anecdotal evidence that Guitar Hero aids rhythm and general hand @-@ coordination , but also that it creates a false preconception of the difficulty of learning guitar , which can lead students to discontinue their studies . Guitar Center conducted a survey which found that a majority of instrument @-@ based rhythm gamers intended to take up a real instrument in the future while a majority of those who were already musicians had been inspired to play their instruments more . Despite such popularity the guitar remains less popular than it was in the 1960s . Some musicians have been critical of Guitar Hero 's impact on music education . Jack White of The White Stripes stated that he was disappointed to learn that video games are the most likely venue where younger audiences will be exposed to new works , while Jimmy Page of Led Zeppelin does not believe that people can learn how to play real instruments from their video game counterparts . Similarly , Prince has turned down opportunities to have his music in the Guitar Hero series , stating that he felt that it was " more important that kids learn how to actually play the guitar " . Other commentators have pointed to drum controllers ( including the expanded , lifelike Drum Rocker kit ) used in such games as potentially useful in learning and creating music with real drums . 
 = Citygarden = 
 Citygarden is an urban park and sculpture garden in St. Louis , Missouri owned by the City of St. Louis but maintained by the Gateway Foundation . It is located between Eighth , Tenth , Market , and Chestnut streets , in the city 's " Gateway Mall " area . Before being converted to a garden and park , the site comprised two empty blocks of grass . Citygarden was dedicated on June 30 , 2009 , and opened one day later , on July 1 , 2009 . 
 Citygarden is 2 @.@ 9 acres ( 1 @.@ 2 ha ) in size — occupying two square city blocks — and cost US $ 30 million to develop . St. Louis ' Gateway Foundation , a not @-@ for @-@ profit organization supporting public art , funded the design and construction of the garden . While the city owns the land on which Citygarden was developed , the foundation owns the statues and covers all park maintenance costs except water and electricity . The Gateway Foundation is also in charge of providing additional security for the garden . 
 There is no admission fee for visitors of Citygarden , which is located close to St. Louis ' Gateway Arch and Busch Stadium . The park is open year @-@ round and complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 . 
 = = History = = 
 Public art is not new to the Gateway Mall . In 1940 , a large Carl Milles work was installed outside St. Louis Union Station . This later became one end of the mall when it was created in the 1960s , with the Gateway Arch on the other end . In 1982 , Richard Serra 's Twain — a sculpture comprising eight large plates of weathering steel — was installed on the 1 @.@ 14 acres ( 0 @.@ 46 ha ) block immediately west of Citygarden , creating Serra Sculpture Park . 
 In the late 1990s , a group of St. Louis residents drew up a plan for a revitalized downtown , which included a sculpture garden at the same two blocks where Citygarden is located . That plan was not immediately realized , but in 2006 , the City of St. Louis asked the Gateway Foundation to prepare a master plan for the entire Gateway Mall strip . In early 2007 , the foundation sponsored a competition , soliciting designs for the planned project ; Nelson Byrd Woltz Landscape Architects , a Charlottesville , Virginia landscape architecture firm , was the winner . The partnership to develop Citygarden was announced in June 2007 . The project was initially proposed to the St. Louis Preservation Board in October 2007 , while development of the land began in April 2008 . Over 250 @,@ 000 people visited Citygarden before Christmas , 2009 , a figure that has since risen to an estimated one million or more . However , because Citygarden has no gates , there is no official visitor count . 
 At the dedication of Citygarden , Mayor of St. Louis Francis G. Slay praised the project , saying , " This new garden is immediately taking its place among the great cultural attractions of St. Louis for residents and visitors alike . It 's dazzling , and its complete openness in the heart of downtown makes it unique in the country . " In front of local and state officials , as well as the media , Slay told workers at the park 's control center to turn on the fountains and tear down the construction fence . On the opening day of Citygarden , city officials asked an ice cream truck to park near the garden to attract tourists , but many visitors arrived at the park regardless . 
 A celebration for Citygarden 's one @-@ year anniversary was held on July 10 , 2010 . The festivities included a flamingo parade — meant to " express the irreverent and whimsical spirit of the garden , " said park spokesperson Paul Wagman . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 According to one city development leader , Citygarden has prompted many people to visit downtown St. Louis . The executive of a local community improvement organization said the garden has also contributed to the city 's economy . In addition , the popularity of Citygarden has led to renewed interest in renovating the 16 @-@ block Gateway Mall . Slay said , " By setting the bar so high , it gives us reason to hope that the entire Gateway Mall will eventually fulfill the dreams that civic planners have had for it for the better part of a century . The Mall can be a wonderful , multi @-@ faceted cultural and recreational space for our City and the region . " 
 Rocco Landesman , chairperson of the National Endowment for the Arts , has used Citygarden as an example of a successful foundation @-@ funded art venture . Landesman — a former resident of St. Louis — said that such projects can help urban areas economically , but they cannot be funded solely by the federal government , thus requiring assistance from both the private sector and foundations . Michael Van Valkenburgh , principal of a Brooklyn landscape architecture firm , said he was drawn to St. Louis partly because of Citygarden 's design and success . Van Valkenburgh was selected in 2010 to renovate the grounds of the Gateway Arch . 
 = = Sculptures = = 
 The park was designed so larger works of art rest on wide lawns , while smaller spaces are reserved for more private areas . It is home to 24 sculptures , some of which were created by Fernand Léger , Keith Haring , Aristide Maillol , Laura Ford , Tony Smith , Jim Dine , Kan Yasuda , <unk> <unk> , Mark di Suvero , Niki de Saint Phalle , Tom <unk> , Tom Claassen , Jack <unk> , Ju Ming , Jean @-@ Michel Folon , Mimmo Paladino , Jonathan Clarke , Donald <unk> , and Martin <unk> . One statue , by Igor <unk> , features a large bronze head lying on its side , while works by Julian Opie comprise digital screens displaying walking people . Park visitors are allowed to touch the sculptures and even walk inside them . This means , however , that some of the works require more frequent maintenance , such as re @-@ waxing . The sculptures range in medium from various metals — bronze , stainless steel , and cast aluminum — fiberglass and even polyester . On September 20 , 2011 , a 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) aluminum sculpture of a bodiless pink suit , by Erwin Wurm and titled Big Suit , was installed in the garden . 
 The Gateway Foundation already owned two of the two dozen pieces prior to Citygarden 's creation , and it purchased the remaining number between 2006 and 2009 . The organization has not revealed the cost of acquiring the sculptures , an amount not included in the $ 30 million ; however , it is estimated that the collection is worth around $ 12 million , if not more . The garden has received criticism from those who think that 24 sculptures is too many in such a small space . 
 = = = Selected works = = = 
 2 Arcs x 4 and 230 @.@ 5 Degree Arc x 5 ( 1999 ) comprise a series of three steel sculptures by <unk> <unk> . One sculpture consists of five steel beams bent into a 230 @.@ 5 @-@ degree arc , another arc is 232 @.@ 5 degrees , and the last is 235 @.@ 5 degrees . 
 Big White Gloves , Big Four Wheels ( 2009 ) is a statue of Pinocchio by Jim Dine . 
 Eros <unk> ( " Eros Bound " ; 1999 ) is a large bronze head by sculptor Igor <unk> . Located on the corner of Eighth and Market streets , the statue lays sideways on a slanted granite circle , which is covered by a steady stream of water . 
 Femmes au <unk> ( " Women with parrot " ; 1952 ) is a bronze relief situated on the wall of the restaurant building . Created by the Cubist artist Fernand Léger , this work features a group of women with a parakeet . 
 Four <unk> Oblique IV ( 1979 ) is a kinetic sculpture by George Rickey . 
 La Rivière ( " The River " ; 1938 – 1943 ) , by Aristide Maillol , depicts a nude woman washing her hair . It is located in the basin outside the restaurant building . Another version of this sculpture can be found at New York City 's Museum of Modern Art . 
 This is Bruce and Sarah Walking ( 2007 ) is an LED panel that displays two people walking . The work , created by Julian Opie , is located next to Tenth Street . Another version of the installation , depicting walkers " Julian " and " Kiera , " is located in another part of Citygarden . 
 Untitled ( Two Rabbits ) ( 2004 ) , by Tom Claassen , consists of two rabbits cast in bronze and then painted white . 
 Voyage ( 1999 ) , by Jean @-@ Michel Folon , depicts a boat sitting amid a pool of water . The boat has two passengers : a man with a hat — the everyman — on one end , and a sleeping cat on the other end . 
 Zenit ( 1999 ) is a bronze horse sculpted by Mimmo Paladino . Instead of a rider , the horse carries a small stellated dodecahedron on its back . 
 = = Features = = 
 Citygarden is not enclosed from the street and can be entered from any direction . The park includes six rain gardens , a 102 @-@ fountain " spray plaza " in which children can play , as well as a 180 feet ( 55 m ) -long pool with a 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) -tall waterfall . The fountain 's water is recycled , and filtered rainwater is also used . A low , winding , 1 @,@ 110 @-@ foot ( 340 m ) -long , granite @-@ topped " meander wall " runs through the park 's southern half and acts as seating for visitors . In the northern half , a 550 @-@ foot ( 170 m ) -long curved wall of yellow Missouri limestone stretches across the property . A 16 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) LED video screen is on the wall ; it displays movies and artworks , as well as some baseball games — including the 2009 Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game . In October 2009 , two films — " The Way Things Go " by Peter Fischli & David Weiss , and Gordon Matta @-@ Clark 's " Conical Intersect " — were featured on the video wall , running a total of 50 minutes . Previously , the video wall had displayed a series of nine short films focused on humor and the absurdity of life . The Contemporary Art Museum St. Louis , Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum at Washington University in St. Louis , Pulitzer Foundation for the Arts , and Saint Louis Art Museum take turns updating the shows at each quarter . 
 Visitors to Citygarden can listen to an audio tour by dialing a special number on their mobile phones . The tour is narrated by prominent St. Louis residents , including former St. Louis Cardinals player Ozzie Smith and St. Louis Symphony Orchestra director David Robertson , as well as Jackie Joyner @-@ Kersee , John Ashcroft , Jenna Fischer , and Kurt Warner , with over twenty narrators in all . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The garden also includes Ginkgo biloba trees , native plants , and spacious sidewalks , features that Warren Byrd of Nelson Byrd Woltz said could be adapted by other sections of the Gateway Mall . Originally , the Citygarden site had an elevation of 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) , but architects increased it to 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in certain areas , placing the restaurant and maintenance shed on the higher ground . 
 The park is divided into three horizontal sections , and architects considered the rivers and other natural characteristics of the St. Louis area when designing the park . The northern limestone wall represents the Mississippi River bluffs , while the southern snaking meander wall stands is inspired by the region 's waterways . Between the two zones are the rain gardens , larger trees , and larger sculptures , an area that meant to represent a floodplain . The main paths of the park were plotted to match the locations of alleyways that park designers saw in a 1916 Sanborn map . 
 Citygarden 's plants , including various grasses and wildflowers , were selected by the Missouri Botanical Garden . Large shade plants were chosen to provide relief in warm and humid weather . At the time of its opening , Citygarden comprised a total of 240 trees , 1 @,@ 100 shrubs , 4 @,@ 000 perennials , 8 @,@ 000 bulbs , and 13 @,@ 000 groundcovers . A garden spokesperson later said that hungry rabbits have forced workers to alter some of the plant choices . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 On October 8 , 2009 , the chairman of the board of the Gateway Foundation was given the St. Louis Award for his part in Citygarden 's development . Upon receiving the award , Peter Fischer — whose parents launched the foundation in 1986 — called for more public spaces similar to Citygarden . " If Citygarden 's design really is world class , then it has set the standard for the development of the rest of the [ Gateway Mall ] . We want great and brilliant design for our public places , " he said . The St. Louis Award recognizes a " resident of metropolitan St. Louis who , during the preceding year , has contributed the most outstanding service for its development . " 
 In early 2011 , Citygarden was named one of five finalists for the Urban Land Institute Amanda Burden Urban Open Space Award . The award , named after its creator , is given to a public open space that has contributed to its surrounding community . Citygarden competed for the $ 10 @,@ 000 prize against Portland , Oregon 's Director Park and Jamison Square , as well as Discovery Green and the Raymond and Susan <unk> Pavilion of Houston , Texas . The institute said that Citygarden " draws on St. Louis ' chief natural feature — its rivers ... has attracted diverse users , catalyzed nearby development , and changed perceptions of downtown . Situated on two blocks of the underutilized Gateway Mall , the active sculpture garden has drawn an estimated one million visitors since its opening . " On May 19 , 2011 , the Urban Land Institute announced Citygarden as the winner of the award at a ceremony in Phoenix , Arizona . In a statement , Slay said , " This is a really wonderful honor for the City of St. Louis and for the Gateway Foundation . <unk> chose Citygarden from among 48 applicants across the country . The decision will bring flattering and well @-@ deserved national attention both to the garden and to the City of St. Louis . " The award was accepted in Phoenix by Rodney Crim , director of the St. Louis Development Corporation , on behalf of the city and the Gateway Foundation . 
 In September 2011 , the American Society of Landscape Architects ( <unk> ) announced the results of its 2011 Professional Awards . Citygarden was named as one of eight recipients of an Honor Award in the <unk> 's " General Design " category . 
 = = Dining = = 
 = = = Terrace View = = = 
 The Terrace View was a restaurant and café located in Citygarden . Operated by local restaurateur Jim Fiala , the Terrace View opened on August 19 , 2009 with Chris Bork as chef . At the time of its opening , Fiala estimated the eatery would produce between $ 600 @,@ 000 and $ 800 @,@ 000 in revenue each year . The Terrace View employed about 30 workers . 
 The 3 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 280 m2 ) Terrace View building was designed by Philip Durham of Studio Durham Architects . It has three glass walls that face the garden and is located near the intersection of Eighth and Chestnut streets . Durham called his design a " Miesian glass box , " similar to the style of Ludwig Mies van der Rohe . The building 's roof — as well as the roof of maintenance building — is covered with Sedum species , meant to decrease energy costs . Inside , Niki de Saint Phalle 's sculpture Adam and Eve sat in the middle of the dining floor . 
 The restaurant served breakfast , lunch , and dinner . With both indoor and outdoor seating , the Terrace View accommodated up to 120 patrons and focused on dishes created locally — within 150 miles ( 240 km ) of its location — as well as Italian and French cuisine . In December 2010 , Terrace View chef Nick Cox narrowed the original Mediterranean @-@ themed menu , focusing more on Northern Italian cuisine . Called " Acero on the Terrace " after Fiala 's Acero restaurant in Maplewood , Missouri , the menu retained dishes made from locally grown produce , including the " 50 @-@ Mile Salad " — composed of ingredients from within 50 miles ( 80 km ) of the Terrace View . 
 Fiala had been referred to the Gateway Foundation by the president of a local catering company , and the foundation later asked him to run the Terrace View . A foundation spokesperson said that the " Gateway Foundation board sorted through a lot of different candidates , and they were thrilled to find one who was perfect . " Fiala had wanted to open the Terrace View before the 2009 All @-@ Star Game , but was forced to delay in order to settle contracts and have a liquor license approved . The establishment was originally scheduled to open on July 1 , the same day as Citygarden 's opening and two weeks before the game . 
 In September 2011 , Fiala announced he would not renew the Terrace View 's lease on the building in Citygarden . After switching to a weekday @-@ lunch @-@ only schedule for the remainder of 2011 , the restaurant closed at the end of the year . Fiala attributed the closure to low profitability due to a lack of dinner customers , though he said lunch business was " fine . " The restaurant 's departure sparked speculation on a possible replacement , including the possibility of St. Louis @-@ born restaurateur Danny Meyer opening a Shake Shack store in Citygarden , but the building remained unoccupied at the beginning of 2012 . 
 = = = Death in the Afternoon = = = 
 Death in the Afternoon opened in the vacated by Joe 's Chili Bowl space . According to restaurant 's website " Death in the Afternoon is a concept built around St. Louis and eating well no matter what time of day . Locally sourced ingredients are assembled by talented chefs to make your brunch , lunch or dinner something unique and fun . " http : / / <unk> / 
 Two roughly square lots are shown on map with a light grey background . Buildings are colored brown ; plantings , green ; water features , blue ; and walking paths , off @-@ white . | In this map of Citygarden , the arcing golden limestone wall divides the park 's northern zone , while the dark meander wall snakes through the southern zone . Ninth Street separates the two blocks on which the garden is located 
 = Battle of Dien Bien Phu = 
 The Battle of Dien Bien Phu ( French : Bataille de <unk> Biên Phu ; Vietnamese : <unk> <unk> Điện Biên Phủ , " Campaign of Dien Bien Phu " ) was the climactic confrontation of the First Indochina War between the French Union 's French Far East Expeditionary Corps and Viet Minh communist @-@ nationalist revolutionaries . It was , from the French view before the event , a set piece battle to draw out the Vietnamese and destroy them with superior firepower . The battle occurred between March and May 1954 and culminated in a comprehensive French defeat that influenced negotiations over the future of Indochina at Geneva . 
 As a result of blunders in French decision @-@ making , the French began an operation to insert then support the soldiers at Điện Biên Phủ , deep in the hills of northwestern Vietnam . Its purpose was to cut off Viet Minh supply lines into the neighboring Kingdom of Laos , a French ally , and tactically draw the Viet Minh into a major confrontation that would cripple them . The Viet Minh , however , under General Võ Nguyên Giáp , surrounded and besieged the French , who knew of the weapons but were unaware of the vast amounts of the Viet Minh 's heavy artillery being brought in ( including anti @-@ aircraft guns ) and their ability to move these weapons through difficult terrain up the rear slopes of the mountains surrounding the French positions , dig tunnels through the mountain , and place the artillery pieces overlooking the French encampment . This positioning of the artillery made it nearly impervious to counter @-@ battery fire . 
 The Viet Minh opened fire with a massive bombardment from the artillery in March . After several days the French artillery commander , Charles Piroth , unable to structure any sort of counter @-@ battery fire , committed suicide . The Viet Minh proceeded to occupy the highlands around Điện Biên Phủ and bombard the French positions . Tenacious fighting on the ground ensued , reminiscent of the trench warfare of World War I. The French repeatedly repulsed Viet Minh assaults on their positions . Supplies and reinforcements were delivered by air , though as the key French positions were overrun the French perimeter contracted and air resupply on which the French had placed their hopes became impossible , and as the anti @-@ aircraft fire took its toll , fewer and fewer of those supplies reached them . The garrison was overrun after a two @-@ month siege and most French forces surrendered . A few escaped to Laos . The French government resigned and the new Prime Minister , the left @-@ of @-@ centre Pierre Mendès France , supported French withdrawal from Indochina . 
 The war ended shortly after the Battle of Dien Bien Phu and the signing of the 1954 Geneva Accords . France agreed to withdraw its forces from all its colonies in French Indochina , while stipulating that Vietnam would be temporarily divided at the 17th parallel , with control of the north given to the Viet Minh as the Democratic Republic of Vietnam under Ho Chi Minh , and the south becoming the State of Vietnam nominally under Emperor Bảo Đại , preventing Ho Chi Minh from gaining control of the entire country . The refusal of Ngô Đình Diệm to allow elections in 1956 , as had been stipulated by the Geneva Conference , eventually led to the first phase of the Second Indochina War , better known as the Vietnam War ( see War in Vietnam ( 1959 – 63 ) ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
 By 1953 , the First Indochina War was not going well for France . A succession of commanders — Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque , Jean Étienne <unk> , Roger <unk> , Marcel Carpentier , Jean de Lattre de Tassigny , and Raoul Salan — had proven incapable of suppressing the Viet Minh insurrection . During their 1952 – 53 campaign , the Viet Minh had overrun vast swathes of Laos , a French ally and Vietnam 's western neighbor , advancing as far as Luang Prabang and the Plain of Jars . The French were unable to slow the Viet Minh advance , and the Viet Minh fell back only after outrunning their always @-@ tenuous supply lines . In 1953 , the French had begun to strengthen their defenses in the Hanoi delta region to prepare for a series of offensives against Viet Minh staging areas in northwest Vietnam . They had set up fortified towns and outposts in the area , including Lai Châu near the Chinese border to the north , Nà Sản to the west of Hanoi , and the Plain of Jars in northern Laos . 
 In May 1953 , French Premier René Mayer appointed Henri Navarre , a trusted colleague , to take command of French Union Forces in Indochina . Mayer had given Navarre a single order — to create military conditions that would lead to an " honorable political solution " . According to military scholar Phillip Davidson , 
 On arrival , Navarre was shocked by what he found . There had been no long @-@ range plan since de Lattre 's departure . Everything was conducted on a day @-@ to @-@ day , reactive basis . Combat operations were undertaken only in response to enemy moves or threats . There was no comprehensive plan to develop the organization and build up the equipment of the Expeditionary force . Finally , Navarre , the intellectual , the cold and professional soldier , was shocked by the " school 's out " attitude of Salan and his senior commanders and staff officers . They were going home , not as victors or heroes , but then , not as clear losers either . To them the important thing was that they were getting out of Indochina with their reputations frayed , but intact . They gave little thought to , or concern for , the problems of their successors . 
 = = = Nà Sản and the hedgehog concept = = = 
 Simultaneously , Navarre had been searching for a way to stop the Viet Minh threat to Laos . Colonel Louis <unk> , commander of Mobile Group 7 and Navarre 's main planner , formulated the hérisson ( " hedgehog " ) concept . The French army would establish a fortified airhead by air @-@ lifting soldiers adjacent to a key Viet Minh supply line to Laos . This would effectively cut off Viet Minh soldiers fighting in Laos and force them to withdraw . " It was an attempt to interdict the enemy 's rear area , to stop the flow of supplies and reinforcements , to establish a redoubt in the enemy 's rear and disrupt his lines " . 
 The hedgehog concept was based on French experiences at the Battle of Nà Sản . In late November and early December 1952 , Giáp attacked the French outpost at Nà Sản , which was essentially an " air @-@ land base " , a fortified camp supplied only by air . Giáp 's forces were beaten back repeatedly with very heavy losses . The French hoped that by repeating the strategy on a much larger scale , they would be able to lure Giáp into committing the bulk of his forces in a massed assault . This would enable superior French artillery , armor , and air support to decimate the exposed Viet Minh forces . The experience at Nà Sản convinced Navarre of the viability of the fortified airhead concept . 
 French staff officers disastrously failed to treat seriously several crucial differences between Điện Biên Phủ and Nà Sản : Firstly , at Nà Sản , the French commanded most of the high ground with overwhelming artillery support . At Điện Biên Phủ , however , the Viet Minh controlled much of the high ground around the valley , their artillery far exceeded French expectations and they outnumbered the French four @-@ to @-@ one . Giáp compared Điện Biên Phủ to a " rice bowl " , where his troops occupied the edge and the French the bottom . Secondly , Giáp made a mistake in Nà Sản by committing his forces to reckless frontal attacks before being fully prepared . At Điện Biên Phủ , Giáp spent months meticulously stockpiling ammunition and emplacing heavy artillery and anti @-@ aircraft guns before making his move . Teams of Viet Minh volunteers were sent into the French camp to scout the disposition of the French artillery . Wooden artillery pieces were built as decoys and the real guns were rotated every few salvos to confuse French counterbattery fire . As a result , when the battle finally began , the Viet Minh knew exactly where the French artillery pieces were , while the French were not even aware of how many guns Giáp possessed . Thirdly , the aerial resupply lines at Nà Sản were never severed , despite Viet Minh anti @-@ aircraft fire . At Điện Biên Phủ , Giáp amassed anti @-@ aircraft batteries that quickly shut down the runway and made it extremely difficult and costly for the French to bring in reinforcements . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Lead up to Castor = = = 
 In June , Major General René Cogny , commander of the Tonkin Delta , proposed Điện Biên Phủ , which had an old airstrip built by the Japanese during World War II , as a " mooring point " . In another misunderstanding , Cogny had envisioned a lightly defended point from which to launch raids ; however , to Navarre , this meant a heavily fortified base capable of withstanding a siege . Navarre selected Điện Biên Phủ for the location of <unk> 's " hedgehog " operation . When presented with the plan , every major subordinate officer protested : Colonel Jean @-@ Louis Nicot ( commander of the French Air transport fleet ) , Cogny , and generals Jean Gilles and Jean <unk> ( the ground and air commanders for Operation Castor , the initial airborne assault on Điện Biên Phủ ) . Cogny pointed out , presciently , that " we are running the risk of a new Nà Sản under worse conditions " . Navarre rejected the criticisms of his proposal and concluded a November 17 conference by declaring that the operation would commence three days later , on 20 November 1953 . 
 Navarre decided to go ahead with the operation , despite operational difficulties , which later became painfully obvious ( but at the time may have been less apparent ) because he had been repeatedly assured by his intelligence officers that the operation had very little risk of involvement by a strong enemy force . Navarre had previously considered three other ways to defend Laos : mobile warfare , which was impossible given the terrain in Vietnam ; a static defense line stretching to Laos , which was not feasible given the number of troops at Navarre 's disposal ; or placing troops in the Laotian provincial capitals and supplying them by air , which was unworkable due to the distance from Hanoi to Luang Prabang and Vientiane . Thus , the only option left to Navarre was the hedgehog , which he characterized as " a mediocre solution " . In a twist of fate , the French National Defense Committee ultimately agreed that Navarre 's responsibility did not include defending Laos . However , their decision ( which was drawn up on 13 November ) was not delivered to him until 4 December , two weeks after the Điện Biên Phủ operation began . 
 = = = Establishment of air operations = = = 
 Operations at Điện Biên Phủ began at 10 : 35 on the morning of 20 November 1953 . In Operation Castor , the French dropped or flew 9 @,@ 000 troops into the area over three days , including a bulldozer to prepare the airstrip . They were landed at three drop zones : " Natasha " ( northwest ) , " Octavie " ( southwest ) , and " Simone " ( southeast ) of Điện Biên Phủ . The Viet Minh elite 148th Independent Infantry Regiment , headquartered at Điện Biên Phủ , reacted " instantly and effectively " . Three of their four battalions , however , were absent that day . Initial operations proceeded well for the French . By the end of November , six parachute battalions had been landed and the French were consolidating their positions . 
 It was at this time that Giáp began his counter @-@ moves . He had expected an attack , but could not foresee when or where it would occur . Giáp realized that , if pressed , the French would abandon Lai Châu Province and fight a pitched battle at Điện Biên Phủ . On 24 November , Giáp ordered the 148th Infantry Regiment and the 316th Division to attack Lai Chau , while the 308th , 312th , and 351st divisions assault Điện Biên Phủ from Việt Bắc . 
 Starting in December , the French , under the command of Colonel Christian de Castries , began transforming their anchoring point into a fortress by setting up seven satellite positions , each allegedly named after a former mistress of de Castries , although the allegation is probably unfounded , as the eight names begin with letters from the first nine of the alphabet ( all but F ) . The fortified headquarters was centrally located , with positions " Huguette " to the west , " Claudine " to the south , and " Dominique " to the northeast . Other positions were " Anne @-@ Marie " to the northwest , " Beatrice " to the northeast , " Gabrielle " to the north and " Isabelle " 6 km ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) to the south , covering the reserve airstrip . 
 The choice of de Castries as the on @-@ scene commander at Điện Biên Phủ was , in retrospect , a bad one . Navarre had picked de Castries , a cavalryman in the 18th century tradition , because Navarre envisioned Điện Biên Phủ as a mobile battle . In reality , Điện Biên Phủ required someone adept at World War I @-@ style trench warfare , something for which de Castries was not suited . 
 The arrival of the 316th Viet Minh Division prompted Cogny to order the evacuation of the Lai Chau garrison to Điện Biên Phủ , exactly as Giáp had anticipated . En route , they were virtually annihilated by the Viet Minh . " Of the 2 @,@ 100 men who left Lai Chau on 9 December , only 185 made it to Điện Biên Phủ on 22 December . The rest had been killed , captured or deserted " . The Viet Minh troops now converged on Điện Biên Phủ . 
 The French had committed 10 @,@ 800 troops , with more reinforcements totaling nearly 16 @,@ 000 men , to the defense of a monsoon @-@ affected valley surrounded by heavily wooded hills that had not been secured . Artillery as well as ten M24 Chaffee light tanks and numerous aircraft were committed to the garrison . The garrison included French regular troops ( notably elite paratroop units plus artillery ) , Foreign Legionnaires , Algerian and Moroccan tirailleurs , and locally recruited Indochinese infantry . All told , the Viet Minh had moved 50 @,@ 000 regular troops into the hills surrounding the valley , totaling five divisions including the 351st Heavy Division , which was made up entirely of heavy artillery . Artillery and AA ( anti @-@ aircraft ) guns , which outnumbered the French artillery by about four to one , were moved into positions overlooking the valley . The French came under direct and sporadic Viet Minh artillery fire for the first time on 31 January 1954 , and patrols encountered the Viet Minh in all directions . The French were now surrounded . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Beatrice = = = 
 The Viet Minh assault began in earnest on 13 March 1954 with an attack on outpost " Beatrice " . Viet Minh artillery opened a fierce bombardment of the fortification and French command was disrupted at 18 : 15 when a shell hit the French command post , killing Legionnaire commander Major Paul <unk> and his entire staff . A few minutes later , Colonel Jules Gaucher , commander of the entire northern sector , was killed by Viet Minh artillery . The Viet Minh 312th Division then launched a massive infantry assault , using sappers to defeat French obstacles . French resistance at Beatrice collapsed shortly after midnight following a fierce battle . Roughly 500 French legionnaires were killed . The French estimated that Viet Minh losses totalled 600 dead and 1 @,@ 200 wounded . The French launched a counter @-@ attack against " Beatrice " the following morning , but it was quickly beaten back by Viet Minh artillery . The victory at " Beatrice " " galvanized the morale " of the Viet Minh troops . 
 Much to French disbelief , the Viet Minh had employed direct artillery fire , in which each gun crew does its own artillery spotting ( as opposed to indirect fire , in which guns are massed farther away from the target , out of direct line of sight , and rely on a forward artillery spotter ) . Indirect artillery , generally held as being far superior to direct fire , requires experienced , well @-@ trained crews and good communications , which the Viet Minh lacked . Navarre wrote that , " Under the influence of Chinese advisers , the Viet Minh commanders had used processes quite different from the classic methods . The artillery had been dug in by single pieces ... They were installed in shell @-@ proof dugouts , and fire point @-@ blank from portholes ... This way of using artillery and AA guns was possible only with the expansive ant holes at the disposal of the Vietminh and was to make shambles of all the estimates of our own artillerymen . " Two days later , the French artillery commander , Colonel Charles Piroth , distraught at his inability to bring counterfire on the well @-@ camouflaged Viet Minh batteries , went into his dugout and committed suicide with a hand grenade . He was buried there in secret to prevent loss of morale among the French troops . 
 = = = Gabrielle = = = 
 Following a five @-@ hour cease fire on the morning of 14 March , Viet Minh artillery resumed pounding French positions . The air strip , already closed since 16 : 00 the day before due to a light bombardment , was now put permanently out of commission . Any further French supplies would have to be delivered by parachute . That night , the Viet Minh launched an attack on " Gabrielle " , held by an elite Algerian battalion . The attack began with a concentrated artillery barrage at 17 : 00 . This was very effective and stunned the defenders . Two regiments from the crack 308th Division attacked starting at 20 : 00 . At 04 : 00 the following morning , an artillery shell hit the battalion headquarters , severely wounding the battalion commander and most of his staff . 
 De Castries ordered a counterattack to relieve " Gabrielle " . However , Colonel Pierre Langlais , in forming the counterattack , chose to rely on the 5th Vietnamese Parachute Battalion , which had jumped in the day before and was exhausted . Although some elements of the counterattack reached " Gabrielle " , most were paralyzed by Viet Minh artillery and took heavy losses . At 08 : 00 the next day , the Algerian battalion fell back , abandoning " Gabrielle " to the Viet Minh . The French lost around 1 @,@ 000 men defending Gabrielle , and the Viet Minh between 1 @,@ 000 and 2 @,@ 000 attacking the strongpoint . The loss of the outpost " Beatrice " and now " Gabrielle " , allowed almost pin point artillery to be rained down for the rest of the battle and cut off any air resupply using the airstrip , and this dictated the resulting events . 
 = = = Anne @-@ Marie = = = 
 " Anne @-@ Marie " was defended by Tai troops , members of a Vietnamese ethnic minority loyal to the French . For weeks , Giáp had distributed subversive propaganda leaflets , telling the Tais that this was not their fight . The fall of " Beatrice " and " Gabrielle " had severely demoralized them . On the morning of 17 March , under the cover of fog , the bulk of the Tais left or defected . The French and the few remaining Tais on " Anne @-@ Marie " were then forced to withdraw . 
 = = = Lull = = = 
 17 March through 30 March saw a lull in fighting . The Viet Minh further tightened the noose around the French central area ( formed by the strongpoints " Huguette " , " Dominique " , " Claudine " , and " Eliane " ) , effectively cutting off Isabelle and its 1 @,@ 809 personnel . During this lull , the French suffered from a serious crisis of command . " It had become painfully evident to the senior officers within the encircled garrison — and even to Cogny at Hanoi — that de Castries was incompetent to conduct the defense of Dien Bien Phu . Even more critical , after the fall of the northern outposts , he isolated himself in his bunker so that he had , in effect , relinquished his command authority " . On 17 March , Cogny attempted to fly into Điện Biên Phủ to take command , but his plane was driven off by anti @-@ aircraft fire . Cogny considered parachuting into the encircled garrison , but his staff talked him out of it . 
 De Castries ' seclusion in his bunker , combined with his superiors ' inability to replace him , created a leadership vacuum within the French command . On 24 March , an event took place which later became a matter of historical debate . Historian Bernard Fall records , based on Langlais ' memoirs , that Colonel Langlais and his fellow paratroop commanders , all fully armed , confronted de Castries in his bunker on 24 March . They told him he would retain the appearance of command , but that Langlais would exercise it . De Castries is said by Fall to have accepted the arrangement without protest , although he did exercise some command functions thereafter . Phillip Davidson stated that the " truth would seem to be that Langlais did take over effective command of Dien Bien Phu , and that Castries became ' commander emeritus ' who transmitted messages to Hanoi and offered advice about matters in Dien Bien Phu " . Jules Roy , however , makes no mention of this event , and Martin <unk> argues that the " paratrooper putsch " is unlikely to have happened . Both historians record that Langlais and Marcel Bigeard were known to be on good terms with their commanding officer . 
 The French aerial resupply took heavy losses from Viet Minh machine guns near the landing strip . On 27 March , Hanoi air transport commander Nicot ordered that all supply deliveries be made from 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) or higher ; losses were expected to remain heavy . De Castries ordered an attack against the Viet Minh machine guns 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) west of Điện Biên Phủ . Remarkably , the attack was a complete success , with 350 Viet Minh soldiers killed and seventeen AA machine guns destroyed ( French estimate ) , while the French lost 20 killed and 97 wounded . 
 = = = 30 March – 5 April assaults = = = 
 The next phase of the battle saw more massed Viet Minh assaults against French positions in the central Điện Biên Phủ — at " Eliane " and " Dominique " in particular . Those two areas were held by five understrength battalions , composed of Frenchmen , Legionnaires , Vietnamese , North Africans , and Tais . Giáp planned to use the tactics from the " Beatrice " and " Gabrielle " skirmishes . 
 At 19 : 00 on 30 March , the Viet Minh 312th Division captured " Dominique 1 and 2 " , making " Dominique 3 " the final outpost between the Viet Minh and the French general headquarters , as well as outflanking all positions east of the river . At this point , the French 4th Colonial Artillery Regiment entered the fight , setting its 105 mm howitzers to zero elevation and firing directly on the Viet Minh attackers , blasting huge holes in their ranks . Another group of French , near the airfield , opened fire on the Viet Minh with anti @-@ aircraft machine guns , forcing the Viet Minh to retreat . 
 The Viet Minh were more successful in their simultaneous attacks elsewhere . The 316th Division captured " Eliane 1 " from its Moroccan defenders , and half of " Eliane 2 " by midnight . On the other side of Điện Biên Phủ , the 308th attacked " Huguette 7 " , and nearly succeeded in breaking through , but a French sergeant took charge of the defenders and sealed the breach . 
 Just after midnight on 31 March , the French launched a counterattack against " Eliane 2 " , and recaptured half of it . Langlais ordered another counterattack the following afternoon against " Dominique 2 " and " Eliane 1 " , using virtually " everybody left in the garrison who could be trusted to fight " . The counterattacks allowed the French to retake " Dominique 2 " and Eliane 1 , but the Viet Minh launched their own renewed assault . The French , who were exhausted and without reserves , fell back from both positions late in the afternoon . Reinforcements were sent north from " Isabelle " , but were attacked en route and fell back to " Isabelle " . 
 Shortly after dark on 31 March , Langlais told Major Marcel Bigeard , who was leading the defense at " Eliane " , to fall back across the river . Bigeard refused , saying " As long as I have one man alive I won 't let go of ' Eliane 4 ' . Otherwise , Dien Bien Phu is done for . " The night of the 31st , the 316th Division attacked " Eliane 2 " . Just as it appeared the French were about to be overrun , a few French tanks arrived , and helped push the Viet Minh back . Smaller attacks on " Eliane 4 " were also pushed back . The Viet Minh briefly captured " Huguette 7 " , only to be pushed back by a French counterattack at dawn on 1 April . 
 Fighting continued in this manner over the next several nights . The Viet Minh repeatedly attacked " Eliane 2 " , only to be beaten back . Repeated attempts to reinforce the French garrison by parachute drops were made , but had to be carried out by lone planes at irregular times to avoid excessive casualties from Viet Minh anti @-@ aircraft fire . Some reinforcements did arrive , but not enough to replace French casualties . 
 = = = Trench warfare = = = 
 On 5 April , after a long night of battle , French fighter @-@ bombers and artillery inflicted particularly devastating losses on one Viet Minh regiment , which was caught on open ground . At that point , Giáp decided to change tactics . Although Giáp still had the same objective — to overrun French defenses east of the river — he decided to employ entrenchment and sapping to try to achieve it . 
 On 10 April , the French attempted to retake " Eliane 1 " , which had been lost eleven days earlier . The loss posed a significant threat to " Eliane 4 " , and the French wanted to eliminate that threat . The dawn attack , which Bigeard devised , was preceded by a short , massive artillery barrage , followed by small unit infiltration attacks , followed by mopping @-@ up operations . " Eliane 1 " changed hands several times that day , but by the next morning the French had control of the strongpoint . The Viet Minh attempted to retake it on the evening of 12 April , but were pushed back . 
 At this point , the morale of the Viet Minh soldiers was greatly lowered due to the massive casualties they had received . During a period of stalemate from 15 April to 1 May , the French intercepted enemy radio messages which told of whole units refusing orders to attack , and communist prisoners said that they were told to advance or be shot by the officers and non @-@ commissioned officers behind them . Worse still , the Viet Minh lacked advanced medical care , with one stating that " Nothing strikes at combat morale like the knowledge that if wounded , the soldier will go <unk> for " . To avert the crisis of mutiny , Giáp called in fresh reinforcements from Laos . 
 During the fighting at " Eliane 1 " , on the other side of camp , the Viet Minh entrenchments had almost entirely surrounded " Huguette 1 and 6 " . On 11 April , the garrison of " Huguette 1 " attacked , and was joined by artillery from the garrison of " Claudine " . The goal was to resupply " Huguette 6 " with water and ammunition . The attacks were repeated on the nights of the 14 @-@ 15 and 16 – 17 April . While they did succeed in getting some supplies through , the French suffered heavy casualties , which convinced Langlais to abandon " Huguette 6 " . Following a failed attempt to link up , on 18 April , the defenders at " Huguette 6 " made a daring break out , but only a few managed to make it to French lines . The Viet Minh repeated the isolation and probing attacks against Huguette 1 , and overran the fort on the morning of 22 April . With the fall of " Huguette 1 " , the Viet Minh took control of more than 90 percent of the airfield , making accurate parachute drops impossible . This caused the landing zone to become perilously small , and effectively choked off much needed supplies . A French attack against " Huguette 1 " later that day was repulsed . 
 = = = Isabelle = = = 
 " Isabelle " saw only light action until 30 March , when the Viet Minh succeeded in isolating it and beating back the attempt to send reinforcements north . Following a massive artillery barrage on 30 March , the Viet Minh began employing the same trench warfare tactics that they were using against the central camp . By the end of April , " Isabelle " had exhausted its water supply and was nearly out of ammunition . 
 = = = Final attacks = = = 
 The Viet Minh launched a massed assault against the exhausted defenders on the night of 1 May , overrunning " Eliane 1 " , " Dominique 3 " , and " Huguette 5 " , although the French managed to beat back attacks on " Eliane 2 " . On 6 May , the Viet Minh launched another massed attack against " Eliane 2 " . The attack included , for the first time , Katyusha rockets . The French artillery fired a " TOT " ( Time On Target ) attack , so artillery rounds fired from different positions would strike on target at the same time . This barrage defeated the first assault wave . A few hours later that night , the Viet Minh detonated a mine shaft , blowing " Eliane 2 " up . The Viet Minh attacked again , and within a few hours had overrun the defenders . 
 On 7 May , Giáp ordered an all @-@ out attack against the remaining French units with over 25 @,@ 000 Viet Minh against fewer than 3 @,@ 000 garrison troops . At 17 : 00 , de Castries radioed French headquarters in Hanoi and talked with Cogny . 
 De Castries : " The Viets are everywhere . The situation is very grave . The combat is confused and goes on all about . I feel the end is approaching , but we will fight to the finish . " 
 Cogny : " Of course you will fight to the end . It is out of the question to run up the white flag after your heroic resistance . " 
 By nightfall , all French central positions had been captured . The last radio transmission from the French headquarters reported that enemy troops were directly outside the headquarters bunker and that all the positions had been overrun . The radio operator in his last words stated : " The enemy has overrun us . We are blowing up everything . Vive la France ! " That night the garrison made a breakout attempt , in the Camarón tradition . While some of the main body managed to break out , none succeeded in escaping the valley . However at " Isabelle " , a similar attempt later the same night saw about 70 troops , out of 1 @,@ 700 men in the garrison , escape to Laos . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Prisoners = = = 
 On 8 May , the Viet Minh counted 11 @,@ 721 prisoners , of whom 4 @,@ 436 were wounded . This was the greatest number the Viet Minh had ever captured : one @-@ third of the total captured during the entire war . The prisoners were divided into groups . Able @-@ bodied soldiers were force @-@ marched over 600 km ( 370 mi ) to prison camps to the north and east , where they were intermingled with Viet Minh soldiers to discourage French bombing runs . Hundreds died of disease along the way . The wounded were given basic first aid until the Red Cross arrived , removed 858 , and provided better aid to the remainder . Those wounded who were not evacuated by the Red Cross were sent into detention . 
 One of their gaolers was Georges <unk> , a French academic and Communist militant . He was accused of torturing French prisoners for the Viet Minh during the First Indochina War . 
 Of 10 @,@ 863 survivors held as prisoners , only 3 @,@ 290 were officially repatriated four months later ; however , the losses figure may include the 3 @,@ 013 prisoners of Vietnamese origin whose eventual fate is unknown . 
 = = = Political ramifications = = = 
 The garrison constituted roughly a tenth of the total French Union manpower in Indochina . The defeat seriously weakened the position and prestige of the French as previously planned negotiations over the future of Indochina began . 
 The Geneva Conference opened on 8 May 1954 , the day after the surrender of the garrison . Ho Chi Minh entered the conference on the opening day with the news of his troops ' victory in the headlines . The resulting agreement temporarily partitioned Vietnam into two zones : the North was administered by the communist Democratic Republic of Vietnam while the South was administered by the French @-@ supported State of Vietnam . The last units of the French Union forces withdrew from Indochina in 1956 . This partition was supposed to be temporary , and the two zones were meant to be reunited through national elections in 1956 . After the French withdrawal , the United States supported the southern government , under Emperor Bao Dai and Prime Minister Ngo Dinh Diem , which opposed the Geneva agreement , and which claimed that Ho Chi Minh 's forces from the North had been killing Northern loyalists and terrorizing people both north and south . The North was supported by both the People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) and the Soviet Union ( USSR ) . This arrangement proved tenuous and escalated into the Vietnam War ( Second Indochina War ) , eventually bringing 500 @,@ 000 American troops into South Vietnam . 
 France 's defeat in Indochina , coupled with the German destruction of her armies just 14 years earlier , seriously damaged its prestige elsewhere in its colonial empire , as well as with its NATO allies , most importantly , the United States . Within her empire , the defeat in Indochina served to spur independence movements in other colonies , notably the North African territories from which many of the troops who fought at Điện Biên Phủ had been recruited . In 1954 , six months after the battle at Điện Biên Phủ ended , the Algerian War started , and by 1956 both the Moroccan and Tunisian protectorates had gained independence . A French board of inquiry , the <unk> Commission , later investigated the defeat . 
 = = = American participation = = = 
 According to the Mutual Defense Assistance Act , the United States provided the French with material aid during the battle – aircraft ( supplied by the USS Saipan ) , weapons , mechanics , 24 CIA / CAT pilots , and U.S. Air Force maintenance crews . The United States , however , intentionally avoided overt direct intervention . In February 1954 , following the French occupation of Điện Biên Phủ but prior to the battle , Democratic senator Michael Mansfield asked United States Defense Secretary Charles Erwin Wilson whether the United States would send naval or air units if the French were subjected to greater pressure there , but Wilson replied that " for the moment there is no justification for raising United States aid above its present level " . President Dwight D. Eisenhower also stated , " Nobody is more opposed to intervention than I am " . On 31 March , following the fall of " Beatrice " , " Gabrielle " , and " Anne @-@ Marie " , a panel of U.S. Senators and House Representatives questioned the American Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , Admiral Arthur W. Radford , about the possibility of American involvement . Radford concluded it was too late for the U.S. Air Force to save the French garrison . A proposal for direct intervention was unanimously voted down by the panel , which " concluded that intervention was a positive act of war " . 
 The United States did covertly participate in the battle . Following a request for help from Henri Navarre , Radford provided two squadrons of B @-@ 26 Invader bomber aircraft to support the French . Subsequently , 37 American transport pilots flew 682 sorties over the course of the battle . Earlier , in order to succeed the pre @-@ Điện Biên Phủ Operation Castor of November 1953 , General Chester McCarty made available 12 additional C @-@ 119 Flying Boxcars flown by French crews . 
 Two of the American pilots , James McGovern , Jr. and Wallace Buford , were killed in action during the siege of Điện Biên Phủ . On 25 February 2005 , the seven still living American pilots were awarded the French Legion of Honor by Jean @-@ David <unk> , the French ambassador to the United States . The role that the American pilots played in this battle had remained little known until 2004 . The American historian Erik <unk> researched the case for more than a year to establish the facts . French author Jules Roy suggests that Admiral Radford discussed with the French the possibility of using nuclear weapons in support of the French garrison . Moreover , John Foster Dulles reportedly mentioned the possibility of lending atomic bombs to the French for use at Điện Biên Phủ , and a similar source claims that the British Foreign Secretary Sir Anthony Eden was aware of the possibility of the use of nuclear weapons in that region . 
 = = = Khe Sanh = = = 
