 The French naval minister Castries wrote orders for de Grasse that gave the latter sufficient flexibility to assist in the campaign . 
 Spanish Louisiana Governor Bernardo de Gálvez released ships and troops to cover French territories while de Grasse sailed north with most of the French military establishment in the West Indies . 
 Spanish Cuban colonial official Francisco Saavedra cooperated in the decision @-@ making that enabled de Grasse 's northward expedition . 
 General Rochambeau and Chevalier Luzerne both urged de Grasse to decide on the Chesapeake . 
 Admiral de Barras violated his orders to operate off Newfoundland , making possible the timely delivery of the French siege train to Yorktown . 
 George Washington decided against an attack on New York and instead embarked on a risky march to Virginia . 
 Admiral De Grasse agreed to overstay his planned time in the Chesapeake , understanding the importance of the undertaking there . 
 Of de Grasse 's negotiations with the Spanish that secured the use of his fleet and his order to the economic fleet to remain in the West Indies , Royal Navy Captain Thomas White , in his 1830 analysis of the 1781 campaign , wrote that " [ i ] f the British government had sanctioned , or a British admiral had adopted such a measure , [ ... ] the one would have been turned out , and the other would have been hung : no wonder they succeeded and we failed . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The principal points of commemoration of the events of this campaign are managed by the National Park Service in the Colonial National Historical Park . In addition to the battlefield at Yorktown , the park includes the Cape Henry Memorial , where the French naval victory by de Grasse is remembered . 
 = Ypresiomyrma = 
 Ypresiomyrma is an extinct genus of ants in the subfamily Myrmeciinae that was described in 2006 . There are four species described ; one species is from the Isle of Fur in Denmark , two are from the McAbee Fossil Beds in British Columbia , Canada , and the fourth from the Bol ’ shaya Svetlovodnaya fossil site in Russia . The queens of this genus are large , the mandibles are elongated and the eyes are well developed ; a stinger is also present . The behaviour of these ants would have been similar to that of extant Myrmeciinae ants , such as solitary foraging for arthropod prey and never leaving pheromone trails . The alates were poor flyers due to their size , and birds and animals most likely preyed on these ants . Ypresiomyrma is not assigned to any tribe , and is instead generally regarded as incertae sedis within Myrmeciinae . However , some authors believe Ypresiomyrma should be assigned as incertae sedis within Formicidae . 
 = = History and classification = = 
 Fossils of Ypresiomyrma were first studied and described by Bruce Archibald , Stefan Cover and Corrie Moreau of the Museum of Comparative Zoology in Cambridge , Massachusetts . They published their 2006 description of the genus and species in an Annals of the Entomological Society of America journal article . The genus name is a combination of Ypresian , referring to the age of the specimens and the Greek myrmex , meaning " ant " . The minimum fossil age is approximately 54 @.@ 5 to 55 @.@ 5 million years . 
 Along with the genus description , the paper contained descriptions of the type species Ypresiomyrma orbiculata and Ypresiomyrma bartletti , both from the McAbee Fossil Beds in British Columbia , part of the Eocene Okanagan Highlands lake system . Archibald , Cover and Moreau also included a redescription of the Danish species Pachycondyla rebekkae under the new name combination Ypresiomyrma rebekkae . A fourth species , Ypresiomyrma orientalis was described in 2015 . 
 Archibald and colleagues originally classified Ypresiomyrma as incertae sedis ( Latin for " of uncertain placement " ) within the ant subfamily Myrmeciinae , as the ants could not be identified to any tribe level . However , a 2008 paper by Cesare Baroni Urbani of the University of Basel , Switzerland , expressed doubt that members of Ypresiomyrma were even ants . He notes that the development of the malar area ( an area between the compound eyes and the mandibles ) was different and not reduced , as a reduced malar is synapomorphic ( key diagnostic traits ) in Myrmeciinae . Baroni Urbani further notes that the antennae 's shape on the type species could not be properly determined , making its true placement within Formicidae indeterminable . However , the antennae of Y. rebekkae has an elongated scape which means the fossil is definitely an ant , as this feature is a key diagnostic trait for Formicidae . Due to this , Baroni Urbani believed that Ypresiomyrma could only be confidently classified as incertae sedis within the family Formicidae . A subsequent report by Russian palaeoentomologist Gennady M. Dlussky describing new myrmecines accepted the classification of Archibald and colleagues without mentioning the comments of Baroni Urbani . 
 The following cladogram generated by Archibald and colleagues show the possible phylogenetic position of Ypresiomyrma among some ants of the subfamily Myrmeciinae . The genus may be closely related to other extinct Myrmeciinae genera , including Avitomyrmex and Macabeemyrma , and the extant Nothomyrmecia macrops . 
 = = Description = = 
 There are several characteristics that separate Ypresiomyrma from other ant genera . The waist connecting the thorax and the abdomen in Ypresiomyrma is composed of a single segment . The head in each species varies in shape , and mandibles are a distinct triangular shape and shorter than the head capsule with eight to twelve teeth , although they are elongated . Queens of the genus are large , measuring over 20 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) . Other characters include large , well developed eyes , a rounded propodeal dorsum and a noticeable stinger . 
 = = = Y. orbiculata = = = 
 Y. orbiculata was described from a single part and counterpart compression fossil found at the Middle Ypresian McAbee Fossil Beds , Kamloops Group , near Cache Creek , British Columbia . The type specimens numbered UCCIPR L @-@ 18 F @-@ 749 and UCCIPR L @-@ 18 F @-@ 750 for the part and counterpart is currently preserved in the <unk> collections housed at Thompson Rivers University , in Kamloops , British Columbia . Archibald , Cover , and Moreau coined the specific epithet from the Latin " <unk> " , meaning " rounded " or " circular " , in reference to the shape of the head . The species is discernible from the other two species of Ypresiomyrma by its notably rounded head capsule , and by the shape of the petiole which has a smoothly sloping convex shape with a node in the center . The petiole is similar in appearance to Prionomyrmex janzeni , and the propodeum is round . The queen is estimated to have been approximately 25 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) . The compound eyes are large and oval shape , but the antennae cannot be described due to poor preservation . The mandibles are large , containing seven to eight teeth . A well @-@ developed stinger is also present . 
 = = = Y. bartletti = = = 
 The second species described from the McAbee Fossil Beds is Y. bartletti which , like Y. orbiculata , is known from a single queen specimen . The holotype part and counterpart are included in the Geological Survey of Canada , Ottawa collections as GSC <unk> and GSC <unk> . The shape of the head is subtriangular , which separates it from Y. orbiculata , and at an estimated 20 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) it is smaller than Y. rebekkae . The petiole shape in Y. bartletti is distinct from both other species . The specific epithet was chosen in honor of Rod Bartlett who collected the specimen , and to honor his work with the Vancouver Paleontological Society and the British Columbia Paleontological Alliance . The antennae are not preserved and the eyes cannot be distinguished . The mandibles have around ten or fewer teeth . The forewings of the queen are faintly preserved , and portions of the legs are preserved and disarticulated . Some portions of the gaster are deformed and the specimen appears to be crushed , but the overall morphology of this species justifies its placement within Myrmeciinae . An undescribed worker in the form genus Myrmeciites may possibly be a Y. bartletti ant , but this cannot be confirmed due to its poor preservation . 
 = = = Y. rebekkae = = = 
 This species is known from over 100 specimens collected from the earliest Ypresian <unk> and Fur Formations , found in calcareous rocks . The specimens were first studied and described by Jes Rust and N. Møller Andersen in 1999 , and they named the species for <unk> Madsen who collected the type specimen in September 1994 . The holotype and paratype queen described are well preserved , although the legs are missing ; the part and counterpart , <unk> No. 1995 8B and <unk> No. 1995 8A are deposited in the Geological Museum of the University of Copenhagen . At that time , Rust and Andersen placed the species into the modern <unk> genus Pachycondyla based on the shape of the abdominal segment VI and lack of dentition on the mandibles . Archibald , Cover , and Moreau moved the species to Ypresiomyrma based on the similarity to the McAbee species , by the shape of the abdominal segment III , which differs from that found in the Ponerinae subfamily genera , and by the morphology of the petiole . Y. rebekkae can be distinguished from other species by the shape of its petiole and the size of its head , being notably larger than Y. bartletti . The ants ' somewhat angular head is also different , with other species having a rounded head . The species is known almost exclusively from queens , with only one known male ant assigned to it by Rust and Andersen . 
 The average length of a queen is around 25 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) , with a robust body . The head is round , and the width and length are the same , measuring 4 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 18 in ) . The eyes are oval shaped and developed , located near the middle of the head . The mandibles are triangular and long , with ten teeth present . The antennae are long with 11 segments , and the scape is 3 @.@ 4 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 13 in ) long . The mesosoma is 7 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 28 in ) long and 4 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 18 in ) wide . The mesosoma is convex and domed , and the pronotum is short . The petiole is 1 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 059 in ) long and 2 @.@ 3 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 091 in ) in wide , and the gaster is swollen , but this is due to the early taphonomic process ( the transition of a decaying organism over time and how it becomes fossilised ) . A well @-@ developed stinger is present in the fossilized specimens . 
 Only a single complete male is known from all the collected specimens . The body length is shorter in comparison to the queen caste , measuring 25 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) and it is also more slender . The head and mandibles are small , but the eyes are fully developed and large . The antennae are not preserved , and only small fragments of the legs are present . The gaster is smaller and more elongated , but the genitalia are not preserved . 
 = = = Y. orientalis = = = 
 Y. orientalis was described from a part and counterpart holotype and a solitary forewing paratype compression fossil found at the late Eocene Bol ’ shaya Svetlovodnaya fossil site , in the Sikhote @-@ Alin area of far @-@ eastern Russia . The type specimens numbered PIN <unk> / 1109 for the part and counterpart and PIN <unk> / 1198 are currently preserved in the A.A. Borissiak Paleontological Institute fossil collections of the Russian Academy of Sciences . Dlussky , <unk> , and Perfilieva coined the specific epithet from the Latin " orientalis " , meaning " eastern " , in reference to the type locality . The species is discernible from Y. rebekkae by its smaller petiole node size . While there are no distinct differences between Y. orientalis and the two Okanagan Highlands species Y. bartletti and Y. orbiculata , the fossils were placed into a new species by Dlussky , <unk> , and Perfilieva . This is due to the notable time difference between the highlands and Bol ’ shaya Svetlovodnaya . Though the possible gyne is incomplete the estimated body length is 17 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 69 in ) and the mesosoma is robust . The fore @-@ wing has closed 1 + <unk> , 3r , rm and <unk> cells , with the 3r elongated while the 1 + <unk> is shorted to just over twice as long as wide . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The life habits of Ypresiomyrma would have been similar to that of extant Myrmeciinae ants . Colonies nested in the soil or in trees , making them an arboreal nesting species . Workers were most likely solitary foragers , foraging on the ground or onto low vegetation and trees while preying on arthropods or consuming nectar . Workers most likely did not recruit or lead nestmates to food sources , nor did workers lay down pheromone trails . Ypresiomyrma ants most likely used their large eyes to find prey and for navigational purposes . 
 The abundance of Ypresiomyrma queens collected suggests that these ants mated in swarms , but the alates were poor flyers due to their large size . The morphology of the mandibles indicate they were specialised tools for excavating chambers in soil or wood during colony foundation ; their large size and common occurrence in their geographical range would mean they were an important food source to a variety of birds and Paleogene animals that predominately fed on insects . 
 = Sword of Mana = 
 Sword of Mana , originally released in Japan as Shin 'yaku Seiken Densetsu ( <unk> 聖剣伝説 , lit . " Legend of the Sacred Sword : The New Testament " ) , is a 2003 action role @-@ playing game developed by Square Enix and Brownie Brown and published by Square Enix and Nintendo for the Game Boy Advance . It is an enhanced remake of the original Game Boy game Final Fantasy Adventure , which was released as Seiken Densetsu : Final Fantasy Gaiden in Japan and Mystic Quest in Europe . Final Fantasy Adventure is the first game in the Mana series , and Sword of Mana is the fifth released game in the series . Set in a high fantasy universe , the game follows an unnamed hero and heroine as they seek to defeat the Dark Lord and defend the Mana Tree from enemies who wish to misuse its power . 
 While incorporating gameplay elements from the original game and generally following the same plot , Sword of Mana has new gameplay mechanics and a much more involved story . It removes elements of the Final Fantasy series present in the original game as a marketing ploy , while adding in gameplay elements and artistic styles from later games in the series . The plot is modified to allow the player to follow the parallel stories of either the hero or the heroine , and the backstory and dialogue is expanded from the original . Sword of Mana was produced by series creator Koichi Ishii , directed by Takeo Oin , and largely developed by employees of Brownie Brown who had previously worked on the series for Square . 
 The game received weakly positive reviews from critics . Reviewers praised the graphics of the game , as well as its enhancements to the original version . They were generally dismissive of the plot , even with enhancements , and disliked elements of the gameplay , especially the computer @-@ controlled ally . Critics recommended the game mainly to fans of the genre or the series . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gameplay of Sword of Mana is an expanded and modified version of the gameplay of the action role @-@ playing game Final Fantasy Adventure , with elements added from later games in the Mana series . Like previous games in the series , Sword of Mana displays a top @-@ down perspective , in which the player characters navigate the terrain and fight off hostile creatures . Unlike the original game , the terrain is in color , is not composed of square tiles , and the player is not restricted to moving only in the cardinal directions . At the beginning of the game the player chooses to follow the story of either the unnamed hero or heroine , and controls them thereafter . The player is often joined by either the <unk> protagonist or by temporary companions , and at any point during battles can choose to take direct control of the other party member instead of their chosen character . The non @-@ selected character is controlled via artificial intelligence . Unlike prior games in the series , Sword of Mana does not have a direct multiplayer component . Instead , players can connect their Game Boy Advances together via a Link Cable to give their characters powerful attacks to be used at a later time , known as the " Amigo " system . The original game featured no multiplayer capabilities . 
 The two main characters have different capabilities . Both are capable of using weapons and magic , but the hero is stronger with melee weapons and the heroine is stronger with ranged magical attacks . Weapons have three attributes : slash , jab , and bash ; and different attributes cause more or less damage to different enemies . Magical spells can cause damage or defend the protagonists , and are affected by the weapon the character is holding . Combat takes place in real @-@ time . Located at the bottom of the screen is an overdrive gauge that increases by one point at each hit given to an enemy . When that gauge is full , the player can release a powerful attack that will deplete the gauge completely if the attack lands . Upon collecting enough experience points in battle , each character increases in level and improves in areas such as strength and evasion . 
 The player can rest in towns , where they can regain hit points or purchase restorative items and equipment . Options such as changing equipment , casting spells , or checking status are performed by cycling through the game 's Ring Commands , a circular menu which hovers over the currently controlled party member . The Ring Command menu , which lets the player pause the game in combat to select different weapons , spells , and items , was not present in the original game , but was present in the sequels Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 . A version of the day @-@ and @-@ night system introduced in Seiken Densetsu 3 was added to the game , whereby some enemies are only present at different times of day , which changes whenever the player enters a new area . Much like Legend of Mana , players can forge weapons and plant produce in an orchard in the game 's " Hot House " feature . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Sword of Mana has a similar story to Final Fantasy Adventure with additional details and dialogue added . The player has the choice to follow the story of either the hero or the heroine , who are named by the player , instead of only the hero as in the original game . The two stories parallel each other , and the two protagonists are often together . 
 The hero 's story begins with a flashback dream of the death of his parents at the hands of the Dark Lord , the ruler of the nation of Granz . Upon waking , the hero , a gladiator @-@ slave in Granz , attempts to escape before being confronted by the Dark Lord and thrown off of a bridge . After being fished out of a lake , the hero is advised to head to the city of Topple . The heroine 's story also begins with a flashback dream of the Dark Lord and his assistant , Julius , killing her stepmother and destroying her village . Upon awaking , she is advised by the knight Bogard to head to Topple , while he journeys to the city of Wendell . The hero and heroine meet in Topple , and agree to journey together . They head toward Wendell , and along the way discover that women of the Mana tribe , which the heroine belongs to , are being kidnapped by vampires . The heroine is kidnapped , and is rescued by the hero and an unnamed man ; they discover that the kidnappings are to keep the woman safe from the Dark Lord and Julius , who are killing them all in part because the tribe was unable to save the Dark Lord 's mother from a terrible fate . 
 In Wendell , the two protagonists learn that Bogard and several other knights were instrumental in overthrowing the Vandole Empire twenty years prior , which had been abusing Mana , the source of magic . The hero states his intention to find the legendary Mana Sword in order to avenge his parents and the heroine reveals she has a pendant from her stepmother that is the key to the Mana Tree , the source of Mana . The unnamed man then reveals himself to be Julius and kidnaps the heroine for the pendant ; during a failed rescue attempt the hero falls from an airship along with the pendant . After a side story resulting in the hero and heroine killing the Dark Lord 's mother , who had been turned into a monster , the pendant is stolen and given to the Dark Lord . The protagonists chase after him . After the two defeat the Dark Lord , Julius reveals himself to be the last survivor of the Vandole Empire . Once gaining the pendant he mind controlled the heroine to use the pendent to give him control the Mana Tree , which Vandole had attempted to do prior to being overthrown . Julius defeats the hero and heroine , and heads off to the Mana Tree . 
 The hero and heroine split up to find the Mana Sword . After the hero passes trials to prove himself worthy of the sword , which first appears as a rusty blade , the two join forces to storm the Mana Tree and defeat Julius . They do so , but the tree is killed in the process ; prior to death , the tree reveals that she was the heroine 's mother , and asks the heroine to replace her as the next Mana Tree . The heroine agrees , and the two protagonists part ways . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 After the release of the previous game in the Mana series , 1999 's Legend of Mana , several members of the development team for the game left Square to form a new development studio , Brownie Brown . These included character designer Kameoka Shinichi and lead artist Kouji Tsuda , as well as several other writers and artists . Square , in turn , outsourced development of the fifth game in the Mana series to Brownie Brown . The producer for the game was Square 's Koichi Ishii , who had directed or designed the previous games in the series . Ishii had served as the director for the original game in the series , Final Fantasy Adventure , which Sword of Mana is a remake of . The remake , in addition to adding enhanced graphics to the original Game Boy title , sought to add elements present in later games in the series , such as the Ring Command menu system , and to expand the game 's storyline . It also removed elements from the Final Fantasy series , which had been placed in the original game as a part of the marketing for the game before its sequels moved to be a distinct series . 
 While the original game had black and white graphics in a style similar to The Legend of Zelda , Sword of Mana 's Game Boy Advance graphics were made similar to the third game in the series , the Super Famicom game Seiken Densetsu 3 . The ability to play as the girl character was added , and an element of multiplayer features that the series had become known for was added by allowing two players to link their Game Boy Advances together to trade items . 
 Square announced in August 2002 that a Mana game for the Game Boy Advance was under development , and in early 2003 announced that the game was a remake of Final Fantasy Adventure and would be released in Japan later that year under the name <unk> Seiken Densetsu . On April 24 , 2003 , Square Enix , formed from the merger of Square and Enix during the game 's development , announced that Sword of Mana would have North American and European releases as well . While Legend of Mana had been released worldwide , Seiken Densetsu 3 had only been released in Japan . In July 2003 , IGN listed the game as one of the top ten most anticipated Game Boy Advance games of 2003 . Sword of Mana was released in Japan on August 29 , 2003 , in North America on December 1 , and in Europe on March 18 , 2004 . In Japan , a special edition " Mana Blue " <unk> Game Boy Advance SP was released on the same date as the game , packaged with Sword of Mana and a carrying case . Those who purchased the game 's soundtrack and strategy guide between August 27 and September 30 , 2003 , were given the opportunity to win a Cactus character cushion and a cellphone strap . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The score for Sword of Mana was composed by Kenji Ito , the composer for the original Final Fantasy Adventure . The music includes reworked tracks from the original game as well as new material . Ito 's music is mainly inspired by images from the game rather than outside influences ; however , he never played either the original game or the remake . The 2003 Sword of Mana Premium Soundtrack album collects 47 tracks of music from the game . The two @-@ disc album contains over an hour and a half of music and was published by DigiCube , with a 2004 reprint by Square Enix . The first disc contains music directly from the game , while the second disc features seven piano arrangements by Ito of songs from the soundtrack . The first edition of the soundtrack included a bonus disc , containing an orchestral arrangement of " Rising Sun ~ Endless Battlefield " . The album reached position # 118 on the Japan Oricon charts , and stayed on the charts for only one week . Music from the soundtrack has been arranged for the piano and published by DOREMI Music Publishing . Additionally , KMP Music Publishing has published a book of sheet music for the piano tracks included in the album . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Sword of Mana sold over 277 @,@ 000 copies in Japan in 2003 . It received positive reviews from critics . The game 's presentation was praised , especially its graphics ; Brad Shoemaker of GameSpot praised the " lush , colorful backgrounds " and animation quality , which was seconded by the reviewer for GamePro . Game Informer 's Justin Leeper also felt that the graphics were beautiful , and Shane Bettenhausen of Electronic Gaming Monthly said it was " one of the most stunning games on [ the ] GBA " . Kevin Gifford of 1UP.com also praised the graphics in relation to other Game Boy Advance games , while Darryl Vassar of GameSpy said that it would have been the best @-@ looking Game Boy Advance game if were not for what he felt was poor animation quality . Reaction to the music was more mixed ; while the reviews for Game Informer and GamePro praised it , Shoemaker of GameSpot termed the music " mostly bland " and Craig Harris of IGN and GameSpy 's Vassar said it was nice but repetitive . Reviewers also noted technical problems with the presentation : both the GameSpot and IGN reviews noted graphical glitches in the game as marring the presentation . 
 The game 's plot was widely dismissed ; IGN 's Harris termed it " a little on the basic side " and " borderline silly " , which 1UP.com 's Gifford amended to just " silly " , with " needlessly @-@ long dialogue " . Vassar of GameSpy felt that the added dialogue simply unjustly inflated a simple story . Shoemaker of GameSpot called it " quaintly simplistic " , while the Electronic Gaming Monthly review said it was one of the biggest problems with the game . 
 Elements of the gameplay were also poorly received . The computer @-@ controlled companion was almost universally derided : Bettenhausen of Electronic Gaming Monthly said they were " nearly useless " , as did Gifford of 1UP.com , Shoemaker of GameSpot called them " just plain dumb " , and IGN 's Harris said it was " the absolute pits " and " definitely the weakest aspect " of the game . The GamePro , GameSpot , and GameSpy reviews found issues with the combat mechanics , and the GameSpot and IGN reviewers felt the game was too easy . 1UP.com 's Gifford felt that the boss battles were too easy , and that the weapon @-@ switching system was needlessly complicated . IGN 's Harris and Game Informer 's Leeper found the day / night system to be odd and unnecessary , and Harris additionally felt that the multiplayer system was underwhelming . Shoemaker of GameSpot concluded that the game was " pretty good " , and recommended it for fans of the genre , while Leeper of Game Informer and Bettenhausen of Electronic Gaming Monthly said that it was " decent " and " worth a look for fans " of the series . The Japanese magazine Famitsu said that it was a good update to Final Fantasy Adventure without innovating the gameplay much beyond the original game . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Sword of Mana was adapted into manga form by author Shiro Amano and published by Enterbrain on February 25 , 2004 . Two novels based on the game were written by Matsui <unk> with illustrations by Yumiko Murakami and were also published by Enterbrain on February 27 , 2004 . Square Enix also produced a book of yonkoma comics based on the game on January 16 , 2004 . 
 = George Thomas Coker = 
 George Thomas Coker ( born July 14 , 1943 ) is a retired US Navy Commander , honored with the Navy Cross for his leadership as a prisoner of war ( POW ) during the Vietnam War , and a Distinguished Eagle Scout noted for his devotion to Scouting . 
 In 1966 , the A @-@ 6 Intruder on which Coker was serving as bombardier – navigator was shot down over North Vietnam . He was held as a prisoner of war in the " Hanoi Hilton " and other camps for 6 @.@ 5 years ( 1966 – 1973 ) . After his release , he continued to serve in the Navy until his retirement in 1986 . He also returned to active participation in Scouting . 
 = = Personal information = = 
 George Coker was born in Amarillo , Texas in 1943 . In 1951 , his family moved to Linden , New Jersey , where he became a New Jersey high school state wrestling champion in the 142 lb weight class and played high school varsity football at Saint Benedict 's Preparatory School in Newark , New Jersey . Coker attended Rutgers University from 1961 – 1963 , where he also wrestled . While at Rutgers , he participated in an aviation officer cadet program and was commissioned an Ensign in the United States Navy . After his release from Vietnam , he returned to college and graduated from the University of San Diego in 1976 with a BS in political science . He studied education and mathematics at Old Dominion University from 1982 to 1986 . Coker is married and has three children ; two daughters and a son . 
 = = Scouting life = = 
 Coker grew up in Linden , New Jersey and became an Eagle Scout in Troop 32 of Saint Elizabeth 's Catholic Church in Linden on January 27 , 1959 . He has stated that his passion for Scouting is one of the things that got him through his 6 @.@ 5 years as a POW in North Vietnam , to the point that at times all he could remember was the Scout Oath , but not the names of his family members . 
 Both of Coker 's older brothers were involved in Scouting and Coker first became involved when he joined Cub Scouts in late 1951 . He completed the <unk> program and joined Troop 32 . Troop 32 had about a dozen members at that time but had over 60 members when Coker made Eagle Scout in 1959 . During this time the troop formed an Explorer Post and Sea Scout unit . After making Eagle Scout , Coker joined the Sea Scout unit and worked at summer camp before the joined the Navy in October 1963 . When Coker returned to Linden after being released from captivity , the Scouts were his biggest supporter . Troop 32 now had over 100 members . Local citizens turned out by the hundreds to greet him . Coker visited many of the local Scouting units . Coker was then inactive in Scouting during a busy Naval career , but got involved again when his son joined Cub Scouts as a Tiger Cub after the family had settled in Virginia Beach , Virginia . He became the den leader of 7 boys , all of whom earned their Arrow of Light , the highest recognition in Cub Scouting . They moved on to Troop 62 , Virginia Beach , in May 1994 ; with five of them later becoming Eagle Scouts , including his son . 
 Troop 62 's adults asked Coker to become Scoutmaster , a position in which he served for several years . Coker is also a Vigil Honor member of the Order of the Arrow ( OA ) . Coker served as the lodge adviser for Tidewater Council 's OA lodge , Blue Heron Lodge , from December 2005 until December 2007 . He was honored by the Boy Scouts of America with their Distinguished Eagle Scout Award on August 9 , 2005 . 
 = = Military career = = 
 = = = Bombardier / navigator = = = 
 Coker served as a Naval Flight Officer for 23 years in the United States Navy . He entered the United States Navy Reserve on October 31 , 1963 and entered active service at Lakehurst , New Jersey on November 13 , 1963 , serving until his retirement on September 30 , 1986 . Following graduation from Aviation Officer Candidate School , he attended Basic Naval Aviation Observer ( <unk> ) School at NAS Pensacola , Florida followed by advanced jet navigation training at NAS <unk> , Georgia . Following graduation and receiving his wings as a Naval Aviation Observer ( NAO ) , he completed additional training as a bombardier / navigator in the A @-@ 6 Intruder . 
 On his first deployment , Coker took part in a 19 @-@ aircraft attack on a radar control facility in Kép , 38 miles northeast of Hanoi . In the face of flak , automatic weapons fire and extremely difficult weather conditions , Coker directed the pilot , navigated his aircraft , managed the ordnance system and used his electronic countermeasures equipment to provide protection for the strike group . The attack inflicted significant damage on the well @-@ protected and dug @-@ in radar station and its equipment , with all three radar stations out of operation and the target described as " obliterated " . For his actions , Coker was awarded the Navy Commendation Medal . 
 Coker was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for his actions the following day , July 1 , 1966 . His airplane was diverted to attack three North Vietnamese torpedo boats in the Gulf of Tonkin that were heading towards U.S. Navy destroyers in the area . Coker navigated to the scene and called out airspeed , altitude and dive angle to allow the pilot to focus their attacks on the enemy boats as they in turn concentrated their fire at Coker 's aircraft . One enemy ship was hit and sunk , and a second suffered a near @-@ miss . The citation notes that " Lieutenant Coker 's resourcefulness , superb airmanship , and courage in the face of great danger contributed materially to the success of the mission . " In a two @-@ hour @-@ long battle , all three ships were sunk by the U.S. Navy aircraft . 
 Coker was awarded the Navy Commendation Medal for his actions as part of a coordinated 23 @-@ aircraft attack on petroleum storage tanks in Hai Phong on August 2 , 1966 , consisting of four waves of A @-@ 6 Intruders and A @-@ 4 Skyhawks , firing a combination of 750 and 1 @,@ 000 pound bombs and rockets . The attack was the third in a series of attacks on North Vietnamese oil storage depots dating back to June . Despite heavy anti @-@ aircraft fire , Coker provided accurate guidance to the pilot on airspeed , altitude and dive angle , while operating both the attack navigation radar system and electronic countermeasures . Despite adverse weather conditions , Coker 's actions contributed to an attack that destroyed all but one of the facility 's storage tanks . 
 = = = Prisoner of war = = = 
 On Coker 's 55th bombing mission , he was a Lieutenant , junior grade serving as the Bombardier – Navigator of an A @-@ 6 Intruder from Attack Squadron 65 ( VA @-@ 65 ) operating from the USS Constellation ( CV @-@ 64 ) , when he and his pilot , John H. " Jack " Fellowes , were shot down over North Vietnam on August 27 , 1966 while flying near Vinh in Nghệ An Province . The aircraft was hit by a surface @-@ to @-@ air missile , which blew off the right wing , and the two crewmembers ejected from the aircraft after it went into a flat spin . Their wingman tracked the parachutes as the crew descended , but lost sight of them due to poor visibility and flak after the crew were within 50 feet of the ground . Ejection was at about 2 @,@ 000 feet altitude and 18 miles inland in flat terrain . Coker and Fellowes landed about one mile apart . Fellowes landed on a hillside and Coker in a large rice paddy in a well @-@ populated area . Both were captured by armed villagers soon after landing . For three hours after they ejected , American aircraft made a thorough search , despite moderate to heavy flak , but were unable to spot the parachutes or get a signal from their emergency beepers . 
 Coker was held by the North Vietnamese at a number of different POW camps in the Hanoi area , including Cu Loc , Dirty Bird , Alcatraz Grove , the Zoo , Little Vegas , and Hỏa Lò Prison ( the " Hanoi Hilton " ) . 
 While in a facility on the outskirts of Hanoi known as " The Zoo " , he was forced to endure a torture called " the wall " , in which he , as well as other prisoners , were forced to stand facing a wall in his cell with his hands above his head from the time a gong sounded at 5 : 30 in the morning until it sounded again at 10 : 00 at night . After two weeks , the knee injury he suffered when he ejected had worsened , and he was taken to a hospital where the infection was drained . After a two @-@ day respite while he recuperated , " the wall " torture continued for two more months . Coker called this " probably my worst experience in Vietnam " . 
 During his captivity , Coker was notable for the ferocity with which he resisted his incarceration . Coker was considered one of " the baddest of the baddest " of the POWs , a reference to his stubborn resistance to his captivity . Coker 's Silver Star Medal citation cited his fierce resistance as one of the significant reasons the North Vietnamese eventually abandoned harsh treatment of the prisoners . Coker served as Chaplain to his fellow prisoners while he was in captivity , providing them with spiritual guidance and constructive counseling . For these efforts , he was awarded the Legion of Merit . 
 In July 1967 , Coker devised " unusual and ingenious methods " to allow his fellow prisoners to communicate with each other within their camp , assisting their collective efforts to resist their captor 's demands and improving the morale of American and Allied POWs . For his " heroic achievement " , Coker was awarded the Bronze Star Medal with Combat " V " . 
 That year , Coker and Air Force Captain George McKnight ( another of the " baddest " ) conceived an escape plan . The two would escape from their cells and make it to the nearby Red River , swim by night and hide by day , estimating that it would take three or four days to reach the mouth of the river . There they would commandeer a boat and make it out to sea where they hoped to flag down a ship of the United States Seventh Fleet , estimating that it would take eight days from their escape until their rescue . The two removed the hinges from their cell and escaped from Dirty Bird prison in Hanoi the night of October 12 , 1967 , climbed to the roof of the prison block and jumped to another roof to escape . They tied themselves together to avoid separation and jumped into the Red River near the <unk> Bridge . That night they made it 15 miles downstream in the dark and hid in the mud on the river 's edge at daybreak . The two were recaptured 12 ½ hours after they had escaped when they were spotted by fishermen along the shore early that morning and were handed over to soldiers . They were held in irons at Hỏa Lò prison before being returned to Dirty Bird a few days later . Their effort made them two of the very few POWs to ever escape from a North Vietnamese POW camp . Coker was awarded the Navy Cross , the Navy 's highest award for heroism , for his actions in his attempted escape as a prisoner of war . The citation reads in part : 
 ... for extraordinary heroism during an extremely daring escape from a solitary confinement cell while a Prisoner of War in Hanoi , North Vietnam on October 12 , 1967 . During a period of particularly harsh treatment , Lieutenant Commander Coker and another prisoner executed an escape as a two @-@ man team despite the high risk of brutal reprisal or possible loss of life . That night , after opening the cell door by removing door bolt brackets from inside the room , he proceeded over the wall and through several blocks of housing to the <unk> Bridge . Walking under the bridge to the Red River 's edge , he swam downstream all night and at sunrise buried himself in a <unk> in an effort to remain concealed . He was later discovered , recaptured , severely beaten for many hours , and banished to solitary confinement for two and a half years . 
 On October 25 , 1967 , Coker was one of 11 of the most effective resisters , among the 267 POWs then held , who were placed in a special facility in a courtyard behind the North Vietnamese Ministry of National Defense , soon nicknamed " Alcatraz " , located about one mile away from Hỏa Lò Prison . Coker and McKnight were added to nine prisoners who had been at a facility nicknamed " Vegas " : Jeremiah Denton , Harry Jenkins , Sam Johnson , James Mulligan , Howard Rutledge , Robert Shumaker , James Stockdale , Ronald Storz and Nels Tanner . While most of those among the Alcatraz 11 were senior officers , Coker was the youngest and most junior of those isolated from the other POWs . The 11 , known as the " Alcatraz Gang " , were separated from other captives and placed in solitary confinement for their leadership in resisting their captors . In Alcatraz , each of the 11 men were kept in solitary confinement . Coker spent two years alone in a windowless concrete cell measuring 3 feet by 9 feet that had a light bulb kept on around the clock . He was locked each night in irons by a guard . Coker remained in Alcatraz until December 9 , 1969 and spent the next three years in captivity shuffled between a number of different prisons . 
 On March 4 , 1973 , both Coker and Fellowes were released as part of Operation Homecoming . Vietnam @-@ era POWs were released by order of capture , and Fellowes and Coker were in the second large release group , about No. 123 and # 124 . Of their 2 @,@ 382 days in captivity ( 6 @.@ 5 years ) , 2 @.@ 5 years were in solitary confinement and 2 @.@ 5 years in the " Hanoi Hilton " . They also spent time in several other POW camps around Hanoi . Fellowes retired from the Navy in July 1986 and Coker on October 1 , 1986 . 
 Coker was promoted to full Lieutenant during his captivity and retroactively designated as a Naval Flight Officer ( <unk> ) , all <unk> having been redesignated as <unk> during his captivity . Coker was awarded six decorations at a ceremony at NAS North Island in San Diego , California : Navy Cross , Silver Star ( Silver Star Medal ) , two Bronze Stars ( two Bronze Star Medals ) , Legion of Merit , and the Navy Commendation ( Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal ) . In 1974 , Mayor John T. Gregorio presented him with a key to the city of Linden . Coker was also awarded the Meritorious Service Medal for his " aggressive leadership " as Director of the Atlantic Fleet Command Center upon retiring from the Navy . 
 Coker is one of the names of fellow POW 's that future Senator John McCain recites in the 2005 film , Faith of My Fathers ; a film based on the 1999 McCain memoir of the same title , Faith of My Fathers . 
 The 1974 documentary film Hearts and Minds , which was critical of the United States ' role in the Vietnam War , featured Coker briefly . Coker , at the time of filming , had recently returned from six and a half years of internment in North Vietnamese camps for American prisoners of war – where he had endured torture and other mistreatment by his captors . The film shows a homecoming parade in his honor in his hometown of Linden , New Jersey , where he tells the assembled crowd on the steps of city hall that if the need arose , that they must be ready to send him back to war . Answering a student 's question about what Vietnam looked like , he responded : " Well , if it wasn 't for the people , it was very pretty . The people over there are very backward and very primitive , and they just make a mess out of everything . " Time magazine 's Stefan <unk> criticized the lack of balance in the film 's portrayal of Coker , noting that " [ t ] he camera , which amply records the agonies of South Vietnamese political prisoners , seems uninterested in the American lieutenant 's experience of humiliation and torture . " 
 A fellow POW , Commander Paul <unk> , said " George is one of my heroes ... but the real reason we 're home is the bad guys wanted to get Coker out of the country . So , you see , George Coker is the real reason we were released . " 
 = = = Military decorations and awards = = = 
 Coker 's military awards include : 
 Navy Cross 
 Silver Star Medal 
 Legion of Merit w / Combat " V " 
 Distinguished Flying Cross 
 Bronze Star Medal w / 5 ⁄ 16 inch gold star and Combat " V " 
 Purple Heart w / 5 ⁄ 16 inch gold star 
 Meritorious Service Medal 
 Air Medal w / bronze Numeral 5 device 
 Navy Commendation w / two 5 ⁄ 16 inch gold stars and Combat " V " 
 Combat Action Ribbon 
 Navy Unit Commendation 
 POW Medal 
 National Defense Service Medal 
 Vietnam Service Medal w / two 3 ⁄ 16 inch silver stars and two 3 ⁄ 16 inch bronze stars 
 Republic of Vietnam Gallantry Cross Unit Citation w / palm 
 Republic of Vietnam Civil Actions Unit Citation w / palm 
 Republic of Vietnam Campaign Medal w / 1960- device 
 = = In retirement = = 
 In addition to continued Scouting activities , Coker has been involved in supporting ex – POWs for many years . In December 2004 , he was elected Commander of his local POW chapter , the Tidewater ex @-@ POW Association . In 2008 , he was also serving as the head of a Virginia state ex – POW association . Coker and his wife are also active in church and civic activities , such as counseling young married couples . Coker still has nightmares from his time as a POW . Reflecting on his wartime experiences in a Veterans Day tribute to POWs , he said " If you 're never tested , you don 't know ... You 're capable of a great deal more than you realize , if you really set your mind to it . Look at me . I did it , and there 's nothing special about me . I 'm just another guy . " Coker went on to say part of that is " ... realizing there 's something bigger than yourself ... " 
 = Incredible Room 7 – Hoa Lo Prison 
 | publisher = 
 <unk> 
 | date 
 = November 7 , 2001 
 | url = 
 http : / / <unk> / room _ <unk> 
 | <unk> = September 3 , 2010 
 } } 
 = Centre Democrats ( Netherlands ) = 
 The Centre Democrats ( Dutch : Centrum <unk> , CD ) was a political party in the Netherlands . Founded in 1984 by members who split out from the Centre Party ( CP ) , the Centre Democrats was joined one month later by the only CP Member of Parliament — Hans Janmaat . Janmaat went on to become the leader of the party , which subsequently became strongly centered on his person . The newly formed Centre Democrats represented the more moderate faction of the Centre Party , but espoused an anti @-@ immigration and nationalist ideology . Their claims of standing in the centre of the political landscape have thus been disputed by political scientists . 
 The Centre Democrats did not gain enough votes for parliamentary representation in the 1986 general election , but Janmaat won back his seat after the following election in 1989 . In 1994 he was joined by two additional representatives won by the party . The CD was subject to a cordon sanitaire by the other parties in Parliament , although some parties rather sought to confront it following its 1994 success . The CD failed to win any seats in the 1998 election , and it fell into disarray until it was finally dissolved in 2002 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1984 – 1989 ) = = = 
 The Centre Democrats was founded on 7 November 1984 by a few low @-@ key members who broke away from the Centre Party ( CP ) . On 5 December the same year the only Member of Parliament for the Centre Party , Hans Janmaat , changed party to the Centre Democrats and became its seventh member . Janmaat believed that by steering a more moderate course , the Centre Party would attract more voters at the polls , but was expelled by the party 's hardliners . In an attempt to appear more mainstream than the Centre Party , the new Centre Democrats ' slogans were more moderate and less explicit . As opposed to the Centre Party 's Eigen volk eerst ( " Our People First " ) , the Centre Democrats ' manifesto used the Dutch proverb Oost West <unk> Best ( " East , West , Home Best " ) . After Janmaat joined the Centre Democrats , the party became known as " his " party . Despite widespread media coverage generated by Janmaat 's reputation , party membership remained small in the first few years . 
 During its early years , the Centre Democrats received extensive media attention on two occasions . The first occurred when the Centre Democrats and Centre Party met on 29 March 1986 in <unk> . A group of anti @-@ fascist activists believed that the two parties were planning to merge , and firebombed the hotel where the meeting was held . The venue was severely damaged , Janmaat narrowly escaped death and the party secretary Wil Schuurman had one leg amputated after jumping from a window to escape the conflagration . 
 Janmaat 's attempt to be reinstated as a teacher at his old school following his failed re @-@ election to parliament led to the second media frenzy . Although he was legally permitted to go back to his job , the protests of some students and parents due to his reputation as a " racist " , led him to be bought off by the court from pursuing a return to his old job . Unable to go back to his former job , <unk> returned to politics . Taking advantage of Janmaat 's profile , the Centre Democrats contested the 1986 general election under the name Lijst Janmaat / Centrumdemocraten , but gained just 0 @.@ 1 % of the vote and no parliamentary seat . The Centre Democrats failed in its attempt to win votes from the Centre Party , which gained 0 @.@ 4 % of the vote but also did not win a seat . 
 = = = In parliament ( 1989 – 1998 ) = = = 
 Following the 1986 election , the Centre Democrats worked on improving both its image and its grassroots support . The strategy paid off with Janmaat winning a seat in the House of Representatives in the 1989 general election . By contesting the election in all nineteen constituencies , the party won the right to state @-@ sponsored television and radio time but still had no more than 300 registered members . In the 1990 local elections the Centre Democrats won eleven seats , then , in the 1991 provincial elections , three seats in the provincial parliament . 
 Electoral success overtook the party and Janmaat began to make controversial statements in the media . Based on his conviction that high office should be restricted to third @-@ generation Dutch nationals , he suggested that several cabinet ministers , including Justice Minister Ernst Hirsch @-@ Ballin who was of Jewish descent , and Agriculture State Secretary <unk> Gabor who was of Hungarian descent , should be removed from the Dutch leadership . This marked the start of prosecutions of Centre Democrats party members on charges of racism , as well as the decision by the other parties in Parliament and government to place a cordon sanitaire around the party . 
 The cordon sanitaire turned out to be counterproductive with the Centre Democrats winning 77 seats in the 1994 local elections and gaining representation in almost every city where it fielded a candidate . Large cities were strongholds of the party , winning more than 10 % of the vote in Rotterdam . It became the fifth largest Dutch political party . After the elections , however , scandal loomed over the Centre Democrats , largely because of its weak organization and lack of active party members . Many of its previously won local seats became vacant after a while , as elected representatives failed to take them up , joined or founded other parties , left the party or left politics altogether . Before the 1994 general election opinion polls predicted that the party could win more than five seats in the House of Representatives . However , media reports claiming that some newly elected local members had extremist pasts damaged the Centre Democrats ' prospects . A secret recording broadcast on national television one week before the election showed an Amsterdam council member bragging about having set immigrant centers on fire in the early 1980s . In the election that followed , the Centre Democrats won 2 @.@ 5 % of the vote and three seats in the House of Representatives ( Janmaat was joined by Wil Schuurman and Cor Zonneveld ) , well below earlier expectations . Janmaat claimed that the relatively poor result was a result of an anti @-@ CD campaign in the media . Due to its growth , and questions arising amongst the other parties over the development of a multicultural society , political opponents began to confront the Centre Democrats directly rather than maintain a strict cordon sanitaire around it . 
 Despite attempts to broaden their appeal , the issue of foreigners remained central to the party 's rhetoric . Janmaat was convicted of " inciting racial hatred " by the Dutch courts for speaking out against multiculturalism . His conviction later came to be seen as unwarranted by mainstream observers . Janmaat and Schuurman , who were to marry in 1996 , dominated the party . With Schuurman 's son head of the party office , the Centre Democrats became almost a family affair . Janmaat remained skeptical of initiatives outside his own control , and expelled multiple local council members from the party . While much of this was due to local cooperation — unauthorized by the Centre Democrats leadership — with the more radical Centre Party ' 86 ( CP ' 86 ) , Janmaat later agreed to coordinate joint demonstrations with it . The cooperation soon fell apart and Janmaat distanced himself from CP ' 86 as the 1998 election approached . 
 In the 1995 provincial elections , in the face of competition from four new ethnocentric competitors , none of which won a seat , the Centre Democrats did not increase its three @-@ seat presence in the provincial parliament . In the 1998 local elections the Centre Democrats lost all but one of its seats , having contested the election in just around half of the municipalities it contested in 1994 . In the 1998 general election two months later , the party lost all its seats in Parliament . This was as a result of the Centre Democrats 's failure to benefit from increased attention on immigration issues , its years of internal infighting , and new legislation directed mainly against the far @-@ right , which had raised the number of signatures per district required in order to contest elections . 
 = = = Demise ( 1998 – 2002 ) = = = 
 After the 1998 election , Janmaat became increasingly worried by legal pressure , believing that the Centre Democrats could become the government 's next target after CP ' 86 was officially banned in 1998 . He founded the " Conservative Democrats " as a potential successor party in the event that the Centre Democrats was proscribed . The new party contested the 1999 European elections as the <unk> Centrumdemocraten / <unk> <unk> , a supposed two @-@ party cooperation , where the two names in reality represented the same party . It won only 0 @.@ 5 % of the vote in the election , a showing widely seen as the last spasm of a dying party . Janmaat 's increasing physical exhaustion only served to exacerbate the situation . Nonetheless , with a new political climate following the September 11 attacks and the rise of Pim Fortuyn , Janmaat sought political rehabilitation in his final years . The reason was that his earlier criminal convictions arose from stating things that had now become accepted . 
 On 18 April 2002 , only a few months before Janmaat died , the party was formally dissolved . As a result it did not participate in the 2002 general election , where the recently emerged Pim Fortuyn List attracted votes based on an appeal similar to that of the Centre Democrats . 
 = = Ideology = = 
 After the split from the Centre Party , the ideology of the Centre Democrats was broadly similar to that of its originator , although the Centre Party became increasingly radical in the following years . The Centre Democrats did not publish a party or electoral manifesto before 1989 , and until then its policies were known primarily through the small @-@ scale distribution of pamphlets , which were almost exact copies of old Centre Party pamphlets . Like the Centre Party , the Centre Democrats claimed to be at the centre of the political spectrum , representing a " centre @-@ democratic ideology " . Nevertheless , the party focused mainly on the issue of immigration , and mainstream observers considered the party 's ideology to be a populist form of nationalism . 
 = = = Immigration and multiculturalism = = = 
 The Centre Democrats was strongly opposed to multiculturalism and immigration . It did not , however , exclude people based on ethnicity . It spoke , initially at least , of a Dutch population rather than a Dutch ethnic community . The party remained distinct from ethnic nationalists , as it gave immigrants the choice between repatriation or assimilation . Its 1989 party program stated that " foreigners and minorities either adjust to the Dutch ways and customs or leave the country . " The Centre Democrats considered Dutch culture to be under threat from foreigners , and that Muslims in particular had come to the Netherlands with the intention of taking over or dominating the country . Also opposed to " multicultural marriages , " and wanting to limit the possibility of adoptions from the Third World , the CP generally sought a return to the old Dutch society with its singular Dutch culture . According to political scientist Cas Mudde , the party 's ideology is best described as civic nationalism . Nevertheless , by 1994 the party had moved more towards ethnic nationalism by asserting that its program began " from the indissoluble unity and solidarity of the Dutch ethnic community [ ... ] based on the common history and the culture that originated from that history . " 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 The Centre Democrats opposed any limitation of the sovereignty of the Dutch state and was thus skeptical of the European Union and European integration , seeing the Maastricht Treaty as one of many international defeats inflicted on the Dutch government . While it generally described international organizations such as the United Nations as superfluous and inefficient bureaucracies , it supported NATO as a means of keeping the West safe from Communism . In its 1998 program , the Centre Democrats included a call for the " reunification with Flanders and other Dutch @-@ speaking territories " , thereby promoting the idea of a Greater Netherlands . 
 = = = Society = = = 
 While the party did not originally place heavy emphasis on ethical issues , it did see the family as the cornerstone of society . By 1994 , it had become more conservative , stressing law and order as well as traditional morals and values . Over the years , it also sought to make divorce more difficult , particularly for families with children . The party also lent much space to discussing the AIDS virus , which it put in the context of a moral crisis and moral relativism that it considered to only be solvable by returning to traditional morality . 
 = = = Economic = = = 
 The party 's economic policies did not deviate substantially from the generally supported mixed economy of the Netherlands . Its other demands did not have a strong ideological coherency . Supporting a generous welfare state for the Dutch people , it was otherwise sceptical of state interventionism in the economy ; notably by high taxes which would hinder private initiative , or overspending on subsidies . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 The original scientific bureau , or think tank , of the Centre Democrats was the Stichting <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Foundation for the Scientific <unk> of the Centre Democratic Ideology , <unk> ) . In 1992 its name was changed to the Thomas Hobbes Stichting ( Thomas Hobbes Foundation ) , after Janmaat 's favorite political philosopher . 
 The Young Centre Democrats ( Jonge Centrumdemocraten ) , became the youth organization of the Centre Democrats , having originally been founded as the youth wing of the Centre Party in the early 1980s . It was later succeeded by the CD Youth ( CD @-@ <unk> ) , which was based almost exclusively in the Haarlem area . The Centre Democrats did not attract many youngsters , nor did it establish a particularly active youth organization . Most of the far @-@ right youth tended to join CP ' 86 . 
 Over time the Centre Democrats published a variety of party papers of varying quality . The <unk> and the <unk> were the original newspapers first published in 1986 . Although the former was intended for general party news , and the latter aimed at a more intellectual readership , they did not differ much in content . By 1987 – 1988 , <unk> was more or less succeeded by CD @-@ info , and <unk> by CD @-@ <unk> . CD @-@ <unk> was distributed for the last time in 1993 , with CD @-@ info succeeded by the CD @-@ <unk> in 1997 , although in later years it had been published less and less frequently . 
 = = International relations = = 
 The CD regarded itself as related to other European " patriotic parties " , but its official contact was limited to the German People 's Union , the French National Front and the Belgian Vlaams Blok . The party regularly attended annual meetings of the German People 's Union and the National Front , and Janmaat spoke of his good contacts with the latter party 's leader Jean @-@ Marie Le Pen . Relations with the Vlaams Blok created a conflict of interest given VB 's arguably better contacts with CP ' 86 , the Centre Democrats ' main rival in the Netherlands . Even so , the Centre Democrats maintained official contacts domestically with both the Centre Party and its successor , the CP ' 86 . 
 = = Election results = = 
 = = = House of Representatives = = = 
 = = = European Parliament = = = 
 = Battle of Wareo = 
 The Battle of Wareo ( 27 November – 8 December 1943 ) was fought by Australian and Japanese forces in New Guinea during the Huon Peninsula campaign of World War II in the later part of 1943 . Coming after the capture of Sattelberg by the Allies , the battle took place amidst the Australian advance north towards Sio . The Australians committed elements from four infantry brigades from the Australian 9th Division with supporting elements including artillery , engineers and tank support , while the Japanese force consisted primarily of two depleted infantry regiments from the 20th Division , with limited artillery support . 
 The Australian advance in this region developed into three drives . In the west , forces advanced north from Sattelberg following its capture , while in the east , an advance was made from North Hill on the coast , north of Scarlet Beach , where the Australians had landed earlier in the campaign . A smaller drive was made in the centre from Nongora , which lay in between the two , although this was limited and subsequently linked up with the coastal drive . Although possessing significant forces , the Australian advance proved slow . Heavy rain and harsh terrain slowed the Australian resupply efforts and reduced the mobility of their manoeuvre elements . Disease and fatigue also heavily depleted their infantry , with more casualties being suffered from illnesses than combat . 
 The Japanese units in the area also defended strongly , but they too were short on supplies and in the end they were forced to withdraw further north . Wareo subsequently fell to the Allies on 8 December , who then established a line east from Wareo to Gusika on the coast . From there they carried out further advances north later in the month and into early January 1944 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In September 1943 , Australian forces launched the first phase of Operation Cartwheel , General Douglas MacArthur 's advance on the main Japanese base at Rabaul . The operation initially went well . Lae fell on 16 September , and having advanced north along the coast towards the Huon Peninsula , the Australians had the Japanese forces on the back foot . On 22 September , elements of the Australian 9th Division , commanded by Major General George Wootten , landed at Scarlet Beach from where they began to fan out to the south and west to capture Finschhafen and to begin the advance towards Sio , further around the coast on the northern side of the Huon Peninsula . 
 Up to this point the Allied advance had been faster than planned , but at Finschhafen it faltered . The rapid advance had created logistical difficulties . In particular , the engineers required to develop the captured areas were not yet available . This became critical when heavy rains delayed the opening of the Lae – Nadzab Road . Without the road , the planned airbase at Nadzab could not be developed , and without the airbase , air cover could not be provided for another amphibious operation . MacArthur was forced to postpone the next phase of Cartwheel , Operation Dexterity , the landing on New Britain . 
 The initiative now passed to the Japanese . As the Australians advanced , a large force of Japanese – consisting largely of the 79th and 80th Infantry Regiments , part of the 26th Field Artillery Regiment and a battalion of the 238th Infantry Regiment , which were grouped together as the 20th Division under Lieutenant General Shigeru Katagiri – launched an unsuccessful counter @-@ attack in October before retreating inland towards an abandoned German mission that sat atop a 900 @-@ metre ( 3 @,@ 000 ft ) peak at Sattelberg . 
 By 5 November , General Headquarters ( GHQ ) South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) had decided that the Finschhafen area would be developed into a major air and naval base , but the large Japanese force on Sattelberg still overlooked the base area . In order to remove this threat , Wootten sent the 26th Infantry Brigade to capture Sattelberg on 16 November . On 25 November , after 10 days of fighting , and an advance up the southern approaches from Jivevaneng by infantry supported by artillery , armour and air support , Sattelberg was seized by the Australians . Having suffered heavy casualties , and short on supplies , the Japanese withdrew north to Wareo , where they established themselves in preparation for further attacks by the Australians . 
 = = Logistics = = 
 = = = Allied = = = 
 Allied supplies were hauled from Lae in the Landing Craft , Vehicle , Personnel and Landing Craft Mechanised of the US 2nd Engineer Special Brigade , affectionately known as the " 9th Division Navy " . The capture of Dreger Harbour and Langemak Bay provided sheltered unloading areas , although they had not yet been developed into ports . This allowed the 2nd Engineer Special Brigade to make supply runs every second day . During October , its boats made 3 @,@ 870 trips totalling 157 @,@ 513 miles ( 253 @,@ 493 km ) , and carried 5 @,@ 930 troops and 26 @,@ 573 long tons ( 26 @,@ 999 t ) of cargo . 
 These were supplemented by less frequent trips by the much larger Landing Craft Tank and Landing Ships Tank of the VII Amphibious Force , which brought up tanks and artillery pieces . Their capacity was not as great as it could have been because , due to fear of Japanese air attacks , they had to quickly unload in the darkness . Some 800 men were employed by day and 800 by night unloading craft on the beaches . By 1 November , there were 12 @,@ 000 rounds of 25 pounder ammunition in the Finschhafen area , and stocks were increasing at a rate of two LCM loads per day . After unloading at Finschhafen , supplies were moved overland to where they were needed by jeeps , and where the terrain prevented this , by hand . In this regard , some New Guinean labourers were employed , but a shortage of such personnel resulted in the Australians allocating some of their combat troops to this role . 
 The wounded were taken to the aid posts and dressing stations in the field , and then to the 2 / 3rd Casualty Clearing Station , which arrived at Langemak Bay in October , or the 2 / 2nd Casualty Clearing Station , which opened at Heldsbach Plantation in November . Patients evacuated by sea on the small Australian Army hospital ship Stradbroke II , and later the improvised American Army hospital ship <unk> . Air evacuation began when the airstrip at Finschhafen was opened in December . 
 Large numbers of Australian and American troops began arriving in November to develop the base at Finschhafen . There were US Army engineers to develop the airbase , and US Navy Seabees to build a PT Boat at Dreger Harbour . The Finschhafen Base Sub Area , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel H. T. Allan , was formed in November to support Australian operations in the area . Its American counterpart , known as Base F , followed on 15 November . 
 = = = Japanese = = = 
 The Japanese also relied upon water transport for logistics during the battle . Due to heavy shipping losses earlier in the year during the Battle of the Bismarck Sea , they employed a small force of submarines in an effort to avoid Allied air attack . Closer to the battle zone , barges were used to augment these submarines , but they too proved vulnerable to attack by Allied aircraft and PT boats . The distribution of Japanese supplies was hampered by the lack of native carriers , which the Japanese had been unable to recruit due to an Allied propaganda campaign in the region . In addition , there was a lack of motor transport and the track system was under developed . As a result , distribution of supplies once they had been landed was undertaken by resupply parties which were drawn largely from combat units . These parties moved overland on foot using a number of key tracks that existed north of the Wareo – Gusika ridge . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Shortly after the Australians had landed at Scarlet Beach in late September , they began to patrol the area north of there towards Bonga and Gusika . Several key tracks and junctions were located by troops from the 2 / 43rd Infantry Battalion , who named them " Imperial " , " Oriental " , " Norfolk " and " Exchange " , after Adelaide pubs . Through the use of aerial reconnaissance evidence was found that the Japanese were using these tracks to traverse the area and to move supplies west towards Sattelberg . Observation posts were established and it became apparent to the Australians that one hill in particular , a feature later dubbed " Pabu " by the Australians after one of their native scouts , was the key terrain in the area . Part of an area that later became known as " Horace the Horse " to the Australians due to its shape as viewed from the air , it was within artillery range of the Australian forward positions at North Hill and as such could be occupied and held by a small party who could then disrupt the Japanese supply line . In October , the Japanese had launched a counter @-@ attack in the region and as the Australians had been forced back , they were forced to abandon Pabu . 
 The October counter @-@ attack was turned back . The commander of the Japanese XVIII Army , Lieutenant General Hatazō Adachi , visited Katagiri 's command post , and ordered a renewal of the attack , which Katagiri scheduled for 23 November . Meanwhile , the Australians sought to regain the initiative . Wootten decided to establish a position in depth behind the Japanese forward line , and subsequently further efforts were made to establish a force at Pabu in front of the Australian forward line at North Hill . Three companies from the 2 / 32nd Infantry Battalion under Major Bill Mollard , were sent to occupy it in mid @-@ November , and after striking north of the Song River from North Hill , with the help of native scouts , they moved between the Japanese positions as " Exchange " and " Pino Hill " . Following a heavy bombardment from the field guns of the 2 / 12th Field Regiment firing from Heldsbach Plantation , they captured the position . Over the next few days , the Australians established themselves , and began patrolling operations . After bringing up mortars and Vickers medium machine guns , they began to attack the Japanese resupply parties moving through the area , inflicting heavy casualties . 
 As a result of the occupation of Pabu , and the general movement of Australian forces towards Wareo – Bonga , the Japanese infantry were threatened with being trapped . In response , the Japanese commander , Katagiri , diverted some of the effort away from the recapture of Finschhafen , and resolved to recapture the North Hill – Pabu area . A strong force of Japanese subsequently advanced south along the coastal track from Bonga , attempting to retake North Hill and the ground north of the Song River . Commencing on 22 November , the Japanese made heavy assaults around North Hill , on positions which were defended by Australians from the 2 / 43rd Infantry Battalion and the 2 / 2nd Machine Gun Battalion . The 2 / 32nd , with two companies isolated to the north around Pabu , was also in the thick of the fighting , and over the space of 10 days it was subjected to repeated attacks . Despite being short of food and receiving repeated mortar fire , the 2 / 32nd held its ground with the assistance of strong artillery support , and in doing so inflicted heavy casualties upon the Japanese . Later at least 195 bodies were found around the 2 / 32nd 's position ; their own losses amounted to 25 killed and 51 wounded . The Japanese commanding general , <unk> Adachi , later pinpointed the Australian capture of Pabu Hill as one of the main reasons for the defeat of his force during the Huon Peninsula campaign . 
 The Japanese counter @-@ attacks were eventually repulsed and after this , the Australians resumed their advance . The plan called for a three @-@ pronged attack by a divisional sized force of around 13 @,@ 000 men . While the 26th Infantry Brigade advanced to Wareo , the 24th Infantry Brigade took up a position on their right with the intention of capturing the area from Gusika on the coast to the " Lakes " , two large water features about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) inland . The 20th Infantry Brigade advanced in the centre between the 24th and 26th Infantry Brigades , striking out for Wareo from Nongora . Meanwhile , the 4th Infantry Brigade was assigned to defend the Allied beachhead around Finschhafen and Heldsbach , although it would later be employed in the coastal drive . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Pursuit of Japanese forces to Bonga = = = 
 Along the coast , the 2 / 28th Infantry Battalion was assigned the task of leading the Australian advance along with a troop from the 1st Tank Battalion and engineers from the 2 / 7th Field Company . Commencing in the afternoon of 27 November , they began clearing operations between Bonga and North Hill along the coast with a secondary task of sending a company towards Pabu to facilitate the relief of the 2 / 32nd . In the vicinity , the Japanese 20th Division , consisting of the remnants of the 79th , 80th and 238th Infantry Regiments , numbered 4 @,@ 670 men , of which 2 @,@ 500 were combat effective . The lead company of the 2 / 28th Infantry Battalion moved off shortly after midday , passing through the 2 / 43rd Infantry Battalion 's lines . Initially there was no opposition and by the afternoon they established a defensive position near a waterfall . The following morning , the advance continued . The ground astride the coastal track , although flat , was covered in dense jungle , which was not suitable for tracked vehicles to move across . The result of this was that the Australian tanks had to remain on the track , advancing behind the infantry , which limited the rate of their advance and prevented them from being able to apply the full weight of their firepower . 
 As the Australians advanced , the engineers used bulldozers to improve the track to facilitate the flow of supplies , nevertheless the advance was slow . Sabotage of the bridges that spanned the various creeks that crossed the track held up the tanks , which were forced to wait while engineers came forward . While a bridge was being prepared for the tanks to cross a stream , attempts were made to attack the Japanese with infantry , however the ground was too rough and hard to penetrate and after suffering two casualties , the attack was called off . The Japanese attempted to delay the oncoming Australian units with snipers and suicide actions , however the supporting fire from the Australian tanks , which had joined the combat after crossing the stream and which at some points closed to 100 yards ( 91 m ) to fire at the Japanese , was used effectively where Japanese resistance was heaviest . In the face of this , the Japanese fell back . At the same time , a platoon advanced north from Pabu and occupied a position named " Exchange " by the Australians , capturing a 75 mm artillery piece in the process . 
 The two companies from the 2 / 32nd Infantry Battalion around Pabu had been reinforced by the remaining two companies which had fought their way through on 26 November , having also captured " Pino Hill " with four Matilda tanks and artillery support . They were then relieved by the 2 / 43rd , who were warned out to begin an advance to the west . The following morning , 29 November , the 2 / 28th Infantry Battalion once again led the Australian advance . By mid @-@ morning Bonga had been taken and shortly after midday , Australian reconnaissance patrols found Gusika undefended and so the main body subsequently occupied a local feature called " Oriental " to its south . It was the site of a large Japanese headquarters , but was found to be abandoned , with piles of equipment left behind . 
 The fall of Bonga put the Japanese forces firmly on the back foot ; their supply route through Bonga having been cut , they had to send supplies and reinforcements along the rough track that passed between <unk> and Wareo . The next step for the Australians was the capture of Gusika to the north on the coast and a position known as " Horace 's Ears " further inland to the west . To that point , the advance had been going well for the Australians , so they split their forces , with the 2 / 28th pushing on to Gusika and the 2 / 43rd turning west towards " Horace " . At this point the Australian forces received a boost in the form of the 4th Infantry Brigade , which was assigned to the 9th Division to begin the advance north up the coastal track towards the high features that existed around Fortification Point . At the same time , the 24th Infantry Brigade would advance on Wareo from Bonga , in the east . 
 The terrain over which the two brigades were to advance was generally steep with the track having been cut along a high spur line that dropped on either side into deep ravines that were covered by kunai grass interspersed with areas of thick jungle . North of Bonga , the ground was markedly different , with the track having been pushed through flat swamp land that was punctuated by many deep creeks ; vegetation in the area was mainly thick secondary growth , although to the west , in the steep hills , kunai grass was predominate . As a result of the harsh conditions and terrain , as the Australian advance continued it was increasingly hampered by vehicle break downs and fatigue amongst their crews . Resupply was also a problem for the Australians and consequently a lack of spare parts developed . This meant that a number of jeeps became unserviceable and some of the Matilda tanks were unable to advance for some time while their crews waited for parts to be brought up . 
 = = = Japanese stand at Horace 's Ears = = = 
 By 30 November , the Australian commander , Wootten , had concentrated a significant force , consisting of 12 infantry battalions , a machine gun battalion , a Matilda tank squadron , a battalion of pioneers , a squadron of commandos , and artillery and engineer support , and was ready to begin the next stage of the advance . The advance began that morning with the 2 / 28th Infantry Battalion advancing on the Australian right in concert with the Matildas from 3 Troop , 1st Tank Battalion . Crossing the Kalueng River , they penetrated only 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) before meeting Japanese resistance , which was overcome with the assistance of an artillery barrage and mortars . At the same time , the 2 / 43rd , which had relieved the 2 / 32nd around Pabu earlier , also advanced . Two companies were sent out late in the afternoon , each with armoured support in the shape of two Matildas , tasked with taking the position known by the Australians as " Horace 's Ears " by advancing through an area of low ground dubbed " Lilac Valley " by the Australians . 
 The Japanese had developed the position considerably , establishing a complex defensive network and , whereas up until that point they had usually withdrawn in the face of the advancing Australians , they decided to make a stand . Employing a 75 mm gun , which was fired over open sights due to the closeness of the fighting , along with some 37 mm guns and a number of machine guns of varying calibre , they fought fiercely . Halted by fire , the Australians called in fire support to overwhelm the Japanese with fire superiority , and resorting to employing the indirect method that would characterise their operations during this phase of the advance , and which was necessitated by the depleted state of their forces . Moving up a steep slope that was covered by kunai grass , one of the tanks broke down , nevertheless the Australian armour was able to deliver a significant bombardment which enabled the infantry to take the position early in the evening . 
 = = = Kalueng Lakes = = = 
 The 2 / 28th Infantry Battalion put a patrol over the Kalueng River on 1 December . The previous day artillery had been used to reduce the Japanese presence in the area of the " Lagoon " – north of Gusika – and , as a consequence , the patrol was able to penetrate deep to the north , almost reaching the Lagoon before turning around . On the return leg , the Australians located a Japanese position and attacked it , killing one and wounding three others before skirting around the position and moving south in an effort to regain Australian lines . A second Japanese force , however , blocked their way and after a firefight at sunset in which a further three Australians were wounded , they were forced back to the north , where they established a defensive position . Runners were sent out to take a message through to the battalion headquarters . Both men never made it , though , being killed after encountering several Japanese . After darkness fell and it began to rain , the patrol , however , was able to extricate itself back to the river where they spent the night before rejoining their battalion early on 2 December . 
 The troop of tanks that had initially been committed was at this point relieved , with another – an ad hoc formation drawn from Headquarters Troop and 2 Troop from the 1st Tank Battalion – being brought up to replace them . In concert with a company from 2 / 43rd , five tanks struck out from Pabu on 2 December . The tanks were kept in reserve at this stage and one broke down early in the advance . Together , the force penetrated close to the Lakes , but a Japanese force moved to cut off their rear , forcing them back . A second company from the 2 / 43rd , also with tank support , was then thrown forward to conduct a move to flank towards the larger of the two water features , approaching from the south . The Japanese were positioned in strength in a heavily wooded area and began firing on the Australians with machine guns , which pinned them down until two tanks came up and destroyed the Japanese position , firing from point blank range . At this point , the Australians lost another tank , which became bogged in the mud and which had to be left with an infantry guard to defend it while the advance continued . 
 By mid @-@ afternoon , the 2 / 43rd 's second company 's advance was checked again , having progressed a further 100 metres ( 110 yd ) . At this point , the last tank , named " Costello " by its crew , moved forward to provide support . As it came up past the infantry , it was fired upon from Japanese artillery positioned on some high ground to the north of the lake . It was initially fired upon by a 37 mm gun , which fired from about 50 metres ( 55 yd ) away , before that was joined by 75 mm artillery piece . Despite being hit more than 50 times , the tank 's crew remained unhurt and were able to keep firing the tank 's 2 pounder until they eventually had to abandon the tank and fall back with the infantry . At this point , the Australians withdrew . 
 Overnight , the Japanese pulled the two guns off the high ground and left a small force behind which was quickly overwhelmed by the Australians when they resumed their advance the following day . The Australian infantry suffered further casualties when they approached the previously abandoned " Costello " and triggered a mine that had been set by the withdrawing Japanese . The advance was slow , though , and in order to support the 2 / 43rd , the 2 / 32nd was brought forward again . Together the composite force overcame the Japanese resistance around the Lakes around midday on 3 December , and at this point they were re @-@ tasked with taking over the drive in the central sector from the 20th Infantry Brigade , which was to be rested for later in the campaign , and pushing on to the Christmas Hills . 
 = = = Nongora and Christmas Hills = = = 
 Although originally the whole 20th Infantry Brigade had been assigned the task of advancing through the Australian centre towards Nongora , in the end only one infantry battalion , the 2 / 15th , and a platoon from the Papuan Infantry Battalion was committed . Stepping off on 30 November , this force struck north from Nongora towards the Song River . The lead company crossed the river west of a fjord and shortly after completing this manoeuvre , a force of Japanese engaged them with machine gun fire , killing one and wounding three others . Still in contact , the Australian company secured the crossing enabling two other companies from the 2 / 15th to come across . While the lead company fixed the Japanese position , the other two conducted a passage of lines manoeuvre and bypassed the Japanese machine gun position as they continued the advance towards Nongora . The lead company then also broke contact and followed them , and in the early afternoon , finding themselves confronted by a high feature to their front which blocked their path east towards Nongora , they established a defensive position short of their objective ; meanwhile , the 2 / 15th 's fourth company , following up in reserve , found the Japanese machine gun position abandoned and subsequently occupied it . 
 On 1 December , the Australians began to prepare to capture the high ground to their front . Japanese had been seen atop it and in the early afternoon a company @-@ level attack was put in on the southern end of the feature . Suffering 13 casualties , the Australians were beaten back , however , during the night the Japanese withdrew from the ridge . The following day , the Australians discovered this and began following them up ; by midday they had entered Nongora and established themselves there . Once this was completed , the 2 / 15th began to send out patrols to the west to probe the Christmas Hills , and to the east towards the Kalueng Lakes , to make contact with the 24th Infantry Brigade . This was affected the following day . At the same time , the 2 / 15th probed the Christmas Hills area , where they were engaged by the Japanese about 900 yards ( 820 m ) south of the feature , with one of their officers being killed . Another patrol was sent out by the 2 / 15th in the early afternoon of 4 December . Advancing on the eastern side of the main track they were able to penetrate deep towards the hills , before finding their way barred by a deep gorge which forced them to turn back . 
 At this point , the Australian commander issued a new operation order , reassigning the task of capturing the Christmas Hills area to the 24th Infantry Brigade and pulling the 20th Infantry Brigade back to Nongora to rest up for the next phase of the campaign , which would see them advance up the coast . The strain of the advance along the coastal route , which had been the 24th Infantry Brigade 's main effort , however , had taken its toll . As a result , the 2 / 32nd Infantry Battalion was called forward again as the 2 / 28th was plagued by sickness and the 2 / 43rd was physically worn out . On the night of 4 / 5 December , the Japanese withdrew from their forward positions , leaving behind a large quantity of equipment and their dead . The following morning , a composite force of Australians from the 2 / 32nd and 2 / 43rd Infantry Battalions then took up the advance towards the Christmas Hills , ranging west , and undertaking a series of flanking moves in order to break into the Japanese main defensive position , where the Japanese were well @-@ entrenched . A firefight ensued in which six Japanese and seven Australians were killed , before the Australian attack was turned back . 
 On 6 December the Australians attacked again , this time with two companies approaching from the north @-@ east , using an intense artillery and mortar bombardment to prepare the area first ; the attack was repulsed with heavy fire . A further barrage rained down on the Japanese and by sunset , the 2 / 32nd Infantry Battalion , severely depleted with most its companies – several of which were commanded by junior non commissioned officers due to heavy casualties amongst the subalterns – at platoon strength , had managed to establish a lodging near the top of the feature on its eastern approach . That night the Japanese fell back from the position and the following day the Australians occupied Christmas Hills . 
 = = = Drive on Kuanko and Wareo = = = 
 In the west , the 26th Infantry Brigade had begun patrolling operations north of Sattelberg on 27 November , moving towards the Song River . The distance to Wareo was 6 @,@ 000 yards ( 5 @,@ 500 m ) , but due to the type of terrain , the actual distance to be traversed was about quadruple that . The 2 / 23rd Infantry Battalion was given the task of leading the Australian advance in this sector and after striking north from <unk> , they moved towards Fior , with the task for finding a river crossing for the brigade . No crossing could be found . At the same time the 2 / 24th set out from Palanko in search of jungle tracks towards the river . Flank protection on the left was provided by the 2 / 4th Commando Squadron and a platoon from the Papuan Infantry Battalion . The search was unsuccessful and after minor clashes occurred , the Australians dispatched two platoons to Fior in an effort to link up with the 2 / 23rd . Short of Fior , the Japanese had established themselves in strength in well dug @-@ in positions amidst a thick bamboo grove . As the 2 / 24th 's platoons approached , they were fired upon and forced to halt their advance , establishing a night defensive position . 
 During the night the Japanese withdrew silently and moved back across the Song , destroying the suspension bridge that spanned it as they went . They established themselves on the opposite side of the river and waited for the Australians to follow after them . The next morning , when the two Australian battalions rose they discovered that the ground in front of them was undefended and they advanced unopposed towards Fior . The 2 / 23rd advanced down the steep escarpment towards Fior , descending some 2 @,@ 300 feet ( 700 m ) into the valley through which the river flowed , crossing several creeks and entering the undefended town . The lead company from the 2 / 23rd Infantry Battalion then exploited towards the river , looking for a crossing . They found the bridge near the main crossing destroyed and about 150 yards ( 140 m ) from the river , began receiving fire from the opposite bank . The Australians then sent out patrols to scout other potential crossings ; one was found and by the early evening the Australians had established themselves on the other side of the Song . 
 Early on 30 November , the single company from the 2 / 23rd that had made it across the Song was joined by another . Together they moved up the steep slope to the Kuanko Track where they split up : one company went north to continue the advance , while the other turned to the south to attack the Japanese that had fired upon them earlier , taking them from the rear . Two attacks were put in against the rearguard of this position , achieving a break @-@ in , which was then exploited by a platoon , which attacked with fixed bayonets , capturing the position . A total of 30 Japanese were killed or wounded in the attack and a short time later , the rest of the 2 / 23rd was able to exploit the main river crossing . Meanwhile , the company that had struck north continued to advance . They were about 900 yards ( 820 m ) north of the river when their advance was checked , at which point the 2 / 23rd formed a defensive harbour to wait out the night . 
 Late that afternoon , after about a week of dry weather , it began to rain . As a result , the track became more difficult and mobility was reduced ; the tanks found the track impassable and as a consequence the advancing Australian infantry lost their direct fire support . Resupply also proved to be a problem for them . The jeeps that had been bringing up supplies could not get forward and there were not enough native porters to meet the demand . As a result , the Australians had to resort to using one of their infantry battalions , the 2 / 24th , to bring supplies forward from Palanko while the 2 / 23rd continued the advance on Kuanko . Several isolated pockets of Japanese defenders were located along the track holding and so , while their sister battalion struggled up and down the steep track under the weight of their portage , on 1 December elements of the 2 / 23rd , leaving their heavy stores and equipment behind , advanced up a steep , muddy slope and set about clearing these positions . The Japanese resistance was overwhelmed and by midday the Australians entered Kuanko . Exploiting beyond the village in the afternoon , the lead Australian company took fire from a ridge line to the north @-@ west and the advance was halted for the day . 
 The next morning the Australians sent out patrols and as they probed forward through the dense bamboo it became apparent to them that the Japanese had established themselves in strength along a ridge line that stretched off to a position called Peak Hill . In response to the Australian patrols , the Japanese raked the jungle with machine gun fire to which the Australians responded by calling in an artillery and mortar bombardment . As the sun began to set , the Japanese launched a quick attack on the lead Australian company , forcing them back . In order to regain the initiative , the 2 / 23rd Infantry Battalion launched a night attack , which , although supported by very accurate artillery fire from the 2 / 12th Field Regiment , proved unsuccessful . As a result of the failed attack , in the morning the Australians found themselves in a position overlooked by the Japanese . Throughout the day , both sides exchanged sniper fire and the Australians had to re @-@ route their supply lines after they came under fire from the high ground . A company from the 2 / 24th was released from their portage tasks and were brought up to bolster the 2 / 23rd , taking up a position to the south in close proximity . During the night , however , the Japanese began to encircle the Australian position . In response , the company from the 2 / 24th moved to link up with the 2 / 23rd . Just short of the position , their advance was checked when they came under heavy fire ; the Australians eventually managed to send out a patrol which outflanked the Japanese positions and linked up with the 2 / 23rd . 
 By 5 December , the Australians had managed to stockpile enough supplies in forward areas to enable the 2 / 24th Infantry Battalion , which had been engaged in moving the stores , to be released from this task and thrown back into the fighting . In order to bypass the Japanese position , elements from the 2 / 23rd along with one company from the 2 / 24th carried out flanking manoeuvres to the west of the track were undertaken before the Australians established themselves in defensive positions short of Peak Hill . On 6 December , the remaining three companies of the 2 / 24th came up and as the Australians continued to advance towards Peak Hill they found considerable Japanese positions which had been abandoned . As movement was seen in Wareo , which was visible in the distance , an artillery bombardment was called in by the Australians . In the afternoon , the Australians cut the branch track that turned towards Kwatingkoo before an attack was put in on Peak Hill . The Japanese defences held and the attack beaten off , the Australians attempted to outflank to the north but they were prevented from doing so by the thick jungle and as the sun set , they had to be content to dig @-@ in on the western approach to Peak Hill . 
 Once again the Japanese withdrew during the night and early the following morning , 7 December , the Australians were able to capture the hill . Throughout the morning , they continued to advance until they were halted by fire about 600 yards ( 550 m ) from Wareo . A brief halt was called at this time , while patrols were sent out to Kwatingkoo to determine the strength of the Japanese there . It was found to be heavily defended . Later in the day , elements of the 2 / 24th and the 2 / 32nd established contact , forming a link between the 24th and 26th Infantry Brigades . At this point fatigue amongst the Australians stalled their advance ; it did not last long , though , and early on 8 December Kwatingkoo was captured by elements of the 2 / 24th Infantry Battalion without opposition as its defenders had fallen back earlier . Follow up moves advanced them towards Wareo and by mid @-@ morning it too had been captured . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Australian advance had been hampered by bad weather , steep terrain , supply problems , fatigue and the strong defence mounted by the Japanese , nevertheless they had secured the Wareo – Gusika spur and the track that ran between Wareo and Bonga . In the face of the Australian advance on Wareo , early in December the Japanese commander , Katagiri , had ordered his troops , who were weary from the fighting and hungry due to a lack of supplies , to fall back to the north . The 79th Infantry Regiment , which had been defending the area around the Lakes , was ordered to move back to <unk> and Sio , while the 80th Infantry Regiment , having been located around Kuanko , followed the 79th and moved east towards the coast . 
 The Australians were also in need of rest and were suffering heavily from tropical diseases , which had inflicted more casualties than Japanese actions in this phase of the campaign . Nevertheless , after the fall of Wareo , fighting in the area continued . In order to enable the two main Japanese infantry regiments to make a clean break , the 2nd Battalion , 238th Infantry Regiment , carried out rearguard operations in the Wareo area until 15 December . On 8 December , shortly after the capture of Kwatingkoo , a company from the 2 / 24th Infantry Battalion was ambushed while moving towards <unk> ; eight Australians were killed and another four wounded . 
 A strong force of Japanese also held out on the 2200 feature , which lay about 1 @,@ 700 yards ( 1 @,@ 600 m ) north @-@ east of Wareo , threatening the Australian hold on the newly won Wareo – Bonga track . On 12 December , the fighting in the Wareo region intensified briefly when a significant clash occurred on the hill . Concerned about the presence of the Japanese rearguard , the Australians sent a force from the 2 / 24th Infantry Battalion to assault the Japanese that were ensconced there . A pitched battle followed in which 27 Japanese and three Australians were killed , before the Australians captured the position . 
 Elsewhere , the Allies landed at Arawe on New Britain on 15 December , while the Australian 4th Infantry Brigade , having commenced its advance up the coast from Gusika on 3 December , continued on passing through Bald Hill , Lakona and <unk> on its way to Fortification Point as it led the opening phase of the Australian advance towards Sio . In late December , the 20th Infantry Brigade , which had largely been rested during the advance on Wareo , took over from the 4th . After sweeping up the coast quickly against light Japanese resistance , they captured Sio in early January 1944 , having suffered only very light casualties . 
 After the war , the Australian Army commemorated the battle , and the fighting that occurred on its periphery , through the awarding of a number of battle honours : " Pabu " , " Gusika " , " Wareo " and " Nongora " . The 2 / 32nd and 2 / 43rd Infantry Battalions both received " Pabu " , while the 2 / 28th was awarded " Gusika " . The 1st Tank Battalion and the 2 / 23rd and 24th Infantry Battalions received " Wareo " , and " Nongora " went to the 2 / 15th . Casualties during the capture of Wareo and Gusika over the 26 November to 7 December period were reported by the Australian II Corps Headquarters as follows : 451 Japanese killed , as well as 40 found dead , and one captured . Against this , 47 Australians were killed and 332 were reported wounded . 
 = Chacal @-@ class destroyer = 
 The Chacal @-@ class destroyer , sometimes known as the Jaguar class , were a group of six large destroyers ( contre @-@ torpilleurs ) built for the French Navy during the 1920s . Their primary role was scouting for the battleline . All were named for predators : Chacal means jackal , and the other five were named for big cats . 
 The ships were initially split between the Mediterranean Squadron and the Second Squadron ( 2ème Escadre ) , based at Brest . One ship served as a flagship during the 1930s , but her sister ships were assigned as training ships beginning in 1932 . The Chacal class was assigned convoy escort duties after the start of World War II in September 1939 until three of them were committed to the English Channel after the Battle of France began on 10 May 1940 . Two of these were sunk shortly afterwards by German forces . 
 When France surrendered on 22 June , two ships were in French Algeria , one was refitting in Toulon and the last ship was in England . During Operation Catapult in July , an attack on the Vichy Fleet intended to prevent it from being turned over to the Germans , the British seized the ship in England , but failed to prevent the two in Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir from escaping to Toulon when they attacked the port . 
 All three of the ships in Toulon were placed in reserve and two of them were captured virtually intact when the Germans attempted to seize the French fleet in November 1942 . They were turned over to the Royal Italian Navy ( Regia Marina ) , but they were only used for transport missions before the Italy surrendered in September 1943 . One of these was scuttled by the Italians , but the other escaped to join the Free French and spent the remainder of the war as a convoy escort in the Mediterranean or protecting Allied forces in the Ligurian Sea . 
 In the meantime , the British had turned over Léopard to the Free French who used her as a convoy escort before she helped to liberate the island of La Réunion in late 1942 . She ran aground shortly after being transferred to the Mediterranean in mid @-@ 1943 and became a total loss . The only ship to survive the war , Tigre , was mostly used after the war as a troop transport and as a training ship until she was struck from the Navy List in 1954 before being scrapped the next year . 
 = = Background = = 
 Preliminary studies for large destroyers capable of defending the French battleline against attacks by enemy destroyers and torpedo boats by the Naval General Staff ( NGS ) began before World War I , but were suspended when the war began . They resumed in 1917 , but serious planning did not begin until after the war when the NGS decided to split the role of the destroyer in 1919 . The smaller torpilleur d 'escadre would have the role of attacking the enemy 's battleline with torpedoes and defending that of the French from enemy torpedo craft . The primary role of the larger contre @-@ torpilleur was scouting ; defending the battleline was secondary and attacking the enemy battleline least important . This required high speed in all weather , good endurance and a powerful armament capable of engaging small cruisers . 
 The Naval Minister selected a 1 @,@ 780 @-@ metric @-@ ton ( 1 @,@ 750 @-@ long @-@ ton ) design , armed with five 100 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) guns , in early 1920 , but this was rejected by the French Parliament . Influenced by the large Italian Leone @-@ class destroyers , armed with eight 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) , and the 2 @,@ 060 @-@ metric @-@ ton ( 2 @,@ 030 @-@ long @-@ ton ) ex @-@ German destroyer SMS <unk> , turned over to France as war reparations , that was armed with four 150 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns , the French went back to the drawing board for a much larger ship armed with six or seven of the new Canon de 130 mm modèle 1919 gun . Ordering was delayed by the negotiations during the Washington Naval Treaty , but six ships of the Chacal class were approved as part of the 1922 Naval Law . 
 = = Description = = 
 They had an overall length of 126 @.@ 8 meters ( 416 ft 0 in ) , a beam of 11 @.@ 1 meters ( 36 ft 5 in ) , and a draft of 4 @.@ 1 meters ( 13 ft 5 in ) . The ships displaced 2 @,@ 126 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 092 long tons ) at standard load and 2 @,@ 980 – 3 @,@ 075 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 933 – 3 @,@ 026 long tons ) at deep load . A double bottom covered most of the ships ' length and the hull was subdivided by 11 transverse bulkheads into a dozen watertight compartments . Their crew consisted of 10 officers and 187 crewmen in peacetime and 12 officers and 209 enlisted men in wartime . 
 The raised forecastle and the prominent sheer and flare of the bow ensured that the Chacal @-@ class ships were good seaboats , but they proved to be <unk> with poor lateral stability despite 40 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 130 ft ) bilge keels . Furthermore , they were not very maneuverable because the 14 @.@ 44 @-@ square @-@ meter ( 155 @.@ 4 sq ft ) rudder was too small and its servomotor too weak ( taking 25 – 30 seconds to move from one side to the other ) . 
 The Chacal class was powered by two geared steam turbine sets , each driving a 3 @.@ 6 @-@ meter ( 11 ft 10 in ) propeller , using steam provided by five du Temple boilers that operated at a pressure of 18 kg / cm2 ( 1 @,@ 765 kPa ; 256 psi ) and a temperature of 216 ° C ( 421 ° F ) . Four ships were fitted with Rateau @-@ Bretagne turbines that were satisfactory once the initial teething problems were worked out , but Léopard and Lynx used Breguet @-@ Laval turbines that were very troublesome and caused Léopard to be enter service two years late . The turbines were designed to produce 50 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 37 @,@ 000 kW ; 49 @,@ 000 shp ) , which would propel the ships at 35 @.@ 5 knots ( 65 @.@ 7 km / h ; 40 @.@ 9 mph ) . During their sea trials , the turbines generated 54 @,@ 850 – 57 @,@ 810 metric horsepower ( 40 @,@ 340 – 42 @,@ 520 kW ; 54 @,@ 100 – 57 @,@ 020 shp ) and they reached a maximum speed of 36 @.@ 7 knots ( 68 @.@ 0 km / h ; 42 @.@ 2 mph ) for a single hour . The ships carried 530 metric tons ( 522 long tons ) of fuel oil which gave them a range of 3 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 600 km ; 3 @,@ 500 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . Fuel consumption at high speeds was excessive and the range was only 600 nmi ( 1 @,@ 100 km ; 690 mi ) at 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) . The ships were fitted with two 60 @-@ kilowatt ( 80 hp ) turbo generators in the forward engine room . In addition , two diesel generators , one of 30 @-@ kilowatt ( 40 hp ) and the other of 15 @-@ kilowatt ( 20 hp ) capacity , were located in the central superstructure . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The main armament of the Chacal @-@ class ships was originally intended to be mounted in a mix of single and twin mounts , but the twin @-@ gun mounts proved unsatisfactory so the ships were armed with five 40 @-@ caliber Canon de 130 mm mle 1919 guns in single mounts , one superfiring pair each fore and aft of the superstructure and the fifth gun abaft the aft funnel . The guns were numbered ' 1' to ' 5' from front to rear . The mounts had a range of elevation from -10 ° to + 36 ° , which gave the gun a range of 18 @,@ 900 meters ( 20 @,@ 700 yd ) at maximum elevation , and the guns could be loaded at any angle below + 16 ° . They fired 32 @.@ 05 @-@ kilogram ( 70 @.@ 7 lb ) armor @-@ piercing projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 735 m / s ( 2 @,@ 410 ft / s ) at a rate of five to six rounds per minute . The fore and aft magazines had a total capacity of 802 shells . Each mount had a ready rack holding 24 shells , except for No. 3 , which had a larger supply of 30 rounds because it lacked an ammunition hoist down to the magazines . 
 The NGS deemed this gun obsolete shortly after the first ships were laid down , but the gun that it wanted to use , the Canon de 138 mm modèle 1923 , was not yet available , so they planned to replace the 130 mm guns later . The guns and their larger hoists were ordered well before any of the ships were completed and had to be written off when it became apparent that the ships ' stability was too marginal to tolerate the additional top weight . 
 The initial plan was to fit each ship with a director that fed data to the Mle <unk> electro @-@ mechanical fire @-@ control computer , but development was protracted and it was not ready in time for the first four ships . They were fitted with the simpler Mle 1919 type aviso mechanical computer ; only Léopard and Lynx had the Mle <unk> computer upon completion . The earlier ships had their Mle 1919 computers replaced by the later computer beginning in 1927 . Development of the director was abandoned and the ships were fitted with a 3 @-@ meter ( 9 ft 10 in ) Mle <unk> coincidence rangefinder that fed data to the computers . This was replaced by a stereoscopic rangefinder in 1931 and by a 5 @-@ meter ( 16 ft 5 in ) <unk> model from 1937 . 
 The anti @-@ aircraft armament of the Chacal class consisted of two 50 @-@ caliber Canon de 75 mm modèle 1924 guns in single mounts positioned amidships . The mounts could elevate to + 90 ° and depress to -10 ° and the guns could be loaded at any angle up to + 75 ° . Their 5 @.@ 93 @-@ kilogram ( 13 @.@ 1 lb ) shells were fired at a muzzle velocity of 850 m / s ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) . The guns had a range of 14 @,@ 100 meters ( 15 @,@ 400 yd ) and a ceiling of about 10 @,@ 000 meters ( 33 @,@ 000 ft ) . They had a theoretical rate of fire of 15 rounds per minute , but only about half that in service . The ships carried 150 rounds , plus 60 star shells , for each gun , of which 30 rounds could be stowed in ready @-@ use lockers . In 1932 , the navy decided that the ships were too top @-@ heavy to accept a director for the guns so they were to be replaced by four twin mounts for 13 @.@ 2 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) anti @-@ aircraft machineguns . These were installed in 1933 – 34 , together with a dedicated 1 @-@ meter ( 3 ft 3 in ) OPL <unk> stereoscopic rangefinder . The substitution saved about 12 metric tons ( 12 long tons ) of weight , although the machineguns proved to have limited utility in combat . Combat operations in 1939 had shown the French that their anti @-@ aircraft defenses were inadequate and they planned to augment them beginning in 1940 by replacing the mainmast with a platform for a twin @-@ gun mount for the 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Mle 1933 light AA gun . This was only installed aboard Panthère before the armistice with Germany and it was removed shortly afterwards . 
 The Chacal @-@ class ships carried two above @-@ water triple sets of 550 @-@ millimeter ( 21 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . Their Mle <unk> torpedoes had a 238 @-@ kilogram ( 525 lb ) , picric @-@ acid warhead and could be set for a speed of 35 knots with a range of 6 @,@ 000 meters ( 6 @,@ 600 yd ) or 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) for 14 @,@ 000 meters ( 15 @,@ 000 yd ) . A pair of depth charge chutes were built into their stern ; these housed a total of twenty Guiraud Mle 1922 200 @-@ kilogram ( 440 lb ) depth charges . They were also fitted with four depth @-@ charge throwers abreast the fore funnel for which they carried a dozen Guiraud Mle 1922 100 @-@ kilogram ( 220 lb ) depth charges . The four depth charge throwers were removed in 1932 as they were badly positioned and their charges tended to cause leaks in the hull when used , although two were reinstalled after the war began in 1939 . Space and weight was reserved for a pair of <unk> towed anti @-@ submarine torpedoes , but these were a failure and were never used in combat . 
 Space was reserved for an unsuccessful French sonar system that was cancelled in September 1930 . The NGS also intended to fit a passive Walser acoustic locator system in the Chacal class , but only Panthère was actually fitted with one . This consisted of a set of two steel lenses , one set on each side of the ship , with a large number of <unk> that ambient amplified sound for the operator . This proved useless while the ship was moving faster than dead slow and was removed in 1931 . The Walser compartment was reused when a British Type 123 ASDIC system was installed aboard the ships in 1939 – 40 , although Panthère did not receive one . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service = = 
 The first three ships to be commissioned , Tigre , Chacal , and Panthère , were assigned to the Mediterranean Squadron at Toulon , and the last three were assigned to the Second Squadron ( 2ème Escadre ) at Brest . The ships made many port visits and participated in several naval reviews during the 1920s and early 1930s . Several even made visits to French West Africa and the French West Indies in the early 1930s . Jaguar served as the flagship of several different destroyer ( torpilleur d 'escadre ) flotillas from 1928 to 1937 . The Chacal @-@ class ships started to become dedicated training ships beginning in 1932 and continued to do so until the beginning of World War II . 
 Jaguar , Léopard and Panthère were assigned to the Northern Command ( Forces maritimes du Nord ) on 7 September in anticipation of a German invasion of Belgium . They proved , however , to be too large and unmaneuverable for operations in the shallow waters of the English Channel and North Sea ; Panthère ran aground on 10 September in poor visibility , but suffered only minor damage , and Jaguar did the same thing on the night of 28 / 29 October . The contre @-@ torpilleurs were relieved by smaller torpilleurs d 'escadre beginning in mid @-@ October . The other ships were assigned to the Western Command ( Forces maritimes de l 'Ouest ) for convoy escort duties from October 1939 to May 1940 where they guarded convoys traveling between Gibraltar and Brest as well as Casablanca , French Morocco , and Le Verdon @-@ sur @-@ Mer . They were joined by the first three ships as they were replaced in the Northern Command . Jaguar was badly damaged during a collision with a British destroyer in January 1940 and her repairs were not completed until early May . 
 When the Germans invaded France on 10 May 1940 , Panthère was being refitted at Toulon and her sisters were still escorting convoys . Jaguar , Léopard and Chacal were assigned to the Northern Command on 22 May to support Allied forces on the French coast . Jaguar was sunk the next day off Dunkirk and Chacal on the evening of 23 / 24 May near Boulogne by German bombers . Léopard remained in the area and bombarded advancing German forces near the northern French coast . After the surrender of France , she was seized by the British in July and turned over to the Free French the following month . 
 Léopard escorted convoys in the Western Approaches in 1940 – 41 before beginning a year @-@ long conversion into an escort destroyer . She helped to sink the German submarine U @-@ 136 in July 1942 before helping to liberate the island of La Réunion in November . The ship ran aground near Benghazi just a few weeks after being transferred to the Mediterranean in mid @-@ 1943 . Salvage attempts failed and her wreck was abandoned after it broke in half . 
 In July 1940 , Lynx and Tigre were present when the British attacked the French ships at Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir , but managed to escape without damage . After they reaching Toulon , the sisters were placed in reserve , together with Panthère , as the oldest contre @-@ torpilleurs in service and stripped of their light anti @-@ aircraft armament . On 27 November 1942 , Lynx was scuttled when the Germans attempted to capture the French ships at Toulon , but Panthère and Tigre were captured virtually intact . They were turned over to the Royal Italian Navy ( Regia Marina ) who renamed them FR 22 and FR 23 , respectively , when they recommissioned them in early 1943 . They were being used as transports when Italy surrendered in September ; FR 22 ( Panthère ) was scuttled by the Italians , but FR 23 ( Tigre ) managed to escape and join the Allies . 
 Tigre resumed her former name and was given to the Free French the following month , but she needed extensive repairs that lasted until early 1944 . The ship returned to convoy work for a few months before beginning a more extensive reconstruction that lasted until early 1945 . She was then assigned to the Flank Force that protected Allied forces in the Tyrrhenian Sea from German forces in Northern Italy for the rest of the war . Several weeks after the end of the war in May , the ship supported French forces in Algeria during the riots in May – June . Tigre was then assigned as a fast troop transport until the end of 1946 . She became a gunnery training ship until mid @-@ 1948 and was then hulked for the Engineering School . The ship was stricken from the Navy List in 1954 and broken up the following year . 
 = = See Also = = 
 List of ships of the Second World War 
 List of ship classes of the Second World War 
 = John Capper = 
 Major @-@ General Sir John Edward Capper KCB KCVO ( 7 December 1861 – 24 May 1955 ) was a senior officer of the British Army during the late nineteenth and early twentieth century who served on the North @-@ West Frontier of British India , in South Africa and during the First World War , where he was instrumental in the development of the tank . 
 An experienced engineer , Capper was involved in numerous building projects during his years in India and pioneered the development of airships in Britain . He helped establish and command several military training establishments in Britain , was involved in large @-@ scale military planning during 1918 and 1919 and was pivotal in establishing the tank as an important feature of the British Army . Although Capper was sometimes described as pompous and possessing poor communication skills , earning the nickname Stone Age for his attitude towards the ideas of junior officers in the Royal Tank Corps , he nevertheless played a vital role in the development and deployment of armoured vehicles in the British Army . 
 = = India , Burma and South Africa = = 
 John Capper was born in Lucknow , India to civil servant William Copeland Capper and his wife Sarah in December 1861 . Returning to England at an early age for education , Capper attended Wellington College and upon leaving in 1880 enrolled in the Royal Military Academy , Woolwich from where he went on to study at the School of Military Engineering at Chatham , before subsequently being commissioned into the Royal Engineers as a lieutenant . A capable engineering officer , Capper served in India and Burma for most of the first 17 years of his career , principally employed on military and public construction projects . He performed well in this position , being promoted to captain in 1889 . 
 In 1897 , Capper was attached to the force dispatched to the Tirah Campaign on the North @-@ West Frontier of British India . One of his tasks there was to supervise the construction of the first road for wheeled vehicles across the Khyber pass . At the campaign 's successful conclusion , he was promoted to major and transferred to South Africa while his wife Edith Mary ( neé <unk> ) and their son John <unk> Copeland Capper returned to England . Arriving in South Africa at the outbreak of the Second Boer War , Capper became deputy assistant director of railways , a vital job given the lengthy and dangerous supply routes along which the war was fought . In 1900 , he received the brevet rank of lieutenant colonel and commanded several locally raised units , eventually becoming the commandant at Johannesburg . He returned to England in June 1902 , following the end of hostilities the previous month , and on 31 October 1902 was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath ( CB ) . 
 = = Aeronautics = = 
 In 1903 he settled with his family at <unk> House in Alresford , and was appointed Commander of the Balloon Sections , based at Aldershot under the command of Col James Templer . In 1906 , having briefly become the Balloon Companies , the organisation became the School of Ballooning with Capper as its Commandant . At about the same time the Balloon Factory was split off and moved to a new site nearby at Farnborough and , on Templer 's retirement , Capper also became its Superintendent and was given the brevet rank of full colonel . Templer was retained at the factory under Capper to complete the development Britain 's first military airship , the Nulli Secundus ( " second to none " ) in a purpose @-@ built airship shed . 
 Capper not only supervised the British Army 's ballooning and airship activities , but took a wider interest in aeronautics . In anticipation of the new airship , he took up the civilian sport of ballooning , flying in competitions initially as assistant to the Hon. C.S. Rolls and later with his own balloon " Pegasus " and his wife as assistant . These included the man @-@ lifting " war kites " developed by Samuel Franklin Cody and the early work on aeroplanes by both Cody and J. W. Dunne . He also conducted fact @-@ finding visits to the USA , where he and his wife befriended the Wright brothers and became involved in protracted but ultimately futile negotiations for the War Office to buy a Wright machine . 
 Capper and Cody undertook the first successful flight of a British airship , the Nulli Secundus , over London in 1907 . 
 Capper went on to modify the airship as Nulli Secundus II , parodied by Punch as " second to none the second " , and a smaller experimental airship called Baby . Neither was an immediate success , although Baby would later be modified and have a long and successful career . 
 Capper oversaw the first Army aeroplanes . He briefly flew Dunne 's first glider , the <unk> , during secret trials at Blair Atholl in Scotland in 1907 . The flight had lasted only a few seconds when the glider crashed into a wall , with Capper sustaining a cut to the head . The next year , Cody flew the first British @-@ built aeroplane at Farnborough , which earned it the title British Army Aeroplane No.1. This was an ironic achievement for Capper 's command , as he had pinned his personal hopes on Dunne , whose <unk> achieved no more than a few hops . 
 That Autumn the government conducted a formal Inquiry into military aviation . Capper had to return early from Blair Atholl in order to present his evidence . He argued strongly for a promising future of all forms of aeronautics and especially the aeroplane . However his Army superiors on the committee were against aeronautics in any form . It was decided that only small @-@ scale airship experiments should continue and that aeroplane work should be stopped . It formally ceased when Dunne and Cody 's contracts ran out at the end of March 1909 . 
 Soon afterwards the Balloon Factory was removed from the command of the Army and a new civilian superintendent , Mervyn O 'Gorman , appointed . Capper remained in command of the Army Balloon School . 
 When Dunne left Farnborough , Capper was one of several friends who offered support for his efforts . In 1911 , one of Dunne 's new aeroplanes was exhibited at the Olympia Aero Show , with a placard stating it was " Built to the order of Col. J. E. Capper , R.E. " 
 In 1910 Capper was transferred to command of the Royal School of Military Engineering at Chatham , marking the end of his aeronautical career . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Capper remained at Chatham until September 1914 when the lack of experienced officers forced his transfer to France in the early months of the First World War . 
 As a brigadier @-@ general , Capper was first made deputy inspector of the lines of communication before being given the post of Chief Engineer to the Third Corps . In July 1915 he was promoted to major @-@ general and made chief engineer of the British Third Army . In October , following the deaths of several senior officers at the Battle of Loos , including Capper 's younger brother Major @-@ General Sir Thompson Capper , he was promoted to overall command of the 24th Division . Capper remained in command of the division for the next 18 months , including periods of heavy fighting at the Battle of the Somme , in which his son John was killed in action serving with the Royal Artillery . The division also spent extensive periods of time in other sections of the line and gained extensive battle experience at the cost of high casualties . As a reward for his service in command of the division , he was presented with the Commander 's Cross of the Légion d 'honneur by the French government . 
 In May 1917 , he was recalled to England , initially to run the Machine @-@ Gun Corps training centre and from 28 July hold the position of Director @-@ General of the newly formed Tank Corps at the War Office . Operational command of tanks at the frontlines was in the hands of Hugh Elles , the first commander of the Heavy Branch . Although tanks had first been introduced on the Somme the year before , their design and manufacture were both inadequate and the tactics of their deployment almost non @-@ existent . Capper 's job at the Tank Corps was to shape the organisation of the unit into an efficient battlefield force , improve mechanical reliability and develop effective tactics . It was in this role that Capper was given the nickname Stone Age , as his subordinates considered him to be unwilling to accept new innovations in tank tactics . In fact , Capper was an able tactician who worked with General J. F. C. Fuller to develop a plan for a large scale armoured assault on German lines in 1919 ( known as Plan 1919 ) : his subordinates ' prejudices were based on Capper 's rigid adherence to the military hierarchy and his consequent failure to communicate his ideas to those below his rank . For his services as Director General of the Tank Corps , Capper was made a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 In July 1918 , Capper left the War Office and commanded the 64th Division in England until May 1919 , when he took over command of Number 1 Area in France and Flanders . In September 1919 , Capper became Lieutenant @-@ Governor of Guernsey and took over command of the island 's military installations . He held the post for five years and during that time was made Colonel @-@ Commandant of the Royal Tank Corps . On 11 July 1921 , he was made a Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order . Retiring in 1925 , Capper remained associated with the Tank Corps and also became a governor of Wellington College , associations he retained until 1946 . 
 During the Second World War , Capper joined the Hampshire Home Guard and remained on duty with the unit until 1943 . Post @-@ War he retired fully to <unk> House and remained there until shortly before his death . He was widowed in 1953 and died at Esperance Nursing Home in Eastbourne in May 1955 , leaving a daughter . In 1971 , his collected papers , and those of his brother Thompson , who had been an instructor at the Staff College , Camberley , were donated to the Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives at King 's College London where they are still available to researchers . 
 = Obsidian ( 1986 video game ) = 
 Obsidian is an action @-@ adventure computer game for the Amstrad CPC personal computer published by Artic Computing in 1986 . The game is set on the titular space station located within the centre of an asteroid , which is out of control and drifting towards a black hole . The player must guide an astronaut with a jet pack around the station and re @-@ activate its engine shields to prevent the Obsidian 's destruction . This involves collecting items and using them to solve puzzles , while avoiding the Obsidian 's reactivated security systems . 
 Obsidian is the first game that was developed by Revolution Software co @-@ founder Tony Warriner , who was a school pupil at the time . Due to concentrating on Obsidian 's development rather than revising he failed all of his exams . The game received a positive response from journalists , it was praised for the quality of its graphics , reviewers held mixed views on the game 's ability to maintain player interest . The jet pack was criticized for being too sensitive when responding to the player 's movement inputs . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Obsidian is an action @-@ adventure presented in two dimensions , spread across approximately 50 game screens . Locations contrast between spaceship interior and rock surfaces . Players control a jet pack wearing astronaut who must deactivate the five engines of the titular <unk> Obsidian , which is located in the hollow centre carved out of an asteroid . Objects are stored in gravity boxes on the station 's ceilings , only one object can be held at a time . These are used to solve the game 's puzzles and allow the player to continue further into the game . Each object 's purpose must be discovered as they are not labelled . 
 The game world is filled with traps , laser defence mechanisms and security robots , all of which kill the astronaut on contact , resulting in the loss of one of his five lives . These defences must be shut down with objects obtained from gravity boxes in order to progress , as the player has no weapon to directly attack the robots with . The jet pack enables the astronaut to travel more quickly , but has a limited supply of nitro fuel . Should this fuel run out then the astronaut will lose a life . The spaceship contains points at which the jet pack can be refuelled , though these can be difficult to locate . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The crew of the Obsidian have temporarily abandoned the vessel in order to allow it to pass through a black hole . The Obsidian 's internal systems are capable of withstanding the black hole , but the station cannot shield its human inhabitants from the gravitational forces . The crew have taken refuge in a smaller craft which has been shielded , intending to return to the Obsidian when both vessels have passed through the black hole . A radiation storm has damaged the Obsidian 's engine protection systems and erased its flight path , leaving the station drifting towards the black hole where it will be destroyed . Only one member of the crew has the skills necessary to return to the Obsidian and prepare it to pass through the black hole , this is the game 's player character . The astronaut is forced to contend with the Obsidian 's re @-@ activated security system which has resulted in security robots being deployed , the space station 's internal doors sealing and defensive laser grids becoming active . Once the player has restored power , reactivated the Obsidian 's engines and reset the station 's flight path , there is a limited time to teleport back to the smaller shielded craft before the Obsidian 's engines carry the astronaut through the black hole without being shielded . 
 = = Development = = 
 Obsidian is the first game developed by Tony Warriner , one of four founders of the adventure game developer Revolution Software . Warriner was introduced to home computers at the age of 13 , as a result of which he developed an interest in game development . This interest resulted in him creating Obsidian when he should have been studying for his school exams , resulting in him failing every exam . The game was published , however , resulting in the young developer 's entry into the video game industry . Revolution Software was formed 4 years later . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The reviewer for Amtix ! magazine awarded the game a score of 64 % , calling it " ... an average , if rather simple , arcade adventure . " The same reviewer stated that Obsidian 's graphics are its most striking feature . The lack of enemies and objects to manipulate in some screens and low number of sound effects received were criticized . The reviewer for Amstrad Action , Bob Wade , awarded the game a score of 81 % and a ' A A Rave ' award , praising the game 's graphics and animations . He listed the game 's robotics enemies as " annoying as you flick between screens " . The reviewers differed in opinion on how the game progressed . Wade stated " ... as the playing area opens up it soon becomes clear that many objects will be required to complete the game and that some hard thinking as well as trial and error will be needed . " Amtix ! ' s reviewer stated " The trouble was that it became all very predictable and easy to solve once a few puzzles had been solved . " Both reviewers stated that the jet pack 's controls are too sensitive , making its usage difficult . 
 Computer and Video Games ' reviewer gave the game a score of 7 out of 10 in each of the magazine 's scoring criteria — graphics , sound , value and playability . The reviewer stated that the game 's premise is unoriginal , but that the game is enjoyable and makes " ... full use of the Amstrad 's colour graphics ... " The reviewer also stated " ... the smooth movement of objects and characters makes this game a pleasure to watch and play . " The game was reviewed again in Amtix ! by Massimo <unk> , several months later when Obsidian was re @-@ released on the budget label Americana . <unk> stated it had been one of his favourite titles when it was originally released , giving the game a rating of 70 % and stating " Everyone should have this game in their software collection . " He praised the game for adding a twist to the maze theme by disallowing the player from fighting back against threats . He added " ... a lot of thought and planning is needed to make your way around the various sections , deactivating the security systems as you go . " 
 = Project X ( 2012 film ) = 
 Project X is a 2012 American comedy film directed by Nima Nourizadeh and written by Michael Bacall and Matt Drake based on a story by Bacall , and produced by director Todd Phillips . The film follows three friends — Thomas ( Thomas Mann ) , Costa ( Oliver Cooper ) and J.B. ( Jonathan Daniel Brown ) — who plan to gain popularity by throwing a party , a plan which quickly escalates out of their control . 
 The title Project X was initially a placeholder for a final title , but interest generated by the secretive title kept it in place . A nationwide open casting call was employed to find fresh faces . The majority of the cast were sourced from this casting call , but a few with prior acting credits , such as Mann , were accepted after multiple auditions . Filming took place on sets in Los Angeles over five weeks on a US $ 12 million budget . The film is presented as a found footage home video from the perspective of an attendee using a camera to document the night 's events . 
 Project X was released in the United States , Canada , and the United Kingdom on March 2 , 2012 , and grossed over $ 100 million worldwide during its theatrical run . Criticism focused on the " loathsome " behavior of the lead characters , the perceived misogyny and the disregard for the effects of drug use . Other reviews considered it funny and thrilling , and equated it to a modern incarnation of the 1978 comedy Animal House . Following release , incidents of large scale parties referenced or blamed the film as an inspiration . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Pasadena , high school students Costa and J.B. plan to throw a party for their friend Thomas ' birthday , aiming to increase their popularity . Thomas ' parents go away for the weekend , leaving him alone in the house , but warn him not to have too many people over , and not to drive his father 's Mercedes . Thomas is reluctant to have the party at his house , but Costa continues with his plan . Costa hires AV @-@ student Dax to chronicle the night 's events . Costa and J.B. advertise the party throughout the school . Thomas himself invites Alexis , the hottest girl at school , and his best friend Kirby , who has a crush on Thomas . 
 Costa , Thomas , and J.B. go to buy marijuana from drug @-@ dealer T @-@ Rick . While T @-@ Rick gets the marijuana , Costa steals his lawn gnome to use as a party mascot . As they leave , T @-@ Rick discovers his gnome stolen and chases after them but they escape in Thomas ' mini @-@ van . As night falls , the party 's start time passes but no one turns up and Thomas worries that the party will fail . Suddenly , party @-@ goers arrive en @-@ masse . Thomas intends to limit the party to the backyard and <unk> with the house guarded by two young security guards , Everett and Tyler . However , more and more people begin to arrive and the party moves beyond their control and into the house . Thomas questions Costa on how he advertised the party , forcing him to confess that he put ads on Craigslist and on a local radio station , worried that no one would attend . 
 Things escalate quickly and the police arrive , responding to a noise complaint . The partygoers remain silent , convincing the officers that the party has already ended . The police leave and the party resumes . T @-@ Rick 's gnome is smashed , revealing that it contains a large amount of ecstasy tablets , which are quickly consumed by the partygoers . Thomas kisses Kirby and reveals that he loves her . Alexis meanwhile flirts with Thomas throughout the night and eventually seduces him . Kirby walks in on the pair as they are about to have sex and leaves the party upset . The noise and chaos of the party , which has now spilled into the surrounding neighborhood , receives televised news coverage with helicopters flying over the house . A dwarf guest drives Thomas ' dad 's Mercedes into the pool after being put into an oven by other partygoers . 
 The police return in force but are overwhelmed and repelled by the guests . They decide to let the party end naturally before moving in . T @-@ Rick arrives armed with a flamethrower in an attempt to reclaim his gnome . He begins setting fire to the trees and cars in search of Costa , forcing the guests to flee and the party to end . The police shoot his flamethrower pack and it explodes . Thomas , Costa , J.B. , and Dax flee with the other guests as Thomas ' house burns and the SWAT team moves in to retake the neighborhood . The neighborhood is left aflame . 
 By morning , the friends return to their respective homes to discover what punishment awaits them . After his parents return , Thomas ' father commends him for managing to throw the party because he thought he was a loser , but he uses Thomas ' college fund to pay for the damages . At school , Thomas , Costa and J.B. are cheered by the students and Thomas reconciles romantically with Kirby . In the epilogue , T @-@ Rick is recovered alive following the explosion , Thomas is convicted for disturbing the peace , contributing to the delinquency of minors , and inciting a riot , and Costa and J.B. are acquitted ; Costa because of his expensive lawyer and J.B. because his parents convince the court that he is mentally incapable and unfit to stand trial . Costa , however , is currently waiting for the results of three paternity tests . Dax , meanwhile , is under investigation for the disappearance of his parents . In an interview with Jillian Reynolds , Costa promises his next party will be even better . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Thomas Mann as Thomas <unk> 
 Mann had prior acting experience , in the feature film It 's Kind of a Funny Story ( 2010 ) , and was told he could not audition for Project X because the producers wished to cast only people without acting credits . Mann ultimately auditioned seven times before winning the role . 
 Oliver Cooper as Costa 
 The film is Cooper 's feature film debut . Costa 's confident nature and backstory of being unwillingly moved to the film 's setting of North Pasadena from Queens , New York was developed based on Cooper 's auditions , where it was felt he gave the impression of being from New York City , despite originating from Ohio . 
 Jonathan Daniel Brown as J.B. 
 The film is Brown 's feature film debut . 
 Dax Flame as Dax 
 A friend of Costa 's hired to chronicle the party . Flame was discovered through his personal YouTube video blog . Describing his character , Flame stated " Because he ’ s holding the camera , my character doesn ’ t have a lot of screen time , but when he does , it ’ s very impactful . " 
 Kirby Bliss Blanton as Kirby 
 Thomas ' friend , who has an unrequited crush on Thomas . 
 Brady <unk> and Nick <unk> as Everett and Tyler 
 A pair of children hired as security for Costa 's party . 
 Alexis Knapp as Alexis 
 A popular high school girl . Knapp 's character required nudity , something with which she was initially uncomfortable , stating " I just had a lot of moral issues with it but I got over it and I heard that it ’ s not that revealing . So I ’ m relieved . " Knapp described her character as a tomboy , and was given the opportunity to add to the role , move beyond a " hot chick " archetype . 
 The cast also includes : Miles Teller as college jock Miles ; Martin Klebba as Angry Little Person , a party guest ; Rick Shapiro as drug dealer T @-@ Rick ; Rob <unk> as Rob , Thomas 's neighbor ; Caitlin Dulany and Peter MacKenzie as Thomas 's Mom and Dad respectively ; Nichole Bloom as J.B. ' s girl ; and Jesse Marco as the party DJ . Television hosts Jillian Reynolds and Jimmy Kimmel cameo as themselves . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Producer Todd Phillips described the film as an experiment , after executive producer Alex Heineman provided a basic concept , with the production team sharing tales of memorable parties that they had either attended or heard about . Writer Michael Bacall developed these stories into an outline scenario in one night with the goal of creating the " <unk> high school party of all time " . The remainder of the story was fleshed out in the following weeks . Bacall and Drake were told to " go crazy " with the script , although Bacall confessed " I was a nerd in high school so I never did anything like what 's in the movie " . Bacall worked on the script generally at nights between simultaneously working on the scripts for 21 Jump Street and Scott Pilgrim vs. the World . 
 Nima Nourizadeh had previously only worked directing music videos and commercials , but he came to the producers ' attention for his directing work on a series of party @-@ themed Adidas commercials . Nourizadeh explained to the producers how he would want to develop the script and how he would want the film to look and feel , and he was eventually brought from London to Los Angeles , for what he believed would be two weeks , but stretched to two years . Phillips believed that Nourizadeh 's interpretation of the film was compatible with his vision , influencing the decision to hire Nourizadeh in his feature film debut . 
 Project X was not intended to be the title of the film , but it was kept to capitalize on interest generated by the rumored secrecy surrounding the project . Adding to the secrecy , producers decided to not send full scripts to any prospective cast member , instead providing only watermarked individual pages . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 To create the impression that the events of Project X had actually happened , the producers decided against casting known faces , but to find completely new actors . Phillips stated that the goal of the open call was to cast “ unknown actors " and " real people of all ethnicities , ” who would not normally be given a chance to star in a film . Phillips and producer Joel Silver decided to create a nationwide open casting call , allowing any United States resident over the age of 18 to audition for Project X through a specially created website . Actors were required to provide videos of themselves telling embarrassing or funny stories , or dancing . However , traditional casting was still employed to allow actors with little professional acting credits to audition . The process allowed traits of the selected actors to be incorporated into their characters , including in several cases , their respective characters taking the actors ' names . In casting the three leads , the production avoided solo casting and instead had a group of three actors auditioning together , switching out and adding different actors to see which group worked best together . 
 The casting of low @-@ profile actors aided in keeping the production budget low by avoiding the larger salaries attached to stars . To prepare for the role and create a believable friendship between the leads , Brown , Cooper , and Mann were sent to Disneyland together and spent a weekend in a cabin at Big Bear City , California . 
 = = = Principal photography = = = 
 Principal photography was scheduled to begin on June 14 , 2010 , in Los Angeles , California on a budget of $ 12 million . Filming took place over twenty @-@ five nights between 5pm and 5am on the Warner Ranch in Burbank , California . The set contained a faux residential area featuring multiple houses . The house belonging to Thomas was situated directly opposite the house used by Danny Glover 's character Roger Murtaugh in the Silver @-@ produced 1987 action film Lethal Weapon . 
 The production decided to film on a set because locating a real neighborhood that could be effectively closed off and which would allow filming throughout the evening and early morning proved difficult . Phillips explained that using a real neighborhood would have also proven difficult because of the fire damage required for the film . Much of the set was destroyed as part of filming . The film was largely shot in chronological sequence as repairing the set damage from a later scene to film an earlier one would have been difficult . Mann described the filming as a " party atmosphere " , with New York disc jockey Jesse Marco on set performing music even when the cameras stopped rolling to maintain the energy of the cast and extras . Many of the same extras were brought back for multiple nights of filming , and would continue to party between scenes . Periodic takes of up to 20 minutes were made of just extras dancing . During filming , Burbank police were called to the set concerning noise complaints made by nearby residents . 
 Project X was filmed in cinéma vérité style , only displaying the events of the film through the first @-@ person view of the cameraman observing the party , to create the effect of the audience being in attendance at the out of control party . Nourizadeh stated that the style allowed the film to seem " real " and " show some of the realities of what kids do " . Cinematographer Ken Seng and Nourizadeh tested twelve different camera systems before choosing the digital @-@ HD Sony <unk> video camera , basing their decision on its ability to handle sudden extreme changes in lighting due to natural daylight and strobe lights . 
 The film is primarily presented from the perspective of the character Dax and his camera , but Nourizadeh also obtained footage by providing the cast and extras with recording devices such as <unk> and iPhones to capture events occurring outside of the perspective or knowledge of the cameraman . This resulted in hours of unusable footage that had to be observed by Nourizadeh and his team to find segments that could be incorporated into the final film . Nourizadeh stated " when you have real material being shot by real people , it then kind of feels like it is . It is found footage . I hated spending 10 hours looking through bits of flip footage – people didn ’ t press stop , it ’ s like in their pockets . But yeah , it was great , man . " Other footage was provided from fictional police and news cameras to give a different perspective on the events . 
 = = Release = = 
 Project X held its world premiere on February 29 , 2012 , at the Grauman 's Chinese Theatre in Hollywood , followed by an after party with performances by Kid Cudi , Tyler , The Creator , and The Hundred in the Hands . Party guests were greeted by a Los Angeles Police Department cruiser and a bouncer warning them to keep their clothes on . 
 The film was scheduled for release in November 2011 , but in August of that year the date was pushed back four months to March 2012 . The film first received a wide release on March 1 , 2012 , in Australia , followed on March 2 , 2012 by the United States and Canada . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 During its box office run , the film grossed $ 54 @,@ 731 @,@ 865 in North America and $ 48 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 from markets elsewhere – a worldwide total of $ 102 @,@ 731 @,@ 865 . 
 The film opened to $ 1 @.@ 2 million in midnight takings from 1 @,@ 003 theaters in the United States and Canada . Throughout its opening day , the film 's release was expanded to 3 @,@ 055 theaters , where it grossed a total of $ 8 @.@ 2 million including midnight takings . The end of the opening weekend saw the film take a total of $ 21 million – an average of $ 6 @,@ 891 per theater – finishing as the number two grossing film of the weekend behind the animated family film The Lorax ( $ 70 @.@ 2 million ) , and exceeding expectations that it would finish with a gross in the mid to high teens . Project X was highly popular with males and youth ; 58 percent of the opening weekend audience for the film was male , and 67 percent of the audience was under the age of 25 . 
 Outside of North America , the film had its most successful opening weekends in France ( $ 3 @.@ 8 million ) , Australia ( $ 1 @.@ 3 million ) , and Germany ( $ 1 @.@ 2 million ) . These countries also represented its largest total gross takings , with $ 15 million from France , $ 4 @.@ 4 million from Australia , and $ 4 @.@ 3 million from Germany . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 28 % , based on 129 reviews , with an average score of 4 @.@ 2 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " <unk> , unfunny , and all @-@ around unattractive , Project X mines the depths of the teen movie and found @-@ footage genres for 87 minutes of predictably mean @-@ spirited debauchery . " On Metacritic , the film has a score of 48 out of 100 , based on 25 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . CinemaScore polls reported that the average grade moviegoers gave the film was a " B " on an A + to F scale , with young males rating it the highest ( A ) , and males in general rating the film higher ( B + ) than females ( C + ) . 
 Criticism against the film focused on the perceived misogyny , mean @-@ spirit , and " loathsome " behavior of the characters , and disregard for the effects of drugs . Empire 's Chris Hewitt gave the film one star out of five , and referred to the central characters portrayed by Mann , Cooper , and Brown , as " spectacularly unlikable " . Hewitt labeled the characters " unrepentant , nihilistic , vile , venal , animalistic , avaricious , charmless , entitled , sub @-@ Kardashian , stunningly irresponsible brats " . Hewitt ended his review by stating that the film was " possibly the worst film of the last 20 years . It ’ s certainly the worst comedy of the last 20 years " . Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter was similarly critical , calling it " grimly depressing , glumly unfunny <unk> " , but admitted that it would " enthrall a portion of the high school / college age demographic it depicts , just as it alternately outrages , confounds and disgusts other , presumably older audiences . " USA Today 's Claudia Puig found the film treated female characters poorly , labeling it a " heinous , misogynistic movie filled with faceless crowds and nary a character who resembles an actual human being " , a sentiment echoed by Melissa Anderson of The Village Voice who felt the film promoted " skull @-@ numbing hedonism without consequences " , and " second @-@ nature misogyny " , and that the only purpose of the male characters is to " ' get high , fuck bitches . ' " 
 Robbie Collin of The Telegraph called the film " flamboyantly loathsome on every imaginable level " and was critical of the three lead characters , saying " unlike Superbad 's leads , these three are <unk> unpleasant , and the supposedly comedic banter between them comes off as bullying . " The Los Angeles Times 's Robert Abele called the main trio " numbingly predictable " and the film itself " unoriginal " , stating the film " bears a <unk> piggish attitude toward rewarding socially unacceptable behavior that feels unseemly rather than exciting " . 
 The New York Times ' Neil Genzlinger said that the funny script and skilled editing potentially made it the " Animal House of the iPhone generation " . Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly praised the film for updating the clichés of similarly themed films from the 1970s to the 1980s like Animal House and Risky Business " so that they look just dangerous enough to make nostalgia feel naughty " , but stated that the film does not offer anything more outrageous than real parties , despite implying " that it 's breaking down bold new barriers of misbehavior " . Gleiberman accused negative reviews of " fulfilling the role of all those uptight parents in ’ 50s news reports about the dangers of rock & roll " , by applying moral judgments to the events of the film . Time Out 's Joshua Rothkopf gave the film four stars out of five , calling it " brainless " , but feeling that the sheer anarchy of the film 's events were " thrilling " . Pete Travers of Rolling Stone praised the film as " gut @-@ <unk> funny " that appealed to a base youth element to become " <unk> and run amok " , and said that it puts its own spin on Animal House . Travers gave particular mention to Mann as " excellent " , however he also stated that Nourizadeh 's filmmaking was a " disaster " . 
 Several reviewers were particularly critical towards Cooper and his character . Hewitt called him " the most annoying movie character since Jar Jar Binks " , while others similarly described him as " singularly loathsome , venal and without humor " , " supremely annoying " , " that dick in a sweater @-@ vest " and a " misogynistic " imitation of Jonah Hill " minus the timing , sad sack appeal and <unk> grace " . Conversely , Genzlinger praised Cooper for bringing a " mischievous likability " to Costa that " anchors " the events . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Cooper was nominated for two 2012 MTV Movie Awards for Best Comedic Performance and Best On @-@ Screen Dirtbag , and the film received a nomination for Best Music for the Steve Aoki remix of the Kid Cudi song Pursuit of Happiness . Project X was listed as the number 1 most illegally downloaded film of 2012 on BitTorrent with approximately 8 @.@ 7 million downloads . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Project X was released on DVD , Blu @-@ ray disc , the UltraViolet cloud storage service and digital download on June 19 , 2012 . Two versions of the Blu @-@ ray disc were released : one containing a Blu @-@ ray and UltraViolet copy of the film , and a combo pack containing the film on Blu @-@ ray , DVD and UltraViolet . The Blu @-@ ray disc version contains an extended edition featuring approximately 6 minutes of additional footage , the theatrical cut , and presents the film in 1080p / AVC with DTS @-@ HD Master Audio sound . The home release also contains three featurettes : " Project X : Declassified " , a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes look at the film 's production ; " Project X : The Pasadena Three " , showing the casting of the three leads , Mann , Cooper , and Brown ; and " Project <unk> " , detailing how much the damage caused in the film would have cost in reality . The DVD version sold 401 @,@ 204 units in the United States during its first week , earning approximately $ 5 @.@ 9 million , and as of December 2012 , it has sold 1 @,@ 012 @,@ 223 units and earned $ 15 @.@ 5 million from home media sales . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The Project X ( Original Motion Picture Soundtrack ) was released on iTunes and on CD on February 28 , 2012 , by WaterTower Music . The album features 13 tracks which appeared throughout the film , with songs by Kid Cudi , D12 , <unk> , Nas , and Pusha T. 
 The score spent eighteen weeks on the US Billboard 200 , where it peaked at number twelve . The album reached number five on the Top Digital Albums , number one on the Top Soundtracks and Top Independent Albums , and number three on the Top Rap Albums and Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums . It also charted on the Top Canadian Albums at number eight , the Swiss Albums Chart at number seventy @-@ three , the French Albums Chart at number twenty , and the Belgian Ultratop 50 Albums Charts at number sixty @-@ six in Flanders and number twenty @-@ nine in Wallonia . In the United States , the album was the number 6 selling soundtrack album of 2012 , selling approximately 217 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Following the release of Project X , many parties were inspired by the film . 
 On March 9 , 2012 , " Project M " became the first event to gain media attention after a party invite was posted on Twitter by Farmington Hills , Michigan high schooler Mikey Vasovski , and was subsequently passed to thousands of users , to the point that the message was being resent once per second , and was posted on Craigslist . The party was dubbed " Project M " by Vasovski , and the invite contained the address of a foreclosed home where the party would take place . By 9 a.m. on March 9 , potential party @-@ goers began arriving at the location , but by 11 a.m. the party had been officially cancelled after police began escorting people off of the premises . Based on his promotion job , Vasovski was offered a summer internship by Gawker Media . On March 10 , 2012 , a second party gained media attention . The party was organized by a Canadian student , titled " Project Kris " . Within 24 hours , it had been viewed by over 900 @,@ 000 people . The event was allegedly intended to be a small party for 30 . 
 On March 13 , 2012 , two separate parties were attempted in Miramar , Florida and Houston , Texas . In Miramar , people were invited to a foreclosed home to recreate the film as " Project X House Party 2 " . The promoter was arrested and charged with $ 19 @,@ 000 of criminal damage before the party had begun . Police claimed to have turned away 2 @,@ 000 teenagers who approached the property unaware of the party 's cancellation . In Houston , 13 teenagers were arrested after successfully throwing a party and causing up to $ 100 @,@ 000 of damage to an empty home . When police questioned the teens about their motivation , they claimed to have been inspired by the film . A second Houston party attracted between 500 and 1 @,@ 000 guests , but resulted in the death of one person after an attendee started firing a gun when police attempted to break up the event . 
 On September 21 , 2012 , in the small Dutch town of Haren a party spiraled out of control after a Facebook invitation . News reports indicated that " There were multiple mentions of an American film called Project X " , and that some revelers wore T @-@ shirts marked ' Project X Haren ' . The damage was estimated to be over € 1 million ( $ 1 @.@ 32 million ) . 
 In 2012 , a party called Proyecto X ( " Project X " in Spanish ) was held in the Pilar Partido of Buenos Aires Province , Argentina . The event gathered 4 @,@ 500 teenagers who were sold alcohol . 
 In 2014 , a party called “ Project P ” was thrown in Mecosta County , MI which attracted more that 2 @,@ 000 people to an isolated farm house . There were go @-@ go dancers , strippers , a fire thrower and two DJs reportedly hired for the party . Dozens of participants were taken to area hospitals after overdosing on drugs ( particularly heroin ) and alcohol including one reported sexual assault . Police from seven agencies who responded chose to manage the situation from the perimeter because of the risk of hundreds of intoxicated drivers fleeing the scene . Three suspected organizers of the rave were formally charged . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 On March 6 , 2012 , four days after its release , Warner Bros. announced a sequel , with Bacall returning to write a script . On May 19 , 2015 , the studio officially announced that the sequel would be titled Project XX and is scheduled for release on August 19 , 2016 . 
 = .no = 
 .no is the Internet country code top @-@ level domain ( ccTLD ) for Norway . Norid , the domain name registry , is based in Trondheim , is owned by the state @-@ owned Uninett and operates under supervision of the Norwegian Post and Telecommunications Authority . As of May 10 , 2013 there were 583 @,@ 962 registered .no @-@ domains . Organizations with a presence in Norway and registration at the Brønnøysund Register Centre are limited to 100 domains each . Individuals residing in Norway may register in the second @-@ level domain priv.no and , as of June 17 , 2014 , directly under .no. Other second @-@ level domains exist for organizations of certain types , such as municipalities and schools . The strict regulations have resulted in near @-@ absence of cybersquatting and warehousing . 
 Management of the ccTLD was awarded to Pål Spilling in 1983 , but was taken over by Uninett four years later . The 1000th domain was registered in 1995 . Norid is the result of several re @-@ organizations within Uninett , in 2003 becoming a separate limited company . Norway has also been allocated two other ccTLDs , .sj for Svalbard and Jan Mayen and .bv for Bouvetøya ; neither are open to registration . Originally only a single domain was permitted per organization , and this was manually checked by Norid to ensure compliance with trademark ownership . The regulations were liberalized in 2001 , when the process was automated and a retrospective dispute resolution scheme was introduced . This resulted in a boom of registrations , with the accumulated registrations exceeding 100 @,@ 000 in the course of the year . Domain names may consist of the twenty @-@ six basic Latin letters , digits and the hyphen , and beginning in 2004 three Norwegian language letters and twenty Sami language letters have been permitted . All @-@ numeric domains were introduced in 2007 and priv.no in 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 The domain name registry responsibility for .no was in 1983 awarded to Pål Spilling at the Norwegian Telecommunications Administration 's Research Institute . The actual registration work was carried out by Jens <unk> . The first registered domains were <unk> ( the Norwegian Telecommunications Administration ) and <unk> ( the Department of Informatics at the University of Oslo ) . Initially the workload of domain registration was light , but after a few years the workload had become unmanageable as a side project for an individual . Policy @-@ makers also indicated a need for the domain registration to be managed by a non @-@ commercial organization . The responsibility was therefore transferred to the publicly owned Uninett , a supplier of information and communications technology to Norwegian public universities , colleges and research institutions on 17 March 1987 . The oldest archived zone file dates from 1989 and includes 19 domains . In 1991 and 1992 , all state university colleges were connected to the Internet and issued domain names , causing a boom of registrations . The 1000th domain was registered in 1995 . 
 Uninett was at first administrated as a division of SINTEF , but was in 1993 transformed to a limited company owned by the Ministry of Education and Research . Norid was established as a division within Uninett in 1996 , and issued the responsibility of managing the .no domain . On 21 August 1997 , Norid was given the responsibility for the newly created .sj and .bv domains . Uninett FAS was established the following year as a subsidiary of Uninett to manage the technical network and service infrastructure , including operation of the network systems for the universities and colleges . Thus Norid also became part of the Uninett FAS portfolio . Two organizations were established in 1998 : the Domain Resolution Body , to resolve domain disputes , and Norpol , a political advisory board . Domain name registrars were introduced in 1999 to handle aspects that could be provided by a third party . Uninett Norid was in 2003 registered as a limited company owned by Uninett , to secure the management of the domains within an independent organization . 
 Until 2001 , each organization could only register a single domain and had to document its right to the name , either directly connected to the company 's name or a trademark ; this information was verified by Norid . The rules were liberalized on 19 February 2001 . A new cap was set at fifteen domains per organization and Norid no longer made an evaluation of the right to the name ; if the domain was not registered it would be awarded . This resulted in a large increase in the number of domains , and the 100,000th domain was registered that same year . Originally only the basic Latin letters were permitted , but from 9 February 2004 an additional twenty @-@ three characters from the Norwegian and Sami languages were permitted , along with the number of permitted domains per organization increasing to twenty . From 13 June 2007 , all @-@ numerical domains names were allowed . The <unk> domain was registered in January 2011 . The priv.no second @-@ level domain was permitted from June 2011 , which gave individuals the possibility to register . On 30 November 2011 , organizations were permitted to register 100 domains . 
 On 17 June 2014 Norid opened up for private citizen registrations of .no domains . On 9 December 2014 Norid enabled support for <unk> . 
 = = Management = = 
 Management of .no lies with the Trondheim @-@ based Norid , which is also the domain name registry for the unused .sj and .bv. Norid is a limited company owned by Uninett , which is again owned by the Ministry of Education and Research . The legal right to manage the domains is two @-@ fold , based both on an agreement with the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority ( IANA ) and regulations under the Electronic Communications Act which is supervised by the Norwegian Post and Telecommunications Authority . The policy for use of .no is regulated by the Regulation Concerning Domain Names Under Norwegian Country Code Top @-@ level Domains , also known as the Domain Regulation . This regulation also regulates Norway 's other two ccTLDs , .bv and .sj , for Bouvetøya and Svalbard and Jan Mayen , respectively ; neither are open to registration . 
 Registration takes place through a third party , a domain name registrar . The relationship between Norid , the registrar and the holder is regulated through civil legal agreements . The registrar registers the domain on behalf of the holder , and the holder then holds the right to the domain name until it is terminated , unless a dispute resolution dictates otherwise . Norid charges registrars 60 Norwegian krone ( NOK ) per registration and change of holder , as well as NOK 60 in an annual fee per domain . Registrars must meet criteria regarding technical and administrative resources , must pay an annual fee of NOK 5 @,@ 000 and a deposit of minimum NOK 10 @,@ 000 , depending on activity level . Registrars must also undertake a minimum activity of either administrating or registering forty domains per year . 
 Upon registering a domain , the user signs a declaration that they are not infringing on the rights of other parties and that the user will assume full responsibility for any consequences of use of the domain name . The registration process at Norid is fully automated and does not include any steps to ensure that the user has the rights to the name . Disputes regarding the right to a domain name are handled retrospectively , either through the Alternative Dispute Resolution Committee or court proceedings . Issues which could give the right to take over a domain name include infringements of the Trademarks Act and the Marketing Control Act . Trademark holders will also be awarded the domain if the registration was solely made to sell the domain to the trademark owner . The dispute bodies will also consider the risk of confusion , based on the domain name itself rather than the content of the site . For one domain , <unk> , the issue of ownership was subject to a Supreme Court case . 
 The Supreme Court has ruled that the Norwegian Prosecuting Authority may seize domain registrations under specifications of the General Civil Penal Code , as domains are legally regarded as assets with financial value . As of 27 September 2012 there were 552 @,@ 255 registered domains . .no @-@ domains had a 90 @.@ 6 @-@ percent renewal rate in 2009 , which is significantly higher than more liberal domains , such as 71 percent of .com domains . <unk> and warehousing has not been a problem with .no @-@ domains because of the strict registration requirements . Norpol is an advisory body with thirteen members appointed to discuss and comment on the domain policy . It consists of members from several government authorities , the Internet industry and other stakeholders . 
 = = Policy = = 
 Only organizations with a local presence in Norway and with registration in the Brønnøysund Register Centre are allowed to register domains under .no. Specifically , they must be registered in the Central Coordinating Register for Legal Entities — and thus have an organization number , have a postal address in Norway and must be able to actually document activity in Norway upon request from Norid . All qualified users may register up to 100 domains directly under .no and five additional domains under each second @-@ level domain . 
 The priv.no domain is available for registration by individuals . To register , an individual must be registered in the National Registry and have been issued a national identity number , must be resident in Norway and be at least 18 years old . Moving abroad will not result in the domain being deleted , but the person cannot register any more domains while living abroad . There is a limit of five registered domains per person . 
 Domain names must consist of 2 to 63 characters . Permitted characters are the ISO basic Latin alphabet ( a through z ) , digits ( 0 through 9 ) , the hyphen ( - ) , the three Norwegian language letters æ , ø and å , and twenty special Sami languages letters ( á · à · ä · č · ç · <unk> · é · è · ê · ŋ · <unk> · ñ · ó · <unk> · ô · ö · <unk> · <unk> · ü · ž ) . The domain name must start and end in a digit or a letter . A large number of domains cannot be registered , including all that are the basis for second @-@ level domains , and a specified series of geographical names , including names of settlements and islands , which may become second @-@ level domains in the future . Eight specific Internet terms may not be registered ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , no , <unk> , internet and <unk> ) . Additional general @-@ category potential future second @-@ level domains have also been blocked , such as <unk> and <unk> 
 = = Second @-@ level domains = = 
 There are three types of second @-@ level domains : <unk> @-@ oriented , category @-@ oriented and those managed by other agencies than Norid . There are reserved geographic second @-@ level domains for all counties ( such as <unk> for Oslo and <unk> for Nord @-@ Trøndelag ) , all urban areas with at least 5 @,@ 000 inhabitants ( such as <unk> for <unk> ) and all municipalities ( such as <unk> for Bergen and both <unk> and <unk> for Inderøy ) . In addition , <unk> has been reserved for Svalbard and jan @-@ <unk> for Jan Mayen . Users are asked to not register with a geographic second @-@ level domain unless they have a local presence in the area . The <unk> name under a geographic second @-@ level domain ( such as <unk> ) may only be carried out by the local government of the area , such as the municipality , the county municipality and the Governor of Svalbard . 
 The category second @-@ level domains require the user to meet specific characteristics ; for instance , only upper secondary schools may register under <unk> Most of the second @-@ level domains are managed by Norid , although five domains are managed by three other government agencies , the Government Administration Services for central parts of the government , the Norwegian Armed Forces for their own sites and the Norwegian Association of Local and Regional Authorities for municipalities and county municipalities . 
 = Matanikau Offensive = 
 The Matanikau Offensive , from 1 – 4 November 1942 , sometimes referred to as the Fourth Battle of the Matanikau , was an engagement between United States ( U.S. ) Marine and Army and Imperial Japanese Army forces around the Matanikau River and Point Cruz area on Guadalcanal during the Guadalcanal campaign of World War II . The action was one of the last of a series of engagements between U.S. and Japanese forces near the Matanikau River during the campaign . 
 In the engagement , seven battalions of U.S. Marine and Army troops under the overall command of Alexander Vandegrift and tactical command of Merritt A. Edson , following up on the U.S. victory in the Battle for Henderson Field , crossed the Matanikau River and attacked Japanese Army units between the river and Point Cruz , on the northern Guadalcanal coast . The area was defended by the Japanese Army 's 4th Infantry Regiment under Nomasu Nakaguma along with various other support troops , under the overall command of Harukichi Hyakutake . After inflicting heavy casualties on the Japanese defenders , U.S. forces halted the offensive and temporarily withdrew because of a perceived threat from Japanese forces elsewhere in the Guadalcanal area . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Guadalcanal Campaign = = = 
 On 7 August 1942 , Allied forces ( primarily U.S. ) landed on Guadalcanal , Tulagi , and Florida Islands in the Solomon Islands . The landings on the islands were meant to deny their use by the Japanese as bases for threatening the supply routes between the U.S. and Australia , and to secure the islands as starting points for a campaign with the eventual goal of isolating the major Japanese base at Rabaul while also supporting the Allied New Guinea campaign . The landings initiated the six @-@ month @-@ long Guadalcanal campaign . 
 Taking the Japanese by surprise , by nightfall on 8 August , the 11 @,@ 000 Allied troops , under the command of Lieutenant General Alexander Vandegrift and mainly consisting of United States Marine Corps units , had secured Tulagi and nearby small islands , as well as an airfield under construction at Lunga Point on Guadalcanal . The airfield was later named Henderson Field by Allied forces . The Allied aircraft that subsequently operated out of the airfield became known as the " Cactus Air Force " ( CAF ) after the Allied codename for Guadalcanal . To protect the airfield , the U.S. Marines established a perimeter defense around Lunga Point . 
 In response to the Allied landings on Guadalcanal , the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters assigned the Imperial Japanese Army 's 17th Army , a corps @-@ sized command based at Rabaul and under the command of Lieutenant @-@ General Harukichi Hyakutake , with the task of retaking Guadalcanal from Allied forces . Beginning on 19 August , various units of the 17th Army began to arrive on Guadalcanal with the goal of driving Allied forces from the island . 
 Because of the threat by CAF aircraft based at Henderson Field , the Japanese were unable to use large , slow transport ships to deliver troops and supplies to the island . Instead , the Japanese used warships based at Rabaul and the Shortland Islands to carry their forces to Guadalcanal . The Japanese warships , mainly light cruisers or destroyers from the Eighth Fleet under the command of Vice Admiral Gunichi Mikawa , were usually able to make the round trip down " The Slot " to Guadalcanal and back in a single night , thereby minimizing their exposure to CAF air attack . Delivering the troops in this manner , however , prevented most of the soldiers ' heavy equipment and supplies , such as heavy artillery , vehicles , and much food and ammunition , from being carried to Guadalcanal with them . These high speed warship runs to Guadalcanal occurred throughout the campaign and were later called the " Tokyo Express " by Allied forces and " Rat Transportation " by the Japanese . 
 The first Japanese attempt to recapture Henderson Field failed when a 917 @-@ man force was defeated on 21 August in the Battle of the Tenaru . The next attempt took place from 12 – 14 September , with the 6 @,@ 000 soldiers under the command of Major General Kiyotake Kawaguchi being defeated in the Battle of Edson 's Ridge . After their defeat at Edson 's Ridge , Kawaguchi and the surviving Japanese troops regrouped west of the Matanikau River on Guadalcanal . 
 As the Japanese regrouped , the U.S. forces concentrated on shoring up and strengthening their Lunga defenses . On 18 September , an Allied naval convoy delivered 4 @,@ 157 men from the U.S. 7th Marine Regiment to Guadalcanal . These reinforcements allowed Vandegrift , beginning on 19 September , to establish an unbroken line of defense completely around the Lunga perimeter . 
 General Vandegrift and his staff were aware that Kawaguchi 's troops had retreated to the area west of the Matanikau and that numerous groups of Japanese stragglers were scattered throughout the area between the Lunga Perimeter and the Matanikau River . Vandegrift , therefore , decided to conduct a series of small unit operations around the Matanikau Valley . 
 The first U.S. Marine operation against Japanese forces west of the Matanikau , conducted between 23 September and 27 September 1942 by elements of three U.S. Marine battalions , was repulsed by Kawaguchi 's troops under Colonel Akinosuke Oka 's local command . In the second action , between 6 October and 9 October , a larger force of U.S. Marines successfully crossed the Matanikau River , attacked newly landed Japanese forces from the 2nd ( Sendai ) Infantry Division under the command of generals Masao Maruyama and Yumio Nasu and inflicted heavy casualties on the Japanese 4th Infantry Regiment . The second action forced the Japanese to retreat from their positions east of the Matanikau . 
 In the meantime , Major General Millard F. Harmon , commander of United States Army forces in the South Pacific , convinced Vice Admiral Robert L. Ghormley , commander of Allied forces in the South Pacific Area , that U.S. Marine forces on Guadalcanal needed to be reinforced immediately if the Allies were to successfully defend the island from the anticipated Japanese offensive . Thus on 13 October , a naval convoy delivered the 2 @,@ 837 @-@ strong 164th U.S. Infantry Regiment , a North Dakota Army National Guard formation from the U.S. Army 's Americal Division , to Guadalcanal . 
 = = = Battle for Henderson Field = = = 
 Between 1 October and 17 October , the Japanese delivered 15 @,@ 000 troops to Guadalcanal , giving Hyakutake 20 @,@ 000 total troops to employ for his planned offensive . Because of the loss of their positions on the east side of the Matanikau , the Japanese decided that an attack on the U.S. defenses along the coast would be prohibitively difficult . Therefore , Hyakutake decided that the main thrust of his planned attack would be from south of Henderson Field . His 2nd Division ( augmented by troops from the 38th Infantry Division ) , under Lieutenant General Masao Maruyama and comprising 7 @,@ 000 soldiers in three infantry regiments of three battalions each was ordered to march through the jungle and attack the American defences from the south near the east bank of the Lunga River . To distract the Americans from the planned attack from the south , Hyakutake 's heavy artillery plus five battalions of infantry ( about 2 @,@ 900 men ) from the 4th and 124th Infantry Regiments under the overall command of Major General Tadashi Sumiyoshi were to attack the American defenses from the west along the coastal corridor . 
 Sumiyoshi 's forces , including two battalions of the 4th Infantry Regiment under Colonel Nomasu Nakaguma , launched attacks on the U.S. Marine defenses at the mouth of the Matanikau on the evening of 23 October . U.S. Marine artillery , cannon , and small arms fire repulsed the assaults and killed many of the attacking Japanese soldiers while suffering only light casualties to themselves . 
 Beginning on 24 October and continuing over two consecutive nights , Maruyama 's forces conducted numerous , unsuccessful frontal assaults on the southern portion of the U.S. Lunga perimeter . More than 1 @,@ 500 of Maruyama 's troops were killed in the attacks while the Americans lost about 60 killed . 
 Further Japanese attacks near the Matanikau on 26 October by Oka 's 124th Infantry Regiment were also repulsed with heavy losses for the Japanese . Thus , at 08 : 00 on 26 October , Hyakutake called off any further attacks and ordered his forces to retreat . About half of Maruyama 's survivors were ordered to retreat back to the area west of the Matanikau River while the rest , the 230th Infantry Regiment under Colonel Toshinari Shoji , was told to head for Koli Point , east of the Lunga perimeter . The 4th Infantry Regiment retreated back to positions west of the Matanikau and around the Point Cruz area while the 124th Infantry Regiment took up positions on the slopes of Mount Austen in the upper Matanikau Valley . 
 In order to exploit the recent victory Vandegrift planned another offensive west of the Matanikau which would have two objectives : to drive the Japanese beyond artillery range of Henderson Field and to cut off the retreat of Maruyama 's men towards the village of Kokumbona , location of the 17th Army 's headquarters . For the offensive , Vandegrift committed the three battalions of the 5th Marine Regiment , commanded by Colonel Merritt Edson , plus the augmented 3d Battalion , 7th Marine Regiment ( called the Whaling Group ) commanded by Colonel William Whaling . Two battalions of the 2nd Marine Regiment would be in reserve . The offensive was supported by artillery from the 11th Marine Regiment and the 164th Infantry Regiment , CAF aircraft , and gunfire from U.S. Navy warships . Edson was placed in tactical command of the operation . 
 Defending the Matanikau area for the Japanese were the 4th and 124th Infantry Regiments . Nakaguma 's 4th Infantry defended the Matanikau from the shore to about 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 914 m ) inland while Oka 's 124th Infantry extended the line further inland along the river . Both regiments , which on paper consisted of six battalions , were severely understrength because of battle damage , tropical disease , and malnutrition . In fact , Oka described his command as at only " half strength . " 
 = = Action = = 
 Between 01 : 00 and 06 : 00 on 1 November , U.S. Marine engineers constructed three footbridges across the Matanikau . At 06 : 30 , nine Marine and U.S. Army artillery batteries ( about 36 guns ) and U.S. warships San Francisco , Helena , and Sterett opened fire on the west bank of the Matanikau , and U.S. aircraft , including 19 B @-@ 17 heavy bombers , dropped bombs in the same area . At the same time , the 1st Battalion ( 1 / 5 ) of the 5th Marine Regiment crossed the Matanikau at its mouth while the 2nd Battalion , 5th Marines ( 2 / 5 ) and the Whaling Group crossed the river further inland . Facing the Marines was the Japanese 2nd Battalion , 4th Infantry under Major Masao Tamura . 
 The 2 / 5 and the Whaling Group encountered very little resistance and reached and occupied several ridges south of Point Cruz by early afternoon . Along the coast near Point Cruz , however , the 7th Company from Tamura 's battalion fiercely resisted the U.S. advance . In several hours of fighting , Company C , 1 / 5 suffered heavy casualties , including the loss of three officers , and was driven back toward the Matanikau by Tamura 's troops . Assisted by another company from 1 / 5 and later by two companies from the 3rd Battalion , 5th Marines ( 3 / 5 ) , plus determined resistance by Marine Corporal Anthony <unk> , among others , the Americans were successful in stopping the retreat . 
 Reviewing the situation at the end of the day , Edson , along with Colonel Gerald Thomas and Lieutenant Colonel Merrill Twining from Vandegrift 's staff , decided to try to encircle the Japanese defenders around Point Cruz . They ordered 1 / 5 and 3 / 5 to continue to press the Japanese along the coast the next day while 2 / 5 wheeled north to envelop their adversaries west and south of Point Cruz . Tamura 's battalion had taken heavy losses in the day 's fighting , with Tamura 's 7th and 5th Companies being left with only 10 and 15 uninjured soldiers respectively . 
 Fearing that the U.S. troops were on the verge of breaking through their defenses , Hyakutake 's 17th Army headquarters hurriedly sent whatever troops could be found on @-@ hand to bolster the 4th Infantry 's defensive efforts . The troops included the 2d Anti @-@ Tank Gun Battalion with 12 guns and the 39th Field Road Construction Unit . These two units took position in pre @-@ prepared fighting emplacements around the south and west of Point Cruz . 
 On the morning of 2 November , with the Whaling Group covering their flank , the men of 2 / 5 marched north and reached the coast west of Point Cruz , completing the encirclement of the Japanese defenders . The Japanese defenses were centered in a draw between a coastal trail and a beach just west of Point Cruz and included coral , earth , and log bunkers as well as caves and foxholes . U.S. artillery bombarded the Japanese positions throughout the day on 2 November , causing an unknown number of casualties to the Japanese defenders . 
 Later in the day , Company I of 2 / 5 conducted a frontal assault with fixed bayonets on the northern portion of the Japanese defenses , overrunning and killing the Japanese defenders . At the same time , two battalions from 2nd Marine Regiment , now committed to the offensive , advanced past the Point Cruz area . 
 At 06 : 30 on 3 November , some Japanese troops attempted to break out of the pocket but were beaten back by the Marines . Between 08 : 00 and noon , five Marine companies from 2 / 5 and 3 / 5 , using small arms , mortars , demolition charges , and direct and indirect artillery fire , completed the destruction of the Japanese pocket near Point Cruz . Marine participant Richard A. Nash described the battle : 
 A jeep wheeled up towing a 37 @-@ mm anti @-@ tank gun and Captain Andrews of D Company put a crew of men to setting the thing up to fire into the palm grove . Then I heard it — just before the gun began firing — a weird wailing and moaning , almost a religious chant ... coming from the trapped Japanese soldiers . Then the gun fired canister shot into them , again and again , and after a while the chanting stopped and the firing stopped and for a moment it was all @-@ quiet . Some of us went among the palm trees to look , and there , row on row , were the torn and shattered bodies of perhaps 300 young Japanese soldiers . There were no survivors . 
 The Marines captured 12 37mm anti @-@ tank guns , one 70 mm field artillery piece , and 34 machineguns and counted the dead bodies of 239 Japanese soldiers , including 28 officers . 
 At the same time , the 2nd Marines with the Whaling Group continued to push along the coast , reaching a point 3 @,@ 500 yards ( 3 @,@ 200 m ) west of Point Cruz by nightfall . The only Japanese troops left in the area to oppose the Marines ' advance were the remaining 500 soldiers of the 4th Infantry augmented by a few frail survivors from units involved in the earlier Tenaru and Edson 's Ridge battles plus malnourished naval troops from the original Guadalcanal garrison . The Japanese feared that they would be unable to prevent the Americans from taking the village of Kokumbona , which would cut @-@ off the retreat of the 2nd Infantry Division and seriously threaten the rear @-@ area support and headquarters units of Japanese forces on Guadalcanal . In despair , Nakaguma discussed taking the regimental colors and seeking death in a final charge at the U.S. forces , but was dissuaded from doing so by other officers on the 17th Army 's staff . 
 A significant event now occurred which granted the Japanese forces a reprieve . Early on 3 November , Marine units near Koli Point , east of the Lunga Perimeter , engaged 300 fresh Japanese troops that had just been landed by a Tokyo Express mission of five destroyers . This , plus the knowledge that a large body of Japanese troops was in the process of relocating to Koli Point after the defeat in the Henderson Field battle , led the Americans to believe that the Japanese were about to conduct a major attack on the Lunga Perimeter from the Koli Point area . 
 To discuss these developments , the Marine leaders on Guadalcanal met on the morning of 4 November . Twining recommended that the Matanikau offensive continue . Edson , Thomas , and Vandegrift , however , urged the abandonment of the offensive and a shift of forces to counter the Koli Point threat . Thus , that same day the 5th Marines and the Whaling group were recalled to Lunga Point . The 2nd Marine 's 1st and 2nd Battalions , plus the 1st Battalion , 164th Infantry took up positions about 2 @,@ 000 yards ( 1 @,@ 829 m ) west of Point Cruz with plans to hold in that location . With their route of retreat still open , the Sendai ( 2nd ) Division survivors began to reach Kokumbona this same day . Around this time , Nakaguma was killed by an artillery shell . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After chasing away the Japanese forces at Koli Point , the U.S. renewed the western offensive towards Kokumbona on 10 November with three battalions under the overall command of U.S. Marine Colonel John Arthur . In the meantime , fresh Japanese troops from the 228th Infantry Regiment of the 38th Infantry Division landed by Tokyo Express over several nights beginning on 5 November and effectively resisted the American attack . After making small advances , at 13 : 45 on 11 November Vandegrift suddenly ordered all the American forces to return to the east bank of the Matanikau . 
 Vandegrift ordered the withdrawal because of the receipt of intelligence from coastwatchers , aerial reconnaissance , and radio intercepts that a major Japanese reinforcement effort was imminent . Indeed , the Japanese were in the process of attempting to deliver the 10 @,@ 000 remaining troops from the 38th Division to Guadalcanal in order to reattempt to capture Henderson Field . The resulting efforts by the Americans to stop this reinforcement attempt resulted in the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal , the decisive naval battle of the Guadalcanal campaign , in which the Japanese reinforcement effort was turned back . 
 The Americans recrossed the Matanikau and attacked westward again beginning on 18 November , but made slow progress against determined resistance from Japanese forces . The U.S. attack was halted on 23 November at a line just west of Point Cruz . The Americans and Japanese would remain facing each other in these positions for the next six weeks , until the ending stages of the campaign when U.S. forces began their final , successful push to drive Japanese forces from the island . Although the Americans had come close to overrunning the Japanese rear areas in the early November offensive , it would not be until the final stages of the campaign that the U.S. finally captured Kokumbona . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Dull , Paul S. ( 1978 ) . A Battle History of the Imperial Japanese Navy , 1941 @-@ 1945 . Naval Institute Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 87021 @-@ 097 @-@ 1 . 
 Frank , Richard ( 1990 ) . Guadalcanal : The Definitive Account of the Landmark Battle . New York : Random House . ISBN 0 @-@ 394 @-@ 58875 @-@ 4 . 
 Griffith , Samuel B. ( 1963 ) . The Battle for Guadalcanal . Champaign , Illinois , USA : University of Illinois Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 252 @-@ 06891 @-@ 2 . 
 Hammel , Eric ( 2007 ) . Guadalcanal : The U.S. Marines in World War II . St. Paul , Minnesota , USA : Zenith Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 7603 @-@ 3148 @-@ 0 . 
 Jersey , Stanley Coleman ( 2008 ) . Hell 's Islands : The Untold Story of Guadalcanal . College Station , Texas : Texas A & M University Press . ISBN 1 @-@ 58544 @-@ 616 @-@ 5 . 
 Morison , Samuel Eliot ( 1958 ) . The Struggle for Guadalcanal , August 1942 – February 1943 , vol . 5 of History of United States Naval Operations in World War II . Boston : Little , Brown and Company . ISBN 0 @-@ 316 @-@ 58305 @-@ 7 . 
 Rottman , Gordon L. ( 2005 ) . Japanese Army in World War II : The South Pacific and New Guinea , 1942 – 43 . Dr. Duncan Anderson ( consultant editor ) . Oxford and New York : Osprey . ISBN 1 @-@ 84176 @-@ 870 @-@ 7 . 
 Smith , Michael T. ( 2000 ) . Bloody Ridge : The Battle That Saved Guadalcanal . New York : Pocket . ISBN 0 @-@ 7434 @-@ 6321 @-@ 8 . 
 = = = Web = = = 
 Anderson , Charles R. ( 1993 ) . <unk> . The U.S. Army Campaigns of World War II . United States Army Center of Military History . CMH Pub 72 @-@ 8 . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 07 @-@ 09 . 
 Hough , Frank O. ; Ludwig , Verle E. ; Shaw , Henry I. , Jr . " Pearl Harbor to Guadalcanal " . History of U.S. Marine Corps Operations in World War II . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 05 @-@ 16 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Shaw , Henry I. ( 1992 ) . " First Offensive : The Marine Campaign For Guadalcanal " . Marines in World War II Commemorative Series . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 07 @-@ 25 . 
 Zimmerman , John L. ( 1949 ) . " The Guadalcanal Campaign " . Marines in World War II Historical Monograph . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 07 @-@ 04 . 
 = Rich Girl ( Gwen Stefani song ) = 
 " Rich Girl " is a song by American singer and songwriter Gwen Stefani from her debut solo studio album , Love . Angel . Music . Baby . ( 2004 ) . Produced by Dr. Dre , the track features American rapper Eve , and is a remake of Louchie Lou & Michie One 's 1993 song of the same name , which is in turn an adaptation of the Fiddler on the Roof song " If I Were a Rich Man " . Stefani says the song discusses her dreams of fame and riches from the perspective of " when she was just an Orange County girl " . 
 The last song to be included on the album , " Rich Girl " was released as the album 's second single in late 2004 to mixed reviews from music critics . It was a commercial success , reaching the top 10 on most of the charts it entered . In the United States , " Rich Girl " was certified gold , and it received a nomination for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration at the 47th Grammy Awards . 
 = = Writing and development = = 
 Stefani and Eve had previously collaborated on the 2001 single " Let Me Blow Ya Mind " . When Stefani first began recording solo material , Eve expressed interest in working with Stefani again , saying , " She 's fly , she 's tight and she is talented . It 's going to be hot regardless . " The two decided to work together again after talking in Stefani 's laundry room during a party . After Stefani had co @-@ written more than 20 songs for her solo debut , she approached Dr. Dre , who had produced for her twice before . Dre had produced " Let Me Blow Ya Mind " as well as " Wicked Day " , a track that was excluded from No Doubt 's 2001 album Rock Steady . 
 After playing some of the songs on which she had been working , Dr. Dre told her , " You don 't want to go back there . " Instead of using one of the tracks , Dr. Dre instead suggested using English reggae duo Louchie Lou & Michie One 's 1993 song " Rich Girl " , which itself interpolated " If I Were a Rich Man " from the 1964 musical Fiddler on the Roof . Stefani and Eve helped each other with their parts , but when they presented Dr. Dre with the demo , he told them to rewrite the song , suggesting that Stefani play a character in the song . 
 Since she had not seen the musical since she was a child , Stefani went to Broadway to better understand the theme that " even if you 're poor and you have love , you 're rich . " The idea which became the final version came to Stefani while brainstorming on her treadmill . She commented that the troubles in writing the song came because " Dre was really pushing me to write in a new way " , but when she presented him with the song , " he just totally tricked the track out . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Rich Girl " is a reggae song composed in the key of C minor . It is written in common time and moves at a moderate 100 beats per minute . The beat is accompanied by an alternating perfect fifth dyad and an accented piano trichord . The song is written in verse – chorus form , and its instrumentation includes the electronic keyboard , guitar , and keyboard bass . Stefani 's voice ranges from G3 to E5 . 
 The introduction consists of the repeated use of the word na . Stefani reaches her highest note of the song , E5 , as part of a trichord and her lowest , G3 , during this section . After the first chorus , Stefani discusses dreams of wealth and luxury , and she <unk> fashion designers Vivienne Westwood and John Galliano . Stefani commented that the references were not product placement but that she included them " because I think they 're rad and want to talk about them . [ ... ] I 'd give all my money to [ Westwood ] and buy all her clothes ! " A bridge , in which Stefani 's voice is overdubbed , precedes the second chorus . During the second verse Stefani discusses her Harajuku Girls , and she then repeats the bridge . Following Eve 's rap , Stefani sings the chorus and closes the song with a coda , which , like the introduction , consists of repeating the word na . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Rich Girl " received mixed reviews from music critics . Richard Smirke of Playlouder said that it brought " a much @-@ needed element of diversity " to L.A.M.B. and called it a " potential hit single " . Krissi Murison of the NME , however , described it as " playground chant featuring a tough @-@ girl ragga cameo from Eve . " John Murphy from musicOMH gave it an overall positive review , calling it " a great fun song , and far superior to some of the dross that comes out these days " , but also commented that it did not live up to " Let Me Blow Ya Mind " and found the references to the Harajuku Girls " slightly creepy . " Lisa Haines of BBC Music referred to the song as " disco gold , impossibly girly and very easy to dance to . " The song drew comparisons to the No Doubt album Rock Steady , and Charles Merwin of Stylus Magazine described it as " a lite version of ' Hey Baby . ' " 
 Several reviewers found it ironic that Stefani , who had already sold 26 million records with No Doubt , discussed having money in the counterfactual conditional . John Murphy from musicOMH found it " rather strange " for Stefani to sing the song while living off of royalties from No Doubt and her husband , post @-@ grunge musician Gavin Rossdale . Anthony Carew from Neumu called the lyrics " insipid " and noted that " the incredibly wealthy pop @-@ starlet wonders what it 'd be like to be , uh , incredibly wealthy " . The Orange County Register writer Ben Wener told Stefani that the song was disingenuous and " absurd " , to which Stefani responded that the point of view was from before she was famous . Stefani later refused to issue credentials to the newspaper after Wener wrote that " while posting a reported US $ 90 million via her clothing lines [ ... ] she 's no more ' just an Orange County girl ' than Best Buy is just a shack that sells Commodore 64s " in response to a track titled " Orange County Girl " from Stefani 's second album The Sweet Escape . 
 The interpolation of " If I Were a Rich Man " drew mixed reviews . Jason Damas , writing for PopMatters , argued that the track " turns it into an anthem of urban bling @-@ lust " and that its " simple pounding piano chord makes for great percussive backing . " Nick Sylvester from Pitchfork Media found the song corny , classifying it as " <unk> and <unk> and Tevye @-@ powered camp @-@ hop . " The Villager 's Winnie <unk> found the interpolation " innovative " and noted the song 's take on " the current style of shout @-@ out rap songs . " David Browne of Entertainment Weekly disagreed , stating that the interpolation was used awkwardly , and Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone called the interpolation a goof . Jason Shawhan from About.com called the track " a dancehall / classic house <unk> of ' If I Were a Rich Man ' " and added , " If this is what Jay @-@ Z 's fudging with Annie has wrought , I say , be glad of it . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Rich Girl " debuted at number 74 on the Billboard Hot 100 on December 25 , 2004 , and peaked 10 weeks later at number seven , remaining on the chart for over six months . The song did well on pop @-@ oriented charts , reaching number three on the Pop 100 , number four on the Mainstream Top 40 , and number 16 on the Adult Top 40 . The single had little crossover success on the urban charts , only reaching number 27 on the Rhythmic Top 40 and number 78 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . " Rich Girl " was helped on the Hot 100 and Pop 100 charts by its strong digital downloads , peaking at number two on the Hot Digital Songs . The song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on March 29 , 2005 . At the 2006 Grammy Awards , the song was nominated for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration but lost to Jay @-@ Z and Linkin Park 's " Numb / Encore " . The single was less successful in Canada , where it peaked at number 12 on the Canadian Singles Chart . 
 " Rich Girl " was largely successful across Europe , reaching number two on the European Hot 100 Singles . It reached the top five in Belgium , Denmark , France , Ireland , the Netherlands , Norway , and Sweden and the top 10 in Austria , Finland , Italy , and Switzerland . The song also charted highly in the United Kingdom , debuting at number four on March 20 , 2005 for the week ending date March 26 , 2005 . The track was unable to reach a higher position and remained on the chart for 12 weeks . 
 Elsewhere , " Rich Girl " peaked within the top 20 on the majority of the charts it entered . In Australia , it debuted on February 27 , 2005 at number two behind Nelly 's " Over and Over " featuring Tim McGraw . It was unable to reach number one and dropped off the chart after 13 weeks . The single was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for sales in excess of 70 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Rich Girl " was directed by David LaChapelle and features a pirate theme . The video , inspired by an early @-@ 1980s Vivienne Westwood advertising campaign , opens with four Japanese schoolgirls playing with a toy pirate ship and two Bratz dolls of Stefani and Eve , while the girls discuss what they would do if they were a " rich girl " . The video features several sequences . Stefani is first shown below the deck of a pirate ship , dancing on a table and singing to the song . She is surrounded by pirates and wenches and is soon joined by Eve , wearing an eyepatch . In the surreal style of LaChapelle , the pirate crew has distorted features , and a leaked casting call commented , " I need the freaks on this one . " Above deck Stefani , the Harajuku Girls , Eve , and more pirates dance on the deck and rigging . Stefani is also seen dancing with the Harajuku Girls in a treasure trove , often carrying a sword , and swinging from an anchor . When the girls dunk the toy ship in a fish tank , the galleon engages in cannon fire , causing Stefani and the pirates to fall all over the ship , and Stefani and the Harajuku Girls are soon shipwrecked . 
 The music video was a success on video channels . The video debuted at number nine on MTV 's Total Request Live on December 13 , 2004 . It worked its way to number five , staying on the chart for a total of 13 days . The video also reached number four on MuchMusic 's Countdown , remaining on the chart for 16 weeks . VH1 listed " Rich Girl " at number 24 on its Top 40 Videos of 2005 . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Love . Angel . Music . Baby . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Battle of Spencer 's Ordinary = 
 The Battle of Spencer 's Ordinary was an inconclusive skirmish that took place on 26 June 1781 , late in the American Revolutionary War . British forces under Lieutenant Colonel John Graves Simcoe and American forces under Colonel Richard Butler , light detachments from the armies of General Lord Cornwallis and the Marquis de Lafayette respectively , clashed near a tavern ( the " ordinary " ) at a road intersection not far from Williamsburg , Virginia . 
 Lafayette had been shadowing Cornwallis as he moved his army toward Williamsburg from central Virginia . Aware that Simcoe had become separated from Cornwallis , he sent Butler out in an attempt to cut Simcoe off . Both sides , concerned that the other might be reinforced by its main army , eventually broke off the battle . 
 = = Background = = 
 In May 1781 , Lord Charles Cornwallis arrived in Petersburg , Virginia after a lengthy campaign through North and South Carolina . In addition to his 1 @,@ 400 troops , he assumed command of another 3 @,@ 600 troops that had been under the command of the turncoat Benedict Arnold , and was soon thereafter further reinforced by about 2 @,@ 000 more troops sent from New York . These forces were opposed by a much smaller Continental Army force led by the Marquis de Lafayette , then located at Richmond . Following orders originally given to Arnold 's predecessor in command , William Phillips ( who died a week before Cornwallis ' arrival ) , Cornwallis worked to eliminate Virginia 's ability to support the revolutionary cause , and gave chase to Lafayette 's army , which numbered barely 3 @,@ 000 and included a large number of inexperienced militia . 
 Lafayette successfully eluded engaging Cornwallis for about one month , who used his numerical advantage to detach forces for raids against economic , military , and political targets in central Virginia . Cornwallis then turned back to the east , marching for Williamsburg . Lafayette , whose force grew to number about 4 @,@ 000 with the arrival of Continental Army reinforcements under General Anthony Wayne and additional experienced militiamen under William Campbell , followed Cornwallis . Buoyed by the increase in his troop strength , Lafayette also became more aggressive in his tactics , sending out detachments of his force to counteract those that Cornwallis sent on forage and raiding expeditions . These detachments were composed of select units taken from a variety of regiments . Among those that were commonly in the army 's advance guard were a combined cavalry and infantry unit from Pennsylvania under Captain William McPherson , and companies of Virginia riflemen under Majors Richard Call and John Willis . 
 Lafayette , once he was joined by Wayne and Campbell , wanted to engage elements of Cornwallis ' army without necessarily facing its full strength . As Cornwallis approached Williamsburg , Lafayette and Wayne received word that Lieutenant Colonel John Graves Simcoe and his Loyalist regiment of Queen 's Rangers were returning from a raid to destroy boats and forage for supplies on the Chickahominy River . Simcoe 's full force included , in addition to the Rangers , a few companies of Hessian jägers led by Captains Johann Ewald and Johann <unk> . On the night of 25 June , Wayne sent most of the advance guard under Colonel Richard Butler , including McPherson , Call , and Willis , to intercept Simcoe 's force . A forward party of about 50 dragoons and 50 light infantry under McPherson caught up with advance companies of Simcoe 's force near Spencer 's Ordinary , a tavern at a road intersection about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) north of Williamsburg . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Simcoe 's troops were moving down the road toward Williamsburg , convoying some cattle with the infantry and jägers in the lead under Major Richard Armstrong , with Simcoe and the cavalry about an hour behind them . At Spencer 's Ordinary ( " ordinary " meaning tavern at the time ) , the troops rejoined and paused to rest . Simcoe ordered fences in the area torn down since " it was an admirable place for the chicanery of action " . While they rested , some of the Loyalists went out to round up more cattle found in the area , and the cavalry went to a nearby farm to feed their horses . McPherson 's men encountered the latter , whose sentries raised the alarm to the main body . Simcoe 's cavalry charged McPherson 's formation , breaking it up . McPherson and a number of his men were unhorsed in the melee , and several were taken prisoner before the leading edge of Butler 's main force began to arrive . Simcoe ordered most of the infantry up to support his cavalry , and sent the jägers and light infantry into the woods on the right to flank the arriving enemy column . By questioning the prisoners , Simcoe learned that Lafayette was not far off . He sent word to Cornwallis , dispatched the cattle convoy toward Williamsburg , and ordered trees to be felled to make a barricade across the road as a point of defense . He then arrayed his troops in a way calculated to mislead the Americans into believing that more troops were in formation just over a rise . When Butler 's force arrived , Simcoe ordered an infantry charge . This scattered the first wave of Butler 's men into the nearby woods , where the jägers then pushed them back . However , Butler 's men continued to advance . Simcoe ordered a cavalry charge and fired a field cannon to give the impression that a larger force was arriving . The charge forced Butler 's men back , at which point the two forces disengaged , Simcoe because he was concerned that Lafayette was approaching , and Butler because his men were fooled by Simcoe 's stratagem . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Simcoe left his wounded men at the tavern under a truce flag , and withdrew down the Williamsburg road , joining with forces Cornwallis sent about two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) down the road . The Americans retreated to Lafayette 's camp at Tyre 's Plantation , and Simcoe was able to return to the tavern and recover his wounded . 
 Simcoe reported his losses at 11 killed and 25 wounded , and the American loss at 9 killed , 14 wounded , and 32 captured . Lafayette claimed the Americans had killed 60 and wounded 100 , while Cornwallis claimed the British had 33 killed and wounded . ( The latter number agrees with that provided by Fryer and <unk> if Hessian casualties are excluded . ) 
 The location of the battle is now within the grounds of James City County 's Freedom Park in Williamsburg . Published park materials do not indicate if the exact location is marked in any way . 
 = = Butler 's identity = = 
 Sources disagree on the name of the Butler who commanded the American force . In early histories , Benson Lossing claims that one Percival Butler was in command , who had also served under Daniel Morgan in earlier campaigns , while Henry Johnston identifies the commander as Richard Butler , a hero of Stony Point . In modern histories , Fryer and <unk> also identify him as Richard , while Brendan Morrissey apparently misidentifies him as John Butler . 
 = Subway Sadie = 
 Subway Sadie is a 1926 American comedy @-@ drama film directed by Alfred Santell . Adapted from Mildred Cram 's 1925 short story Sadie of the Desert , the film focuses on a relationship between New York salesgirl Sadie Hermann ( Dorothy Mackaill ) and subway guard Herb McCarthy ( Jack Mulhall ) , who meet on a subway and become engaged . However , after Sadie receives a promotion , she must choose between her new job and marrying Herb . The cast also includes Charles Murray , Peggy Shaw , Gaston Glass , and Bernard Randall . 
 The film began production in May 1926 . Arthur Edeson served as cinematographer , shooting around Central Park in areas like casinos and nightclubs . Distributed by First National Pictures , the film premiered in New York on September 12 , 1926 . Many publications wrote positively of the film , praising its acting and Santell 's direction . Today , it remains unclear if a print of Subway Sadie has survived . 
 = = Plot = = 
 <unk> Sadie Hermann ( Dorothy Mackaill ) , employed in a New York fur store , has always dreamed of traveling to Paris . While riding the subway to work one morning , she meets Irish subway guard Herb McCarthy ( Jack Mulhall ) , and the two strike up a conversation before Herb eventually arranges to have them meet at Cleopatra 's Needle that Sunday . 
 Herb and Sadie are soon engaged to be married , but as Sadie has been promoted from <unk> to firm buyer she must cancel the wedding date to sail to Paris for the job , saddening Herb . Sadie prepares to leave , but then receives a message from Herb , which informs her that he is in the hospital as the result of an accident . Sadie chooses to visit him , and she decides to forgo her new job and marry Herb instead , Herb revealing that his father is the president of the subway company . 
 = = Production = = 
 Alfred Santell directed Subway Sadie , from a screenplay written by Adele <unk> and Paul Schofield . The pair adapted a short story by Mildred Cram entitled Sadie of the Desert , which had first been published in an October 1925 issue of The Red Book Magazine . 
 On May 3 , 1926 , the film entered production . Santell and Al Rockett , the film 's producer and production manager , selected the actors to appear in the film . Jack Mulhall was cast in the lead as Herb McCarthy . Although he had ridden on a subway many times , he did not take notice of the guards , so as preparation for playing the character he rode on a subway for " practically an entire day " to observe them . Mulhall said of Santell : 
 That man 's a great director . He can make people feel perfectly natural . He 's got what Chaplin did when he directed A Woman of Paris - he and Lewis Milestone and Mal St. Clair all have that same touch , they all belong to the new school of directors , it seems to me . They 're not so busy thinking about technique that they have actors turning into marionettes . 
 Chosen to play female lead Sadie Hermann , Dorothy Mackaill opined that the film would appeal to " every girl in America . " She believed that " there is not a situation in this picture which could not happen to any girl . That is one of the things I like about it . There is nothing in it that could not be true . " The rest of the cast includes Charles Murray as a driver , Peggy Shaw as Ethel , Gaston Glass as Fred Perry , and Bernard Randall portraying Brown . 
 Arthur Edeson served as the cinematographer for Subway Sadie , shooting the silent film in black @-@ and @-@ white . Filming took place at several locations in Central Park , including Cleopatra 's Needle and a local casino inn , which marked the first time the location had been filmed . A nightclub scene was also shot in New York . Hugh Bennett served as the film 's editor , while Al Rockett Productions produced . Rockett told Motion Picture News in June 1926 that the film had been completed . First National Pictures filed a copyright for the film on August 18 , 1926 . The finished product was seven reels long , and comprised 6 @,@ 727 feet ( 2 @,@ 050 m ) of film , running for about 70 minutes . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 First National Pictures handled distribution for Subway Sadie , with the film premiering in New York on September 12 , 1926 . It received positive reviews ; a journalist for The New York Times enjoyed the film , calling it " an amusing photoplay " . Although the review branded the ending unsurprising , they described it as " nevertheless pleasing " . The Evening Independent praised the film , lauding it as " one of the cleverest and most interesting pictures that has been here this season " . 
 A review from Photoplay applauded Mackaill 's performance and described the film as " a true and human story " . The review in the Motion Picture Herald assessed it as " a nice little feature , nothing big , but will go over on bargain nights " , with praise directed to Mulhall 's performance . A Berkeley Daily Gazette review wrote of the film by saying " sheer brilliance rarely has been equalled " and praised the story , direction , and acting . 
 The Morning Telegraph 's review said that Subway Sadie would " delight the majority of <unk> " and that " it is what the boys call excellent box @-@ office " . The New York American review was similarly positive , describing it as " a light but charming comedy " . In the New York World , the review described the film as " a consistently decent affair " which featured good direction by Santell . A review in The Daily Mirror wrote positively of Mackaill 's performance and complimented Santell 's directing abilities , while Reading Eagle praised the performances of the leads , calling them " a stellar combination . " Not all reviews were positive ; a negative review came from The Educational Screen , whose reviewer found the film to be " pretty trite stuff " . 
 In June 1927 , a Southeast Missourian journalist wrote that the film had since become " very successful " . The pairing of Mulhall and Mackaill was described as " such a perfect team " that plans to have them star in many further films occurred . Films they appeared in after Subway Sadie include Smile , Brother , Smile ( 1927 ) , Ladies ' Night in a Turkish Bath ( 1928 ) , Lady Be Good ( 1928 ) , and Children of the Ritz ( 1929 ) . The 1933 drama Curtain at Eight marked the final film they appeared in together . 
 Screenings of Subway Sadie occurred as late as January 12 , 1928 . As of November 2007 , it is unclear whether a print of the film exists ; it has likely become a lost film . A poster of the film can be seen at the New York Transit Museum . 
 = Manifesto of the Sixteen = 
 The Manifesto of the Sixteen ( French : Manifeste des seize ) , or Proclamation of the Sixteen , was a document drafted in 1916 by eminent anarchists Peter Kropotkin and Jean Grave which advocated an Allied victory over Germany and the Central Powers during the First World War . At the outbreak of the war , Kropotkin and other anarchist supporters of the Allied cause advocated their position in the pages of the Freedom newspaper , provoking sharply critical responses . As the war continued , anarchists across Europe campaigned in anti @-@ war movements and wrote denunciations of the war in pamphlets and statements , including one February 1916 statement signed by prominent anarchists such as Emma Goldman and Rudolf Rocker . 
 At this time , Kropotkin was in frequent correspondence with those who shared his position , and was convinced by one of their number , Jean Grave , to draft a document encouraging anarchist support for the Allies . The resulting manifesto was published in the pages of the pro @-@ war socialist periodical La Bataille on March 14 , 1916 , and republished in other European anarchist periodicals shortly thereafter . The manifesto declared that supporting the war was an act of resistance against the aggression of the German Empire , and that the war had to be pursued until its defeat . At this point , the authors conjectured , the ruling political parties of Germany would be overthrown and the anarchist goal of the emancipation of Europe and of the German people would be advanced . 
 Contrary to its misleading title , the Manifesto of the Sixteen had originally fifteen signatories — among them some of the most eminent anarchists in Europe — and was later countersigned by another hundred . The position of the Manifesto was in stark contrast to that of most anarchists of the day , many of whom denounced its signatories and their sympathizers , and accused them of betraying anarchist principles . In the fallout over the war , Kropotkin became increasingly isolated , with many former friends cutting their ties to him . The Russian anarchist movement was split into two , with a faction supporting Kropotkin 's position to the strong criticism of the Bolsheviks . Elsewhere in Europe , including in the Spanish and Swiss anarchist movements , the dismissal of the Manifesto was overwhelming , with supporters being angrily denounced and marginalized . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Kropotkin 's anti @-@ German stance = = = 
 Anti @-@ German sentiment was a strong current in progressive and revolutionary movements in Russia from their early beginnings , due to German influence on the aristocracy of the ruling Romanov dynasty . Historian George Woodcock contended that as a Russian , Kropotkin was influenced by similar opinions throughout his life , culminating in a staunch anti @-@ German prejudice at the onset of the First World War . Kropotkin was also influenced by fellow Russian anarchist Mikhail Bakunin , who was affected by his rivalry with Karl Marx ; the successes of the Social Democratic Party of Germany , which subverted Germany 's revolutionary movements ; and the rise of the German Empire under the rule of Otto von Bismarck . As such , Woodcock notes Kropotkin came to despise the growth of Marxism , " German ideas " , and augmented this with an interest in the French Revolution , which Woodcock referred to as " a kind of adoptive patriotism " . 
 Following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria , Kropotkin was arrested under suspicion of having motivated the assassins . While in jail , Kropotkin was interviewed for an article to appear in the August 27 edition of The New York Times . The piece , which referred to him as a " veteran Russian agitator and democrat " , quoted him as an optimistic supporter of the newly erupted war , believing it would ultimately have a liberalizing effect on Russian society . In a letter to Jean Grave , written in September of that year , Kropotkin chastised Grave for desiring a peaceful end to the conflict , and insisted that the war must be fought to its end since " the conditions of peace would be imposed by the victor " . 
 Months later , Kropotkin allowed a letter he wrote to be included in an October 1914 issue of Freedom . Entitled " A Letter to Steffen " , in it he made his case for the war , arguing that the presence of Germany 's empire had prevented the progress of anarchist movements throughout Europe , and that the German people were as culpable for the war as the German state was . He also claimed that Russia 's populace would be radicalized and united following victory in the war , preventing the Russian aristocracy from benefiting from the conflict . As such , he claimed that tactics designed to end the war , such as pacifism and general strikes , were unnecessary , and that instead the war should be pursued until Germany was defeated . 
 The Bolsheviks quickly responded to Kropotkin 's militarism in a bid for political capital . Vladimir Lenin published a 1915 article in The National Pride of the Great Russians , in which he attacked Kropotkin and Russian anarchists en masse for the former 's early pro @-@ war sentiment , and denounced Kropotkin and another political enemy , Georgi Plekhanov , as " chauvinists by opportunism or <unk> " . In other speeches and essays , Lenin referred to Kropotkin in the early years of the war as a " bourgeoisie " , demoting him in the following months to " petit bourgeoisie " . 
 Throughout 1915 and 1916 , Kropotkin , who lived in Brighton , England , was often in poor health . He was unable to travel during the winter , having been ordered not to do so by doctors in January 1915 , and underwent two operations to his chest in March . As a result , he was confined to a bed for the majority of 1915 and to a wheeled bath @-@ chair in 1916 . During this time , Kropotkin kept a steady correspondence with other anarchists , including fellow Russian anarchist Marie Goldsmith . Goldsmith and Kropotkin clashed often on their opinions about the World War , the role of internationalism during the conflict , and whether it was possible to advocate antimilitarism during that period ( early 1916 ) . As explained above , Kropotkin took firmly pro @-@ war positions during these communiques , as he was predisposed to frequently criticize the German Empire . 
 = = = Anarchist response to the War and Kropotkin = = = 
 Unprepared by what historian Max Nettlau called the " explosive imminence " of the First World War at its outbreak in August 1914 , anarchists resigned themselves to the reality of the situation and , after a time , began themselves to take sides . Like all nationals , the anarchists had been conditioned to react to the political interests of their nations , whose influence left few unaffected . On the climate of the time , Nettlau remarked : " The air was saturated with accepted nations , conventional opinions and the peculiar illusions which people entertained concerning small nationalities and the virtues and defects of certain races . There were all sorts of plausible justifications for imperialism , for financial controls and so on . And , since Tolstoy had been dead since 1910 , no voice of libertarian and moral power was heard in the world : no organisation , large or small , spoke up . " European anarchist activity was restricted both physically and by the internal divisions within the anarchist movement over attitudes towards the war . 
 The November 1914 issue of Freedom featured articles supporting the Allied cause from anarchists including Kropotkin , Jean Grave , <unk> <unk> and <unk> as well as a rebuttal to Kropotkin 's " A Letter to Steffen " , entitled " Anarchists have forgotten their Principles " , by Italian anarchist Errico Malatesta . In the following weeks , numerous letters critical of Kropotkin were sent to Freedom , and in turn published due to the editorial impartiality of the newspaper 's editor , Thomas Keell . Responding to the criticism , Kropotkin became enraged at Keell for not rejecting such letters , denouncing him as a coward unworthy of his role as editor . A meeting was later called by members of Freedom who supported Kropotkin 's pro @-@ war position and called for the paper to be suspended . Keell , the only anti @-@ war anarchist called to attend , rejected the demand , ending the meeting in hostile disagreement . As a result , Kropotkin 's connection with Freedom ended and the paper continued to be published as an organ for the majority of anti @-@ war Freedom members . 
 By 1916 , the Great War had been ongoing for almost two years , during which anarchists had taken part in anti @-@ war movements across Europe , issuing numerous anti @-@ war statements in anarchist and leftist publications . In February 1916 , a statement was issued by an assembly of anarchists from various regions , including England , Switzerland , Italy , the United States , Russia , France , and the Netherlands . The document was signed by such figures as <unk> Nieuwenhuis , Emma Goldman , Alexander Berkman , Luigi Bertoni , Saul <unk> , Harry Kelly , Thomas Keell , Lilian Wolfe , Rudolf Rocker , and George Barrett . It was also endorsed by Errico Malatesta and Alexander Schapiro , two of three secretaries elected to their position at the Anarchist International of 1907 . It set out several viewpoints , including that all wars were the result of the current system of society , and therefore not the blame of any particular government ; did not regard a defensive and offensive war as being fundamentally distinctly different ; and encouraged all anarchists to support only class conflict and the liberation of oppressed <unk> as a means by which to resolve wars between nation @-@ states . 
 As a result of their increasing isolation from the majority of anti @-@ war anarchists , George Woodcock notes that Kropotkin and anarchists who supported his position drew closer together in the months that preceded the Manifesto 's creation . Several of these same men would later sign the Manifesto , including Jean Grave , Charles Malato , Paul Reclus , and Christiaan Cornelissen . 
 = = The Manifesto = = 
 = = = Conception and publication = = = 
 As he was unable to travel during 1916 , Kropotkin found himself in frequent correspondence with others , including Jean Grave , who visited Kropotkin from France with his wife . Together , they discussed the war and Kropotkin 's firm support for it . At Kropotkin 's suggestion that he would like to have been a combatant were he younger , Grave suggested publishing a document urging anarchists to support the war effort on the side of the Allied Powers . Initially hesitant , due to his personal inability to sign up for active duty , Kropotkin was eventually persuaded by Grave . 
 Exactly what part each played in the authorship is unknown . At the time , Grave asserted that he had authored the manifesto and that Kropotkin had revised it . Alternatively , Gregori Maximoff reported that Kropotkin had written the document and that Grave had merely advised minor alterations . George Woodcock noted that the work seems to be highly influenced by Kropotkin 's common concerns and arguments against the German Empire , and so felt that the exact authorship was unimportant . 
 The Manifesto , which would be given its famous name at a later point , dates from February 28 , 1916 and was first published in La Bataille on March 14 . La Bataille was a controversial socialist periodical known for its support of the war , and was accused of being a front for government propaganda by Marxist groups as a result . The manifesto was later republished in Freedom , in London , on April 14 , 1916 , and in Libre Fédération , May 1916 , in Lausanne , Switzerland . The Libre Fédération version included additional signatories of individuals who supported the document after the initial publication . 
 = = = Contents = = = 
 The original statement , ten paragraphs in length , includes philosophical and ideological premises based upon the opinions of Peter Kropotkin . 
 The essay begins by declaring that anarchists had correctly resisted the war from its inception , and that the authors would prefer a peace brought about by an international conference of European workers . It then submits that German workers would most likely also favor such a conclusion to the war , and presents several reasons why it would be in their best interest to call for an armistice . These reasons were that the citizens , after twenty months of war , would understand that they had been deceived into believing they were taking part in a defensive war ; that they would recognize that the German state had long prepared for such a conflict , and as such it would be inevitably at fault ; that the German Empire could not logistically support an occupation of the territory it had captured ; and that the individuals living in the occupied territories were free to choose whether or not they would like to be annexed . 
 Several paragraphs outline potential conditions for an armistice , rejecting any notion that the German Empire has any place in dictating the terms of peace . The authors also insist that the German populace must accept some blame for having not resisted the march to war on the part of the German government . The authors maintain that immediate calls for negotiation would not be favorable , as the German state would potentially dictate the process from a position of diplomatic and military power . Instead , the manifesto proclaims that the war must be continued so that the German state loses its military strength , and by extension , its ability to negotiate . 
 The authors proclaim that , due to their anti @-@ government , antimilitarist , and internationalist philosophy , supporting the war was an act of " resistance " to the German Empire . The manifesto then concludes that victory over Germany and the overthrow of the Social Democratic Party of Germany and other ruling parties of the German Empire would advance the anarchist goal of the emancipation of Europe and of the German people , and that the authors are prepared to collaborate with Germans to advance this goal . 
 = = = Signatories and supporters = = = 
 The manifesto was signed by some of the most eminent anarchists in Europe . The signatories originally numbered fifteen , with the mistaken sixteenth name , " Hussein Dey " , being the name of the city in which Antoine Orfila lived . As the manifesto 's co @-@ authors , Jean Grave and Peter Kropotkin were among its first signatories . 
 From France , the anarcho @-@ syndicalists Christiaan Cornelissen and François Le <unk> were signatories ; Cornelissen was a supporter of the union sacrée , a truce between the French government and trade unions during the First World War , and wrote several anti @-@ German brochures , while the thirty @-@ two @-@ year @-@ old Le <unk> later joined the French Resistance during the Second World War . Another French signatory was Paul Reclus , brother of renowned anarchist Élisée Reclus , whose endorsement of the war and manifesto convinced Japanese anarchist <unk> Ishikawa ( who was staying with Reclus ) to sign . Ishikawa signed the paper as " <unk> " . 
 <unk> <unk> ( who signed in the Russian manner as " <unk> <unk> " ) , a Georgian anarchist , Marxist critic , and journalist was another noteworthy signatory . The remaining signatories of the initial publication of the document were Henri Fuss , Jacques Guérin , Charles @-@ Ange Laisant , Charles Malato , Jules Moineau , Antoine Orfila , Marc Pierrot and Ph. Richard . James Guillaume , although a supporter of the war , was for reasons unknown not an initial signatory . The manifesto was countersigned by approximately one hundred other anarchists , half of whom were Italian anarchists . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 The publication of the Manifesto was met with great disapproval by the international anarchist movement , and in considering its impact , George Woodcock stated that it " merely confirmed the split which existed in the anarchist movement . " The signatories of the Manifesto saw the First World War as a battle between German imperialism and the international working class . In contrast , most anarchists of the time , including Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman , saw the war as being that of different capitalist @-@ imperialist states at the expense of the working class . The number of supporters of Kropotkin 's position peaked at perhaps 100 or so , while the overwhelming majority of anarchists embraced Goldman 's and Berkman 's views . 
 Alongside the reprinted manifesto in the letter columns of Freedom in April 1916 was a prepared response by Errico Malatesta . Malatesta 's response , titled " Governmental Anarchists " , recognized the " good faith and good intentions " of the signatories but accused them of having betrayed anarchist principles . Malatesta was soon joined in denunciation by others , including Luigi Fabbri , Sébastien Faure , and Emma Goldman : 
 As a result of his firm support of the war , Kropotkin 's popularity dwindled , and many former friends cut ties with him . Two exceptions included Rudolf Rocker and Alexander Schapiro , but both were serving prison sentences at the time . As a result , Kropotkin became increasingly isolated during his final years in London prior to his return to Russia . In Peter Kropotkin : His Federalist Ideas ( 1922 ) , an overview of Kropotkin 's writings by Camillo Berneri , the author interjected criticism of the former 's militarism . Berneri wrote , " with his pro @-@ war attitude Kropotkin separated himself from anarchism , " and asserted that the Manifesto of the Sixteen " marks the culmination of incoherence in the pro @-@ war anarchists ; [ Kropotkin ] also supported Kerensky in Russia on the question of prosecuting the war . " Anarchist scholar Vernon Richards speculates that were it not for the desire of Freedom editor Thomas Keell ( himself staunchly anti @-@ war ) to give the supporters of the war a fair hearing from the start , they might have found themselves politically isolated far earlier . 
 = = = Russia = = = 
 Historian Paul Avrich describes the fallout over the support for the war an " almost fatal " division in the Russian anarchist movement . Muscovite anarchists split into two groups , with the larger faction supporting Kropotkin and his " <unk> " associates ; the smaller anti @-@ war faction responded by abandoning <unk> anarchist communism for anarcho @-@ syndicalism . In spite of this , the anarchist movement in Russia continued to gain strength . In an article published in a December 1916 issue of The State and Revolution , Bolshevik leader Lenin accused the vast majority of Russian anarchists of following Kropotkin and Grave , and denounced them as " anarcho @-@ chauvinists " . Similar remarks were made by other Bolsheviks , such as Joseph Stalin , who wrote in a letter to a Communist leader , " I have recently read Kropotkin 's articles — the old fool must have completely lost his mind " . Lenin protégé Leon Trotsky cited Kropotkin 's support for the war and his manifesto while further denouncing anarchism : 
 The superannuated anarchist Kropotkin , who had a weakness ever since youth for the Narodniks , made use of the war to disavow everything he had been teaching for almost half a century . This <unk> of the State supported the Entente , and if he denounced the double power in Russia , it was not in the name of anarchy , but in the name of a single power of the bourgeoisie . 
 Historian George Woodcock characterized these criticisms as acceptable insofar as they focused on Kropotkin 's militarism . However , he found the criticisms of Russian anarchists to be " unjustified " , and regarding accusations that Russian anarchists embraced Kropotkin and Grave 's message , Woodcock stated , " nothing of the kind happened ; only about a hundred anarchists signed the various pronouncements in support of the war ; the majority in all countries maintained the anti @-@ militarist position as consistently as the Bolsheviks . " 
 = = = Switzerland and Spain = = = 
 In Geneva , an angry group of " internationalists " – Grossman @-@ <unk> , Alexander <unk> and Kropotkin 's disciple K. <unk> among them – labeled the anarchist champions of the war " Anarcho @-@ Patriots " . They maintained that the only form of war acceptable to true anarchists was the social revolution that would overthrow the bourgeoisie and their oppressive institutions . Jean <unk> , founder of the Ferrer School of Lausanne and editor of La libre <unk> , was isolated from the Swiss anarchist movement when he aligned himself with the Manifesto and its signatories . 
 The Spanish anarcho @-@ syndicalists , who opposed the war out of doctrinaire cynicism and a belief that neither faction were on the workers ' side , angrily repudiated their former idols ( including Kropotkin , Malato and Grave ) after discovering they had authored the manifesto . A small number of anarchists in Galicia and Asturias dissented and were heatedly denounced by the majority of Catalonian anarcho @-@ syndicalists ( who prevailed in the anarchist union Confederación Nacional del Trabajo ) . 
 = Whitetip reef shark = 
 The whitetip reef shark ( Triaenodon obesus ) is a species of requiem shark , in the family Carcharhinidae , and the only member of its genus . A small shark usually not exceeding 1 @.@ 6 m ( 5 @.@ 2 ft ) in length , this species is easily recognizable by its slender body and short but broad head , as well as tubular skin flaps beside the nostrils , oval eyes with vertical pupils , and white @-@ tipped dorsal and caudal fins . One of the most common sharks found on Indo @-@ Pacific coral reefs , the whitetip reef shark occurs as far east as South Africa and as far west as Central America . It is typically found on or near the bottom in clear water , at a depth of 8 – 40 m ( 26 – 131 ft ) . 
 During the day , whitetip reef sharks spend much of their time resting inside caves . Unlike other requiem sharks , which rely on ram ventilation and must constantly swim to breathe , this shark can pump water over its gills and lie still on the bottom . At night , whitetip reef sharks emerge to hunt bony fishes , crustaceans , and octopus in groups , their elongate bodies allowing them to force their way into crevices and holes to extract hidden prey . Individuals may stay within a particular area of the reef for months to years , time and again returning to the same shelter . This species is viviparous , in which the developing embryos are sustained by a placental connection to their mother . One of the few sharks in which mating has been observed in the wild , receptive female whitetip reef sharks are followed by prospective males , which attempt to grasp her pectoral fin and maneuver the two of them into positions suitable for copulation . Females give birth to one to six pups every other year , after a gestation period of 10 – 13 months . 
 Whitetip reef sharks are rarely aggressive towards humans , though they may investigate swimmers closely . However , spear fishers are at risk of being bitten by one attempting to steal their catch . This species is caught for food , though ciguatera poisoning resulting from its consumption has been reported . The IUCN has assessed the whitetip reef shark as Near Threatened , noting its numbers are dwindling due to increasing levels of unregulated fishing activity across its range . The slow reproductive rate and limited habitat preferences of this species renders its populations vulnerable to overfishing . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The whitetip reef shark was first described by the German naturalist Eduard Rüppell as Carcharias obesus , in the 1837 Fische des Rothen Meeres ( Fishes of the Red Sea ) . His choice of the specific epithet obesus was curious , given that this shark is actually quite slender . Later in 1837 , Johannes Müller and Friedrich Henle moved this species into its own genus Triaenodon , from the Greek <unk> meaning " trident " , and odon meaning " tooth " . As Rüppell did not originally designate a holotype , in 1960 a 31 @-@ cm @-@ long specimen caught off Jeddah , Saudi Arabia , was made the species lectotype . Other common names for this shark include <unk> shark , light @-@ tip shark , reef whitetip shark , and whitetip shark . 
 Once placed in the family Triakidae , the whitetip reef shark is now recognized by most authors as belonging to the family Carcharhinidae on the basis of morphological characters , such as a full nictitating membrane , well @-@ developed precaudal pit , strong lower caudal fin lobe , and scroll @-@ like intestinal valves . Morphological and molecular phylogenetic analyses suggest the whitetip reef shark is grouped with the lemon sharks ( Negaprion ) and the <unk> shark ( <unk> ) in occupying an intermediate position on the carcharhinid evolutionary tree , between most basal genera ( Galeocerdo , Rhizoprionodon , and Scoliodon ) and the most derived ( Carcharhinus and Sphyrna ) . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Whitetip Reef Shark is distributed widely across the entire Indo @-@ Pacific region . It was once thought to have formerly existed in the Atlantic Ocean , based on fossil teeth found in North Carolina dating to the Miocene epoch . However , more recent research indicates that the teeth belonged to a mackerel shark , and that this species has never colonized the Atlantic . In the Indian Ocean , it occurs from northern KwaZulu @-@ Natal , South Africa to the Red Sea and the Indian subcontinent , including Madagascar , Mauritius , the Comoros , the Aldabra Group , the Seychelles , Sri Lanka , and the Chagos Archipelago . In the western and central Pacific , it occurs from off southern China , Taiwan , and the Ryukyu Islands , to the Philippines , Southeast Asia , and Indonesia , to northern Australia , and is also found around numerous islands in Melanesia , Micronesia , and Polynesia , as far as Hawaii to the north and the Pitcairn Islands to the southeast . In the eastern Pacific , it occurs from Costa Rica to Panama , and off the Galápagos Islands . 
 Associated almost exclusively with coral reef habitats , whitetip reef sharks are most often encountered around coral heads and ledges with high vertical relief , and additionally over sandy flats , in lagoons , and near drop @-@ offs to deeper water . They prefer very clear water and rarely swim far from the bottom . This species is most common at a depth of 8 – 40 m ( 26 – 131 ft ) . On occasion , they may enter water less than 1 m deep , and there is an exceptional record of a whitetip reef shark being captured from a depth of 330 m ( 1 @,@ 080 ft ) in the Ryukyu Islands . 
 = = Description = = 
 A relatively small species , few whitetip reef sharks are longer than 1 @.@ 6 m ( 5 @.@ 2 ft ) . The maximum length this species attains is often given as 2 @.@ 1 m ( 6 @.@ 9 ft ) , though this was originally based on visual observations and may be dubious . The maximum reported weight is 18 @.@ 3 kg ( 40 lb ) . The whitetip reef shark has a slim body and a short , broad head . The snout is flattened and blunt , with large flaps of skin in front of the nares that are furled into tubes . The eyes are small and oval with vertical pupils and prominent ridges above , and are often followed by a small notch . The mouth has a distinct downward slant ( imparting a disgruntled expression to the shark ) , with short furrows at the corners . There are 42 – 50 tooth rows in the upper jaw and 42 – 48 tooth rows in the lower jaw . Each tooth has a single narrow , smooth @-@ edged cusp at the center , flanked by a pair of much smaller cusplets . 
 The first dorsal fin is positioned well back on the body , closer to the pelvic than the pectoral fins . The second dorsal and anal fins are large , about half to three @-@ quarters as high as the first dorsal fin . The broad , triangular pectoral fins originate at or slightly before the level of the fifth gill slit . There is no ridge between the first and second dorsal fins . The lower lobe of the caudal fin is half the length of the upper , which has a strong notch near the tip . The dermal denticles are small and overlapping , usually with 7 horizontal ridges , giving the skin a smooth feel . The coloration is grayish to brownish above and white below , with a pattern of scattered small , dark spots unique to each individual . The tips of the first dorsal fin and upper caudal fin lobe , and sometimes also the second dorsal fin and lower caudal fin lobe , are bright white . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The whitetip reef shark is one of the three most common sharks inhabiting the reefs of the Indo @-@ Pacific , the other two being the blacktip reef shark ( Carcharhinus melanopterus ) and the grey reef shark ( Carcharhinus amblyrhynchos ) . The habitat preferences of this species overlap those of the other two , though it does not tend to frequent very shallow water like the blacktip reef shark , nor the outer reef like the grey reef shark . The whitetip reef shark swims with strong undulations of its body , and unlike other requiem sharks can lie motionless on the bottom and actively pump water over its gills for respiration . This species is most active at night or during slack tide , and spends much of the day resting inside caves singly or in small groups , arranged in parallel or stacked atop one another . Off Hawaii , these sharks may be found sheltering inside underwater lava tubes , while off Costa Rica they are often seen lying in the open on sandy flats . 
 Whitetip reef sharks generally remain within a highly localized area ; only rarely do they undertake long movements , wandering for a while before settling down somewhere new . One study at Johnston Atoll found that none of the sharks examined had moved more than 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) away from their original capture location over periods of up to a year . Another study at Rangiroa Atoll in French Polynesia found that , after more than three years , around 40 % of the originally tagged sharks were still present on the same reef where they were first captured . An individual shark may rest inside the same cave for months to years . The daytime home range of a whitetip reef shark is limited to approximately 0 @.@ 05 km2 ( 0 @.@ 019 sq mi ) ; at night this range increases to 1 km2 ( 0 @.@ 39 sq mi ) . These sharks are not territorial and share their home ranges with others of their species ; they do not perform threat displays . 
 Important predators of the whitetip reef shark include tiger sharks ( Galeocerdo cuvier ) , Galapagos sharks ( Carcharhinus galapagensis ) , and possibly also silvertip sharks ( Carcharhinus albimarginatus ) , though they usually occur at depths greater than those favored by whitetip reef sharks . An 80 cm ( 31 in ) long whitetip reef shark has also been found in the stomach of a giant grouper ( Epinephelus lanceolatus ) , though these groupers are unlikely to be significant predators of this species due to their rarity . Known parasites of the whitetip reef shark include the copepod <unk> elongatus and the praniza ( parasitic ) larvae of the isopod Gnathia grandilaris . While resting during the day , these sharks have been observed being cleaned by the wrasse <unk> <unk> and the goby Elacatinus <unk> . Unusually , there is also a report of seven whitetip reef sharks adopting a cleaning posture ( mouth agape and gills flared ) in the midst of a swarm of non @-@ cleaning hyperiid amphipods ; the mechanical stimulation from the moving amphipods are thought to have evoked this behavior through their similarity to actual cleaner organisms . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 With its slender , lithe body , the whitetip reef shark specializes in wriggling into narrow crevices and holes in the reef and extracting prey inaccessible to other reef sharks . Alternatively , it is rather clumsy when attempting to take food suspended in open water . This species feeds mainly on bony fishes , including eels , <unk> , snappers , damselfishes , <unk> , <unk> , triggerfishes , and <unk> , as well as octopus , spiny lobsters , and crabs . The whitetip reef shark is highly responsive to the olfactory , acoustic , and electrical cues given off by potential prey , while its visual system is attuned more to movement and / or contrast than to object details . It is especially sensitive to natural and artificial low @-@ frequency sounds in the 25 – 100 Hz range , which evoke struggling fish . 
 Whitetip reef sharks hunt primarily at night , when many fishes are asleep and easily taken . After dusk , groups of sharks methodically scour the reef , often breaking off pieces of coral in their vigorous pursuit of prey . Multiple sharks may target the same prey item , covering every exit route from a particular coral head . Each shark hunts for itself and in competition with the others in its group . Unlike blacktip reef sharks and grey reef sharks , whitetip reef sharks do not become more excited when feeding in groups and are unlikely to be stirred into a feeding frenzy . Despite their nocturnal habits , whitetip reef sharks will hunt opportunistically in daytime . Off Borneo , this species gathers around reef drop @-@ offs to feed on food brought up by the rising current . Off Hawaii , they follow Hawaiian monk seals ( Monachus <unk> ) and attempt to steal their catches . A whitetip reef shark can survive for six weeks without food . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 Like other members of its family , the whitetip reef shark is viviparous ; once the developing embryos exhaust their supply of yolk , the yolk sac is converted into a placental connection through which the mother delivers nourishment for the remainder of gestation . Mature females have a single functional ovary , on the left side , and two functional uteruses . The reproductive cycle is biennial . 
 Mating is initiated when up to five males follow closely behind a female and bite at her fins and body , possibly cued by pheromones indicating the female 's readiness . Each male attempts to seize the female by engulfing one of her pectoral fins ; at times two males might grasp a female on both sides simultaneously . Once engaged , the sharks sink to the bottom , whereupon the male ( or males ) rotates one of his claspers forward , inflates the associated siphon sac ( a subcutaneous abdominal organ that takes in seawater that is used to flush sperm into the female ) , and attempts to make contact with the female 's vent . In many cases , the female resists by pressing her belly against the bottom and arching her tail ; this may reflect mate choice on her part . The male has a limited time in which to achieve copulation , as while he is holding the female 's pectoral fin in his mouth he is being deprived of oxygen . On the other hand , if the female is willing , the pair settles side @-@ by @-@ side with their heads pressed against the bottom and their bodies at an upward angle . 
 After a gestation period of 10 – 13 months , females give birth to litters of 1 – 6 ( usually 2 – 3 ) pups . The number of offspring is not correlated with female size ; each female produces an estimated average of 12 pups over her entire lifetime . Parturition occurs from May to August ( autumn and winter ) in French Polynesia , in July ( summer ) off Enewetak Atoll , and in October ( summer ) off Australia . Females give birth while swimming , making violent twists and turns of their bodies ; each pup takes under an hour to fully emerge . The newborns measure 52 – 60 cm ( 20 – 24 in ) long and have relatively longer caudal fins than adults . This shark develops slowly compared to other requiem sharks ; newborns grow at a rate of 16 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) per year while adults grow as a rate of 2 – 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 – 1 @.@ 57 in ) per year . Sexual maturity is reached at a length of around 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) and an age of 8 – 9 years , though mature males as small as 95 cm ( 37 in ) long have been recorded from the Maldives , suggesting regional variation in maturation size . On the Great Barrier Reef , males live to 14 years and females to 19 years ; the maximum lifespan of this shark may be upwards of 25 years . In 2008 , a whitetip reef shark produced a single pup through possibly asexual means at the <unk> Centre in Hungary ; previous instances of asexual reproduction in sharks have been reported in the bonnethead ( Sphyrna tiburo ) and the blacktip shark ( Carcharhinus limbatus ) . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Unlike its Oceanic cousin , the white tip reef shark is more harmless and is seldom aggressive unless provoked . They are also fearless and curious , as the whitetip reef sharks may approach swimmers closely to investigate . However , these sharks readily attempt , and quite boldly , to steal catches from spear fishers , which has resulted in several people being bitten in the process . In some places , local whitetip reef sharks have learned to associate the sound of a speargun discharge or a boat dropping anchor with food and respond within seconds . As of 2008 , the International Shark Attack File lists two provoked and three unprovoked attacks to this species . Whitetip reef sharks are well @-@ suited to ecotourism diving , and with conditioning they can be hand @-@ fed by divers . In Hawaiian mythology , the fidelity ( i.e. " loyalty " ) of whitetip reef sharks to certain areas of the reef for years at a time may have inspired belief in <unk> , the spirits of family ancestors that take animal form and protect their descendants . 
 The whitetip reef shark is taken by fisheries operating off Pakistan , India , Sri Lanka , Madagascar , and likely elsewhere , using longlines , gillnets , and trawls . The meat and liver are eaten , though sharks from certain areas present a substantial risk of ciguatera poisoning ( especially the liver , which contains a much higher concentration of the toxin than the meat ) . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Near Threatened , as its numbers have dropped in recent decades due to increasing , and thus far unregulated , fishing pressure in the tropics . Its restricted habitat , low dispersal , and slow reproduction are factors that limit this shark 's capacity for recovering from overfishing . On the Great Barrier Reef , populations of whitetip reef sharks in fishing zones have been reduced by 80 % relative to no @-@ entry zones . Furthermore , populations in no @-@ take zones , where boats are allowed but fishing prohibited , exhibit levels of depletion comparable to fishing zones due to poaching . Demographic models indicate that these depleted populations will continue to decline by 6 @.@ 6 – 8 @.@ 3 % per year without additional conservation measures . 
 = PlayOnline = 
 PlayOnline is an online gaming service created by Square Co . ( now Square Enix ) in January 28 , 2000 , and has been the launcher application and Internet service for many of the online PC , PlayStation 2 and Xbox 360 games the company publishes . Games hosted included Front Mission Online , Fantasy Earth : The Ring of Dominion , Tetra Master , and the Japanese releases of EverQuest II , Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII and <unk> . 
 The service hosted hundreds of thousands of players at its peak , and was one of the first cross @-@ platform gaming services . It was shutdown during the 2011 earthquake in Japan for twelve days . The platform was also subjected to denial of service attacks and players attempting to cheat who were subsequently banned . 
 Starting with Final Fantasy XIV , Square Enix began moving their online games off of the service , and many of the social networking features the game was released with failed to catch on , with the service being described as " clunky " . The termination date of service for Final Fantasy XI and PlayOnline for PlayStation 2 and Xbox 360 was March 2016 , with only the PC version of Final Fantasy XI still supported . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Launch = = = 
 PlayOnline was originally conceived as an all @-@ in @-@ one solution to house multiple types of game content . At the " Square Millennium " event in Japan on January 28 , 2000 , Square announced three Final Fantasy games , including Final Fantasy XI , to be released in the summer of 2001 , and that Square had been working on an online portal called " PlayOnline " with Japanese telecom company NTT Communications , and would feature online games , chat , email , online comics , Internet browsing , online shopping , sports , and instant messaging . The service was first announced as costing ¥ 500 for monthly membership and a ¥ 1000 monthly user fee . Final Fantasy XI , then nicknamed " Final Fantasy Online " , was the first game to use the online service . The WonderSwan Color portable gaming system was also planned to be able to connect to PlayOnline through an adapter connected to one of the PlayStation 2 's USB ports . PlayOnline opened on June 6 , 2000 to both Japanese and English speaking countries with news about upcoming software titles , interviews , and wallpapers . The site 's merchandise included pieces from Parasite Eve , Vagrant Story , Chocobo Racing , Front Mission , Chrono Cross , and Final Fantasy . 
 = = = Service = = = 
 PlayOnline was seen as part of Sony 's strategy to turn the PlayStation 2 into an Internet set @-@ top box . Accordingly , Sony brought broadband equipment and a hard drive to the PlayStation 2 . The quality of the browser was noted in its " clean " graphics , excellent page layouts , and " high quality sound " . The browser was not a general purpose Internet tool , but only accessed Square content , such as news about Square products and a comic @-@ strip walkthrough of Final Fantasy XI . 
 <unk> Final Fantasy XI to the Xbox proved difficult due to compatibility issues greater than was hoped for between Xbox Live and PlayOnline , likely because the latter was designed first . After negotiation , Xbox 360 players were able to play the game through PlayOnline 's servers exclusively , despite Microsoft 's initial wish that Square Enix would use its own platform . Downloadable content was also not available on the platform since the game played through PlayOnline . It was hoped that content would eventually be offered through the Xbox Live Marketplace . Final Fantasy XII started out as a game designed for the PlayOnline game platform . 
 = = = Security and Outages = = = 
 In February 2005 , 800 players were banned from the card game Tetra Master and from Final Fantasy XI for monopolizing areas where high level items and monsters would spawn , making it impossible for other players to become stronger . In March 2009 , Square Enix announced a new security system for players beginning April 6 , 2009 , involving a security token players could purchase for $ 9 @.@ 99 and including an in @-@ game bonus called a " Mog Satchel " . On April 9 , 2005 , a distributed denial of service attack against PlayOnline 's servers shut down Final Fantasy XI access for players in North America and Europe for three hours : the attack continued for over a week , leading Square Enix to involve law enforcement . At the time , Square Enix did not reveal if the Japanese server which hosted Front Mission Online , Fantasy Earth , and Japanese players of EverQuest II were affected . 
 After Japan 's 2011 earthquake , Square @-@ Enix , Co . Ltd. voluntarily disabled servers to conserve energy due to the incapacitated state of the region 's nuclear power plant . This led to a temporary halt of the Final Fantasy XIV , Final Fantasy XI , and PlayOnline games and services from March 13 to 25 . During the power shortage , air conditioning and lighting was reduced , and the subscription fees for Final Fantasy XI were waived for the month of April . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 In June 2009 , Square Enix announced they had decided not to use PlayOnline for Final Fantasy XIV due to the marked decrease of content on the service . Instead , they would migrate to a new service that still allowed cross @-@ platform gameplay , including the use of a universal Square Enix ID that would allow players to play from wherever they left off . In June 2011 , Square Enix announced that they would merge the account management portion of the PlayOnline service into Square Enix accounts from July 2011 and culminate on August 31 , 2011 . However , PlayOnline is still required in order to actually play Final Fantasy XI . Square Enix replicated the idea of the friends list from Final Fantasy XI in Final Fantasy XIV . The termination date of service for Final Fantasy XI and PlayOnline for PlayStation 2 and Xbox 360 was March 2016 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In December 2001 , Square Enix projected it would have 250 @,@ 000 users by the end of 2001 , and 400 @,@ 000 by year end 2002 : the service charged $ 10 per person , and thus needed 200 @,@ 000 participants to break even . 
 On January 7 , 2004 , Square Enix announced they had more than 500 @,@ 000 registered users on the PlayOnline gaming service , and slightly under one million active players . In September 2004 , Square Enix stated they had 1 @.@ 2 million characters , with most players having two to three characters . In May 2005 , Front Mission Online became the second game to utilize the service , retailing at ¥ 7 @,@ 140 with a monthly subscription price of ¥ 1 @,@ 344 . In June 2009 , a San Francisco , California resident sued Square Enix for " deceptive advertising , unfair competition , and unjust enrichment " from Final Fantasy XI , and sought a $ 5 million settlement . 
 Composer Nobuo Uematsu stated that Square 's efforts to push forward with online gaming was important to the video game industry 's development . The PlayOnline Viewer was criticized as being nothing more than a longer way to get to Final Fantasy XI 's content . The game also had <unk> chat rooms that ended up with explicit content . The interface was also described as " clunky " , with " strange functional restrictions " . 
 = County Route 149 ( Sullivan County , New York ) = 
 County Route 149 ( CR 149 ) is a 8 @.@ 69 @-@ mile ( 13 @.@ 99 km ) county route in northern Sullivan County , New York , in the United States . The route runs from an intersection with New York State Route 52 ( NY 52 ) in the <unk> community of Youngsville to an intersection with CR 178 in the Rockland community of Livingston Manor . CR 149 was originally designated as New York State Route 284 during the 1930s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 CR 149 begins at an intersection with NY 52 in the community of Youngsville . The route progresses northward , passing and paralleling Tremper Road , a dead @-@ end road . CR 149 passes by several residential homes in Youngsville , along with one local commercial building . After leaving the community , CR 149 continues to the north as Shandelee Road , passing through the residential surroundings . After passing by a few more residences , Shandelee Road makes a bend to the northwest , and into more dense woodlands in the area . About a mile north of Youngsville , CR 149 continues its way northward , passing by a local residence , and intersects with Stump Pond Road , which heads westward from the main highway . <unk> Road makes another bend , this time to the north , passing through moderate development for about another mile . A short distance into the bend , the woodlands that were surrounding the highway clear and the highway becomes surrounded by fields and residential homes . 
 After a short gap in the clearing , CR 149 intersects with Hardenburg Road , a local road , in another clearing . After Hardenburg Road , Shandelee Road begins to bend in different directions , several times to the west and several times to the east , intersecting with Meyer Road at a fork . CR 149 , which continues to the left at the fork , heads to the northwest , paralleling Meyer Road to the west . The residences begin to disappear and CR 149 continues into a more wooded area , where it intersects with <unk> Road , a local dead @-@ end road . A short distance from <unk> Road , CR 149 makes a sharp bend to the northeast , intersecting with the northern termini of Stump Pond Road and Meyer Road . Near the intersection with Gilda Lane , CR 149 passes the Sand Pond , and intersects with a series of short local roads . Paralleling the shores of Sand Pond for a short distance , Shandelee Road begins to enter the community of Shandelee . There , the highway intersects with Shandelee Lake Road , a short connector highway in the area . CR 149 makes a curve to the east , following Shandelee Road for a distance , making several winds in direction until the alignment turns towards the northeast . Shandelee Road continues to the northeast , passing through local woodlands and fields . As CR 149 nears Livingston Manor , the name changes from Shandelee Road to Main Street . 
 After a curve to the northeast , CR 149 passes under some power lines , intersecting with <unk> Road . There the highway turns to the north , and soon to the northeast , entering Livingston Manor . Immediately after entering the community , CR 149 becomes more developed , with residential homes and commercial buildings now surrounding highway . After an intersection with Creamery Road , CR 149 continues to the northeast through downtown Livingston Manor , ending at an intersection with CR 178 ( a former alignment of NY 17 ) . Interchange 98 on Route 17 ( the Quickway ) , is not far to the north and is accessible via CR 178 and CR 81 . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , the New York State Department of Public Works renumbered several routes assigned during the 1920s and assigned route numbers to hundreds of state highways that had yet to receive a designation . By the following year , the current alignment of CR 149 , then a state highway , was designated as NY 284 . The NY 284 designation was short @-@ lived , however , as it was removed c . 1939 . The former alignment of NY 284 was designated as CR 149 by the Sullivan County Highway Department by 1995 . The NY 284 designation is now assigned to a road in nearby Orange County . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Sullivan County . 
 = Tennis for Two = 
 Tennis For Two is a sports video game developed in 1958 which simulates a game of tennis , and was one of the first games developed in the early history of video games . American physicist William Higinbotham designed the game for display at the Brookhaven National Laboratory 's annual public exhibition after learning that the government research institution 's Donner Model 30 analog computer could simulate trajectories with wind resistance . He designed the game , displayed on an oscilloscope and played with two custom aluminum controllers , in a few hours , after which he and technician Robert V. Dvorak built it over three weeks . The game 's visuals show a representation of a tennis court viewed from the side , and players adjust the angle of their shots with a knob on their controller and try to hit the ball over the net by pressing a button . 
 The game was very popular during the three @-@ day exhibition , with players lining up to see the game , especially high school students . It was shown again the following year with a larger oscilloscope screen and more a complicated design that could simulate different gravity levels . It was then dismantled and largely forgotten until the late 1970s , when Higinbotham testified in court about the game during lawsuits between Magnavox and Ralph H. Baer over video game patents . Since then , it has been celebrated as one of the earliest video games , and Brookhaven has made recreations of the original device . Under some definitions Tennis for Two is considered the first video game , as while it did not include any technological innovations over prior games , it was the first computer game to be created purely as an entertainment product rather than for academic research or commercial technology promotion . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 1958 , American physicist William Higinbotham worked in the Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton , New York as the head of the instrumentation division . Higinbotham had a bachelor 's degree in physics from Williams College , and had previously worked as technician in the physics department at Cornell University while unsuccessfully pursuing a PhD there . He served as the head of the electronics division of the Manhattan Project from 1943 to 1945 , and began working at Brookhaven in 1947 , which focused on researching peaceful uses of atomic power . Once a year , the government research facility held an exhibition for the public , with one day each for high school students , college students , and the general public . The exhibition largely consisted of tours and static displays , with some attempts at making displays with " action " , so for the 1958 exhibition Higinbotham decided to make an interactive display to entertain the visitors . While reading the instruction manual for one of Brookhaven 's computers , a Donner Model 30 analog computer , he learned that the computer could calculate ballistic missile trajectories or a bouncing ball with wind resistance , and he decided to use this ability to form the foundation of a game . He later recalled his intentions were that " it might liven up the place to have a game that people could play , and which could convey the message that our scientific endeavors have relevance for society . " 
 Higinbotham designed a game that used an oscilloscope to display the path of a simulated ball on a tennis court viewed from the side . The attached computer calculated the path of the ball and reversed its path when it hit the ground . The game also simulated the ball hitting the net if it did not achieve a high enough arc as well as changes in velocity due to drag from air resistance . Two aluminum controllers were attached to the computer , each consisting of a button and a knob . Pressing the button hit the ball , and turning a knob controlled the angle of the shot . Originally , Higinbotham considered having a second knob to control the velocity of the shot , but decided it would make the controller too complicated . The device was designed in a few hours with the help of colleague Dave Potter and was assembled over three weeks with the help of technician Robert V. Dvorak . While most of the circuitry was based on vacuum tubes and relays , the circuits to display the graphics on the oscilloscope used transistors , then beginning to replace vacuum tubes in the electronics industry . Excluding the oscilloscope and controller , the game 's circuitry approximately took up the space of a microwave oven . 
 = = Presentation = = 
 Tennis for Two was first shown on October 18 , 1958 . The game was rendered as a horizontal line , representing the tennis court , and a short vertical line in the center , representing the tennis net . The first player would press the button on their controller to send the ball , a point of light , over the net , and it would either hit the net , reach the other side of the court , or fly out of bounds . The second player could then hit the ball back with their controller while it was on their side , either before or after it bounced on the ground . Hundreds of visitors lined up to play the new game during its debut . Higinbotham claimed later that " the high schoolers liked it best , you couldn 't pull them away from it . " Due to the game 's popularity , an upgraded version was shown the following year , with enhancements including a larger screen and different levels of simulated gravity . Players could set the game to simulate the gravity levels of the Moon or Jupiter . Higinbotham referred to the game as Tennis for Two , though a placard attached to the 1959 version titled it " Computer Tennis " . After the 1959 exhibition , the game was dismantled so its components could be put to other uses . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After being dismantled , Tennis for Two was largely forgotten . It remained virtually unknown until the late 1970s and early 1980s when Higinbotham was called on to testify in court cases for defendants sued by Magnavox over the video game patents of Ralph H. Baer . Having discovered the game , the lawyers for the defense unsuccessfully attempted to have the game declared prior art to invalidate Baer 's patents on television video games , resulting in attention being given to the nearly 20 year old game as possibly the first video game . It received further attention as the subject of articles in Creative Computing and Video Replay in 1982 and 1983 highlighting its possible status as the first video game ; the editor of Creative Computing , David H. Ahl , had played Tennis for Two at Brookhaven in 1958 , and dubbed Higinbotham the " Grandfather of Video Games " . Higinbotham himself felt that the game was an obvious extension of the Donner Model 30 's bouncing ball program and therefore not worthy of patenting or a large part of his legacy ; he preferred to be remembered for his post @-@ World War II nuclear nonproliferation work . 
 In 1997 , a team at Brookhaven recreated the game for Brookhaven 's 50th anniversary . The reconstruction took about three months , partially because the parts were not readily available . This recreation was also displayed at the 2008 celebration of the 50th Anniversary of the original game . The replica implemented an analog computer using solid @-@ state operational amplifier devices instead of vacuum tubes as the original Donner Model 30 did . In 2010 , it was replaced with a restored Donner Model 3400 analog computer . In 2011 , Stony Brook University founded the William A. Higinbotham Game Studies Collection , dedicated to " documenting the material culture of screen @-@ based game media " , and " collecting and preserving the texts , ephemera , and artifacts that document the history and work of early game innovator and Brookhaven National Laboratory scientist William A. Higinbotham , who in 1958 invented the first interactive analog computer game , Tennis for Two . " 
 Tennis for Two is considered under some definitions to be the first video game . Other candidates with stronger candidacies from a technological standpoint include the 1947 cathode @-@ ray tube amusement device , the earliest known interactive electronic game , though it did not run on a computing device ; the 1950 Bertie the Brain , the earliest known game to run on a computer , though it used lightbulbs for a display ; and OXO and a draughts game by Christopher Strachey in 1952 , the earliest digital computer games to display visuals on an electronic screen . Tennis for Two , though it contained no technological developments to separate it from earlier games , has the distinction of being the earliest known computer game with visuals created purely for entertainment purposes . Prior games were created primarily for academic research purposes or to demonstrate the computing power of the underlying machine , with the exception of the non @-@ computer based cathode @-@ ray tube amusement device . This , therefore , makes Tennis for Two the first video game under some definitions from a philosophical viewpoint rather than a technical one and a distinctive moment in the early history of video games . 
 = SR Q class = 
 The Q Class , is a type of 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 steam locomotive designed by Richard Maunsell of the Southern Railway and constructed immediately prior to the Second World War , for use on medium @-@ distance freight trains throughout network . Twenty locomotives were built by Maunsell 's successor , Oliver Bulleid , in 1938 . The design was relatively old @-@ fashioned and the class was soon afterwards eclipsed by Bulleid 's own more powerful Q1 class . Nevertheless the locomotives performed adequately and reliably on the tasks for which they were designed until their withdrawal in 1965 . Only one has survived , and is preserved on the Bluebell Railway . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Southern Railway was primarily a passenger @-@ carrying railway which used most of its resources to extend its electrified lines . There was a continuing need for steam freight locomotives however , although the Traffic Department preferred mixed traffic designs which could also haul passenger trains on the remaining non @-@ electrified lines at peak periods . By the late 1930s the Southern Railway was adequately served with powerful mixed traffic locomotives of the S15 and N and N1 classes , but there was a need for a smaller freight locomotive with high route availability that could also undertake light passenger duties . This role had been performed by the ex @-@ LSWR ' Jubilee ' A12 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 2 , which were approaching the end of their useful lives . During his last year as the Chief Mechanical Engineer ( CME ) of the Southern Railway Richard Maunsell decided on an inside @-@ cylinder 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 tender locomotive to undertake this role , in what was to become the Q Class of 1938 . This was a relatively ‘ old @-@ fashioned ’ design for the late 1930s , although each of Britain ’ s major railways built locomotives of this pattern until the 1940s . The class nevertheless contained several ‘ modern ’ features such as a Belpaire firebox , superheater , and a side @-@ widow cab . It was the last Southern steam locomotive design before the Second World War , and represented the final design of Maunsell 's career , as he retired due to ill @-@ health in 1937 . 
 = = Construction history = = 
 Maunsell ’ ' s successor , Oliver Bulleid , oversaw the building of twenty members of the class at Eastleigh railway works between January 1938 and September 1939 . Bulleid is reported to have found the Q Class uninspiring , having been manufactured to traditional Victorian principles of locomotive design , and is said to have stated that the order for the Q Class would have been cancelled if he had been appointed CME earlier . However , Bulleid had ample opportunity either to cancel the order or to build and test a single prototype , without incurring the expense of building twenty members of the class , if this was the case . 
 The class performed adequately and reliably on the tasks for which they were designed , but were less versatile than might have been hoped . When the requirement for modern freight locomotives on the Southern increased during the Second World War , Bulleid was faced with the options of continuing the production of the Q Class , or to design a completely new locomotive . Taking the latter option , Bulleid designed what was to become the highly utilitarian SR Class Q1 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 locomotives . 
 = = = Modifications = = = 
 In common with most Maunsell designs , the Q class locomotives were reliable , but there were complaints of poor steaming when used on main @-@ line trains ( for which they were never designed ) . In 1940 Bulleid fitted one member of the class with a Lemaître blast pipe in an attempt to improve their efficiency . This proved to be successful and the remainder of the class were so fitted between 1946 and 1949 . During the 1950s further experiments were carried out by the fitting of a British Railways Standard Class 4 plain blast pipe and small stovepipe chimney to no . <unk> in 1955 , resulting in further improvements in both steaming and fuel consumption ; in 1958 – 61 , six more received the same blast pipe with a BR Standard Class 4 chimney . 
 = = Operational details and preservation = = 
 The locomotives were adequate and reliable on secondary services throughout their working lives , their utility compounded by their light weight and steady handling . They were however disappointing on main line traffic until the draughting was improved after the war . They were fitted with steam carriage heating , and despite being primarily a freight design , they periodically deputised in this duty . 
 British Railways was responsible for the class from 1948 and gave it a 4F power classification , F denoting a freight locomotive in power class 4 . Withdrawals from service began during 1962 and were completed by 1965 . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 The class was not considered sufficiently important for official preservation and had it not been for Woodham Brothers 's scrapyard in Barry , South Wales , no examples would have survived . Only one , number 541 ( BR No. <unk> ) , was rescued , and has operated on the Bluebell Railway in Sussex . It is operational in BR Black after returning to service in April 2015 . 
 = = Livery and numbering = = 
 = = = Southern Railway = = = 
 Due to its primary role as a freight locomotive , the Q Class carried the Southern Black livery . Locomotive number and " Southern " were located on the tender , and were painted in Sunshine Yellow . The numbering of the locomotives under the Southern Railway ranged from 530 – 549 . Even though they were built under the tenure of Bulleid , the locomotives never followed his adaptation of the UIC classification system which refers to the number of leading , trailing and driving axles – in this case three . Under this system , this class would have had the prefix " C " before the numbers , such as C30 . In the event , this form of numbering was granted to Bulleid 's Q1 Class locomotives of 1942 . 
 = = = Post @-@ 1948 ( nationalisation ) = = = 
 Early livery included the temporary retention of the Southern number , and remained black , although in certain cases " British Railways " was applied to the tender in place of " Southern " , in Sunshine Yellow . Under British Railways , the class was granted the power classification 4F . Immediately after nationalisation , the Q Class was given a temporary " S " prefix to the original Southern Railway number . As overhauls and re @-@ paints became due , the class was eventually re @-@ numbered within the British Railways standard numbering system and the livery was changed to British Railways goods plain black with the crest on the tender and numbering on the side of the cab . These locomotive numbers ranged between <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = Locomotive Summary = = 
 = 2009 Mediterranean Games = 
 The 2009 Mediterranean Games , officially the XVI Mediterranean Games ( Italian : XVI Giochi del Mediterraneo ) and commonly known as Pescara 2009 , was a multi @-@ sport event held in Pescara , Italy , from 26 June to 5 July 2009 . It was governed by the International Committee of Mediterranean Games ( ICMG ) ( French : Comité international des Jeux <unk> ) . A total of 3 @,@ 368 athletes ( 2 @,@ 183 men and 1 @,@ 185 women ) from 23 National Olympic Committees ( NOCs ) participated in the Games . Montenegro participated for the first time at the Mediterranean Games , after their independence in 2006 . The program included competitions in 24 different sports , including three non @-@ Olympic sports – bocce , karate , and water skiing – and golf , which will be reinstated as an official Olympic sport in 2016 Summer Olympics . Water skiing was introduced as a demonstration sport . Two disabled sports , athletics and swimming , were also contested in the Games . Italy became the first nation to host the Mediterranean Games three times , having previously hosted them in Naples ( 1963 ) and Bari ( 1997 ) . 
 Pescara was awarded the Games on 18 October 2003 in Almeria , Spain , which was the host of 2005 Mediterranean Games , defeating bids from Rijeka and Patras . The organising committee of the Games , Comitato <unk> dei XVI Giochi del Mediterraneo ( <unk> ) , was created in 2006 to oversee the staging of the Games . A total of 33 venues were used to host the events , including Stadio Adriatico — main stadium of the Pescara Games , hosted both the opening and closing ceremonies , as well as the athletics competition and football final . Many events took place in several different cities . The official logo of the 2009 Mediterranean Games featured simple graphical illustrations of mountains and sea of the Abruzzo region , and the Marsican brown bear was chosen as the mascot of the Games . 
 Athletes from 21 countries won medals , leaving two countries without a medal ; 18 of them won at least one gold medal . A total of 782 medals — 243 gold , 244 silver and 295 bronze — were awarded . Competitors from the host nation , Italy , led the medal table for the eleventh time in the history of the Games , with 64 gold medals . Italian swimmer Federica Pellegrini and Spanish swimmer Aschwin Wildeboer Faber set new world records in their respective events . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Mediterranean Games is a multi @-@ sport event , much like the Summer Olympics ( albeit on a much smaller scale ) , with participation exclusively from countries around the Mediterranean Sea where Europe , Africa , and Asia meet . The Games started in 1951 and are held every four years . The idea of holding the Mediterranean Games originated with Muhammed Taher Pasha , who was the chairman of the Egyptian Olympic Committee and the vice @-@ president of the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) , at a meeting during the 1948 London Olympics . The Games " were designed specifically to bring together the Muslim and European countries surrounding the Mediterranean basin " to promote understanding through sporting competition . 
 The first edition of the Mediterranean Games was held in the Egyptian city of Alexandria in 1951 , attracting 734 competitors from 10 nations . Female athletes were not allowed to compete . Italy hosted the Games for the first time in 1963 in Naples — the fourth edition of the Games . Naples was the second in Europe ( following Barcelona in 1955 ) to host the Games . Thirty @-@ four years later , another Italian city , Bari , hosted the Games . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 = = = Selection of host city = = = 
 Pescara was elected as the host city for the 2009 Mediterranean Games on 18 October 2003 in Almeria , Spain , defeating bids from Rijeka and Patras . The decision for the host city was made after the voting by members of the International Committee of Mediterranean Games , held in Almeria , host of the 2005 Mediterranean Games . Croatia 's bidding city , Rijeka , was the first city to be eliminated , followed by Patras , Greece 's biding city . This was the third time that any Italian city hosted this multi @-@ sport event . 
 Croatian delegates were outraged by the final decision , particularly as this was their third bid in recent years ; Croatia made bids in 1995 and 1999 for the 1997 and 2001 Mediterranean Games , respectively . Former Prime Minister of Croatia and the president of the Croatian Olympic Committee Zlatko Mateša expressed his disappointment , " it just shows , once again , that small countries have no chance of competing with the big ones . " The Croatian bid was supported by the president and CEO of Formula One Management and Formula One Administration Bernie Ecclestone , 1992 Olympic bronze medallist in tennis Goran Ivanišević and 1998 FIFA World Cup Golden Shoe Award winner Davor <unk> . 
 = = = Organising committee = = = 
 The Comitato <unk> dei XVI Giochi del Mediterraneo – Pescara 2009 ( English : Organizing Committee of the XVI Mediterranean Games – Pescara 2009 ; abbreviated as <unk> ) was created in 2006 to oversee the staging of the Games . The committee was in charge of implementing and staging the Games , and to maintain the infrastructure and provide other services . The committee 's board of directors consisted of politicians , IOC members from Italy , and presidents of the various Italian sports governing bodies . Mario <unk> was appointed as the Commissioner Extraordinary of the Games in 2008 by the Italian Government . He had held the same office during the 2006 Winter Olympic , held in Turin . 
 A few weeks before the Games on 18 May 2009 , Sabatino Aracu resigned from his post of the president of the organising committee in order to allow its dissolution , which according to him was " incapable of taking urgent measures . " Aracu 's decision was reportedly motivated by the bureaucratic reasons . He was later appointed Honorary President of the Games . 
 = = = Logo and mascot = = = 
 The official logo of this edition of the Mediterranean Games featured simple graphical illustrations of mountains and sea of the Abruzzo region . Pescara is the capital of Province of Pescara which is situated in the Abruzzo region . The official mascot was a Marsican brown bear wearing a diving mask and flip @-@ flops with <unk> in his hands . The Marsican brown bear is a highly threatened , unrecognised subspecies of the Brown bear , with a range restricted to the Abruzzo National Park . The mascot was unveiled by the Mediterranean Games Executive Committee during their meeting in Pescara from 24 to 28 March 2008 . 
 = = = Medals = = = 
 The medals of the Games were designed and produced by the Italian company , <unk> , specialising in the manufacture of medals , jewellery , badges , plaques , and trophies . The medals were made up of brass , bronze , and gold . The obverse features the Games logo , stylised shape of an athlete posed to plunge into the waves , with the inscription " Pescara 2009 " and XVI Jeux <unk> in French and the ICMG logo at bottom — three interlocking rings , representing Africa , Asia and Europe . The reverse features the Warrior of Capestrano ( Italian : <unk> di Capestrano ) , a fourth @-@ century BC statue , measures more than two metres in height . The statue was discovered in 1934 in Capestrano , Province of L 'Aquila , Abruzzo region . It is widely considered to be an archaeological evidence of the pre @-@ Roman settlements in Abruzzo . 
 = = = Venues = = = 
 The main stadium of the 2009 Mediterranean Games was Stadio Adriatico . The stadium received major renovations and upgrades at a cost of about € 10 million . It hosted both the opening and closing ceremonies as well as the athletics competition and football final . A total of 33 venues were used to host the events during the Games . Many events took place in several different cities . 
 The Mediterranean Village provided accommodation and training for athletes of the Games . It was designed by the Italian architect Paolo <unk> , and the total cost of the project was € 150 million . It was located in the municipality of Chieti and was spread over an area of 18 acres ( 7 @.@ 3 ha ; 0 @.@ 028 sq mi ) , including a 7 acres ( 2 @.@ 8 ha ; 0 @.@ 011 sq mi ) public park . More than 450 apartments accommodated athletes and team officials . 
 The village was designed according to modern architecture and was said to have adopted green features like solar water heating . Key facilities such as a restaurant , medical centre , and a conference hall with a seating capacity of 800 people were hosted there . Rhythmic gymnast Fabrizia D <unk> was appointed the mayor of the village . 
 = = Calendar = = 
 In the following calendar for the 2009 Mediterranean Games , each blue box represents an event competition , such as a qualification round , on that day . The yellow boxes represent days during which medal @-@ awarding finals for a sport were held . On the left the calendar lists each sport with events held during the Games . There is a key at the top of the calendar to aid the reader . 
 Although , the Games officially began on 26 June 2009 , the first football games were held on 25 June . Opening ceremony was held on 26 June , and on the same day Tunisian weightlifter Khalil El @-@ <unk> won the first gold medal of the Games in the men 's 56 kg event . 
 = = Games = = 
 = = = Opening ceremony = = = 
 The opening ceremony officially began at 9 : 00 pm Central European Summer Time ( UTC + 02 : 00 ) on 26 June 2009 in the Stadio Adriatico . Italian entrepreneur Marco <unk> , who coordinated the opening ceremony of the 2006 Winter Olympics , held in Turin , was its producer and director , with " music moments and stage actions " were developed by the choreography director Doug Jack . K @-@ events ( now <unk> Events ) , subsidiary of the Italian holding company <unk> Group , was responsible for the organisation of the opening and closing ceremonies . 
 The ceremony , among other dignitaries and guests , included the president of the International Olympic Committee Jacques Rogge , president of the ICMG Amar <unk> , Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi , Albert II , Prince of Monaco , Commissioner Extraordinary of the Games Mario <unk> , president of the Pescara Games organising committee Sabatino Aracu , European Olympic Committee ( EOC ) president Patrick Hickey , president of the Italian National Olympic Committee ( Italian : Comitato Olimpico Nazionale Italiano ( CONI ) ) Gianni Petrucci and the EOC and CONI secretary general Raffaele <unk> . 
 The cultures of Abruzzi Region and Mediterranean were highlighted in the two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours long opening ceremony . The stadium was full to its 25 @,@ 000 capacity . A special tribute was presented to the victims of the 2009 L 'Aquila earthquake , occurred in the region of Abruzzo on 6 April 2009 ; Italian flag was carried by the Italian Special Forces , " who were the first to arrive in L ’ Aquila " . The ceremony featured a special performance by the Italian Air Force . Italian musician and singer @-@ songwriter Eros Ramazzotti sang " L <unk> " from his 2009 studio album Ali e <unk> . The main attraction of the ceremony was the " Water Ceremony " . The " water journey " took place through the villages most stricken by the earthquake and ended at the stadium . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 The programme for the Pescara Games included 24 sports and 245 events . Two disabled sports – athletics and swimming – were also held , each comprising two events . Three sports were open only to men – boxing , football and water polo – while rhythmic gymnastics and two events of fencing ( foil and sabre ) were open only to women . Equestrian was the only sport in which men and women competed together . Water skiing was added as a demonstration sport . 
 Numbers in parentheses indicate the number of medal events contested in each sport . 
 = = = Closing ceremony = = = 
