 = = Models = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 Randall Made Knives ( official Website ) 
 = = = Web Articles = = = 
 “ The Randall Story ” , Knife World , April 1999 by Jim Williamson 
 = Tessellation = 
 A tessellation of a flat surface is the tiling of a plane using one or more geometric shapes , called tiles , with no overlaps and no gaps . In mathematics , tessellations can be generalized to higher dimensions and a variety of geometries . 
 A periodic tiling has a repeating pattern . Some special kinds include regular tilings with regular polygonal tiles all of the same shape , and <unk> tilings with regular tiles of more than one shape and with every corner identically arranged . The patterns formed by periodic tilings can be categorized into 17 wallpaper groups . A tiling that lacks a repeating pattern is called " non @-@ periodic " . An aperiodic tiling uses a small set of tile shapes that cannot form a repeating pattern . In the geometry of higher dimensions , a space @-@ filling or honeycomb is also called a tessellation of space . 
 A real physical tessellation is a tiling made of materials such as cemented ceramic squares or hexagons . Such tilings may be decorative patterns , or may have functions such as providing durable and water @-@ resistant pavement , floor or wall coverings . Historically , tessellations were used in Ancient Rome and in Islamic art such as in the decorative tiling of the Alhambra palace . In the twentieth century , the work of M. C. Escher often made use of tessellations , both in ordinary Euclidean geometry and in hyperbolic geometry , for artistic effect . Tessellations are sometimes employed for decorative effect in quilting . Tessellations form a class of patterns in nature , for example in the arrays of hexagonal cells found in honeycombs . 
 = = History = = 
 Tessellations were used by the Sumerians ( about 4000 BC ) in building wall decorations formed by patterns of clay tiles . 
 Decorative mosaic tilings made of small squared blocks called tesserae were widely employed in classical antiquity , sometimes displaying geometric patterns . 
 In 1619 Johannes Kepler made an early documented study of tessellations . He wrote about regular and semiregular tessellations in his Harmonices Mundi ; he was possibly the first to explore and to explain the hexagonal structures of honeycomb and snowflakes . 
 Some two hundred years later in 1891 , the Russian crystallographer <unk> Fyodorov proved that every periodic tiling of the plane features one of seventeen different groups of isometries . Fyodorov 's work marked the unofficial beginning of the mathematical study of tessellations . Other prominent contributors include <unk> and Belov ( 1964 ) , and Heinrich Heesch and Otto <unk> ( 1963 ) . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 In Latin , <unk> is a small cubical piece of clay , stone or glass used to make mosaics . The word " <unk> " means " small square " ( from <unk> , square , which in turn is from the Greek word <unk> for four ) . It corresponds with the everyday term tiling , which refers to applications of tessellations , often made of glazed clay . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Tessellation or tiling in two dimensions is a topic in geometry that studies how shapes , known as tiles , can be arranged to fill a plane without any gaps , according to a given set of rules . These rules can be varied . Common ones are that there must be no gaps between tiles , and that no corner of one tile can lie along the edge of another . The tessellations created by bonded brickwork do not obey this rule . Among those that do , a regular tessellation has both identical regular tiles and identical regular corners or vertices , having the same angle between adjacent edges for every tile . There are only three shapes that can form such regular tessellations : the equilateral triangle , square , and regular hexagon . Any one of these three shapes can be duplicated infinitely to fill a plane with no gaps . 
 Many other types of tessellation are possible under different constraints . For example , there are eight types of semi @-@ regular tessellation , made with more than one kind of regular polygon but still having the same arrangement of polygons at every corner . Irregular tessellations can also be made from other shapes such as pentagons , polyominoes and in fact almost any kind of geometric shape . The artist M. C. Escher is famous for making tessellations with irregular interlocking tiles , shaped like animals and other natural objects . If suitable contrasting colours are chosen for the tiles of differing shape , striking patterns are formed , and these can be used to decorate physical surfaces such as church floors . 
 More formally , a tessellation or tiling is a cover of the Euclidean plane by a countable number of closed sets , called tiles , such that the tiles intersect only on their boundaries . These tiles may be polygons or any other shapes . Many tessellations are formed from a finite number of prototiles in which all tiles in the tessellation are congruent to the given prototiles . If a geometric shape can be used as a prototile to create a tessellation , the shape is said to tessellate or to tile the plane . The Conway criterion is a sufficient but not necessary set of rules for deciding if a given shape tiles the plane periodically without reflections : some tiles fail the criterion but still tile the plane . No general rule has been found for determining if a given shape can tile the plane or not , which means there are many unsolved problems concerning tessellations . For example , the types of convex pentagon that can tile the plane remains an unsolved problem . 
 Mathematically , tessellations can be extended to spaces other than the Euclidean plane . The Swiss geometer Ludwig Schläfli pioneered this by defining <unk> , which mathematicians nowadays call <unk> . These are the analogues to polygons and polyhedra in spaces with more dimensions . He further defined the Schläfli symbol notation to make it easy to describe <unk> . For example , the Schläfli symbol for an equilateral triangle is { 3 } , while that for a square is { 4 } . The Schläfli notation makes it possible to describe tilings compactly . For example , a tiling of regular hexagons has three six @-@ sided polygons at each vertex , so its Schläfli symbol is { 6 @,@ 3 } . 
 Other methods also exist for describing polygonal tilings . When the tessellation is made of regular polygons , the most common notation is the vertex configuration , which is simply a list of the number of sides of the polygons around a vertex . The square tiling has a vertex configuration of 4 @.@ 4 @.@ 4 @.@ 4 , or 44 . The tiling of regular hexagons is noted 6 @.@ 6 @.@ 6 , or 63 . 
 = = In mathematics = = 
 = = = Introduction to tessellations = = = 
 Mathematicians use some technical terms when discussing tilings . An edge is the intersection between two bordering tiles ; it is often a straight line . A vertex is the point of intersection of three or more bordering tiles . Using these terms , an isogonal or vertex @-@ transitive tiling is a tiling where every vertex point is identical ; that is , the arrangement of polygons about each vertex is the same . The fundamental region is a shape such as a rectangle that is repeated to form the tessellation . For example , a regular tessellation of the plane with squares has a meeting of four squares at every vertex . 
 The sides of the polygons are not necessarily identical to the edges of the tiles . An edge @-@ to @-@ edge tiling is any polygonal tessellation where adjacent tiles only share one full side , i.e. , no tile shares a partial side or more than one side with any other tile . In an edge @-@ to @-@ edge tiling , the sides of the polygons and the edges of the tiles are the same . The familiar " brick wall " tiling is not edge @-@ to @-@ edge because the long side of each rectangular brick is shared with two bordering bricks . 
 A normal tiling is a tessellation for which every tile is topologically equivalent to a disk , the intersection of any two tiles is a single connected set or the empty set , and all tiles are uniformly bounded . This means that a single circumscribing radius and a single inscribing radius can be used for all the tiles in the whole tiling ; the condition disallows tiles that are pathologically long or thin . 
 A monohedral tiling is a tessellation in which all tiles are congruent ; it has only one prototile . A particularly interesting type of monohedral tessellation is the spiral monohedral tiling . The first spiral monohedral tiling was discovered by Heinz <unk> in 1936 ; the <unk> tiling has a unit tile that is a <unk> <unk> . The Hirschhorn tiling , published by Michael D. Hirschhorn and D. C. Hunt in 1985 , is a pentagon tiling using irregular pentagons : regular pentagons cannot tile the Euclidean plane as the internal angle of a regular pentagon , <unk> / 5 , is not a divisor of 2π . 
 An isohedral tiling is a special variation of a monohedral tiling in which all tiles belong to the same transitivity class , that is , all tiles are transforms of the same prototile under the symmetry group of the tiling . If a prototile admits a tiling , but no such tiling is isohedral , then the prototile is called <unk> and forms <unk> tilings . 
 A regular tessellation is a highly symmetric , edge @-@ to @-@ edge tiling made up of regular polygons , all of the same shape . There are only three regular tessellations : those made up of equilateral triangles , squares , or regular hexagons . All three of these tilings are isogonal and monohedral . 
 A semi @-@ regular ( or Archimedean ) tessellation uses more than one type of regular polygon in an isogonal arrangement . There are eight semi @-@ regular tilings ( or nine if the mirror @-@ image pair of tilings counts as two ) . These can be described by their vertex configuration ; for example , a semi @-@ regular tiling using squares and regular octagons has the vertex configuration 4 @.@ 82 ( each vertex has one square and two octagons ) . Many non @-@ edge @-@ to @-@ edge tilings of the Euclidean plane are possible , including the family of Pythagorean tilings , tessellations that use two ( <unk> ) sizes of square , each square touching four squares of the other size . 
 = = = Wallpaper groups = = = 
 <unk> with translational symmetry in two independent directions can be categorized by wallpaper groups , of which 17 exist . It has been claimed that all seventeen of these groups are represented in the Alhambra palace in Granada , Spain . Though this is disputed , the variety and sophistication of the Alhambra tilings have surprised modern researchers . Of the three regular tilings two are in the <unk> wallpaper group and one is in <unk> . <unk> in 2D with translational symmetry in just one direction can be categorized by the seven frieze groups describing the possible frieze patterns . <unk> notation can be used to describe wallpaper groups of the Euclidean plane . 
 = = = <unk> tilings = = = 
 Penrose tilings , which use two different quadrilaterals , are the best known example of tiles that forcibly create non @-@ periodic patterns . They belong to a general class of aperiodic tilings , which use tiles that cannot tessellate periodically . The recursive process of substitution tiling is a method of generating aperiodic tilings . One class that can be generated in this way is the rep @-@ tiles ; these tilings have surprising self @-@ replicating properties . Pinwheel tilings are non @-@ periodic , using a rep @-@ tile construction ; the tiles appear in infinitely many orientations . It might be thought that a non @-@ periodic pattern would be entirely without symmetry , but this is not so . <unk> tilings , while lacking in translational symmetry , do have symmetries of other types , by infinite repetition of any bounded patch of the tiling and in certain finite groups of rotations or reflections of those patches . A substitution rule , such as can be used to generate some Penrose patterns using assemblies of tiles called rhombs , illustrates scaling symmetry . A Fibonacci word can be used to build an aperiodic tiling , and to study quasicrystals , which are structures with aperiodic order . 
 Wang tiles are squares coloured on each edge , and placed so that abutting edges of adjacent tiles have the same colour ; hence they are sometimes called Wang dominoes . A suitable set of Wang dominoes can tile the plane , but only aperiodically . This is known because any Turing machine can be represented as a set of Wang dominoes that tile the plane if and only if the Turing machine does not halt . Since the halting problem is undecidable , the problem of deciding whether a Wang domino set can tile the plane is also undecidable . 
 <unk> tiles are square tiles decorated with patterns so they do not have rotational symmetry ; in 1704 , Sébastien <unk> used a square tile split into two triangles of contrasting colours . These can tile the plane either periodically or randomly . 
 = = = Tessellations and colour = = = 
 Sometimes the colour of a tile is understood as part of the tiling ; at other times arbitrary colours may be applied later . When discussing a tiling that is displayed in colours , to avoid ambiguity one needs to specify whether the colours are part of the tiling or just part of its illustration . This affects whether tiles with the same shape but different colours are considered identical , which in turn affects questions of symmetry . The four colour theorem states that for every tessellation of a normal Euclidean plane , with a set of four available colours , each tile can be coloured in one colour such that no tiles of equal colour meet at a curve of positive length . The colouring guaranteed by the four @-@ colour theorem does not generally respect the symmetries of the tessellation . To produce a colouring which does , it is necessary to treat the colours as part of the tessellation . Here , as many as seven colours may be needed , as in the picture at right . 
 = = = Tessellations with polygons = = = 
 Next to the various tilings by regular polygons , tilings by other polygons have also been studied . 
 Any triangle or quadrilateral ( even non @-@ convex ) can be used as a prototile to form a monohedral tessellation , often in more than one way . Copies of an arbitrary quadrilateral can form a tessellation with translational symmetry and 2 @-@ fold rotational symmetry with centres at the midpoints of all sides . For an asymmetric quadrilateral this tiling belongs to wallpaper group p2 . As fundamental domain we have the quadrilateral . Equivalently , we can construct a parallelogram subtended by a minimal set of translation vectors , starting from a rotational centre . We can divide this by one diagonal , and take one half ( a triangle ) as fundamental domain . Such a triangle has the same area as the quadrilateral and can be constructed from it by cutting and pasting . 
 If only one shape of tile is allowed , tilings exists with convex N @-@ <unk> for N equal to 3 , 4 , 5 and 6 . For N 
 = 5 , see Pentagonal tiling and for N = 
 6 , see Hexagonal tiling . 
 For results on tiling the plane with polyominoes , see <unk> § Uses of polyominoes . 
 = = = Voronoi tilings = = = 
 Voronoi or Dirichlet tilings are tessellations where each tile is defined as the set of points closest to one of the points in a discrete set of defining points . ( Think of geographical regions where each region is defined as all the points closest to a given city or post office . ) The Voronoi cell for each defining point is a convex polygon . The Delaunay triangulation is a tessellation that is the dual graph of a Voronoi tessellation . Delaunay triangulations are useful in numerical simulation , in part because among all possible triangulations of the defining points , Delaunay triangulations maximize the minimum of the angles formed by the edges . Voronoi tilings with randomly placed points can be used to construct random tilings of the plane . 
 = = = Tessellations in higher dimensions = = = 
 Tessellation can be extended to three dimensions . Certain polyhedra can be stacked in a regular crystal pattern to fill ( or tile ) three @-@ dimensional space , including the cube ( the only regular polyhedron to do so ) , the rhombic dodecahedron , and the truncated octahedron . Naturally occurring rhombic dodecahedra are found as crystals of <unk> ( a kind of Garnet ) and Fluorite . 
 A Schwarz triangle is a spherical triangle that can be used to tile a sphere . 
 Tessellations in three or more dimensions are called honeycombs . In three dimensions there is just one regular honeycomb , which has eight cubes at each polyhedron vertex . Similarly , in three dimensions there is just one <unk> honeycomb , which has eight tetrahedra and six octahedra at each polyhedron vertex . However , there are many possible semiregular honeycombs in three dimensions . Uniform polyhedra can be constructed using the <unk> construction . 
 The Schmitt @-@ Conway biprism is a convex polyhedron with the property of tiling space only aperiodically . 
 = = = Tessellations in non @-@ Euclidean geometries = = = 
 It is possible to tessellate in non @-@ Euclidean geometries such as hyperbolic geometry . A uniform tiling in the hyperbolic plane ( which may be regular , <unk> or semiregular ) is an edge @-@ to @-@ edge filling of the hyperbolic plane , with regular polygons as faces ; these are vertex @-@ transitive ( transitive on its vertices ) , and isogonal ( there is an isometry mapping any vertex onto any other ) . 
 A uniform honeycomb in hyperbolic space is a uniform tessellation of uniform polyhedral cells . In 3 @-@ dimensional hyperbolic space there are nine Coxeter group families of compact convex uniform honeycombs , generated as <unk> constructions , and represented by permutations of rings of the Coxeter diagrams for each family . 
 = = In art = = 
 In architecture , tessellations have been used to create decorative motifs since ancient times . Mosaic tilings often had geometric patterns . Later civilisations also used larger tiles , either plain or individually decorated . Some of the most decorative were the Moorish wall tilings of Islamic architecture , using Girih and Zellige tiles in buildings such as the Alhambra and La Mezquita . 
 Tessellations frequently appeared in the graphic art of M. C. Escher ; he was inspired by the Moorish use of symmetry in places such as the Alhambra when he visited Spain in 1936 . Escher made four " Circle Limit " drawings of tilings that use hyperbolic geometry . For his woodcut " Circle Limit IV " ( 1960 ) , Escher prepared a pencil and ink study showing the required geometry . Escher explained that " No single component of all the series , which from infinitely far away rise like rockets perpendicularly from the limit and are at last lost in it , ever reaches the boundary line . " 
 <unk> designs often appear on textiles , whether woven , stitched in or printed . Tessellation patterns have been used to design interlocking motifs of patch shapes in quilts . 
 Tessellations are also a main genre in origami ( paper folding ) , where pleats are used to connect molecules such as twist folds together in a repeating fashion . 
 = = In manufacturing = = 
 Tessellation is used in manufacturing industry to reduce the wastage of material ( yield losses ) such as sheet metal when cutting out shapes for objects like car doors or drinks cans . 
 = = In nature = = 
 The honeycomb provides a well @-@ known example of tessellation in nature with its hexagonal cells . 
 In botany , the term " tessellate " describes a checkered pattern , for example on a flower petal , tree bark , or fruit . Flowers including the Fritillary and some species of <unk> are characteristically tessellate . 
 Many patterns in nature are formed by cracks in sheets of materials . These patterns can be described by Gilbert tessellations , also known as random crack networks . The Gilbert tessellation is a mathematical model for the formation of <unk> , needle @-@ like crystals , and similar structures . The model , named after Edgar Gilbert , allows cracks to form starting from randomly scattered over the plane ; each crack propagates in two opposite directions along a line through the initiation point , its slope chosen at random , creating a tessellation of irregular convex polygons . Basaltic lava flows often display columnar jointing as a result of contraction forces causing cracks as the lava cools . The extensive crack networks that develop often produce hexagonal columns of lava . One example of such an array of columns is the Giant 's Causeway in Northern Ireland . <unk> pavement , a characteristic example of which is found at <unk> Neck on the Tasman Peninsula of Tasmania , is a rare sedimentary rock formation where the rock has fractured into rectangular blocks . 
 Other natural patterns occur in foams ; these are packed according to Plateau 's laws , which require minimal surfaces . Such foams present a problem in how to pack cells as tightly as possible : in 1887 , Lord Kelvin proposed a packing using only one solid , the <unk> cubic honeycomb with very slightly curved faces . In 1993 , Denis Weaire and Robert Phelan proposed the Weaire – Phelan structure , which uses less surface area to separate cells of equal volume than Kelvin 's foam . 
 = = In puzzles and recreational mathematics = = 
 Tessellations have given rise to many types of tiling puzzle , from traditional jigsaw puzzles ( with irregular pieces of wood or cardboard ) and the <unk> to more modern puzzles which often have a mathematical basis . For example , <unk> and polyominoes are figures of regular triangles and squares , often used in tiling puzzles . Authors such as Henry <unk> and Martin Gardner have made many uses of tessellation in recreational mathematics . For example , <unk> invented the hinged dissection , while Gardner wrote about the rep @-@ tile , a shape that can be dissected into smaller copies of the same shape . Inspired by Gardner 's articles in Scientific American , the amateur mathematician Marjorie Rice found four new tessellations with pentagons . Squaring the square is the problem of tiling an integral square ( one whose sides have integer length ) using only other integral squares . An extension is squaring the plane , tiling it by squares whose sizes are all natural numbers without repetitions ; James and Frederick Henle proved that this was possible . 
 = = Examples = = 
 = Rise , O Voices of Rhodesia = 
 " Rise , O Voices of Rhodesia " ( or " Voices of Rhodesia " ) was the national anthem of the unrecognised state of Rhodesia ( renamed Zimbabwe in 1980 ) between 1974 and 1979 . The tune was that of " Ode to Joy " , the Fourth Movement from Ludwig van Beethoven 's Ninth Symphony , which had been adopted as the official European Anthem by the Council of Europe in 1972 ( it remains Europe 's anthem today ) . The music used in Rhodesia was an original sixteen @-@ bar arrangement by Captain Ken MacDonald , the bandmaster of the Rhodesian African Rifles . A national competition was organised by the government to find an appropriate set of lyrics to match the chosen tune , and won by Mary Bloom of Gwelo . 
 In the fallout from Rhodesia 's Unilateral Declaration of Independence from Britain on 11 November 1965 , the country still claimed loyalty to Queen Elizabeth II as its professed head of state , and so retained " God Save the Queen " as its national anthem . With Rhodesia 's reconstitution in 1970 as a republic , however , the royal anthem was dropped along with many other references to the monarchy . The Republic of Rhodesia lacked a national anthem until it adopted " Rise , O Voices of Rhodesia " in 1974 . The national anthem lost its legal status in December 1979 , when the UK took interim control of the country pending its internationally recognised independence as Zimbabwe five months later . Rhodesia 's use of the well @-@ known Beethoven tune has since caused the playing of " Ode to Joy " to be controversial in modern @-@ day Zimbabwe . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 A dispute over the terms for the granting of full statehood to the self @-@ governing colony of Rhodesia led its predominantly white minority government , headed by Prime Minister Ian Smith , to unilaterally declare independence from Britain on 11 November 1965 . As Whitehall had been insisting on majority rule as a condition for independence , this declaration went unrecognised and caused Britain and the United Nations to impose economic sanctions on Rhodesia . Queen Elizabeth II continued to be the Rhodesian head of state in the eyes of Smith 's administration , which regarded itself as " Her Majesty 's Rhodesian Government " despite its international non @-@ acknowledgement ; " God Save the Queen " therefore remained the Rhodesian national anthem . Though this was intended to demonstrate Rhodesia 's enduring loyalty to the Queen , the retention of a song so associated with Britain in the midst of the Anglo @-@ Rhodesian constitutional struggle soon gave Rhodesian state occasions " a faintly ironic tone " , in the words of the London Times . 
 = = = Adoption = = = 
 The Rhodesian government initiated a search for a new anthem around the time of its adoption of a new green @-@ and @-@ white flag in November 1968 , but continued to use " God Save the Queen " until June 1969 , when the mostly white electorate voted in favour of a republican form of government . The royal anthem officially remained in place until the formal declaration of a republic in March 1970 , when it was abandoned along with numerous other overt references to the Crown . Republican Rhodesia was without an anthem for over four years before the chosen music was announced on 28 August 1974 : the Fourth Movement , commonly called " Ode to Joy " , from Ludwig van Beethoven 's Ninth Symphony . The fact that the Council of Europe had adopted this tune as the " Anthem of Europe " in January 1972 apparently did not perturb the Rhodesian government ; John Sutherland and Stephen Fender comment that Rhodesia 's choice proved deeply embarrassing for the British Labour administration , whose leaders now had to respect a melody associated with Rhodesia when attending official European functions . With a tune now in place , the Rhodesian government organised a nationwide competition to write matching lyrics , the winner of which would receive a cash prize of R $ 500 ( equal to about US $ 1 @,@ 000 ) . 
 The Council of Europe , though less than pleased with Rhodesia 's selection , did not object to it , reasoning that so long as Rhodesia was using " Ode to Joy " in its original form , it could not be subject to reproach as the music was long out of copyright and in the public domain . It did announce , however , that should Rhodesia use the same arrangement as the Council of Europe , then the author of that score , Herbert von Karajan , would have grounds for a plagiarism lawsuit . Such an incident was averted when Rhodesia adopted an original sixteen @-@ bar arrangement by Captain Ken MacDonald , the Rhodesian African Rifles ' bandmaster . The anthem 's inaugural instrumental performance in Salisbury provoked mixed reactions : some were enthusiastic — including a coloured sergeant musician who proudly told the Rhodesia Herald that " it 's just like ' God Save Our Gracious Queen ' " — but many others were disappointed that the government had not commissioned an original tune . Rhys Lewis , music critic for the Herald , wrote that he was " stupefied " by the government 's choice , which he said was not only unoriginal , but also so associated with supranational brotherhood that it risked making internationally isolated Rhodesia the subject of ridicule . <unk> Sithole , who headed the African Trade Union Congress ( a black Rhodesian trade union federation ) , commented that he did not believe most of the country 's blacks would identify with a song chosen while people of their ethnicity remained largely absent from the government 's top levels . 
 The winning lyricist was confirmed on 24 September 1974 to be Mary Bloom , a company director , music critic and poet from Gwelo , who had moved to Rhodesia from South Africa in 1947 . Bloom titled her work " Voices of Rhodesia " , but the full first line , " Rise , O Voices of Rhodesia " , ultimately entered common parlance as the song 's title . 
 = = Lyrics = = 
 The lyrics officially adopted were as follows : 
 = = Fall from use and legacy = = 
 " Rise , O Voices of Rhodesia " remained in official usage for the rest of Rhodesia 's history , as well as between June and December 1979 , when Rhodesia was reconstituted as Zimbabwe Rhodesia , a black @-@ ruled version of the same country , which also failed to achieve legitimacy in the eyes of Britain and the UN . Though the anthem remained in place during these six months , a new flag was adopted and Rhodesia 's national holidays , largely based around colonial figures and milestones , were replaced by alternatives intended to be more inclusive : President 's Day , Unity Day and Ancestors Day . The national anthem remained unchanged on 12 December 1979 , when Zimbabwe Rhodesia came under British control for an interim period before internationally recognised independence came in April 1980 , with the country now called Zimbabwe . " Ishe <unk> Africa " , a Shona translation of Enoch Sontonga 's Xhosa hymn " Nkosi Sikelel ' iAfrika " ( " God Bless Africa " in English ) was made Zimbabwe 's first national anthem , and remained in place until 1994 , when it was replaced by the present anthem , " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( " Blessed be the Land of Zimbabwe " ) . 
 Because of its use by " Rise , O Voices of Rhodesia " , the " Ode to Joy " melody is controversial in Zimbabwe , where its annual playing at foreign embassies on Europe Day initially caused shock to Zimbabwean government officials who , according to historian Josephine Fisher , had not previously been aware of the song 's use by the Council of Europe . During the 1980s , Derek Hudson , the long @-@ time conductor of the Bulawayo Philharmonic Orchestra , had considerable difficulty securing official permission to give the first Zimbabwean performance of Beethoven 's Ninth Symphony . He was eventually able to do so , but only after prolonged negotiations with the authorities . When " Ode to Joy " was included in a fundraising organ recital held by a Harare church at Christmas 1994 , it provoked angry protests from some who attended . 
 = Chalk ( TV series ) = 
 Chalk is a British television sitcom set in a comprehensive school named Galfast High . Two series , both written by Steven Moffat , were broadcast on BBC1 in 1997 . Like Moffat 's earlier sitcom Joking Apart , Chalk was produced by Andre Ptaszynski for Pola Jones . 
 The series focuses upon deputy headteacher Eric Slatt ( David Bamber ) , permanently stressed over the chaos he creates both by himself and some of his eccentric staff . His wife Janet ( Geraldine Fitzgerald ) and new English teacher Suzy Travis ( Nicola Walker ) attempt to help him solve the problems . 
 Because of the very good reaction of the studio audience , a second series was commissioned before the first had been broadcast . However , journalists were critical of the show , highlighting stylistic similarities to Fawlty Towers . Some members of the teaching profession and its unions objected to the negative representation of teachers and the comprehensive system . The second series did not receive a stable broadcast slot , with many episodes aired after 10pm . The first series was released on DVD in December 2008 . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Inception = = = 
 Steven Moffat left his job as an English teacher at <unk> High in Greenock to write the BAFTA @-@ award winning show Press Gang . However , its high cost and changes in the executive structure at Central Independent Television meant that the show might not be recommissioned after its second series . As the writer wondered what to do next and was worried about future employment , Bob Spiers , Press Gang 's primary director , suggested that he meet with producer Andre Ptaszynski to discuss writing a sitcom . Inspired by his experience in education ( in addition to his own former career , his father was a headteacher ) , the writer 's initial proposal was similar to what would become Chalk . However , Ptaszynski realised that Moffat was talking more passionately at the meeting at the Groucho Club about his impending divorce and suggested that he write about that instead . That idea became Joking Apart , which received low audience figures but a high rating on the Appreciation Index . In an interview with The Herald , Moffat reflected on the nature of writing from experience : " I don 't think you have an alternative to writing about what you know . You 've no life experience to go on other than your own . Even if you 're writing something you think is entirely remote from you - Star Trek , for instance - you 'll find the finished result is actually very close to your own experience . That 's not a conscious decision a writer makes - it 's an inevitability . " 
 After the second series of Joking Apart had been transmitted , Ptaszynski revived Moffat 's original idea about a sitcom set in a school . In an article for The Guardian newspaper , writer and comedian Richard Herring observed that Moffat has not used the show " as a soapbox from which to satirise the government ’ s educational policy , preferring to concentrate on being funny ... yet beneath it all is a much more broadly satirical swipe at the implicit pointlessness of the way we are educated . " For this article , Moffat told Herring : 
 Secondary School is a big waste of time . What are French teachers doing ? None of us can speak French . How much maths can you do ? Do you know any history ? What is the point in training people to do things that none of us can do ? The system seems designed to qualify you for the Indian Civil Service in 1911 . We all leave school unable to drive ! Now that would be quite handy . 
 Moffat discussed similar institutional and political issues with The Independent : 
 <unk> are funny places , full of articulate , mad people . They have a tremendous sense of black humour , but there 's a layer of dust over them . They are immature because they 're in a children 's environment all the time . They have a strange perspective ; because they spend all day with kids , they are more aware of kids ' culture than adults ' . When they read about a former pupil who has become head of ICI , they always say , ' But that boy 's an idiot . He 's crap at geography . ' The boy is condemned forever because in the 1960s he didn 't know all the capitals of the Third World . 
 The Independent reported that Moffat " stresses that Chalk is a sitcom , not some banner @-@ waving , agitprop pamphlet " , but is still " passionate about education " . Moffat criticises " the [ Conservative ] government talk about the specially talented needing more education , but that 's absurd , the equivalent of hospitals for the healthy . " Moffat expected that teachers would find the show funny because it " has certain notes of accuracy " , recognising familiar myths such as the dead teacher and teachers ' contempt for their pupils . Moffat continued to say that teachers would " also recognise the pathological preference for science over arts and all that league @-@ table shit . An official teaching organisation couldn 't say , ' It 's a very faithful portrayal , ' but I hope they 'd say , ' It 's a comedy series . Why take it seriously ? ' You couldn 't claim it is the most flattering series , but , there again , people continued to stay at hotels after Fawlty Towers . " 
 As with Joking Apart , Ptaszynski produced Chalk for independent production company Pola Jones . The positive reaction of the studio audience during recording of the first series in 1996 propelled executives to commission a second set of six episodes before the first batch had aired . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 All of the location shots for Chalk were filmed at the beginning of the production block . Acland Burghley School , in the Tufnell Park area of Camden , London , provided the exterior of the fictional Galfast High . The cast recall that it was difficult to perform comedy on location without a studio audience to gauge the reception and success of the jokes . Another school near Wembley was used for large interior shots , such as the school hall featured in the episode " The Inspection " . Rehearsals took place in BBC premises in Acton , west London , colloquially known by those in the industry as the " Acton Hilton " . David Bamber , his colleagues note , knew the script at the beginning of rehearsals and never dropped a line . The cast recall that director Juliet May provided a calm working environment ; rather than losing her temper when things went wrong , she instead focussed everyone 's mind on how to solve the problem . 
 After the exterior shots had been filmed , the episodes were recorded at BBC Television Centre in London . Most of the episodes were recorded in studios three or four , but occasionally the larger studio eight was used . After a week 's rehearsals , the episodes were filmed on Sundays . The cast and crew would have a camera rehearsal followed by a dress run . After a supper , the cast were introduced to the studio audience . The studio audience responded very positively to the show during recordings . However , Moffat reflects that the show 's style was not suited to the home audience . In a 2012 interview , he says : 
 Of any sitcom I ’ ve ever witnessed being made , and I ’ ve seen loads of them like Men Behaving Badly and The Vicar of Dibley , Chalk had the biggest laughs on the night . As a piece of theatre it was brilliant in the studio – people came back every week ; the audiences were rapturous . The trouble was when I watched the tape at home , it was far too loud and raucous [ for TV ] . 
 The BBC commissioned a second series based on the studio audience reactions during recordings . As development on series two had reached a relatively late stage when the first had received negative reviews upon transmission , it was too late to cancel the production . The cast and crew , then , had to work on a show which they knew was widely disliked . Moffat reflects on the experience : " There ’ s no feeling on earth like working on a show that you know is doomed and already <unk> . ” 
 BBC executives insisted that the title be changed as they felt that " Chalk " did not stand out in the schedules . They were also concerned that the title might be somewhat anachronistic because schools were beginning to use whiteboards rather than blackboards . Many people , including the actors , attempted to think of alternatives , but instead reverted to " Chalk " . 
 Funding was running low towards the end of filming the first series . Moffat contrived an episode , " The Staff Meeting " , where all of the main cast would be locked in the staff room to avoid paying for any guest actors . To reduce expenditure further , crew members were enlisted to provide the voices for the television news report at the end of the episode : producer Andre Ptaszynski played the broadcast journalist , whilst second assistant director Sarah Daman voiced the protesting student Gail Bennett . When a guest actor delivered an inadequate performance of the psychiatric doctor at the end of " The Inspection " , Moffat coached assistant director Stacey Adair to perform the line . However , professional actor C.J. Allen lived near to the location and he was enlisted to deliver the line instead . 
 The expense and restrictions placed upon child actors limited the number of pupils that could be featured . The non @-@ speaking extras had to be licensed , a process that took four weeks , providing difficulties for assistant director Stacey Adair . The episode " Both Called Eric " features Antony Costa as one of the pupils , one of his earliest TV roles before going on to appear in Grange Hill and in the boy band Blue . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 The sitcom is based at the fictional comprehensive school Galfast High . It begins with the arrival of the young new English teacher Suzie Travis ( Nicola Walker ) . She immediately encounters the chaos of the school , a chaos enhanced by the manic Deputy Head Eric Slatt ( David Bamber ) . The Guardian retrospectively commented that the show 's " best episodes of ... <unk> their unwitting participants towards a climax of terrible sexual humiliation or violence . " 
 Moffat integrated many references to secondary characters and locations from his previous BAFTA winning show Press Gang into Chalk . For instance , the Chalk character Eric Slatt refers to his neighbouring school Norbridge High , run by Mr Sullivan : these were the names of the school and deputy headmaster in Press Gang . The scene where Slatt is being given instructions by wire is taken from the unfilmed Press Gang movie Dead Line . The pornographic video Lesbian Spank Inferno , owned by Dan McGill in the final episode , is later referenced in the Coupling episode " Inferno " . In an interview with The New York Times , Moffat admitted that the video is inspired by his then @-@ new partner , Sue Vertue , finding a similar video in their VCR . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Eric Slatt ( David Bamber ) is the deputy headmaster of Galfast High , who seems to " deepen the many crises that face the school ( most of Slatt ’ s own making ) " . Jeff Evans , writing in the The Penguin TV Companion , observed that " Slatt is certainly keen , but regrettably he is also unbalanced , tactless , clumsy , snobby , sarcastic , at times pointlessly aggressive and always prone to appalling errors of judgment ( an academic version of Basil Fawlty , it was widely noted ) " . The Independent commented : " Chalk is in the idiom of sadistic farce : disaster begets catastrophe begets apocalypse , and they all engulf Slatt . There are inevitable echoes of other sitcom characters - a dash of Basil Fawlty 's unquenchable apoplexy , a slice of Gordon Brittas 's purblind <unk> - but Slatt 's entanglements are caused by his own cocktail of failings . " Nicola Walker commented that viewers sympathise with Slatt because he is in charge of a bunch of lunatics . Moffat told The Herald that Slatt was inspired by a real person : 
 My main character , the deputy head , is a manic git , and he 's based on a guy I never actually met and is therefore being denigrated terribly . He had already retired by the time I started but I used to get a lift to work from his wife , who still worked there . And she would tell me stories about him with the affectionate disdain of anyone who has been married for more than a year . In the staff room , all these bitter teachers who hadn 't been promoted would describe him as someone who would only briefly consider stopping short of invading Poland if he got the chance . I 've since found out that the real man is actually a very nice bloke . 
 Ptaszynski had attempted to persuade his friend Angus Deayton , who wanted to move into more acting roles away from Have I Got News for You , to play Slatt . The producer reflects that Deayton would have brought a more " sardonic " element to the character . The cast regularly teased David Bamber during rehearsals , speculating upon how Deayton might have performed a particular line or sequence . 
 Janet Slatt ( Geraldine Fitzgerald ) is Eric 's wife and the school 's secretary . She has an antagonistic relationship with Eric , with each regularly the butt of the other 's jokes . For instance , Eric suggests one morning that she had not shaved , and that she should rest her hind legs . 
 Suzy Travis ( Nicola Walker ) is a new English teacher who arrives at the school in the first episode . The press described Suzy as " the voice of sanity at Galfast High and the thorn in Slatt 's side . " 
 Amanda <unk> ( Amanda Boxer ) is the neurotic music teacher . Throughout the series , she invents her pupils to prevent her department being closed , uses the school 's telephone network to surf the internet about Star Trek , and demands the return of a musical instrument from a former pupil now on death row . 
 Dan McGill ( Martin Ball ) is a young teacher who instantly develops a crush on Suzy when she arrives at the school , and attempts to date her throughout the series . The character is given most prominence in " The Staff Meeting " episode , which was written in order to save money by not having any guest actors . In this episode it is revealed that Dan has agreed to teach several subjects in order to keep his job . Suzy is dismayed to find that he invented an entire language when he became a foreign languages teacher , and then invented its country ( <unk> ) when made a Geography teacher . After Ball 's performance in that episode , Moffat promised him that he would not underwrite him in the second series . 
 Mr <unk> ( John Grillo ) , the head of English , very rarely utters anything but expletives . Struggling to find a rationale for his character , Grillo paced up and down a rehearsal room carrying a brown briefcase , which he remembers all of his own teachers carrying around , and shouting profanities . 
 Mr Richard Nixon ( John Wells ) was the headteacher in the first series . Evans observes that he " shows precious little leadership " , and the running of the school seems to fall to Slatt . Wells was too ill to participate in the second series , and died a year after its transmission . 
 Mr J.F. Kennedy ( Duncan Preston ) replaced Mr Nixon as the head in the second series . Like Nixon , Mr Kennedy takes a back @-@ seat in the developments . In the final episode he reads a letter from the former head , which inadvertently serves to show how their characters are identical . 
 Jason <unk> ( Damien Matthews ) is a young religious education teacher . He arrives at the school in the first series episode " Both Called Eric " , and appears more regularly in the second series . Suzy is immediately attracted to him , making Dan McGill so jealous that he tells the pupils that he is Satan . The character was a deliberate attempt to add some sex appeal to the show . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Due to the positive reaction of the studio audience during recordings , a second series was commissioned before the first had started to be transmitted . However , the show was , as Mark Lawson summarised , " widely disliked " . The BBC 's publicity department compared Chalk to Fawlty Towers in the publicity materials . Critics , though , took exception to a new show being compared to such a renowned and respected programme . The cast point out that Fawlty Towers and Chalk are completely different shows , while Nicola Walker says that the comparison is like being asked to be " compared to a comedy God " . Writing for the BBC Guide to Comedy , Mark Lewisohn observes that the critical reception was mixed , with " its detractors pointing out that Eric Slatt was a carbon copy of John Cleese 's Basil Fawlty [ and ] its supporters praising its non @-@ PC , off @-@ the @-@ wall approach and the breathlessly paced plots that delivered moments of high farce . " Lewisohn also comments that while some elements of the show resemble Please Sir ! , " Chalk more closely resembled the ill @-@ fated Hardwicke House with its concentration on the teachers rather than the pupils , dark themes and overall depiction of the teachers as ... nuts . " Tom Lappin for Scotland on Sunday derided the combination of Chris Barrie 's Gordon Brittas and Cleese 's Basil Fawlty . 
 The first four episodes were transmitted at 21 : 30 , but the final two episodes of the second series were moved to 22 : 20 . The second series received an unstable timeslot , being replaced in its more mainstream slot by Men Behaving Badly . Commenting on the second series , the Glasgow Herald said , " the manic depute head of Galfast High , Eric Slatt , is looking more and more like Basil Fawlty on a bad day . So are those of us who remain glued to it in ghoulish fascination to see if it can get any worse . " Tabloid newspaper The Mirror published a damming review of the show 's second series opener : 
 The head of comedy at Television Centre deserves six of the best for bringing back Chalk ( BBC1 ) for a second term . If the opening episode of the new series is anything to go by , we are in for six of the worst half @-@ hours of comedy in the history of television ... It is no surprise that the show has been relegated to a late slot . It is a watershed for smut . Some of the jokes were in the worst possible taste . The standards of comedy are so pitiful , Galfast High School should not have been given a grant from TV licence @-@ payers ' money and it is time it closed its gates for good . David Bamber ... deserves a better vehicle for his acting talents . He was lured into playing Eric Slatt because the character was supposed to be the classroom equivalent of Basil Fawlty . They are as different as Chalk and Cleese . 
 In an interview in the early 2000s , Moffat refused to even mention Chalk , joking that he might get attacked in the street . The first series received criticism from some teachers and teaching unions , who criticised the representation of their professions . Letters were printed in specialist publications such as the Education Guardian . The Association of Teachers and Lecturers labelled Chalk as " perverse " and " vapid " , and its leader called upon the show to be axed . Teachers , according to the Daily Record , complained that the show portrayed teachers as " mentally unstable " , and deterred people from entering the profession . John Grillo , who played Mr <unk> , recalls that he was appearing in a West End play at the time he was auditioning for the role ; a fellow actor in the play was meant to be auditioning for Chalk but , having been a deputy head teacher earlier in his career , was so disgusted by the material that he refused to attend . The unions ' derision actually inspired The Times 's Matthew Bond to like the show . However , despite identifying " genuine humour " such as Slatt 's rant against French teachers , Bond 's review is largely critical . He concedes , " the teaching organisations , you see , are half right . Slatt has no credible basis in the teaching profession , but far more importantly he has no credible basis in the human race . And what we don 't believe in , we rarely find funny . " 
 Kevin <unk> , the show 's executive producer and head of Independent Commissions Entertainment , who commissioned the series defending the show from the union 's criticisms , saying : " Chalk is a comedy . Just as Ben Elton 's Thin Blue Line does not reflect the modern police force nor The Vicar of Dibley the Church of England today , Chalk was never intended to reflect life in British schools . " Moffat said that Chalk was written " just for larks " and was not intended as a serious political diatribe . However , Scotland on Sunday responded in a piece placing Chalk in the context of other television shows about schools : " where such dramas fall down is not in shirking some contrived social responsibility but in their playing up to so many daft myths about the teaching profession . They could almost be written by one of those strange politicians who deny there is an education crises in Britain . " 
 = = Home release = = 
 The first three episodes were released on VHS in the United Kingdom on 7 September 1998 by BBC Video ( now 2entertain ) . During a DVD audio commentary for Coupling , Moffat claims that " no @-@ one bought it " , including him . 
 The complete first series was released on Region 2 PAL DVD by <unk> , the independent label that had released Joking Apart , on 15 December 2008 . The disc contains audio commentaries on all six episodes ; Nicola Walker , Martin Ball , Geraldine Fitzgerald and John Grillo commentate over four of the episodes , with David Bamber and Amanda Boxer contributing to the remaining two . All of the above , along with producer Andre Ptaszynski , also feature in a 45 @-@ minute retrospective documentary , After the Chalk Dust Settled . 
 = Kind of Blue = 
 Kind of Blue is a studio album by American jazz musician Miles Davis , released on August 17 , 1959 , by Columbia Records . It was recorded earlier that year on March 2 and April 22 at Columbia 's 30th Street Studio in New York City . The recording sessions featured Davis 's ensemble sextet , consisting of pianist Bill Evans , drummer Jimmy Cobb , bassist Paul Chambers , and saxophonists John Coltrane and Julian " Cannonball " Adderley , together with pianist Wynton Kelly on one track . 
 After the entry of Evans into his sextet , Davis followed up on the modal experimentations of Milestones ( 1958 ) by basing Kind of Blue entirely on modality , in contrast to his earlier work with the hard bop style of jazz . 
 Though precise figures have been disputed , Kind of Blue has been described by many music writers not only as Davis 's best @-@ selling album , but as the best @-@ selling jazz record of all time . On October 7 , 2008 , it was certified quadruple platinum in sales by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 Kind of Blue has been regarded by many critics as jazz 's greatest record , Davis 's masterpiece , and one of the best albums of all time . Its influence on music , including jazz , rock , and classical genres , has led writers to also deem it one of the most influential albums ever recorded . Kind of Blue was one of fifty recordings chosen in 2002 by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry , and in 2003 , it was ranked number 12 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . 
 = = Background = = 
 By late 1958 , Davis employed one of the most acclaimed and profitable working bands pursuing the hard bop style . His personnel had become stable : alto saxophonist Cannonball Adderley , tenor saxophonist John Coltrane , pianist Bill Evans , long @-@ serving bassist Paul Chambers , and drummer Jimmy Cobb . His band played a mixture of pop standards and bebop originals by Charlie Parker , Thelonious Monk , Dizzy Gillespie , and <unk> Dameron . As with all bebop @-@ based jazz , Davis 's groups improvised on the chord changes of a given song . Davis was one of many jazz musicians growing dissatisfied with bebop , and saw its increasingly complex chord changes as hindering creativity . 
 In 1953 , the pianist George Russell published his Lydian Chromatic Concept of Tonal Organization , which offered an alternative to the practice of improvisation based on chords and chord changes . Abandoning the traditional major and minor key relationships , the Lydian Chromatic Concept introduced the idea of chord / scale unity and was the first theory to explore the vertical relationship between chords and scales , as well as the only original theory to come from jazz . This approach led the way to " modal " in jazz . Influenced by Russell 's ideas , Davis implemented his first modal composition with the title track of his studio album Milestones ( 1958 ) . Satisfied with the results , Davis prepared an entire album based on modality . Pianist Bill Evans , who had studied with Russell but recently departed from Davis 's sextet to pursue his own career , was drafted back into the new recording project , the sessions that would become Kind of Blue . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Kind of Blue was recorded on three @-@ track tape in two sessions at Columbia Records ' 30th Street Studio in New York City . On March 2 , 1959 , the tracks " So What " , " Freddie Freeloader " , and " Blue in Green " were recorded for side one of the original LP , and on April 22 the tracks " All Blues " and " Flamenco Sketches " were recorded , making up side two . Production was handled by Teo Macero , who had produced Davis 's previous two LPs , and Irving Townsend . 
 As was Davis 's penchant , he called for almost no rehearsal and the musicians had little idea what they were to record . As described in the original liner notes by pianist Bill Evans , Davis had only given the band sketches of scales and melody lines on which to improvise . Once the musicians were assembled , Davis gave brief instructions for each piece and then set to taping the sextet in studio . While the results were impressive with so little preparation , the persistent legend that the entire album was recorded in one pass is untrue . Only " Flamenco Sketches " yielded a complete take on the first try . That take , not the master , was issued in 1997 as a bonus alternate take . The five master takes issued , however , were the only other complete takes ; an insert for the ending to " Freddie Freeloader " was recorded , but was not used for release or on the issues of Kind of Blue prior to the 1997 reissue . Pianist Wynton Kelly may not have been happy to see the man he replaced , Bill Evans , back in his old seat . Perhaps to assuage the pianist 's feelings , Davis had Kelly play instead of Evans on the album 's most blues @-@ oriented number , " Freddie Freeloader " . The live album Miles Davis at Newport 1958 documents this band . However , the Newport Jazz Festival recording on July 3 , 1958 , reflects the band in its hard bop conception , the presence of Bill Evans only six weeks into his brief tenure in the Davis band notwithstanding , rather than the modal approach of Kind of Blue . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Kind of Blue is based entirely on modality in contrast to Davis 's earlier work with the hard bop style of jazz and its complex chord progression and improvisation . The entire album was composed as a series of modal sketches , in which each performer was given a set of scales that defined the parameters of their improvisation and style . This style was in contrast to more typical means of composing , such as providing musicians with a complete score or , as was more common for improvisational jazz , providing the musicians with a chord progression or series of harmonies . 
 Modal jazz of this type was not unique to this album . Davis himself had previously used the same method on his 1958 Milestones album , the ' 58 Sessions , and Porgy and Bess ( 1958 ) , on which he used modal influences for collaborator Gil Evans 's third stream compositions . Also , the original concept and method had been developed in 1953 by pianist and writer George Russell . Davis saw Russell 's methods of composition as a means of getting away from the dense chord @-@ laden compositions of his time , which Davis had labeled " thick . " Modal composition , with its reliance on scales and modes , represented , as Davis called it , " a return to melody . " In a 1958 interview with Nat Hentoff of The Jazz Review , Davis elaborated on this form of composition in contrast to the chord progression predominant in bebop , stating " No chords ... gives you a lot more freedom and space to hear things . When you go this way , you can go on forever . You don 't have to worry about changes and you can do more with the [ melody ] line . It becomes a challenge to see how melodically innovative you can be . When you 're based on chords , you know at the end of 32 bars that the chords have run out and there 's nothing to do but repeat what you 've just done — with variations . I think a movement in jazz is beginning away from the conventional string of chords ... there will be fewer chords but infinite possibilities as to what to do with them . " 
 As noted by Bill Evans in the LP liner notes , " Miles conceived these settings only hours before the recording dates . " Evans continued with an introduction concerning the modes used in each composition on the album . " So What " consists of two modes : sixteen measures of the first , followed by eight measures of the second , and then eight again of the first . " Freddie Freeloader " is a standard twelve @-@ bar blues form . " Blue in Green " consists of a ten @-@ measure cycle following a short four @-@ measure introduction . " All Blues " is a twelve @-@ bar blues form in 6 / 8 time . " Flamenco Sketches " consists of five scales , which are each played " as long as the soloist wishes until he has completed the series " . 
 Liner notes list Davis as writer of all compositions , but many scholars and fans believe that Bill Evans wrote part or the whole of " Blue in Green " and " Flamenco Sketches " . Bill Evans assumed co @-@ credit with Davis for " Blue in Green " when recording it on his Portrait in Jazz album . The Davis estate acknowledged Evans ' authorship in 2002 . The practice of a band leader 's appropriating authorship of a song written by a sideman occurred frequently in the jazz world , as legendary saxophonist Charlie Parker did so to Davis when Parker took a songwriting credit for the tune " Donna Lee " , written by Davis while employed as a sideman in Charlie Parker 's quintet in the late 1940s . The composition later became a popular jazz standard . Another example is the introduction to " So What " , attributed to Gil Evans , which is closely based on the opening measures of French composer Claude Debussy 's <unk> ( 1910 ) , the second prelude from his first collection of preludes . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Since its release in 1959 , Kind of Blue has been regarded by many critics as Davis 's greatest work ; it is his most acclaimed album , and has been cited as the best @-@ selling jazz record released , despite later claims attributing the achievement to Davis 's first official gold record Bitches Brew ( 1970 ) . Music writer Chris Morris cited Kind of Blue as " the distillation of Davis 's art . " Kind of Blue has also been noted as one of the most influential albums in the history of jazz . One reviewer has called it a " defining moment of twentieth century music . " Several of the songs from the album have become jazz standards . Kind of Blue is consistently ranked among the greatest albums of all time . In a review of the album , AllMusic senior editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine stated : 
 Kind of Blue isn 't merely an artistic highlight for Miles Davis , it 's an album that towers above its peers , a record generally considered as the definitive jazz album , a universally acknowledged standard of excellence . Why does Kind of Blue possess such a mystique ? Perhaps because this music never flaunts its genius .... It 's the pinnacle of modal jazz — tonality and solos build from the overall key , not chord changes , giving the music a subtly shifting quality .... It may be a stretch to say that if you don 't like Kind of Blue , you don 't like jazz — but it 's hard to imagine it as anything other than a cornerstone of any jazz collection . 
 In 1958 , however , the arrival of Ornette Coleman on the jazz scene via his fall residency at the Five Spot club , consolidated by the release of his The Shape of Jazz to Come LP in 1959 , muted the initial impact of Kind of Blue , a happenstance that irritated Davis greatly . Though Davis and Coleman both offered alternatives to the rigid rules of bebop , Davis would never reconcile himself to Coleman 's free jazz innovations , although he would incorporate musicians amenable to Coleman 's ideas with his great quintet of the mid @-@ 1960s , and offer his own version of " free " playing with his jazz fusion outfits in the 1970s . The influence of Kind of Blue did build , and all of the sidemen from the album went on to achieve success on their own . Evans formed his influential jazz trio with bassist Scott <unk> and drummer Paul Motian ; " Cannonball " Adderley fronted popular bands with his brother Nat ; Kelly , Chambers and Cobb continued as a touring unit , recording under Kelly 's name as well as in support of Coltrane and Wes Montgomery , among others ; and Coltrane went on to become one of the most revered and innovative of all jazz musicians . Even more than Davis , Coltrane took the modal approach and ran with it during his career as a leader in the 1960s , leavening his music with Coleman 's ideas as the decade progressed . 
 According to Acclaimed Music , Kind of Blue is the 49th most ranked record on critics ' all @-@ time lists . In 1994 , the album was ranked number one in Colin Larkin 's Top 100 Jazz Albums . Larkin described it as " the greatest jazz album in the world " . It has been ranked at or near the top of numerous " best album " lists in disparate genres . In 2002 , Kind of Blue was one of 50 recordings chosen that year by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry . In selecting the album as number 12 on its 2003 list of the 500 greatest albums of all time , Rolling Stone magazine stated : " This painterly masterpiece is one of the most important , influential and popular albums in jazz " . On December 16 , 2009 , the United States House of Representatives passed a resolution honoring the 50th anniversary of Kind of Blue and " reaffirming jazz as a national treasure " . It is included in the 2005 book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die , described by reviewer Seth Jacobson as " a genre @-@ defining moment in twentieth @-@ century music , period . " 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 The album 's influence has reached beyond jazz , as musicians of such genres as rock and classical have been influenced by it , while critics have written about it as one of the most influential albums of all time . Many improvisatory rock musicians of the 1960s referred to Kind of Blue for inspiration , along with other Davis albums , as well as Coltrane 's modal records My Favorite Things ( 1961 ) and A Love Supreme ( 1965 ) . Guitarist Duane Allman of the Allman Brothers Band said his soloing on songs such as " In Memory of Elizabeth Reed " " comes from Miles and Coltrane , and particularly Kind of Blue . I 've listened to that album so many times that for the past couple of years , I haven 't hardly listened to anything else . " Pink Floyd keyboardist Richard Wright said that the chord progressions on the album influenced the structure of the introductory chords to the song " Breathe " on their landmark opus The Dark Side of the Moon ( 1973 ) . In his book Kind of Blue : The Making of a Miles Davis Masterpiece , writer Ashley Kahn wrote " still acknowledged as the height of hip , four decades after it was recorded , Kind of Blue is the premier album of its era , jazz or otherwise . Its <unk> piano introduction is universally recognized " . Producer Quincy Jones , one of Davis ' longtime friends , wrote : " That [ Kind of Blue ] will always be my music , man . I play Kind of Blue every day — it 's my orange juice . It still sounds like it was made yesterday " . Pianist Chick Corea , one of Miles ' acolytes , was also struck by its majesty , later stating " It 's one thing to just play a tune , or play a program of music , but it 's another thing to practically create a new language of music , which is what Kind of Blue did . " 
 Gary Burton noted the consistent innovation present throughout the album , stating : " It wasn ’ t just one tune that was a breakthrough , it was the whole record . When new jazz styles come along , the first few attempts to do it are usually kind of shaky . Early Charlie Parker records were like this . But with Kind of Blue [ the sextet ] all sound like they ’ re fully into it . " Along with the Dave Brubeck Quartet 's Time Out ( 1959 ) and Coltrane 's Giant Steps ( 1960 ) , Kind of Blue has often been recommended by music writers as an introductory jazz album , for similar reasons : the music on both records is very melodic , and the relaxed quality of the songs makes the improvisation easy for listeners to follow , without sacrificing artistry or experimentation . Upon the release of the 50th anniversary collector 's edition of the album , a columnist for All About Jazz stated " Kind of Blue heralded the arrival of a revolutionary new American music , a post @-@ bebop modal jazz structured around simple scales and melodic improvisation . Trumpeter / band leader / composer Miles Davis assembled a sextet of legendary players to create a sublime atmospheric masterpiece . Fifty years after its release , Kind of Blue continues to transport listeners to a realm all its own while inspiring musicians to create to new sounds — from acoustic jazz to post @-@ modern ambient — in every genre imaginable . " Later in an interview , renowned hip @-@ hop artist and rapper Q @-@ Tip reaffirmed the album 's reputation and influence when discussing the significance of Kind of Blue , stating " It 's like the Bible — you just have one in your house . " The 2014 album Blue by Mostly Other People Do the Killing is a note @-@ for @-@ note reproduction of Kind of Blue . 
 The Kind of Blue musicians appeared together in further recorded ventures through the 1960s . Davis had made a rare post @-@ 1953 sideman appearance in 1958 on Adderley 's Somethin ' Else album ; Evans and Adderley collaborated on the latter 's LP Know What I Mean ? from 1961 . Kelly and Chambers backed Hank Mobley on Soul Station in 1960 , and Evans and Chambers played on the sessions for The Blues and the Abstract Truth by Oliver Nelson in 1961 . The rhythm section of Kelly , Chambers , and Cobb backed Coltrane for Coltrane Jazz and one track on his landmark Giant Steps , which featured Chambers throughout . That trio stayed with Davis for the recordings Someday My Prince Will Come and the live sets at the Blackhawk and at Carnegie Hall . 
 = = = Davis in retrospect = = = 
 Late in his life , from the electric period on , Davis repeatedly disregarded his earlier work , such as the music of Birth of the Cool or Kind of Blue . In Davis ' view , remaining static stylistically was the wrong option . 
 " So What " or Kind of Blue , they were done in that era , the right hour , the right day , and it happened . It 's over [ ... ] . What I used to play with Bill Evans , all those different modes , and substitute chords , we had the energy then and we liked it . But I have no feel for it anymore — it 's more like warmed @-@ over turkey . 
 When Shirley Horn insisted , in 1990 , that Davis reconsider playing the gentle ballads and modal tunes of his Kind of Blue period , he demurred : " Nah , it hurts my lip . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Musicians = = = 
 Per the liner notes 
 Miles Davis — trumpet 
 Julian " Cannonball " Adderley — alto saxophone ( except on " Blue in Green " ) 
 John Coltrane — tenor saxophone 
 Bill Evans — piano ( except on " Freddie Freeloader " ) 
 Wynton Kelly — piano ( on " Freddie Freeloader " ) 
 Paul Chambers — double bass 
 Jimmy Cobb — drums 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Irving Townsend — producer 
 Fred Plaut — engineering 
 Don Hunstein — photography 
 Bill Evans — original liner notes 
 Michael <unk> — reissue production 
 Mark Wilder — remix engineering 
 Jay Maisel — 2009 reissue booklet photography 
 Nat Hentoff — 1997 reissue liner notes 
 Francis Davis — 2009 reissue liner notes 
 = = Charts = = 
 Billboard Music Charts ( North America ) 
 1977 : Jazz Albums – No. 37 
 1987 : Top Jazz Albums – No. 10 
 2001 : Top Internet Albums – No. 14 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 Kind of Blue was originally released as a 12 @-@ inch vinyl record , in both stereo and mono . There have been several reissues of Kind of Blue , including additional printings throughout the vinyl era . On some editions , the label switched the order for the two tracks on side two , " All Blues " and " Flamenco Sketches " . The record has been remastered many times during the compact disc era , including the 1986 Columbia Jazz Masterpieces reissue and , most notably , the 1992 remastering that corrected the speed for side one , which had been issued slightly off @-@ pitch originally , and the 1997 issue that added the alternative take of " Flamenco Sketches " . In 2005 , a DualDisc release included the original album , a digital remastering in 5 @.@ 1 Surround Sound and LPCM Stereo , and a 25 @-@ minute documentary Made in Heaven about the making and influence of Kind of Blue . Kind of Blue has also been re @-@ released on a rare 24 @-@ carat gold CD collectors version . 
 The album was also released on many other formats , many of which are only to be found second hand . 
 Two @-@ track open @-@ reel tape ( US only ) , Columbia GCB 60 , from which " Freddie Freeloader " and " Flamenco Sketches " were omitted to keep cost down . This release was on the market less than a year and was discontinued some time after July 1961 , after Sketches of Spain had been released as four @-@ track only . Sonically most often better than the four @-@ track counterpart that replaced it . The reports that the two @-@ track version was the only one to be issued at correct speed for the tracks off the first album side are false . None issued were at the correct speed . 
 Four @-@ track open @-@ reel tape ( US only ) , Columbia CQ 379 , as the complete five @-@ track album . This release replaced the two @-@ track release and remained in the Columbia catalog for a few years . Some tracks are available on other reel tapes issued current at the time of or following the original release of the album , as by Various Artists . None issued were at the correct speed . " All Blues " is included on the Greatest Hits album . 
 Armed Forces Radio and Television Service 16 @-@ inch transcription discs . Note these are monophonic and the tune on side P @-@ 6925 marked " Flamenco Sketches " actually holds " All Blues " . None issued were at the correct speed . 
 Philips Compact Cassette . Both as the original album prior to the Jazz Masterpiece remaster , and as the 1987 Jazz Masterpiece remaster . Neither are at the correct speed . 
 MiniDisc , Columbia CM <unk> ( US ) . Only as the master prior to 1997 , but not as the Jazz Masterpiece remaster . This was unavailable by the end of the 1990s when production of Jazz Masterpiece series had ceased . None issued were at the correct speed . 
 Two @-@ disc box set " 50th Anniversary Collector 's Edition " , released on September 30 , 2008 , by Columbia and Legacy . 
 = Newfoundland referendums , 1948 = 
 The Newfoundland Referendums of 1948 were a series of two referendums to decide the political future of the Dominion of Newfoundland . Before the referendums , Newfoundland was in debt and went through several delegations to determine whether the country would join Canada , remain under British rule or regain independence . The voting for the referendums occurred on June 3 and July 22 , 1948 . The eventual result was for Newfoundland to enter Canadian Confederation . 
 = = Background = = 
 Newfoundland is the oldest settled region in what would become Canada but was the last to obtain either a local representative government or responsible government . In 1832 , it received local representative government in the form of a locally elected body of officials overseen by a governor . The British granted responsible government , in which the government is responsible to the legislature and elected officials occupy ministerial jobs , only in 1855 . 
 Newfoundland did not send any delegates to the 1864 Charlottetown Conference , which was to discuss a union of Maritime colonies . Later that year , Newfoundland attended the Quebec Conference , called by John A. Macdonald to discuss a greater British North America union . The two Newfoundland delegates , Frederick Carter and Ambrose Shea , returned in favour of a union with Canada . However , Confederation was highly unpopular with the Newfoundland public , and the Government of Newfoundland did not send representatives to the London Conference of 1866 , in which the British government and the colonies agreed to the terms the British North America Act . Opponents of Confederation decisively won the Newfoundland general election , 1869 . 
 By the 1920s and the 1930s , Newfoundland was almost $ 40 million in debt , and on the verge of economic collapse . A commission recommended Newfoundland to be " given a rest from party politics " and to be administered by a special Commission of Government . Chaired by the governor , it would consist of three people from Newfoundland and three from the United Kingdom . Backing the recommendation was the United Kingdom , which agreed to take on Newfoundland 's debts . The Commission of Government began on February 16 , 1934 , governing the island until it entered Canada in 1949 . 
 Prosperity returned when the Americans were invited to the island by Britain to set up military bases in 1941 to 1945 . The American Bases Act became law in Newfoundland on June 11 , 1941 . As Earle ( 1998 ) finds , Newfoundland girls married American personnel by the thousands . In 1948 there was a short @-@ lived but growing movement for some sort of economic union with the United States . 
 The British government , keen to cut expenditure after World War II , hoped that Newfoundland would decide to join the Canadian Confederation and end the rule by commission . Newfoundland first asked Canada for help in a return to responsible government , however . The response from the Canadian government was that it was not interested in helping Newfoundland economically unless Newfoundland joined the Canadian Confederation . 
 The British did not want their colony to become an American possession , and the Canadian government , despite convinced that absorbing Newfoundland would not benefit Canada economically , thought that the <unk> would be the lesser of two evils when compared to the prospect of the country being almost completely surrounded by American territory . 
 Seeking a union with the United States was not a referendum option , despite the idea having some currency amongst locals . With the Cold War looming , U.S. interest in Newfoundland were centered primarily on its strategic importance to the defence of North America . The Americans ' ability to maintain bases on the island satisfied those concerns - after receiving assurances that the Canadian government would honour the leases for bases on Newfoundland , the U.S. State department had no further interest in the political future of Newfoundland . President Harry S. Truman 's administration had little incentive to pursue annexation . With respect to foreign policy , such a territorial ambition would have only served to antagonize two key allies . With respect to domestic policy , the administration would not likely have been able to convince Congress to offer statehood to Newfoundland due to its small population and geographical isolation from the then @-@ 48 existing states , and would not likely have been able to convince Newfoundlanders to accept territorial status as an alternative to admission as a U.S. state . 
 = = The National Convention = = 
 The British government decided to let Newfoundlanders deliberate and choose their own future by calling a National Convention in 1946 . Chaired by Judge Cyril J. Fox , it consisted of 45 elected members one of whom was the future first premier of Newfoundland , Joey Smallwood . 
 The Convention set up committees to study where Newfoundland 's future lay . Many members assumed that the final decision was due near the end of their deliberations , but the timeline was upset when Smallwood moved that the Convention should send a delegation to Ottawa to discuss a union in October 1946 . His motion was defeated , as it only received the support of 17 members , although the Convention later decided to send delegations to both London and Ottawa . 
 = = = The London Delegation = = = 
 The London delegation , made up of so @-@ called anti @-@ confederates , preferred that Newfoundland become independent rather than join Canada . The group left Newfoundland on April 25 , 1947 , and met with a British delegation headed by the Dominions Secretary , Viscount Addison . The British response to the delegation was that it would give no economic help to Newfoundland if it returned to responsible government . The leader of the delegation from Newfoundland , Peter Cashin , gave an angry speech to the Convention on May 19 claiming , " A conspiracy existed to sell this country to the Dominion of Canada " . 
 = = = The Ottawa Delegation = = = 
 The Ottawa delegation , dominated by pro @-@ confederates including Smallwood , preferred a union with Canada to independence . The talks between them and Ottawa began on June 24 , 1947 with the goal being to stay in Ottawa as long as needed to negotiate good terms for Newfoundland 's entry . Ottawa was reluctant at first because they felt that the delegation was not an official representation of the Dominion of Newfoundland , but the Federal Cabinet finally decided to begin negotiations on July 18 . By mid @-@ August , the agreement of draft terms was nearly complete . However , with the death of Frank Bridges , Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King 's minister from New Brunswick , negotiations effectively ended . King refused further discussions until New Brunswick had representation , and so the delegation headed back to St. John 's . 
 = = = Back in St. John 's = = = 
 The Convention reconvened on October 10 and Smallwood presented his delegations report , infuriating the anti @-@ confederates . Just as the Convention decided to debate the delegation 's report , the draft terms from Ottawa arrived . Ottawa offered to assume most of the debt , negotiate a tax agreement , and outlined which services would remain in the jurisdiction of the province . 
 = = Referendums = = 
 Newfoundland recommended that the British Government hold a referendum on Newfoundland 's future . London agreed that a referendum was a good idea , and left it up to the Convention to decide what was to be on the ballot . Originally , the Convention decided that only two choices were to be on the ballot : restoration of responsible government and the continuation of the Commission of Government . 
 Smallwood moved on January 23 , 1948 to add Confederation with Canada to the choices . The debate ended at 5 : 30 in the morning on January 28 , with the motion being defeated 29 @-@ 16 . The British government intervened in March and overruled the Convention , deciding that Confederation with Canada would indeed be on the ballot . They did this after having concluding , " It would not be right that the people of Newfoundland should be deprived of an opportunity of considering the issue at the referendum " . 
 = = = The factions = = = 
 Three main factions actively campaigned during the lead up to the referendums . One faction , led by Smallwood , was the Confederate Association ( CA ) advocating union with the Canadian Confederation . They campaigned through a newspaper known as The Confederate . The Responsible Government League ( <unk> ) , led by Peter Cashin , advocated an independent Newfoundland with a return to responsible government . They also had their own newspaper The Independent . A third smaller Economic Union Party ( <unk> ) , led by Chesley Crosbie , advocated closer economic ties with the United States . 
 = = = The first referendum = = = 
 The first referendum took place on June 3 , 1948 . The votes were as follows : 
 = = = The second referendum = = = 
 Since none of the choices had gained over 50 % , a second referendum with only the two most popular choices was scheduled for July 22 , 1948 . Both sides recognized that more people had voted against responsible government than for it , which encouraged the CA and discouraged its opponents , although the <unk> and <unk> now became allies . The confederates widely publicized the Roman Catholic Archbishop E. P. Roche 's strong opposition to confederation , and persuaded the Loyal Orange Association to advise Protestants to resist Catholic influence . The CA also denounced anti @-@ confederates as anti @-@ British and pro @-@ republican , and called confederation with Canada " British Union " . Anti @-@ confederates responded that " Confederation Means British Union With French Canada " . 
 The results of the second referendum were : 
 = = = Results map = = = 
 The Avalon Peninsula , the location of St. John 's , supported responsible government in both referendums , while the rest of Newfoundland supported confederation . A majority of districts with mostly Catholic voters supported responsible government . 
 = = Reaction to the referendums = = 
 As the results of the binding referendum were to join Canada , Newfoundland began to negotiate with Canada to enter into Confederation . After negotiations were completed , the British Government received the terms and the British North America Act 1949 was subsequently passed by the British Parliament and given Royal Assent . Newfoundland officially joined Canada at midnight , March 31 , 1949 . At the elections for the Newfoundland House of Assembly two months later , Smallwood 's Liberal Party won and controlled the provincial government until the 1970s . Reactions to Confederation were mixed . 
 Newfoundland as a province secured some significant guarantees as a part of the union . As ruled by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in 1927 , Canada agreed to put Labrador under the jurisdiction of Newfoundland , after some consideration . Such commitments carried over to other areas as well , such as a ferry between Port aux Basques and North Sydney , and a guarantee that Newfoundland would be able to continue to manufacture and sell margarine , a very controversial product at the time . 
 Canada welcomed Newfoundland into confederation , as seen in an editorial in the The Globe and Mail on April 1 , 1949 : 
 Union with Newfoundland , as everyone knows , rounds out the dream of the Fathers of Confederation . This newspaper is certain that Canadians welcome their new fellow @-@ countrymen with full hearts . May the union be forever a blessing for Canada and to the island which is yielding its ancient independence , but not its identity , to belong to a larger fraternity . 
 An editorial from the Montreal Gazette also welcomed Newfoundland , saying : 
 For Canadians tomorrow will be a day of welcome . For this is the day when a tenth province is added to the Dominion of Canada . There will be a greater meaning than ever to the Canadian motto , chosen by Sir Leonard Tilley from the words of Isaiah which describes the dominion that reaches ' from sea to sea ' . 
 The Vancouver Sun also reflected on the results , saying : 
 Today a dream of greatness , present in the minds of the Fathers of Confederation more than 80 years ago , comes true . Newfoundland at long last is part of Canada . 
 = Telopea speciosissima = 
 Telopea speciosissima , commonly known as the New South Wales waratah or simply waratah , is a large shrub in the plant family Proteaceae . It is endemic to New South Wales in Australia and is the floral emblem of that state . No subspecies are recognised , but the closely related Telopea aspera was only recently classified as a separate species . 
 T. speciosissima is a shrub to 3 or 4 m ( 9 @.@ 8 or 13 @.@ 1 ft ) high and 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) wide , with dark green leaves . Its several stems arise from a pronounced woody base known as a lignotuber . The species is well renowned for its striking large red springtime inflorescences ( flowerheads ) , each including hundreds of individual flowers . These are visited by the eastern pygmy possum ( Cercartetus nanus ) , birds such as honeyeaters ( Meliphagidae ) , and various insects . 
 The floral emblem for its home state of New South Wales , Telopea speciosissima has featured prominently in art , architecture , and advertising , particularly since Australian federation . Commercially grown in several countries as a cut flower , it is also cultivated in home gardens , requiring good drainage yet adequate moisture , but is vulnerable to various fungal diseases and pests . A number of cultivars with various shades of red , pink and even white flowers are available . Horticulturists have also developed hybrids with T. oreades and T. mongaensis which are more tolerant of cold , shade , and heavier soils . 
 = = Description = = 
 Telopea speciosissima , the New South Wales waratah , is a large , erect shrub up to 3 or 4 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 or 13 @.@ 1 ft ) in height with one or more stems . Arising vertically or near vertically from a large woody base , or lignotuber , the stems are little branched . In late spring , there is a spurt of new growth after flowering , with new shoots often arising from old flowerheads . The dark green leaves are alternate and usually coarsely @-@ toothed , ranging from 13 to 25 cm ( 5 to 10 in ) in length . <unk> in leafy bracts , the flowerheads develop over the winter and begin to swell in early spring , before opening to reveal the striking inflorescences . The exact timing varies across New South Wales , but flowering can begin as early as August in the northern parts of its range , and finish in November in the southern , more elevated areas . Spot flowering may also occur around March in autumn . Containing up to 250 individual flowers , the domed flowerheads are crimson in colour and measure 7 – 10 cm ( 3 – 4 in ) in diameter . They are cupped in a whorl of leafy bracts which are 5 to 7 cm ( 2 to 3 in ) long and also red . Variations are not uncommon ; some flowerheads may be more globular or cone @-@ shaped than dome @-@ shaped , and the bracts may be whitish or dark red . The tips of the stigmas of some inflorescences may be whitish , contrasting with the red colour of the rest of the flowerhead . 
 An individual flowerhead reaches full size about two weeks after first emerging from the bracts , and lasts another two weeks before the flowers fade and fall . In the first phase , the individual small flowers , known as florets , remain unopened — and the flowerhead retains a compact shape — before they mature and split open , revealing the stigma , style , and anther . The anther is sessile , lacking a filament , and lies next to the stigma at the end of the style . The outermost florets open first , with anthesis progressing towards the centre of the flowerhead , which becomes darker and more open in appearance , and begins attracting birds and insects . The ovary lies at the base of the style and atop a stalk known as the gynophore , and it is from here that the seed pods then develop . Meanwhile , a crescent @-@ shaped nectary lies at the base of the gynophore . 
 The seed pods grow to 8 – 15 cm ( 3 – 6 in ) long . As the pods mature , they range from green , to yellow and finally turn russet red @-@ brown . The pods become leathery before splitting open during early winter , . The pods contain winged seeds inside . In the wild , only two or three seed pods develop per flowerhead , but there may be anywhere from 5 to 50 in cultivated plants . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Telopea speciosissima , the New South Wales Waratah , was first described by botanist James Edward Smith in his 1793 book A Specimen of the Botany of New Holland , from " very fine dried specimens sent by Mr. White " . He gave the species its original binomial name of Embothrium <unk> . The specific epithet is derived from the superlative of the Latin word speciosus " beautiful " or " handsome " , hence " <unk> " or " most beautiful " . Embothrium had been a wastebasket taxon at the time , and Robert Brown suggested the genus Telopea for it in 1809 , which was published in 1810 . Richard Salisbury had published the name Hylogyne speciosa in 1809 , but Brown 's name was nomenclaturally conserved . 
 Telopea speciosissima is one of five species from southeastern Australia which make up the genus Telopea . Its closest relative is the very similar Gibraltar Range waratah ( T. aspera ) from northern New South Wales , which was only recognised as a separate species in 1995 , having previously been considered an unusual northern population of T. speciosissima . 
 The genus is classified in the subtribe Embothriinae of the Proteaceae , along with the tree waratahs ( Alloxylon ) from eastern Australia and New Caledonia , and Oreocallis and the Chilean firetree ( Embothrium coccineum ) from South America . Almost all these species have red terminal flowers , and hence the subtribe 's origin and floral appearance must predate the splitting of Gondwana into Australia , Antarctica , and South America over 60 million years ago . 
 Although no subspecies are recognised within Telopea speciosissima itself , geographical variations within its range have been noted . Forms toward the northern limits of its range have more prominently lobed leaves . A population from Waterfall has darker red , wider inflorescences , and a population at West Head in Ku @-@ ring @-@ gai Chase National Park has paler inflorescences . Leaf shape varies widely . 
 The common name waratah was first applied to this species before being generalised to other members of the genus Telopea and , to a lesser extent , Alloxylon . Waratah is derived from the Eora Aboriginal people , the original inhabitants of the Sydney area . The Dharawal people of the Illawarra region knew it as <unk> , and <unk> is another aboriginal name . A former common name from around 1900 is " native tulip " , possibly derived from Telopea . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The species is found in New South Wales ( Australia ) from the <unk> Mountains southward to Ulladulla , with a relatively widespread distribution in the Central Coast region . It usually occurs as an understory shrub in open forest on sandy soils in areas with moderately high rainfall , receiving on average around 1 @,@ 200 mm ( 47 in ) a year . <unk> shade from eucalyptus ( Eucalyptus ) trees reduces sunlight by around 30 % . Much of its range occurs in the Sydney Basin , an area with one of the highest human populations and most intense development in Australia . The impact of habitat fragmentation and decreased fire interval ( time between bushfires ) on the gene pool of Telopea speciosissima , which relies on outcrossing , is unclear . Although largely protected within National Parks and conservation reserves in the Sydney area , most populations are small , numbering under 200 plants , and are often located near urban developments . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Telopea speciosissima is a <unk> @-@ flowering species , relying on post @-@ fire flowering followed by production and dispersal of non @-@ dormant seeds to take advantage of favourable growing conditions in the altered environment following a fire . Of the woody <unk> species of southeastern Australia , it is one of the slowest to produce seedlings after bushfires , taking at least two years . The species resprouts from a lignotuber , a swollen woody base largely under the soil , that stores energy and nutrients as a resource for rapid growth of new shoots after a bushfire . Waratahs dominate the understorey around two years after a fire , but are later overtaken by the slower @-@ growing banksias ( Banksia ) and wattles ( Acacia ) . Fire also serves to strip away diseases and pests . Flowering may be prolific at this time . 
 The prominent position and striking colour of Telopea speciosissima and many of its relatives within the subtribe Embothriinae both in Australia and South America strongly suggest it is adapted to pollination by birds , and has been for over 60 million years . Honeyeaters , in particular the New Holland honeyeater ( Phylidonyris novaehollandiae ) and the crescent honeyeater ( P. pyrrhopterus ) , are frequent visitors . However , a field study conducted at Barren Grounds showed New Holland honeyeaters to carry relatively little pollen . The eastern pygmy possum ( Cercartetus nanus ) also forages among the flowerheads . 
 The New South Wales waratah had been considered to be protandrous ( that is , with male parts concluding sexual activity before female parts become receptive on the same plant ) , but analysis of the timing of pollen viability and stigma receptivity has shown significant overlaps . The species has been shown to be self @-@ incompatible , requiring cross @-@ pollination with plants of other genotypes to reproduce successfully . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 The New South Wales waratah was a popular garden plant at the beginning of the 20th century . It had been introduced early ( 1789 ) into the United Kingdom , and was reported flowering for the first time in 1809 at <unk> , the villa of one E. J. A. Woodford Esq . The Royal Horticultural Society awarded it an Award of Merit in 1914 , and a First Class Certificate in 1922 . 
 Initially , waratahs were picked from the bushland for market , but by the early 20th century , a few plantsmen grew concerned at the development of urban areas at the expense of bush , particularly areas noted for wildflowers . Percy Parry of <unk> in <unk> developed the idea of " Preservation by Cultivation " and investigated the commercial cultivation of waratahs and other native plants . Meanwhile , the New South Wales Government was looking to curb flower and plant collecting from the wild , and considered prohibition in 1944 , but after witnessing the ability of Parry to manage and develop cultivation , introduced compulsory licences for wildflower collecting the following year . With his wife Olive , Percy promoted and developed knowledge over fifty years and received the Order of Australia medal in 1981 . Following on from the Parrys were Howard Gay and Arch Dennis , who pioneered growing waratahs at <unk> in the Dandenong Ranges in the 1940s , Sid <unk> and Frank Stone , who did likewise in Dural and the Blue Mountains respectively . The growing movement for cultivating and preserving native plants led to the establishment of the Society for Growing Australian Plants in 1957 , and the waratah was featured heavily in the first edition of its journal Australian Plants . 
 Today , New South Wales waratahs are grown commercially in Australia north of Sydney and in the Dandenong Ranges near Melbourne . They are also grown commercially in New Zealand and in Israel , and also in Hawaii , where they have been grown since 1961 . One major challenge in commercial production is that in any one location the flowering season is generally short ( five weeks total , with only small numbers in the earliest and latest weeks ) . The season for cut flowers may be extended , however , by growing plants at different latitudes . The vase life of a cut waratah is 10 to 14 days , and cut flower waratahs can be revived somewhat by water . 
 Although they grow naturally on deep sandy soils , the species has proved adaptable to other deep , well @-@ drained soils , especially where natural slopes assist drainage . Despite their natural occurrence in woodland , waratahs flower best in full sun , although they tolerate the dappled shade of eucalypts . Heavy pruning after flowering reinvigorates the plants and promotes more profuse flowering in the next season . Waratah blooms are highly susceptible to damage from wind , and benefit from some protection from prevailing winds . Waratah blooms attract birds to the garden . The species is readily propagated from fresh seed , but cultivars must be reproduced from cuttings to remain true @-@ to @-@ type . 
 Several species of fungi infect the roots of waratahs , causing significant plant morbidity or death . Typical symptoms include yellow leaves , wilting , blackening and dieback or part or all of the plant , or lack of proteoid roots . The most common pathogen is the soil @-@ borne water mold Phytophthora cinnamomi , which appears to be more problematic in cultivated plants than in wild populations . Mass plantings at the Royal Botanic Gardens in Sydney and at Mount Annan planted before the 2000 Summer Olympics were devastated by the disease . <unk> solani can cause damping off or root rot , and is an uncommon pathogen . <unk> scoparium and C. <unk> ( now Nectria radicicola ) are also uncommon causes of infection and result in decay of the crown of the plant . Although significant problems , fungi are less likely to be the cause of plant morbidity than poor drainage or soil conditions . 
 The larvae of the Macadamia <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , a moth , burrow along and disfigure the waratah 's leaves , and are mainly a problem in lowering the value of cut flower crops . More problematic is the larger caterpillar of another moth , the Macadamia twig girdler Macadamia twig girdler ( Xylorycta <unk> ) which can burrow into and disfigure the developing flowerhead . 
 = = = Cultivars = = = 
 A number of natural variants of Telopea speciosissima have been selected for cultivation as follows : 
 Telopea ' Brimstone Blush ' is a shrub of smaller size than the species , reaching a metre ( 3 ft ) tall , and was originally found growing on a property of Ben Richards in Oakdale , southwest of Sydney . Flowering takes place in October . The flowerhead is globular with a pink crown and has 160 individual flowers , the styles of which are pink and white towards the ends . Three rows of whorled dark red bracts surround the flowerheads . 
 Telopea ' Cardinal ' is a form originally found on the property of Lucille Pope in <unk> , from where it was propagated and made available commercially . The original plant was a vigorous specimen reaching 3 by 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 by 9 @.@ 8 ft ) and producing 100 to 120 flowerheads each year . It is named for its large dome @-@ shaped cardinal red flowerheads , which bear 210 individual flowers and are surrounded by two rows of dark red bracts . These blooms have long vase life . 
 Telopea ' <unk> ' , a form with longer styles , has compact inflorescences measuring 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 5 in ) high and wide , and is a vigorous grower . It was selected for commercial propagation in 1974 by Nanette Cuming of Bittern , Victoria , and registered with the Australian Cultivar Registration Authority in 1989 . It is grown principally for the cut flower industry . 
 Telopea ' Fire and Brimstone ' is a vigorous form with large inflorescences selected by waratah grower and author Paul Nixon of Camden , New South Wales . It is a shrub which may reach 3 – 4 m tall and 2 m wide , with large leaves with more heavily toothed margins . Each flowerhead is cone @-@ shaped and has up to 240 florets . The stigmas are a light red and tipped with white . The bracts surrounding the flowerheads are relatively small , while the leaves are large and can reach 44 cm ( 17 @.@ 5 in ) in length . The cultivar is thought to be tetraploid . With a long vase life of 17 days , the cultivar is suitable for the cut flower industry . 
 Telopea ' Galaxy ' has flowerheads with pinkish red tepals and white tips to the styles , surrounded by large bracts . 
 Telopea ' Olympic Flame ' is a form with prominent bracts around the flowerheads . It has large leaves with toothed margins and flowers in early spring . Also known as ' Sunburst ' , it arose as a seedling in a breeding program conducted by Cathy Offord , Peter Goodwin and Paul Nixon under the auspices of the University of Sydney . 
 Telopea ' Parry 's Dream ' was a chance seedling in the early 1970s . It gave rise to this cultivar , a vigorous plant with red @-@ pink flowerheads which reach a diameter of 10 cm × 10 cm ( 4 in × 4 in ) surrounded by pink bracts . 
 Telopea ' Shade of Pale ' is an unusual pale @-@ pink flowered form of T. speciosissima . It is less vigorous than the parent plant . It was initially promoted as ' Light Shade of Pale ' but there can only be three words in a registered cultivar name . 
 Telopea ' <unk> ' is an early @-@ flowering form . It has large leaves with toothed margins and flowers in early spring . It also arose as a seedling in the same breeding program by the University of Sydney mentioned above . Selected in 1981 , it has red flowerheads with white @-@ tipped styles which reach 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) in diameter . 
 Telopea ' <unk> White ' is a white form from <unk> near Robertson . Aboriginal legends of white waratahs existed , and several had been encountered , but none had been previously preserved in horticulture . Joseph Maiden had previously found a white waratah near Kurrajong , and others had been sighted near <unk> on the Central Coast in 1919 , and Colo Vale in the 1950s . <unk> Frank Stone reported one in his garden , possibly propagated from the latter plant . ' <unk> White ' was brought into cultivation in 1972 by cuttings from the original plant , which grew on water catchment property . It has pale greenish buds which open to a cream @-@ white inflorescence . It is less vigorous than the parent species and vulnerable to borers . It is also highly vulnerable to the Macadamia twig girdler . 
 In addition , a number of interspecific Telopea hybrids have also been produced . These have been bred or used as more <unk> or shade @-@ tolerant plants in cooler climates such as Canberra , Melbourne or elsewhere . 
 Telopea ' Braidwood Brilliant ' is a frost @-@ tolerant hybrid between a male T. speciosissima and female T. mongaensis . Dr Boden of the Canberra Parks Administration began investigating this hybrid in 1962 , and it was registered in 1975 by Richard Powell . It is a lignotuberous shrub to 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) high and has oblanceolate leaves to 20 cm ( 8 in ) long . The red blooms are 6 – 8 cm ( 2 @.@ 5 – 3 in ) in diameter , intermediate in size between the parent species . It has grown well in cooler climates such as Canberra . 
 Telopea ' Canberry Coronet ' is a cross between T. speciosissima from Wentworth Falls in the Blue Mountains and T. mongaensis intended for increased cold tolerance . It has red flowerheads to 6 – 8 cm ( 2 @.@ 5 – 3 in ) in diameter . Reaching 3 – 4 m ( 9 @.@ 8 – 13 @.@ 1 ft ) high , it is a larger plant than ' Braidwood Brilliant ' . It was bred by Doug Verdon of the Australian National Botanic Gardens in Canberra . 
 Telopea ' Champagne ' is a cultivar registered under Plant Breeders Rights ( PBR ) in 2006 . Its creamy yellow flowerheads appear from October to December . It is a three @-@ way hybrid between T. speciosissima , T. oreades and the yellow @-@ flowered form of T. truncata . 
 Telopea ' Golden Globe ' is a cultivar registered under PBR in 2006 . Larger than ' Champagne ' , it is also a three @-@ way hybrid between T. speciosissima , T. oreades and the yellow @-@ flowered form of T. truncata . It has been propagated and sold as ' Shady Lady Yellow ' . It was originally bred in the <unk> east of Melbourne . 
 Telopea ' Shady Lady ' is a larger shrub which may reach 5 m ( 16 ft ) high and 2 or 3 m ( 6 @.@ 6 or 9 @.@ 8 ft ) wide . A hybrid of T. speciosissima and T. oreades , it arose by chance in a Melbourne garden . The flowerheads are smaller and lack the bracts of the speciosissima parent . As its name suggests , it tolerates more shade . It is vigorous and more reliable in temperate and subtropical areas , and grows in semi @-@ shade or sun . ' Shady Lady Crimson ' , ' Shady Lady Red ' and ' Shady Lady Pink ' are three selected commercially available colour forms . 
 Telopea ' Shady Lady White ' is a white hybrid between T. speciosissima and T. oreades . 
 = = Symbolic and artistic references = = 
 The New South Wales waratah featured prominently in the folklore of the Darug and Tharawal people in the Sydney basin and Gandangara people to the southwest . A dreamtime legend from the Eora tells of a female wonga pigeon searching for her husband who has been lost while out hunting . A hawk attacks and wounds her , and she hides in a waratah bush . Her husband calls and as she struggles in the bush her blood turns the white waratah blooms red . A tale from the <unk> Valley tells of a beautiful maiden named <unk> , who wore a red cloak of rock wallaby adorned with the feathers of the gang @-@ gang cockatoo . She fell in love with a young warrior who did not return from battle . Grief @-@ stricken , she died , and up from the ground grew the first waratah . The Dharawal people regarded it as a totem , using it in ceremonies and timing ceremonies to its flowering . 
 The striking form of the New South Wales waratah became a popular motif in Australian art in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century and was incorporated in art nouveau designs of the time . <unk> , paperweights and especially tins have been decorated with the flower . Arnott 's often used the waratah as an alternative to their parrot logo on biscuit and cake tins from the early 1900s . Shelleys soft drinks , established in 1893 in Broken Hill , also displayed it on their label . The French artist Lucien Henry , who had settled in Sydney in 1879 , was a strong proponent of a definitive Australian art style incorporating local flora , particularly the waratah . His most famous surviving work is a triptych stained glass window of Oceania flanked by numerous waratahs overlooking the Centennial Hall in Sydney Town Hall . 
 In 1925 , artist Margaret Preston produced a hand @-@ coloured woodcut depicting waratahs . The species also appeared on an Australian 3 shilling stamp in 1959 designed by botanical illustrator Margaret Jones and a <unk> stamp in 1968 . 
 The Sydney suburb of Telopea takes its name from the Waratah , as does the Newcastle suburb of Waratah and the Super Rugby team , the Sydney @-@ based NSW Waratahs . 
 After Australian federation in 1901 , the upsurge in nationalism led to the search for an official national floral emblem . The New South Wales waratah was considered alongside the wattle Acacia pycnantha , and debate raged between proponents of the two flowers . The economist and botanist R. T. Baker proposed that the waratah 's endemism to the Australian continent made it a better choice than the wattle , as well as the prominence of its flowers . He was nicknamed the " Commander in Chief of the Waratah Armed Forces " . The South Australian Evening News also supported the bid , but to no avail . 
 Decades later , in 1962 , Telopea speciosissima was proclaimed as the official floral emblem of New South Wales by the then @-@ governor Sir Eric Woodward , after being used informally for many years . The species has also been adopted by others , including the New South Wales Waratahs rugby union team since the 1880s , and the former department store Grace Bros in a stylised form for their logo in the 1980s . Contemporary clothing designers Jenny Kee and Linda Jackson produced waratah @-@ inspired fabric designs in the 1970s and 1980s during a resurgence of Australian motifs . 
 From 1956 the annual Waratah Festival was held in Sydney , run by the Sydney Committee . It took place from late October to early November , coinciding with the blooming of the waratahs . It was an important cultural event which included a parade , a popular art competition , beauty contests , exhibitions and performances . A highlight was the Lord Mayor 's reception at the Sydney Town Hall for which the floral displays were made of hundreds of waratahs culled by Park Rangers from the national parks . 
 In 2009 , the Premier of New South Wales , Nathan Rees , commissioned a state logo based on the floral emblem . The resultant logo design has been criticised as resembling a lotus rather than the New South Wales Waratah . 
 = Treehouse of Horror XIX = 
 " Treehouse of Horror XIX " is the fourth episode of the twentieth season of The Simpsons . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 2 , 2008 . This is the nineteenth Treehouse of Horror episode , and , like the other " Treehouse of Horror " episodes , contains three self @-@ contained segments : in " Untitled Robot Parody " , Transformer robots run amok in Springfield ; in " How to Get Ahead in Dead @-@ Vertising " , Homer is hired by ad agents to kill celebrities so their images can be used for free ; and in a Simpsons @-@ style parody of It 's the Great Pumpkin , Charlie Brown ( called " It 's The Grand Pumpkin , Milhouse " ) , Milhouse summons a demon pumpkin who goes berserk when it sees humans carving its brethren into jack @-@ o @-@ lanterns as part of Halloween tradition . It was written by Matt Warburton and directed by Bob Anderson . 
 A total of 12 @.@ 48 million viewers tuned in to watch during its first airing , more than any other episode since " The Wife Aquatic " . The episode received mixed reviews from critics , who generally regarded " It 's the Grand Pumpkin , Milhouse " as the best segment . Shortly after airing , the episode was criticized by the Gay , Lesbian and Straight Education Network ( GLSEN ) because a character ( Nelson Muntz ) casually uses the adjective " gay " to insult The Grand Pumpkin . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the opening scene , Homer tries to vote for Democratic Senator Barack Obama in the 2008 American presidential election . However , the voting machine is rigged to turn his vote into one for Republican Senator John McCain . After six attempts to vote Homer heads out to report the mishap ( " This machine is <unk> ! MUST <unk> PRESIDENT <unk> ! " ) but the machine sucks him in and kills him , then shoots out his body out of the voting booth . Jasper sticks a patriotic @-@ themed " I voted " sticker on Homer 's forehead . 
 = = = Untitled Robot Parody = = = 
 In a parody of Transformers , Bart buys Lisa a Malibu Stacy convertible as a Christmas present . However , the car turns out to be a Transformer . The robot transforms all of the technology in Springfield into robots so they can wage war with each other . Just as the two machine factions ' leaders prepare to face off , Marge asks why the robots are at war with one another ; as it turns out , they cannot even remember . Thanking Marge , the two sides declare that they will work together , only for the " Optimus Prime @-@ esque " robot to shout " we shall enslave your planet ! " The two factions of sentient machines work together to overthrow humanity in which they use Homer 's idea of Springfield 's residents in a game of foosball . 
 = = = How to Get Ahead in Dead @-@ Vertising = = = 
 Homer takes Maggie to a daycare and encourages her to enjoy a mural featuring Krusty the Clown to make her feel better while she is away from her parents . However , Krusty arrives to have the images of his face sandblasted from the mural , as his likeness is trademarked and used without his permission . This left Maggie upset and an outraged Homer shoves Krusty in retaliation , sending him flying into a wood chipper and shredded alive . Homer is later approached by two advertising agents who have heard of his deed and explain their plan to use celebrities ' likenesses in advertising without issues over permission by simply killing the celebrities who refuse to lend their names to advertising . Homer is then hired as a celebrity assassin , taking out such famous faces as George Clooney ( by replacing wet cement with quicksand ) , Prince ( by strangling and stabbing him with his own guitar ) and Neil Armstrong ( by hitting him with a golf club , in the style of a Rube Goldberg machine ) . In Heaven , the dead celebrities are outraged by this and stage an attack on the living , with Homer as their main target . Ghost Krusty blasts Homer in the head with a shotgun , after Ghost Krusty tells him that the one true religion is a mix between Methodist and voodoo . Ghost Homer gets revenge by locking out all the celebrities in Heaven , but the joke is on him when an apparently gay Ghost Abraham Lincoln pretends to be Ghost Homer 's friend so he can hit on him for all eternity . 
 = = = It 's the Grand Pumpkin , Milhouse = = = 
 In a parody of It 's the Great Pumpkin , Charlie Brown , Milhouse waits in a pumpkin patch on Halloween for the Grand Pumpkin ( which Bart made up ) with Lisa . After Lisa sees everyone at school having a Halloween party , she grows tired of waiting and leaves in frustration . Milhouse starts to cry and his tears and childlike belief bring the Grand Pumpkin to life . However , the Pumpkin is appalled to find that his kindred pumpkins are being carved up on Halloween and made into pumpkin bread , originally thinking it was bread especially made for pumpkins until Milhouse revealed it is made from them , and vows revenge . He devours Homer as he carves a pumpkin , then marches to the school and eats Nelson who threatens to stab a yellow pumpkin . It becomes apparent at this point that the Grand Pumpkin is racist towards this type of pumpkin and then eats Groundskeeper Willie after being offered roasted pumpkin seeds . Realizing that Milhouse can bring things to life by believing in them , Lisa tells him about " Tom Turkey " , a symbol of Thanksgiving . Milhouse starts to believe in Tom Turkey , who comes to life and kills the Grand Pumpkin , freeing everyone he ate . However , when Tom Turkey learns that people eat turkeys on Thanksgiving from Bart , he vows revenge and starts angrily chasing children around the school , devouring some of them whole as Marge wishes the viewers happy holidays . 
 = = Production = = 
 The opening segment of the episode , which was leaked onto the internet weeks before the episode aired , features Homer voting for Barack Obama . Rather than taking sides in the election , executive producer Al Jean says it is " mostly a comment on what many people to believe to be the irregularities in our voting system . " " Untitled Robot Parody " is modeled on the live action Transformers film , rather than the cartoon . Al Jean said it was " just really fun to do transformations [ and ] you can see why they enjoyed doing that film . " " How to Get Ahead in Dead @-@ Vertising " featured a parody of the title sequence of Mad Men . Jean was a fan of the series and pitched the scene . 
 The final segment is based on the Halloween cartoon It 's the Great Pumpkin , Charlie Brown . It could not be titled " It 's the Great Pumpkin , Milhouse " to exactly match its namesake because of a " big legal issue " , according to Al Jean . However , the characters were redesigned to resemble the style of Peanuts , and they also obtained rights to use Vince Guaraldi 's music . Jean said in 2011 that " For years we had never been able to parody Charlie Brown 's Halloween special , which is one of the all @-@ time top three animated shows ever . The Vince Guaraldi music is such a huge part of it , so we got to clear it . It was just a dream come true to satirize it . I thought it was a really funny idea that instead of not ever seeing the Grand Pumpkin , it comes to life , and he 's really horrified at the way humans cook pumpkins into pies , and eat pumpkin seeds , which are basically pumpkin fetuses .... " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The first segment of the episode is a parody of Transformers . The second segment features a parody of the opening of Mad Men and Homer kills several celebrities , including Prince , George Clooney , and Neil Armstrong , set to the song " Psycho Killer " by Talking Heads . Other celebrities shown include Golda Meir , Edward G. Robinson , John Wayne and John Lennon , who says " All we 're saying is ' Let 's eat some brains ' " , a reference to the chorus of " Give Peace a Chance " by the Plastic Ono Band . The commercial " Planet of the Taste " is a parody of the 1968 film Planet of the Apes . 
 The second segment 's opening is a parody of the opening titles to AMC drama Mad Men . 
 The final segment , " It 's the Grand Pumpkin , Milhouse " is a parody of It 's the Great Pumpkin , Charlie Brown ( and was supposed to be named " It 's The Great Pumpkin , Milhouse , " but due to legal reasons , was renamed ) and contains several references to the Peanuts series . In the segment , Milhouse wears the same clothes and plays the same role as Linus van Pelt . Lisa is modelled after Sally Brown and Bart looks like Charlie Brown ; he even says " good grief " , echoing Charlie Brown 's catchphrase . The main theme to Peanuts " Linus and Lucy " is played several times . A redesigned version of Santa 's Little Helper can be seen sleeping on top of his dog house and Homer is seen sleeping on top of his house in a manner similar to Snoopy . When Marge first speaks , she uses a muted trombone . This is a parody of the " wah wah wah " voice that is used for adults in the various Peanuts specials . At the end of the segment , she says to the audience that they can send complaints to an address which she only says in more muted trombone noises . Milhouse ' prayer to the Grand Pumpkin is similar to the Nicene Creed . The dance scene during the Halloween party is a parody of the dance scene in A Charlie Brown Christmas right down to Kang and Kodos in a nonspeaking cameo as the twins 3 and 4 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original airing , the episode was viewed in 12 @.@ 48 million viewers and achieved a 4 @.@ 9 Nielsen rating . It was the highest rated episode of the night in the 18 – 49 demographic , the sixteenth highest rated show of the week , and the fourth highest rated on Fox after two airings of the World Series and House . It was the highest rated episode since season 18 's " The Wife Aquatic " . 
 " Treehouse of Horror XIX " received mixed reviews from critics . Rick Bentley of the Seattle Times described it as a " paint @-@ by @-@ numbers episode " . Robert Canning of IGN gave the episode a 7 @.@ 9 / 10 , calling it " funny , entertaining and even nostalgic [ which ] only makes this yearly tradition that much better . " 
 " It 's the Grand Pumpkin , Milhouse " was regarded by reviewers as the best segment in the episode . Canning wrote , " this segment may not be all that gory , but it 's funny and , quite honestly , it will just make you feel good " , and Bentley described it as " a dead @-@ on comedy assault of the Charlie Brown animated Halloween special . " Rob Owen of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette concurred , writing that it " succeeds because it offers sly cultural commentary . " Show Patrol wrote " The nostalgia factor makes “ Grand Pumpkin ” the best of these amusing bits for me , but they all lack that trademark “ Simpsons ” brand of satirical smartness . " Hal <unk> of the Orlando Sentinel gave the episode a 4 / 5 and called the final segment a " witty parody of Charlie Brown 's Halloween classic . [ ... ] The best gag , though , is a subtle one . Marge plays a trombone , a loving salute to the way the Peanuts specials portrayed adult voices . " 
 Director Bob Anderson received an Annie Award nomination for " Best Directing in an Animated Television Production " but lost to Avatar : The Last Airbender . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 The Gay , Lesbian and Straight Education Network ( GLSEN ) , which was in the middle of running a campaign to prevent casual use of the adjective " gay " , criticized Nelson Muntz 's line " the Grand Pumpkin is super gay " . A spokesperson for the GLSEN said " many people say gay without even realizing what they 're saying is bad , we 're trying to educate people that this is a term that is hurtful to young people when used in a negative way . " The spokesperson added , " Nelson should send an apologetic e @-@ card to Milhouse . " 
 = 2008 – 09 York City F.C. season = 
 The 2008 – 09 season was the eighty @-@ seventh season of competitive association football and fifth season in the Football Conference played by York City Football Club , a professional football club based in York , North Yorkshire , England . Their fourteenth @-@ place finish in 2007 – 08 meant it was their fifth successive season in the Conference Premier . The season covers the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 . 
 Ahead of Colin Walker 's first start to a season as manager , York signed nine players before the summer transfer window closed . The season started with an eight @-@ match unbeaten run , but Walker was sacked in November 2008 after three successive defeats . Martin Foyle was appointed as his successor , and after the turn of the year York won only five league matches . Survival in the Conference Premier was achieved with a seventeenth @-@ place finish . York reached the 2009 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium , being beaten 2 – 0 by Stevenage Borough . They were eliminated from the 2008 – 09 FA Cup in the fourth qualifying round , and from the 2008 – 09 Conference League Cup in the Northern section fourth round . 
 Thirty @-@ three players made at least one appearance in nationally organised first @-@ team competition , and there were fourteen different goalscorers . Defender Danny Parslow missed only one of the fifty @-@ eight competitive matches played over the season . Richard Brodie finished as leading scorer with nineteen goals , of which fifteen came in league competition and four came in the FA Trophy . The winner of the Clubman of the Year award , voted for by the club 's supporters , was Parslow . 
 = = Background and pre @-@ season = = 
 Billy McEwan was sacked as manager of York City early into the 2007 – 08 season , with the team nineteenth in the Conference Premier table and having recently been beaten by Conference South team Havant & Waterlooville in the FA Cup . After a six @-@ match unbeaten run as caretaker manager , Colin Walker was appointed as York 's permanent manager and led the team to a fourteenth @-@ place finish in the table . York released Darren Craddock , Stuart Elliott , Tom Evans , Ross Greenwood , Anthony Lloyd , Manny Panther and Alex Rhodes after the season ended , while Nicky Wroe and Martyn Woolford left for Torquay United and Scunthorpe United respectively . 
 Jimmy Beadle , Richard Brodie , Craig Farrell , Josh Mimms , Danny Parslow , Ben Purkiss , Mark Robinson and Onome Sodje signed new contracts ahead of 2008 – 09 . York signed seven players before the season started ; they were goalkeepers Michael Ingham from Hereford United and Artur Krysiak on a one @-@ month loan from Birmingham City , defender Mark Greaves from Burton Albion , midfielders Niall Henderson from Raith Rovers , Steven Hogg from Gretna and Ben Wilkinson from Hull City , and striker Daniel McBreen from St Johnstone . Professional contracts were handed to three youth team players , those being defenders Andy McWilliams and Josh Radcliffe and winger Liam Shepherd . Greaves was named as York 's club captain for the season . 
 New home and away kits were introduced for the first time in two years . The home kit comprised red and navy blue halved shirts with red collars , navy blue shorts and navy blue socks with two white strips on the cuffs . The away kit included white shirts with black shoulders , white shorts and white socks with black cuffs . Last season 's third kit was retained , which featured light blue shirts with a maroon collar , bar a section under the neck which was light blue , and maroon trims on the sleeves , maroon shorts and light blue socks . CLP Industries continued as shirt sponsors for the fourth successive season . 
 = = Review = = 
 = = = August = = = 
 York 's season started with a 1 – 0 victory away to Crawley Town , Farrell scoring the winner nineteen minutes from time . The second match was a 1 – 0 home win over Wrexham , who had won their opening fixture 5 – 0 against Stevenage Borough , with Greaves scoring the winner . Krysiak suffered a dislocated finger during this match , which resulted in him returning to Birmingham prematurely from his loan spell , and was replaced by Mimms , who gave an assured performance . York 's winning start to the season ended after a 1 – 1 home draw with Histon , who took the lead through a Daniel Wright penalty kick in the first half , before McBreen scored the equaliser for York on sixty @-@ nine @-@ minutes . 
 Winger Simon Russell signed for the club from Kidderminster Harriers . York drew 2 – 2 away to Northwich Victoria , which saw the team fight back on two occasions after twice being a goal down , with Brodie scoring his first goal of the season . He then scored in the third minute against Barrow , who equalised seven minutes later through Lee Hunt , in a home match that finished a 1 – 1 home draw . Beadle was loaned out to Northern Premier League Premier Division club Whitby Town for a month , having not made any appearances in 2008 – 09 . Sodje scored with a late volley after coming off the bench to give York a 1 – 1 draw away to Torquay United to maintain the team 's unbeaten record , which looked under threat after Danny Stevens gave Torquay the lead on sixty @-@ five minutes . Sodje 's goal against Torquay won the first Conference Premier Goal of the Month competition , for August 2008 . 
 = = = September = = = 
 Grimsby Town midfielder Peter Bore joined on an initial one @-@ month loan on transfer deadline day . York drew for the fifth time in succession with a 1 – 1 home draw with Mansfield Town , in which Sodje scored after he latched onto Adie Moses ' misplaced header . The team 's first victory in six games came in a 2 – 0 home win over Woking ; the goals came from McBreen and a Danny Bunce own goal . A 4 – 2 defeat away to Kettering Town saw York 's unbeaten run come to an end after nine games , leaving their opponents as the only unbeaten team in the division . Former Accrington Stanley striker David Brown , former Rotherham United defender Tom Hirst and Ipswich Town midfielder Jai Reason joined the club on trial . After impressing in a reserve match , Hirst was signed by the club . However , Brown and Reason were not offered contracts . 
 An eighty @-@ sixth @-@ minute equaliser from McBreen gave York a 1 – 1 draw at home to Salisbury City , which maintained the team 's unbeaten record at Bootham Crescent . Parslow signed a new contract with the club , and Rotherham midfielder Peter Holmes joined on a one @-@ month loan . A second defeat of the season came after losing 2 – 0 away to Kidderminster , Brian <unk> and Justin Richards scoring for the home team . Beadle was released by the club towards the end of his loan spell at Whitby , due to him looking for regular first team football . This was followed by the departure of Bore , who returned to Grimsby from his loan spell early . A 3 – 3 draw away against Stevenage was achieved after the team were 2 – 0 down after nineteen @-@ minutes , with the York goals coming from Sodje , Holmes and Farrell . Sodje picked up a hamstring injury during this match , meaning he would be out of action for four to six weeks . 
 = = = October = = = 
 Despite having the better chances , York drew 0 – 0 at home with Cambridge United , before being beaten 3 – 1 away by Wrexham , in which Wilkinson scored a late consolation goal . The club made an attempt to re @-@ sign former striker Clayton Donaldson on loan from Crewe Alexandra , but were told to make an inquiry four weeks later , due to him being injured . York 's first double of the season came with a 2 – 0 away win over Woking , the goals coming from Wilkinson and McBreen . <unk> Christie 's loan spell at Kettering from Stevenage was to be terminated for a loan move to York to go ahead , but this deal fell through . Walker revealed he was interested in signing striker Bruce Dyer , shortly after he played against York 's reserves for Bradford City . 
 York achieved a consecutive victory for the first time in 2008 – 09 after beating Rushden & Diamonds 2 – 0 at home , with goals from Robinson and Farrell . After this match , Holmes was recalled by Rotherham . Brodie was loaned to fellow Conference Premier side Barrow for one month , having lost his place in the starting line @-@ up . Former Leeds United midfielder Gavin Rothery impressed in the reserves against Hartlepool United , after which he signed a short @-@ term contract with the club . A 0 – 0 home draw with Mansfield in the fourth qualifying round of the FA Cup resulted in a replay , which would be played at Field Mill . Radcliffe was sent out on loan for a month at Harrogate Railway Athletic of the Northern Premier League Division One North . York were eliminated from the FA Cup after a 1 – 0 defeat away to Mansfield . 
 = = = November = = = 
 An eighty @-@ seventh @-@ minute penalty scored by Yemi Odubade saw York lose 1 – 0 away to Oxford United . Dyer signed for the club , having been unattached after his release by Chesterfield at the end of 2007 – 08 . Adam Boyes signed a long @-@ term professional contract ahead of York 's Conference League Cup third round tie against Mansfield , which was won with a 4 – 2 penalty shoot @-@ out victory . This was preceded by Greaves ' headed goal in the fourth minute of stoppage time , earning the team a 1 – 1 draw , which was followed by a goalless period of extra time . The attendance of 609 was the lowest crowd in the club history — breaking the previous record of 763 set in the 2007 – 08 Conference League Cup . 
 York lost 2 – 1 at home to Torquay , in their first home defeat of the season . After Roscoe D <unk> gave the visitors the lead , Greaves equalised for York with a header from a Purkiss cross in the eighty @-@ fifth minute , before Mark Ellis scored for Torquay on ninety minutes . A third successive defeat came after losing 1 – 0 away to Cambridge . It was agreed that Brodie 's loan at Barrow would be extended after he scored four goals in six appearances , but York decided to overturn this decision a day later . Barrow hoped to open talks over signing him on a permanent contract in January 2009 . 
 Walker was sacked as manager , alongside head coach Eric Winstanley , and youth team coach Neil Redfearn took over as caretaker manager . He took charge of the team for the home match against Crawley , which finished a 2 – 2 draw after Lewis Killeen scored the rebound from a Thomas Pinault penalty in the ninetieth @-@ minute . Former Port Vale manager Martin Foyle was appointed as manager , with Redfearn taking the role of assistant manager . Foyle made his first signing by bringing in winger Adam Smith on loan from Conference North club Gainsborough Trinity . Foyle 's first match in charge was a 1 – 1 away draw against Salisbury City , which was earned following a Brodie goal in the eighty @-@ third @-@ minute . 
 = = = December = = = 
 A 1 – 0 home defeat by Grays Athletic through a Wes Thomas goal followed ; this was Grays ' first away victory of the season . York followed this with a 1 – 1 draw away to Histon , in which they took the lead through Brodie in the fourteenth @-@ minute , before Parslow scored an own goal on fifty @-@ nine minutes . North Ferriby United striker Steve Torpey was appointed as youth team coach to succeed Redfearn . Foyle 's first win as manager came in a 2 – 0 away victory over Northwich Victoria in the FA Trophy first round , both goals coming from Brodie . This was followed with a 3 – 1 home win over Ebbsfleet United , with goals from Adam Smith , Brodie and Sodje after being one goal down . Dyer retired from football , having only made three appearances for York through back and hamstring injuries , while Rothery was released . York 's two @-@ match winning run ended after a 2 – 1 defeat away to league @-@ leaders Burton Albion , which was secured after Greaves scored an own goal . A 2 @-@ 1 home defeat by Altrincham followed ; Brodie scored a free kick in the thirty @-@ second minute to give York the lead , before Chris Senior and Dale Johnson scored for the visitors in the second half . Redfearn left the club to take charge of the Leeds under @-@ 18 team and Andy Porter , a former teammate of Foyle at Port Vale , was appointed as assistant manager . 
 = = = January = = = 
 The New Year began with a second defeat of the season to Burton , this time being beaten 3 – 1 at home , in which Brodie scored in the first half with a shot from the edge of the penalty area . Wrexham defender Kyle Critchell was signed on a one @-@ month loan , who Foyle knew while he was a coach at the club . Adam Smith returned to Gainsborough following the conclusion of his loan , while a permanent move had been stalled as Gainsborough were holding out for a fee . Progression to the third round of the FA Trophy was ensured with a 2 – 1 away victory over Oxford , with goals from McBreen and Brodie . Further signings from Wrexham took place when striker Simon Brown and midfielder Christian Smith signed on loan and permanently respectively . Hirst was released having failed to break into the first team . Lewes were beaten 3 – 0 at home ; Brodie opened the scoring with a volley into the top corner from outside the penalty area , and Christian Smith scored from thirty yards before Brodie finished the scoring with a low shot into the bottom corner . Henderson was released having fallen out of the reckoning for a first team place . 
 York were knocked out of the Conference League Cup following a 3 – 1 away defeat by Barrow in the Northern section fourth round . Midfielder Levi Mackin was signed on loan from Wrexham until the end of the season . He debuted in York 's 2 – 1 away defeat to Eastbourne Borough , in which Christian Smith scored a header from Brown 's cross . Adam Smith rejoined York from Gainsborough on a permanent contract for an undisclosed fee . His return came as a substitute in York 's 1 – 1 draw away to Altrincham , in which Brodie scored the equalising goal after Shaun Densmore put the home team in the lead . Farrell was loaned out to Oxford for the remainder of the season , as he sought more game time . York drew 1 – 1 away with Kidderminster in the FA Trophy third round , in which Boyes scored his first goal for York , meaning a replay was to be played . 
 = = = February = = = 
 Critchell 's loan at York was extended for a second month , with the fitness of several York defenders in doubt . York were beaten 1 – 0 away by Mansfield , courtesy of a Robert Duffy penalty , in the teams ' fourth encounter of the season . A 13 – 12 penalty shoot @-@ out victory over Kidderminster followed a 1 – 1 extra time draw in an FA Trophy replay ; in normal time , McBreen scored a header from a corner delivered by Simon Rusk before the away team equalised shortly after through Justin Richards . A new record for the most consecutive penalties scored in a shoot @-@ out was set , at twenty @-@ five . McBreen was reported to have signed for North Queensland Fury of the A @-@ League , although the transfer had yet to be confirmed by York . It was confirmed that he would join the Fury for the start of 2009 – 10 in August 2009 . Former Wrexham defender Shaun Pejic signed after a successful trial at the club . York beat Conference South team Havant & Waterlooville 2 – 0 at home in the fourth round of the FA Trophy to secure a place in the semi @-@ final , with both goals scored by McBreen . This was followed by a 2 – 0 away defeat to Rushden in the league . York 's first league victory in a month was a 2 – 0 home win over Weymouth , who were forced to play a weakened team due to their financial situation , and Brodie scored headers in each half . 
 = = = March = = = 
 Ingham made several important saves as York drew 0 – 0 away to Ebbsfleet . The first leg of the FA Trophy semi @-@ final tie against AFC Telford United ended in a 2 – 0 away win , with goals in each half from Rusk and Purkiss . A late goal from Sodje with a shot from the edge of the penalty area earned the team a 1 – 1 draw away to Forest Green Rovers , after Kaid Mohamed had given the home side a first half lead . A 2 – 1 home win over AFC Telford in the second leg of the FA Trophy semi @-@ final , with goals in each half from Brodie and McBreen , saw York progress into 2009 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium with 4 – 1 aggregate victory . This was followed by a 0 – 0 home draw with Kettering in the league . Wilkinson joined divisional rivals Altrincham on loan until the end of the season , having failed to feature in the team since January 2009 . York drew 0 – 0 with play @-@ off contenders Kidderminster at home , which was followed by a 2 – 0 home defeat to Stevenage . 
 = = = April and May = = = 
 York dropped into the relegation zone after a 1 – 0 away defeat to Grays , who themselves moved out of the relegation zone and above York , and this was followed with a 0 – 0 home draw with Oxford . They were beaten 2 – 1 at home by Northwich ; Jonny Allan gave the visitors the lead in the first half and Robinson equalised with a penalty on sixty @-@ eight minutes , before Allan scored a stoppage @-@ time winner for Northwich . This was followed by a 0 – 0 draw away to fellow strugglers Barrow . Before York 's penultimate home match against Eastbourne , Parslow was named the 2008 – 09 Clubman of the Year , voted for by the club 's supporters . A 1 – 0 victory saw York move out of the relegation zone , in what was their first league win in ten matches . It was achieved after McBreen scored from a Purkiss pass in the thirty @-@ fifth minute . A second successive win came at home to Forest Green , who York beat 2 – 1 with second half goals from Boyes and Brodie . 
 A 2 – 1 away victory over Weymouth saw York secure survival from relegation , with their opponents facing relegation as a result . Brodie gave York a fourteenth @-@ minute lead , and after Cliff <unk> equalised for Weymouth late in the first half , Boyes scored the winning goal thirteen minutes from time . York 's last league match was a 1 – 1 away draw with bottom placed Lewes , Greaves scoring on eighty minutes before the home team equalised three minutes from time . This result saw them finish the season seventeenth the table . York were defeated 2 – 0 by Stevenage in the 2009 FA Trophy Final at Wembley , who scored with second half goals from Steve Morison and Lee Boylan . 
 = = Summary and aftermath = = 
 York were in a mid @-@ table position for most of the season , and were as high as fifth in August 2008 , while dropping as low as twenty @-@ second in April 2009 . Their goalscoring record of forty @-@ seven goals scored was the fifth lowest in the division ; whereas , their defensive record of fifty @-@ one goals conceded was better than that of the champions Burton . Parslow made the highest number of appearances during the season , appearing in fifty @-@ seven of York 's fifty @-@ eight matches . Brodie was York 's top scorer in the league and in all competitions , with fifteen league goals and nineteen in total . McBreen was the only other player to reach double figures , with ten goals . 
 After the season ended , York released Greaves , Hogg , McBreen , Pejic , Radcliffe , Robinson , Rusk , Shepherd , Christian Smith and Wilkinson . Boyes , Farrell , Darren Kelly and Sodje left for Scunthorpe , Rushden , Portadown and Barnsley respectively . Brodie , McWilliams , Mimms and Purkiss signed new contracts with the club . Over the summer York signed defenders James Meredith from Shrewsbury Town , Alan O 'Hare from Mansfield and Djoumin Sangaré from Salisbury , midfielders Neil Barrett from Ebbsfleet , Andy Ferrell from Kidderminster , Alex Lawless from Forest Green , Mackin from Wrexham , winger Craig Nelthorpe from Oxford and strikers Michael Gash from Ebbsfleet , Richard Pacquette from Maidenhead United and Michael Rankine from Rushden . Striker Michael Emmerson was promoted from the youth team after he signed a professional contract with the club . 
 = = Match details = = 
 = = = Conference Premier = = = 
 = = = League table ( part ) = = = 
 = = = FA Cup = = = 
 = = = FA Trophy = = = 
 = = = Conference League Cup = = = 
 = = Transfers = = 
 = = = In = = = 
 Brackets around club names denote the player 's contract with that club had expired before he joined York . 
 = = = Out = = = 
 Brackets around club names denote the player joined that club after his York contract expired . 
 = = = Loans in = = = 
 = = = Loans out = = = 
 = = Appearances and goals = = 
 Source : 
 Numbers in parentheses denote appearances as substitute . 
 Players with names struck through and marked left the club during the playing season . 
 Players with names in italics and marked * were on loan from another club for the whole of their season with York . 
 Players listed with no appearances have been in the matchday squad but only as unused substitutes . 
 Key to positions : GK – Goalkeeper ; DF – Defender ; MF – Midfielder ; FW – Forward 
 = Tiruchirappalli = 
 Tiruchirappalli ( <unk> ) ( pronunciation ) ( formerly Trichinopoly in English ) , also called Tiruchi or Trichy , is a city in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu and the administrative headquarters of Tiruchirappalli District . It is the third largest municipal corporation and the third largest urban agglomeration in the state . Located 322 kilometres ( 200 mi ) south of Chennai and 379 kilometres ( 235 mi ) north of Kanyakumari , Tiruchirappalli sits almost at the geographic centre of the state . The Kaveri Delta begins 16 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) west of the city as the Kaveri river splits into two , forming the island of Srirangam , now incorporated into Tiruchirappalli City Municipal Corporation . Occupying 167 @.@ 23 square kilometres ( 64 @.@ 57 sq mi ) , the city was home to 916 @,@ 857 people as of 2011 . 
 Tiruchirappalli 's recorded history begins in the 3rd century BC , when it was under the rule of the Cholas . The city has also been ruled by the Pandyas , Pallavas , Vijayanagar Empire , Nayak Dynasty , the Carnatic state and the British . The most prominent historical monuments in Tiruchirappalli include the Rockfort , the Ranganathaswamy temple at Srirangam and the Jambukeswarar temple at <unk> . The archaeologically important town of Uraiyur , capital of the Early Cholas , is now a suburb of Tiruchirappalli . The city played a critical role in the Carnatic Wars ( 1746 – 1763 ) between the British and the French East India companies . 
 The city is an important educational centre in the state of Tamil Nadu , and houses nationally recognised institutions such as the Indian Institute of Management ( <unk> ) , Indian Institute of Information Technology ( <unk> ) and National Institute of Technology ( <unk> ) . Industrial units such as Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited ( BHEL ) , Golden Rock Railway Workshop and Ordnance Factory Tiruchirappalli ( OFT ) have their factories in Tiruchirappalli . The presence of a large number of energy equipment manufacturing units in and around the city has earned it the title of " Energy equipment and fabrication capital of India " . Tiruchirappalli is internationally known for a brand of cheroot known as the Trichinopoly cigar , which was exported in large quantities to the United Kingdom during the 19th century . 
 A major road and railway hub in the state , the city is served by an international airport which operates flights to Southeast Asia and the Middle East . According to the National Urban Sanitation Policy , Tiruchirappalli was listed as the third @-@ cleanest city in India in 2016 . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 According to Hindu Mythology , the word " Tiruchirappalli " is derived from " Tiru " which is to address someone with respect , " <unk> " is a compound of <unk> - head , palli - to sleep . It is a reference to the deity <unk> who is depicted at rest with his head in a slightly elevated position in the Srirangam Temple , Tiruchirappalli . Telugu scholar C. P. Brown has proposed that Tiruchirappalli might be a derivative of the word <unk> @-@ palli meaning " little town " . Orientalists Henry Yule and Arthur Coke Burnell have speculated that the name may derive from a rock inscription carved in the 16th century in which Tiruchirappalli is written as Tiru @-@ <unk> @-@ palli , meaning " holy @-@ rock @-@ town " in Tamil . Other scholars have suggested that the name Tiruchirappalli is a rewording of Tiru @-@ <unk> @-@ palli , meaning " holy little town " . The Madras Glossary gives the root as <unk> or the " holy ( <unk> ) village ( palli ) of the <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) plant " . 
 Historically , Tiruchirappalli was commonly referred to in English as " Trichinopoly " . The shortened forms " Trichy " or " Tiruchi " are used in common parlance and the full name Tiruchirapalli appears in official use by government and quasi @-@ government departments but seldom by the native people . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early and medieval history = = = 
 Tiruchirappalli is one of the oldest inhabited cities in Tamil Nadu ; its earliest settlements date back to the second millennium BC . Uraiyur , the capital of the Early Cholas for 600 years from the 3rd century BC onwards , is a suburb of present @-@ day Tiruchirappalli . The city is referred to as <unk> by the historian Ptolemy in his 2nd @-@ century work Geography . The world 's oldest surviving dam , the <unk> ( Lower Anaicut ) about 18 kilometres ( 11 mi ) from Uraiyur , was built across the Kaveri River by Karikala Chola in the 2nd century AD . 
 The medieval history of Tiruchirappalli begins with the reign of the Pallava king Mahendravarman I , who ruled over South India in the 6th century AD and constructed the rock @-@ cut cave @-@ temples within the Rockfort . Following the downfall of the Pallavas in the 8th century , the city was conquered by the Medieval Cholas , who ruled until the 13th century . 
 After the decline of the Cholas , Tiruchirappalli was conquered by the Pandyas , who ruled from 1216 until their defeat in 1311 by Malik Kafur , the commander of Allauddin Khilji . The victorious armies of the Delhi Sultanate are believed to have plundered and ravaged the region . The idol of the Hindu god Ranganatha in the temple of Srirangam vanished at about this time and was not recovered and reinstated for more than fifty years . Tiruchirappalli was ruled by the Delhi and Madurai sultanates from 1311 to 1378 , but by the middle of the 14th century the Madurai Sultanate had begun to fall apart . Gradually , the Vijayanagar Empire established supremacy over the northern parts of the kingdom , and Tiruchirappalli was taken by the Vijayanagar prince Kumara Kampanna <unk> in 1371 . The Vijayanagar Empire ruled the region from 1378 until the 1530s , and played a prominent role in reviving Hinduism by reconstructing temples and monuments destroyed by the previous Muslim rulers . Following the collapse of the Vijayanagar Empire in the early part of the 16th century , the Madurai Nayak kingdom began to assert its independence . The city flourished during the reign of <unk> Nayak ( c . 1529 – 1564 ) , who is said to have protected the area by constructing the Teppakulam and building walls around the Srirangam temple . His successor Kumara Krishnappa Nayaka made Tiruchirappalli his capital , and it served as the capital of the Madurai Nayak kingdom from 1616 to 1634 and from 1665 to 1736 . 
 In 1736 the last Madurai Nayak ruler , Meenakshi , committed suicide , and Tiruchirappalli was conquered by Chanda Sahib . He ruled the kingdom from 1736 to 1741 , when he was captured and imprisoned by the Marathas in the siege of Tiruchirappalli ( 1741 ) led by general <unk> Bhonsle under the orders of <unk> <unk> . Chanda Sahib remained prisoner for about eight years before making his escape from the Maratha Empire . Tiruchirappalli was administered by the Maratha general Murari Rao from 1741 to 1743 , when it was acquired by the Nizam of Hyderabad , who bribed Rao to hand over the city . Nizam appointed Khwaja Abdullah as the ruler and returned to Golkonda . When the Nawab of the Carnatic Muhammed Ali Khan Wallajah was dethroned by Chanda Sahib after the Battle of <unk> ( 1749 ) , the former fled to Tiruchirappalli , where he set up his base . The subsequent siege of Tiruchirappalli ( 1751 – 1752 ) by Chanda Sahib took place during the Second Carnatic War between the British East India Company and Muhammed Ali Khan Wallajah on one side and Chanda Sahib and the French East India Company on the other . The British were victorious and Wallajah was restored to the throne . During his reign he proposed renaming the city <unk> after the Sufi saint <unk> Vali , who is thought to have lived there in the 12th century AD . Tiruchirappalli was invaded by Nanjaraja Wodeyar in 1753 and Hyder Ali of the Mysore kingdom in 1780 , both attacks repulsed by the troops of the British East India Company . A third invasion attempt , by Tipu Sultan — son of Hyder Ali — in 1793 , was also unsuccessful ; he was pursued by British forces led by William Medows , who thwarted the attack . 
 = = = British rule = = = 
 The Carnatic kingdom was annexed by the British in July 1801 as a consequence of the discovery of collusion between Tipu Sultan — an enemy of the British — and <unk> Ul @-@ <unk> , son of Wallajah and the Nawab at the time , during the Fourth Anglo @-@ Mysore War . Trichinopoly was incorporated into the Madras Presidency the same year , and the district of Trichinopoly was formed , with the city of Trichinopoly ( or Tiruchirappalli ) as its capital . 
 During the Company Raj and later the British Raj , Tiruchirappalli emerged as one of the most important cities in India . According to the 1871 Indian census — the first in British India — Tiruchirappalli had a population of 76 @,@ 530 , making it the second largest city in the presidency after the capital of Madras . It was known throughout the British Empire for its unique variety of cheroot , known as the Trichinopoly cigar . Tiruchirappalli was the first headquarters for the newly formed South Indian Railway Company in 1874 until its relocation to Madras in the early 20th century . 
 Trichinopoly during the British Raj 
 = = = Contemporary and modern history = = = 
 Tiruchirappalli played an active role during the pre @-@ independence era ; there were a number of strikes and non @-@ violent protests during the Quit India Movement , notably the South Indian Railway Strike that took place in 1928 . The city was the base for the Vedaranyam salt march initiated by C. Rajagopalachari in parallel with the Dandi March in 1930 . Tiruchirappalli was an epicentre of the anti @-@ Hindi agitations of Tamil Nadu when a team of Tamil language supporters gathered and organised a rally from the city to Madras in 1938 . Later in 1965 , Tiruchirappalli was made the base of the " Madras state Anti @-@ Hindi Conference " convened by C. Rajagopalachari . The population of Tiruchirappalli continued to grow rapidly , achieving a growth rate of 36 @.@ 9 % during the period 1941 – 51 . After independence in 1947 , Tiruchirappalli fell behind other cities such as Salem and Coimbatore in terms of growth . Tiruchirappalli remained a part of Madras State , which was renamed Tamil Nadu in 1969 . The city underwent extensive economic development in the 1960s with the commissioning of Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited . In the early 1980s , M. G. Ramachandran , then Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu drafted a plan to move the state 's administrative headquarters to Tiruchirappalli . A satellite town was developed near <unk> on the outskirts of the city , but the proposed move was shelved by successive governments . 
 Like much of Tamil Nadu , Tiruchirappalli remains prone to communal tensions based on religion and ethnicity . There have been occasional outbreaks of violence against Sri Lankans . In 2009 , the offices of a Sri Lankan airline were attacked in the city . In September 2012 , two groups of Sri Lankan pilgrims who had visited the Basilica of Our Lady of Good Health in Velankanni and the <unk> Madha Basilica had their buses attacked in Tiruchirappalli by a group of Tamil activists . Owing to a series of terrorist attacks in Indian cities since 2000 , security has been increased at sites such as Sri Ranganathaswamy Temple . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Tiruchirappalli is situated in central south @-@ eastern India , almost at the geographic centre of the state of Tamil Nadu . The Kaveri Delta begins to form 16 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) west of the city where the river divides into two streams — the Kaveri and the Kollidam — to form the island of Srirangam . By road it is 912 kilometres ( 567 mi ) south of Hyderabad , 322 kilometres ( 200 mi ) south @-@ west of Chennai and 341 kilometres ( 212 mi ) south @-@ east of Bangalore . The topology of Tiruchirappalli is almost flat , with an average elevation of 88 metres ( 289 ft ) . A few isolated hillocks rise above the surface , the highest of which is the Rockfort ; its estimated age of 3 @,@ 800 million years makes it one of the oldest rocks in the world . Other prominent hillocks include the Golden Rock , <unk> , and one each at <unk> Thirumalai and Thiruverumbur . 
 The two major rivers draining Tiruchirappalli are the Kaveri and its tributary the Kollidam , but the city is also drained by the <unk> Channel , <unk> and <unk> river channels . The land immediately surrounding the Kaveri River — which crosses Tiruchirappalli from west to east — consists of deposits of fertile alluvial soil on which crops such as finger millet and maize are cultivated . Further south , the surface is covered by poor @-@ quality black soil . A belt of Cretaceous rock known as the Trichinopoly Group runs to the north @-@ east of the city , and to the south @-@ east there are layers of archaean rocks , granite and gneiss covered by a thin bed of <unk> laterite . The region falls under Seismic Zone III , which is moderately vulnerable to earthquakes . 
 = = = Urban structure = = = 
 The city of Tiruchirappalli lies on the plains between the <unk> Hills to the north and the <unk> Hills to the south and south @-@ west . Tiruchirappalli is completely surrounded by agricultural fields . <unk> populated industrial and residential areas have recently been built in the northern part of the city , and the southern edge also has residential areas . The older part of Tiruchirappalli , within the Rockfort , is unplanned and congested while the adjoining newer sections are better executed . Many of the old houses in Srirangam were constructed according to the <unk> <unk> , the canonical texts of Hindu temple architecture . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Tiruchirappalli experiences a tropical savanna climate — designated " Aw " under the Köppen climate classification — with no major change in temperature between summer and winter . The climate is generally characterised by high temperature and low humidity . With an annual mean temperature of 28 @.@ 9 ° C ( 84 @.@ 0 ° F ) and monthly average temperatures ranging between 25 ° C ( 77 ° F ) and 32 ° C ( 90 ° F ) , the city is the hottest in the state . The warmest months are from April to June , when the city experiences frequent dust storms . As of November 2013 , the highest temperature ever recorded in Tiruchirappalli was 43 @.@ 9 ° C ( 111 @.@ 0 ° F ) , which occurred on 2 May 1896 ; the lowest was observed on 6 February 1884 at 13 @.@ 9 ° C ( 57 @.@ 0 ° F ) . The high temperatures in the city have been attributed to the presence of two rivers — Kaveri and Kollidam — and the absence of greenery around the city . As Tiruchirappalli is on the Deccan Plateau the days are extremely warm and dry ; evenings are cooler because of cold winds that blow from the south @-@ east . From June to September , the city experiences a moderate climate tempered by heavy rain and thundershowers . Rainfall is heaviest between October and December because of the north @-@ east monsoon winds , and from December to February the climate is cool and moist . The average annual rainfall is 841 @.@ 9 mm ( 33 @.@ 15 in ) , slightly lower than the state 's average of 945 mm ( 37 @.@ 2 in ) . Fog and dew are rare and occur only during the winter season . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the 2011 Indian census , Tiruchirappalli had a population of 847 @,@ 387 , 9 @.@ 4 % of whom were under the age of six , living in 214 @,@ 529 families within the municipal corporation limits . The recorded population density was 5 @,@ 768 / km2 ( 14 @,@ 940 / sq mi ) while the sex ratio was 975 males for every 1 @,@ 000 females . The Tiruchirappalli urban agglomeration had a population of 1 @,@ 022 @,@ 518 , and was ranked the fourth largest in Tamil Nadu and the 53rd in India as of 2011 . The city had an average literacy rate of 91 @.@ 37 % , significantly higher than the national average of 73 @.@ 00 % . Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes accounted for 10 @.@ 48 % and 0 @.@ 27 % of the population respectively . There were 228 @,@ 518 people , roughly constituting about 26 @.@ 96 % of the total population , who lived in slums in the city . The daily floating population of the city was estimated at around 250 @,@ 000 . 
 The city 's population is predominantly Hindu . Twenty per cent are Muslims and there is also a considerable Christian population . Sikhs and Jains are present in smaller numbers . Roman Catholics in Tiruchirappalli are affiliated to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Tiruchirapalli while Protestants are affiliated to the Trichy – Tanjore Diocese of the Church of South India . 
 The most widely spoken language are Tamil , , Gujarati , Telugu , Kannada , Malayalam and Hindi speakers . The standard dialect of Tamil spoken is the Central Tamil dialect . Saurashtrian is spoken by the <unk> who migrated from Gujarat in the 16th century . There is also a substantial population of Anglo @-@ Indians , and Sri Lankan Tamil migrants , most of whom are housed in refugee camps on the outskirts of the city . 
 = = Administration and politics = = 
 Covering 18 square kilometres ( 6 @.@ 9 sq mi ) , the municipality of Tiruchirappalli was inaugurated under the Town Improvements Act 1865 on 1 November 1866 ; it originally consisted of two ex @-@ officio and nine nominated members . Council elections were introduced in 1877 and the first chairman was elected in 1889 . The municipality was upgraded to a municipal corporation as per the Tiruchirappalli City Municipal Corporation Act 1994 by inclusion of the erstwhile Srirangam and Golden Rock municipalities . Covering 167 @.@ 23 square kilometres ( 64 @.@ 57 sq mi ) , the municipal corporation comprises 65 wards and four administrative zones ; these are Srirangam , <unk> , Golden Rock and <unk> . 
 Tiruchirappalli City Municipal Corporation Council , the legislative body , comprises 65 councillors elected from each of the 65 wards and is headed by a mayor assisted by a Deputy Mayor . The executive wing has seven departments — general administration , revenue , town planning , engineering , public health , information technology and personnel — and is headed by a City Commissioner . The Commissioner is assisted by two executive engineers for the east and west sections , and Assistant Commissioners for personnel , accounts and revenue departments , a public relations officer , a city engineer , a city health officer and an Assistant Commissioner for each of the four zones . A Local Planning Authority for Tiruchirappalli was created on 5 April 1974 as per the Tamil Nadu Town and Country Planning Act of 1971 with the District Collector of Tiruchirappalli as chairman and the Assistant Director of Town and Country Planning as its member secretary . 
 The city of Tiruchirappalli is represented in the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly by four elected members , one each for the Tiruchirappalli East ( State Assembly Constituency ) , Tiruchirappalli West ( State Assembly Constituency ) , Srirangam and Thiruverumbur constituencies . Jayalalithaa , the chief minister of Tamil Nadu as of 2014 , represents the Srirangam constituency . Tiruchirappalli is also part of the Tiruchirappalli Lok Sabha constituency and once every five years elects a member to the Lok Sabha — the lower house of the Parliament of India . The Lok Sabha seat has been held by the Indian National Congress for four terms ( 1957 – 62 , 1984 – 89 , 1989 – 91 and 1991 – 96 ) , the Communist Party of India ( 1962 – 67 , 1971 – 77 and 1977 – 80 ) and the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( 2001 – 04 , 2009 – 14 and 2014 – present ) for three terms each ) and Bharatiya Janata Party ( 1998 – 99 and 1999 – 2001 ) for two terms each . Candidates from the Communist Party of India , Tamil Maanila Congress and the Marumalarchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam have won once each . Indian politician Rangarajan <unk> , who served as the Minister of Power in the government of Atal Bihari Vajpayee , was elected to the Lok Sabha from Tiruchirappalli in the 1998 and 1999 elections . 
 Law and order are enforced by the Tamil Nadu police , which for administrative purposes has constituted Tiruchirappalli city as a separate district , divided into 18 zonal offices and units , with a total of 38 police stations . The Tiruchirappalli city police force is headed by a Commissioner of police assisted by Deputy Commissioners . Law and order in suburban areas is enforced by the Tiruchirappalli district police . As of 2011 , Tiruchirappalli had a crime rate of 342 @.@ 17 , making it the second highest among cities in Tamil Nadu , but it also had the lowest proportion of rape and murder cases in the state . 
 = = Economy = = 
 During British rule , Tiruchirappalli was known for its tanneries , cigar @-@ manufacturing units and oil presses . At its peak , more than 12 million cigars were manufactured and exported annually . <unk> hides and skins from Tiruchirappalli were exported to the United Kingdom . The city has a number of retail and wholesale markets , the most prominent among them being the Gandhi Market , which also serves people from other parts of the district . Other notable markets in the city are the flower bazaar in Srirangam and the mango market at <unk> Salai . The suburb of <unk> is known for its rice mills , where polished Ponni rice is produced . 
 Tiruchirappalli is a major engineering equipment manufacturing and fabrication hub in India . The Golden Rock Railway Workshop , which moved to Tiruchirappalli from Nagapattinam in 1928 , is one of the three railway workshop – cum – production units in Tamil Nadu . The workshops produced 650 conventional and low @-@ container flat wagons during 2007 – 2008 . 
 A high @-@ pressure boiler manufacturing plant was set up by Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited ( BHEL ) , India 's largest public sector engineering company , in May 1965 . This was followed by a seamless steel plant and a boiler auxiliaries plant . In 2010 , the Tiruchirappalli unit of the company contributed to nearly 30 per cent of its total sales , making it the largest of all units . As of 2011 , the Tiruchirappalli division employed about 10 @,@ 000 people , and is supported by a number of ancillary industries producing almost 250 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 250 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 kg ) of fabricated materials . These ancillary units together with BHEL contribute nearly 60 per cent of India 's steel fabrication , earning the city the title , " Energy equipment and fabrication capital of India " . Other important industries in Tiruchirappalli include Trichy Distilleries and Chemicals Limited ( <unk> ) , which was established at <unk> in the former Golden Rock municipality in 1966 @.@ and the Trichy Steel Rolling Mills , which was started as a private limited company on 27 June 1961 . The Trichy Distilleries and Chemicals Limited manufactures rectified spirit , acetaldehyde , acetic acid , acetic anhydride and ethyl acetate . It is one of the biggest private sector distilleries in Tamil Nadu and produced 13 @.@ 5 megalitres ( 3 @.@ 0 million imperial gallons ) of spirit alcohol between December 2005 and November 2006 . The Ordnance Factories Board runs a weapons manufacturing unit and a Heavy Alloy Penetrator Project ( <unk> ) facility ; the latter was set up in the late 1980s and comprises a flexible manufacturing system ( FMS ) — the first of its kind in India . 
 From the late 1980s , a synthetic gem industry was developed in the city ; the gemstones are cut and polished in Tiruchirappalli district and in <unk> district . In 1990 , the Indian government launched a scheme to increase employment by boosting the production of American diamonds and training local artisans in semi @-@ automated machinery and technology . The local gem industry was reportedly generating annual revenues of ₹ 100 million ( equivalent to ₹ 420 million or US $ 6 @.@ 2 million in 2016 ) by the mid @-@ 1990s . Concerns have been raised over the employment of children aged 9 – 14 in the gem cutting and polishing industry . As a result , in 1996 , Tiruchirappalli district was selected to be involved in the National Child Labour Project and in the running of special schools to educate working children . 
 As of December 2010 , the Tiruchirappalli region annually exports around ₹ 262 @.@ 1 million ( equivalent to ₹ 410 million or US $ 6 @.@ 1 million in 2016 ) of software . The <unk> IT Park — the city 's first IT park — commissioned at a cost of ₹ 600 million ( equivalent to ₹ 940 million or US $ 14 million in 2016 ) was inaugurated in December 2010 . Set up by the Electronics Corporation of Tamil Nadu , the park occupies an area of 59 @.@ 74 hectares ( 147 @.@ 6 acres ) and constitutes a Special Economic Zone . 
 = = Culture = = 
 A resident of Tiruchirappalli is generally referred to as a <unk> . Situated at the edge of the Kaveri Delta , the culture of Tiruchirappalli is predominantly Brahminical , prevalent elsewhere in the delta . With a substantial population of students and migrant industrial workers from different parts of India , Tiruchirappalli has a more cosmopolitan outlook than the surrounding countryside . The main festival celebrated in Tiruchirappalli is Pongal , a regional harvest festival celebrated during January . As part of the Pongal celebrations , Jallikattu , a bull @-@ taming village sport played on the last day of the festival , is occasionally held on the outskirts of the city . Aadi <unk> , <unk> flower festival , Vaikunta <unk> , Srirangam car festival , and the Teppakulam float festival are some of the prominent festivals that are held locally . Bakrid and Eid al @-@ Fitr are also widely celebrated , owing to the substantial number of Muslims in the city . Nationwide festivals such as the Gregorian New Year , Christmas , Deepavali and Holi are also celebrated in Tiruchirappalli . 
 The 12th century Tamil epic <unk> was first recited at the Ranganathaswamy temple in Srirangam . In 1771 , Rama <unk> , a musical drama written Arunachala Kavi and based on the Ramayana , was also performed there . Tiruchirappalli was home to some of the prominent Carnatic musicians — including <unk> Jayaraman , Srirangam Kannan and A. K. C. Natarajan — and scholars such as T. S. Murugesan Pillai , <unk> <unk> and K. A. P. <unk> . Composers , poets and vocalists such as G. Ramanathan , T. K. Ramamoorthy , Vaali and P. Madhuri , who have made significant contributions to Tamil film music hail from the city . 
 Textile weaving , leather @-@ work and gem cutting are some of the important crafts practised in Tiruchirappalli . Wooden idols of Hindu gods and goddesses are sold at Poompuhar , the crafts emporium run by the Government of Tamil Nadu . The Trichy Travel Federation ( <unk> ) was formed on 5 May 2009 to promote Tiruchirappalli as a favourable tourist destination . The federation organises an annual food festival called <unk> . Lack of infrastructure has been a major deterrent to the city 's tourism industry . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 Once a part of the Chola kingdom , Tiruchirappalli has a number of exquisitely sculpted temples and fortresses . Most of the temples , including the Rockfort temples , the Ranganathaswamy Temple at Srirangam , the Jambukeswarar Temple at <unk> , the <unk> Mariamman Temple , the Erumbeeswarar Temple , <unk> temple in <unk> and the temples in Urayur , are built in the Dravidian style of architecture ; the Ranganathaswamy Temple and Jambukeswarar Temple are often counted among the best examples of this style . The rock @-@ cut cave temples of the Rockfort , along with the gateway and the Erumbeeswarar Temple , are listed as monuments of national importance by the Archaeological Survey of India . 
 Considered one of the symbols of Tiruchirappalli , the Rockfort is a fortress which stands atop a 273 @-@ foot @-@ high rock . It consists of a set of monolithic rocks accommodating many rock @-@ cut cave temples . Originally built by the Pallavas , it was later reconstructed by the Madurai Nayaks and Vijayanagara rulers . The temple complex has three shrines , two of which are dedicated to Lord Ganesha , one at the foot and the <unk> <unk> Temple at the top , and the <unk> Temple between them . The <unk> temple , the largest of the three , houses a shrine for <unk> as well as the main deity . The Rockfort is visible from almost every part of the city 's north . The Teppakulam at the foot of the Rockfort is surrounded by bazaars . It has a mandapa at its centre and has facilities for boat riding . 
 The Ranganathaswamy Temple , dedicated to the Hindu god Vishnu , is located on the island of Srirangam . Often cited as the largest functioning Hindu temple in the world , it has a perimeter of 4 @,@ 116 metres ( 13 @,@ 504 ft ) and occupies 156 acres ( 630 @,@ 000 m2 ) . Considered to be among the 108 Divya Desams ( Holy shrines of Lord Vishnu ) , the temple is believed to house the mortal remains of the Vaishnavite saint and philosopher Ramanujacharya . Originally built by the Cholas , the temple was later renovated by the Pandyas , the Hoysalas , the Madurai Nayaks and the Vijayanagar empire between the 9th and 16th centuries AD . There are 21 gopurams ( towers ) , of which the Rajagopuram is 236 feet ( 72 m ) . According to the Limca Book of Records , it was the tallest temple tower in the world until 1999 . 
 The Jambukeswarar Temple at <unk> and the Erumbeeswarar Temple at Thiruverumbur were built in the rule of the Medieval Cholas . The Jambukeswarar Temple is one of the Pancha Bhoota Stalams dedicated to Lord Shiva ; it is the fifth largest temple complex in Tamil Nadu . The city 's main mosque is the Nadir Shah Mosque or <unk> Shah mosque , which encloses the tomb of the 10th century Muslim saint Nadir Shah . The Christ Church constructed by the German Protestant missionary Christian Friedrich Schwarz in 1766 and the Our Lady of Lourdes Church are noted examples of Gothic Revival architecture in the city . 
 The Chokkanatha Nayak Palace , which houses the Rani <unk> Mahal , was built by the Madurai Nayaks in the 17th century ; it has now been converted into a museum . The Nawab 's palace , the Railway Heritage Centre , the Upper Anaicut constructed by Sir Arthur Cotton , and the world 's oldest functional dam , the Grand Anaicut , are some of the other important structures in Tiruchirappalli . 
 = = Education = = 
 Tiruchirappalli has been recognised in India as an important educational centre since the time of British rule . St. Joseph 's College , which opened in Nagapattinam in 1846 and transferred to Tiruchirappalli in 1883 , is one of the oldest educational institutions in South India . The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel ( SPG ) college , established in 1883 , is a premium missionary institution in the city . 
 As of 2013 , Tiruchirappalli has 45 arts and science colleges , 40 polytechnic colleges and 13 colleges that offer management education . The St. Joseph 's College , National College , Bishop Heber College , Jamal Mohamed College and the Government Law College are prominent colleges providing higher education in the arts and sciences . There are approximately 35 engineering colleges in and around the city . The National Institutes of Technology , established by the government in 1964 as the Regional Engineering College , is one of the top engineering colleges in India . 
 The <unk> <unk> Agricultural College and Research Institute was established as a constituent college of Tamil Nadu Agricultural University in 1989 , and the National Research Centre for Banana offer higher education and research in agriculture . The Tiruchirappalli branch of Anna University was established after the bifurcation of Anna University in 2007 . 64 self @-@ financing colleges which offer courses in engineering , architecture , management and computer applications in the districts of Ariyalur , Cuddalore , Nagapattinam , Perambalur , Pudukkottai , Thanjavur and Tiruvarur are affiliated to Anna University . The SRM Group of Colleges established the SRM Institute of Science and Technology at <unk> near Tiruchirappalli ; this was followed by Chennai Medical College and Hospital in 2007 . A proposal by the group to include the institutions in SRM University is under review by the Ministry of Human Resources Development of the Government of India . 
 The Bharathidasan University was established in Tiruchirappalli in 1982 and controls 104 colleges in Tiruchirappalli district and seven neighbouring districts . The university also runs a management school , the Bharathidasan Institute of Management in the city in collaboration with BHEL . The Indian Institute of Management Tiruchirappalli was set up during the Eleventh Five @-@ Year Plan , along with five other IIMs opened during the 2011 – 12 academic season . In 2013 , the Ministry of Human Resource Development ( <unk> ) approved Indian Institute of Information Technology ( <unk> ) , and the Tamil Nadu National Law School , modelled on the National Law School of India University , both started their operations in the city . 
 There are 200 higher secondary schools in Tiruchirappalli ; notable ones are the Campion Anglo @-@ Indian Higher Secondary School , St Joseph 's Anglo Indian Girls Higher Secondary School , St. Johns Vestry Anglo Indian Higher Secondary School , Railway Mixed Higher Secondary School , Higher Secondary School for Boys , Srirangam and RSK Higher Secondary School . 
 Notable people who were either born or educated at Tiruchirappalli include scientists C. V. Raman , A. P. J. Abdul Kalam , Sujatha Rangarajan , Vaali , G. N. Ramachandran , and former President of India R. Venkataraman . 
 = = Sports and recreation = = 
 Hockey and cricket are the most popular sports in Tiruchirappalli . Former Indian hockey goalkeepers Charles Cornelius and Leslie Fernandez , and <unk> Sathish , who represent the Mumbai Indians in the Indian Premier League , all hail from the city . The Anna Stadium complex is the main venue for sports in the city ; it hosts an indoor stadium and an astro turf hockey ground . The stadium complex also includes a football ground , an athletic track , a swimming pool , a gymnasium , a badminton court and a hostel for the athletes . The Tiruchirappalli District Cricket Association ( <unk> ) is one of the constituents of the Tamil Nadu Cricket Association , and regulates school , college and club cricket in the district . First class cricket matches were held at the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium — formerly the <unk> Stadium . At the association 's golden jubilee celebrations in 2008 – 09 , plans for the establishment of another cricket stadium and an academy in the outskirts of Tiruchirappalli city were mooted . The <unk> Cricket Academy is one of the noted cricket coaching academies in Tiruchirappalli . Domestic association football , tennis and volleyball tournaments are held in and around the city . Tiruchirappalli hosted the Federation Cup , a knockout @-@ style club football tournament in 1984 and an open chess tournament organised by FIDE in 2006 . 
 The city has a few sources of entertainment . Parks that are monitored by the corporation suffer from maintenance issues . The Trichinopoly Club or Trichy Club was established in Tiruchirappalli Cantonment in 1869 . The club was disbanded in 1972 and its assets were taken over by the Madras Club . The P. T. Rajan Park , <unk> Park , <unk> Park , Raja Park , <unk> <unk> Park and Ibrahim Park are some of the important government @-@ run parks in the city . Of these , the Raja Park and Ibrahim Park are frequented by children . There have been plans to set up a zoological park at M. R. <unk> on the outskirts of the city . Once completed , the zoo is expected to house about 500 animals belonging to 50 different species . The Anna Science Centre in Tiruchirappalli has one of the two planetaria in the state . 
 The <unk> <unk> Sabha , founded in 1914 , is the only popular venue for arts and cultural events in the city . According to the Limca Book of Records , the Maris theatre complex in Tiruchirappalli runs the highest number of regular film shows in the world as of 2001 . The <unk> theatre is another notable cinema in Tiruchirappalli . There are a few shopping malls in the city , the Femina Shopping Mall and the Spencer 's Shopping Mall being the most prominent . 
 = = Media = = 
 According to the Registrar of Newspapers in India , more than 100 newspapers have been registered in Tiruchirappalli as of November 2013 . The weekly newspaper Wednesday Review , founded in 1905 , is the first prominent journal to be published in Tiruchirappalli . Among the major English @-@ language newspapers being published in Tiruchirappalli are The Hindu which launched a Tiruchirappalli edition in 2004 , and The New Indian Express , which was publishing in Tiruchirappalli before The Hindu . Some of the important Tamil @-@ language newspapers that publish a Tiruchirappalli edition are Dina Thanthi Dina Mani , Dina Malar , Malai Malar , Dinakaran , Tamil Murasu and Tamil Sudar . The popular Tamil weekly Ananda Vikatan launched a local supplement for Tiruchirappalli in 2011 . 
 The first radio transmission station in Tiruchirappalli was opened by All India Radio ( AIR ) on 16 May 1939 . AIR started providing direct @-@ to @-@ home enabled radio broadcasting service from 2006 . In 2007 , the AIR launched Ragam , a separate Carnatic music station , from the city . Apart from the government @-@ owned AIR , private FM radio stations such as Hello FM and Suryan FM broadcast from Tiruchirappalli . Indira Gandhi National Open University 's Gyan Vani started broadcasting from the city in 2008 . Tiruchirappalli 's first campus community radio station was started by Holy Cross College on 22 December 2006 . 
 Television broadcasting from Chennai was started on 15 August 1975 . Satellite television channels have been available since 1991 . Direct @-@ to @-@ home cable television services are provided by DD Direct Plus and Sun Direct DTH . 
 = = Utility services = = 
 Electricity supply to the city is regulated and distributed by the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board ( TNEB ) . Tiruchirappalli is the headquarters of the Trichy region of TNEB . The city and its suburbs form the Trichy Metro Electricity Distribution Circle , which is subdivided into six divisions . A chief distribution engineer is stationed at the regional headquarters at <unk> . Water supply is provided by the Tiruchirappalli City Corporation . The city gets its drinking water supply from the Kaveri River and 1 @,@ 470 bore wells linked to 60 service reservoirs in and around the city . Four of the six head works from which the city gets its water supply are maintained by the municipal corporation and the rest by other agencies . 
 Pollution has been a major concern in Tiruchirappalli . The Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board has set up five stations in the city to check the quality of air . As of 2012 , about 432 tonnes ( 432 @,@ 000 kg ) of solid waste are produced in the city every day . Solid waste management in the city is handled by the corporation ; places such as the Gandhi Market , Central Bus terminus and the <unk> bus terminus are being monitored by other agencies . The principal landfill is at <unk> . Waste water management in the Trichy @-@ Srirangam underground drainage ( <unk> ) areas is handled by the Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage Board ( <unk> ) and in other areas by the Tiruchirappalli Municipal Corporation . As of 2013 , there were a total of 40 @,@ 580 <unk> connections maintained by the municipal corporation . The high toxicity of the waste water released by the Trichy Distilleries and Chemicals Limited ( <unk> ) is a major cause of concern for the corporation . The corporation 's annual expenditure for the year 2010 – 11 was estimated to be ₹ 1 @,@ 559 @.@ 4 million ( equivalent to ₹ 2 @.@ 2 billion or US $ 33 million in 2016 ) . In 2013 , researchers from Bharathidasan University assessed water quality in the Tiruchirappalli area and concluded that although the quality of the groundwater was suitable for human consumption , the quality of the pond water in the city was " not fit for human usage , agricultural or industrial purposes " . 
 Under the National Urban Sanitation Policy , Tiruchirappalli was ranked sixth in India and first in Tamil Nadu on the basis of sanitation for the year 2009 – 10 . In January 2010 , Tiruchirappalli became the first city in India where open defecation was prevented in all its slums . In a 2016 survey conducted by the Ministry of Urban Development , as a part of the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan campaign , Tiruchirappalli was ranked third in the list of cleanest cities in India . 
 Tiruchirappalli comes under the Tiruchi Telecom District of the Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited ( BSNL ) , India 's state @-@ owned telecom and internet services provider . There are about 20 @,@ 000 business telephone subscribers in the city . Both Global System for Mobile Communications ( GSM ) and Code division multiple access ( CDMA ) mobile services are available . BSNL also provides broadband internet services . BSNL began offering wireless internet services with the commencement of Evolution @-@ Data <unk> ( <unk> ) transmission in 2008 . Tiruchirappalli is one of the few cities in India where BSNL 's Caller Line Identification ( CLI ) -based internet service Netone is available . <unk> ( <unk> ) , Tata VSNL , Bharti and Reliance are other major broadband internet service providers in the city . 
 Tiruchirappalli has a passport office , the second in Tamil Nadu , which commenced its operations on 23 March 1983 . The office also caters to the needs of seven adjacent districts namely , Karur , Nagappattinam , Perambalur , Pudukkottai , Thanjavur , Ariyalur and Tiruvarur . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Healthcare = = = 
 Healthcare in Tiruchirappalli is mainly provided by government @-@ run and private hospitals . The CSI Mission General Hospital at Uraiyur is one of the oldest in the city . The Divisional Railway Hospital at Golden Rock , which was established by the then South Indian Railway in 1927 , caters exclusively to railway staff of the entire Tiruchirappalli Railway Division , which spreads over 10 districts . The Mahatma Gandhi Government Hospital — attached to the <unk> Government Medical College — and Srirangam Government Hospital offer low @-@ cost facilities . Major private hospitals that serve Tiruchirappalli include <unk> Medical Centre and Hospital ( <unk> ) , the 750 @-@ bed Chennai Medical College Hospital and Research Centre and Apollo Specialty Hospital . 
 Vasan Healthcare , a rapidly growing healthcare chain , is based in Tiruchirappalli . Tiruchirappalli has 29 nursing homes approved by the Department of Health and Family Welfare . As of 2011 , there are 133 hospitals in the city , including 10 maternity homes and two urban family welfare centres maintained by the municipal corporation . Tiruchirappalli is a hub for low @-@ cost medical tourism in central Tamil Nadu . The doctors of Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Government Hospital ( <unk> ) conducted a risky surgery on Parasitic twins to remove their extra limbs on . 
 = = = Transport = = = 
 The most commonly used modes of local transport in Tiruchirappalli are the state government @-@ owned Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation ( TNSTC ) buses , and auto rickshaws . Tiruchirappalli forms a part of the Kumbakonam division of the TNSTC . The city has two major bus termini ; <unk> Bus Stand and Central Bus Stand , both of which operate intercity services and local transport to suburban areas . 
 Tiruchirappalli sits at the confluence of two major National Highways — NH 45 and NH 67 . NH 45 is one of the most congested highways in south India and carries almost 10 @,@ 000 lorries on the Tiruchirappalli – Chennai stretch every night . Other National Highways originating in the city are NH 45B , NH 210 and NH 227 . State highways that start from the city include SH 25 and SH 62 . Tiruchirappalli has 715 @.@ 85 km ( 444 @.@ 81 mi ) of road maintained by the municipal corporation . A semi @-@ ring road connecting all the National Highways is being constructed to ease traffic congestion in the city . As of 2013 , approximately 328 @,@ 000 two @-@ wheelers , 93 @,@ 500 cars and 10 @,@ 000 public transport vehicles operate with in the city limits , apart from the 1 @,@ 500 inter @-@ city buses that pass through Tiruchirappalli daily . Tiruchirappalli suffers from traffic congestion mainly because of its narrow roads and absence of an integrated bus station . 
 Passenger trains also carry a significant number of passengers from nearby towns . The Great Southern of India Railway Company was established in 1853 with its headquarters at England . In 1859 , the company constructed its first railway line connecting Tiruchirappalli and Nagapattinam . The company merged with the Carnatic Railway Company in 1874 to form the South Indian Railway Company with Tiruchirappalli as its headquarters . The city retained the position until 1908 when the company 's headquarters was transferred to Madras . Tiruchirappalli Junction is the second biggest railway station in Tamil Nadu and one of the busiest in India . It constitutes a separate division of the Southern Railway . Tiruchirappalli has rail connectivity with most important cities and towns in India . Other railway stations in the city include Tiruchirappalli Fort , Tiruchirappalli Town , Srirangam , <unk> and Golden Rock . 
 Tiruchirappalli is served by Tiruchirappalli International Airport ( IATA : <unk> , ICAO : <unk> ) , 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) from the city centre . The airport handles fivefold more international air traffic than domestic services , making it the only airport in India with this huge variation . It serves as a gateway to immigrants from South @-@ east Asian countries There are regular flights to Abu Dhabi , Chennai , Colombo , Dubai , Kuala Lumpur , Mumbai and Singapore . The airport handled more than 1 million passengers and 2012 tonnes of cargo during the fiscal year 2013 – 14 . 
 = Monica Geller = 
 Monica E. Geller is a fictional character , one of the six main characters who appear in the American sitcom Friends . Created by show creators David Crane and Marta Kauffman , and portrayed by actress Courteney Cox , Monica appears in each of the show 's 236 episodes , from its premiere on September 24 , 1994 to its finale on May 6 , 2004 . A chef known for her cleanliness , competitiveness and obsessive @-@ compulsive nature , Monica is the younger sister of Ross and best friend of Rachel , the latter of whom she invites to move in with her after Rachel forsakes her own wedding . The two characters spend several years living together as roommates until Monica becomes romantically involved with neighbor Chandler , whom she marries . Unable to conceive children on their own , the couple eventually adopts twins and moves out of their apartment into a larger house in the suburbs to raise their growing family . 
 The creators ' first choice for the role of Monica was comedian Janeane Garofalo . Cox had originally been offered the role of Rachel , but declined in favor of playing the character 's best friend Monica because she was drawn to her strong personality . Meanwhile , the role of Rachel went to actress Jennifer Aniston , Cox 's co @-@ star to whom the role of Monica had originally been offered . Before Friends aired , Monica 's characterization was greatly debated among writers in regards to the character sleeping with a man on their first date during the pilot . Kauffman in particular greatly defended Monica , arguing with NBC executive Don Ohlmeyer over whether or not this would make the character too promiscuous . Ultimately , the episode aired unchanged after the studio surveyed the audience , the results of which returned in favor of Monica 's existing storyline . The character 's struggles with childhood obesity , challenges with romantic relationships and complicated relationship with her mother would each become popular staples of the show . 
 Several months before Friends premiered , NBC conducted a research report , the results of which determined that Monica was the only character to have been remotely well received by test audiences . When Friends first aired , critics initially perceived Monica – who was immediately established as the show 's " mother hen " – and Cox as the series ' main character and star , respectively . Critics have been largely receptive towards both Cox and her character ; the Los Angeles Times holds Cox 's acting responsible for disproving the stigma that attractive women are incapable of comedic performances . Revered as a television icon , Monica famously addressed several topics that were rarely discussed in prime time television at the time , including safe sex , casual sex and age disparity in relationships . Despite garnering positive reviews for her performance , Cox remains the only main cast member to have never been nominated for an Emmy Award during Friends ' ten @-@ year run . In addition to being widely recognized as one of the most famous fictional chefs , Monica 's Greenwich Village apartment , one of the series main locations , is considered to be among television 's most famous sets . 
 = = Role = = 
 A hardworking Monica is introduced in the pilot as one of five close @-@ knit friends who live in New York City , including her older brother Ross ( David Schwimmer ) , neighbors Joey ( Matt Leblanc ) and Chandler ( Matthew Perry ) , and former roommate Phoebe ( Lisa Kudrow ) . When her privileged , inexperienced childhood best friend Rachel ( Jennifer Aniston ) , with whom she had long lost contact , suddenly arrives in her neighborhood unannounced as a runaway bride after abandoning her own wedding , Monica allows her to move in with her while she attempts to reorganize her life , and the two reconnect . 
 Monica begins dating Dr. Richard Burke ( Tom Selleck ) , an older man who is also one of her father 's best friends and 21 years her senior . However , the couple mutually agrees to end their long @-@ running relationship after realizing that Richard does not want children , while Monica aspires to eventually raise a family of her own one day . While in England attending Ross ' second wedding , to Emily ( Helen Baxendale ) , Monica sleeps with Chandler . Initially supposed to have been a casual , one @-@ time thing which grew more recurrent , Monica and Chandler eventually develop feelings for each other , but attempt to conceal it from their friends for as long as possible . After finally revealing their relationship to their friends , who are delighted by the news , Monica proposes to Chandler , and they marry . 
 After several failed attempts to conceive a child of their own , Monica and Chandler discover that they are both infertile , and ultimately settle upon adoption as an alternative , deciding to adopt the yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ born child of expectant single mother Erica ( Anna Faris ) . The couple is very much surprised when Erica gives birth to twins , and name the boy Jack after Monica 's father , and the girl Erica after her birth mother . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 Television writers David Crane and Marta Kauffman originally pitched Friends as a show about " that special time in your life when your friends are your family " to then @-@ NBC president Warren Littlefield shortly after their short @-@ lived sitcom Family Album was canceled by CBS . Inspired by their own experiences as young adults living in New York City , the writers loosely based the six main characters on some of their own friends and family ; Monica is based on Kauffman herself . Observing that each main character was originally written as a " one @-@ note stereotype " , Jonathan Bernstein of The Daily Telegraph identified Monica as the group 's " uptight fun @-@ killer " . When Friends first aired , the majority of its earliest episodes revolved around Monica , via whom each character appears to be interconnected ; Friends stars the character 's brother , her best friend , her former roommate and her two neighbors socializing in Monica 's apartment . 
 In the pilot , Monica is dumped almost immediately after sleeping with her new date Paul on the night of their first date . Monica is tricked into bed with him after Paul lies to her about his sex life , falsely alleging that he has not slept with anyone in the two years since his wife left him . At first , NBC executives worried that audiences would react to Monica 's role unfavorably , thus they decided to survey the studio audience and ask them whether or not they thought that having Monica sleep with someone on their first date made her character too promiscuous . Don Ohlmeyer , then @-@ president of NBC 's west coast division , was particularly adamant about his stance against Monica 's role in the pilot , which he considered " casual sex " , and created a " stacked " questionnaire asking audience members if they thought Monica was a whore . Kauffman recalled Ohlmeyer specifically expressing that Monica deserved to be dumped , a statement by which the writer was greatly offended , dismissing Ohlmeyer as a misogynist . Ultimately , the results returned in favor of Monica ; audiences liked the character nonetheless , and the episode aired unchanged . 
 Early in the series , Monica 's apartment is established as one of the show 's two primary locations . In the pilot , the apartment number is 5 , which was changed to 20 in subsequent episodes after the writers determined that Monica actually lived on a much higher floor . Season three 's " The One Where No One 's Ready " takes place entirely in Monica 's apartment because the show 's budget was not large enough to accommodate additional sets or guest stars at that time . In the series finale , Phoebe certifies that each character shared Monica 's apartment at least one point during their lives . 
 = = = = Relationship with Chandler Bing = = = = 
 Andrew Harrison of The New Republic believes that the writers deliberately broke up any main character who was approaching a borderline life @-@ changing relationship because " The ones the Friends were really meant to be with were , after all , the other Friends " . Because Monica and Joey were initially conceived as the show 's two most sexual characters , Crane and Kauffman had originally intended for them to be the show 's main couple , before ultimately replacing them with Ross and Rachel . The idea of Monica and Joey was abandoned once the role of Joey was cast ; actor Matt LeBlanc approached his character using much more of a " big brother vibe " in terms of Joey 's relationship with Cox 's character as opposed to a romantic one , which the writers ultimately preferred . According to Allison <unk> of Bustle , Monica and Joey 's relationship would have greatly altered the trajectory of the entire series , having life @-@ changing effects on its characters . Summarizing the role of Monica in the series , Martin Gitlin wrote in his book The Greatest <unk> of All Time that while her friends " were ... just out to make the most of their social lives " , Monica " sought to keep the others in line " while searching for " Mr. Right " , who surprisingly turns out to be close friend Chandler . Several years before Monica and Chandler became romantically involved , Cox once joked in an interview that if her character were to ever have sex with another main character , it would most likely be Chandler . Crane and Kauffman had never intended to pair off Monica and Chandler with each other , and only decided to expand upon the idea of a relationship between the two friends upon realizing that viewers had " fallen in love " with the notion of Monica and Chandler as a couple . According to Robert Bianco of USA Today , " Their affair came out of the blue and was supposed to quickly return there — but something in the relationship clicked with viewers . " The idea of Monica and Chandler 's romantic arc originally surfaced much earlier in the series from writers Scott Silveri and Shana Goldberg @-@ Meehan , who first observed the characters ' chemistry in the season two episode " The One Where Ross Finds Out " , in which an idle and unemployed Monica is temporarily acting as Chandler 's personal trainer . However , Silveri 's suggestion was initially vetoed by the other writers , who felt that it was simply too soon to introduce another main couple to Friends having just recently paired off Ross and Rachel . Following Ross and Rachel 's break up in season three , the writers felt that the timing was just about right to officially introduce Monica and Chandler as a couple , deciding that Friends " can 't simply rest on this one [ Ross and Rachel ] relationship " , while believing that Monica and Chandler 's would ultimately provide a fun opportunity for the writers to explore brand new storylines . 
 Silveri and Goldberg @-@ Meehan deliberately intended to keep Monica and Chandler 's union " low @-@ key " in order to further differentiate it from Ross and Rachel 's , which had been very public . In order to get an idea how audiences would react to Monica and Chandler hooking up at Ross and Emily 's wedding in London , the scene in which a clearly nude Monica suddenly emerges from under the sheets of Chandler 's hotel bed was filmed in front of three separate test audiences , each of whom responded very enthusiastically to the surprise , several months before the episode was actually taped . Despite the warm reception received from the audience , Silveri and Goldberg @-@ Meehan were at first uncertain as to whether or not they should continue expanding upon their relationship even further , and proceeded with caution by having Monica and Chandler initially keep their relationship hidden from their peers . Protective of their characters , Cox and Perry shared similar hesitations at first , but ultimately grew to accept Monica and Chandler as a couple . The characters ' relationship is eventually revealed to their friends in the episode " The One Where Everybody Finds Out " . While each character very much approves of their union , Monica 's parents initially resent their daughter 's feelings for Chandler due to an age @-@ old misunderstanding involving Chandler . 
 Bianco observed that " On most shows , linking two main characters like Monica and Chandler would have been an act of desperation . " However , " On Friends , it was a stroke of genius that made both characters more appealing while providing a needed diversion from the show 's central task : Retaining a romantic equilibrium between Ross and Rachel . " Monica and Chandler 's relationship is the antithesis of Ross and Rachel 's because it remained " healthy and strong until the series ended " , while the other couple was relentlessly on @-@ and @-@ off . Encyclopedia of Television author Horace Newcomb believes that Monica 's feelings for Chandler are responsible for curing the latter 's fear of commitment . Similarly , Slate writer Ruth Graham observed that " Chandler is painted as a self @-@ loathing loser with women , until he finally snags Monica at the end of Season 4 . " Meanwhile , Silveri believes that Friends ultimately ran as long as it did due in part to Monica and Chandler 's romance , explaining , " if the center of Friends had remained Ross and Rachel , you would 've seen a much shorter shelf life for the show " ; Monica and Chandler 's arc is believed to have extended the series by approximately three years . Crane and Kauffman had always intended to give Monica and Chandler a child . When it finally came time for them to write the finale , the idea of the couple adopting newborn twins was conceived at the last minute simply " for fun " . The birth of Monica and Chandler 's twins serves as sone of the finale 's main plots . They were named Jack and Erica – after Monica 's father and their birth mother , respectively . – The twins are born three minutes and forty @-@ six seconds apart . Although the surprise addition of Monica and Chandler 's twins was generally well received , critics questioned the fact that the babies are brought home from the hospital the same day as their delivery 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Monica is portrayed by American actress Courteney Cox . Crane and Kauffman had originally written the role of Monica for comedian Janeane Garofalo , their first choice , because they were attracted to her " edgier and <unk> " voice . However , Garofalo ultimately turned down the offer . Actress Jamie Gertz was also offered the role but declined , while actress Leah Remini auditioned for Monica before ultimately being cast as Carrie Heffernan in the sitcom The King of Queens in 1998 ; Remini would eventually guest star in an episode of Friends . Before being cast as Monica in Friends , Cox was best known for appearing in singer Bruce Springsteen 's " Dancing in the Dark " music video ; within the television industry for her recurring role as Lauren Miller , Alex P. Keaton 's girlfriend , on the sitcom Family Ties ; and Melissa Robinson in the comedy film Ace Ventura : Pet Detective ( 1994 ) , opposite Jim Carrey . After guest starring on the sitcom Seinfeld as Meryl , main character Jerry Seinfeld 's girlfriend , the producers offered Cox the role of Monica 's spoiled best friend Rachel because the actress " had this cheery , upbeat energy " , which was significantly different than how they had envisioned Monica at the time . Feeling she was not " quirky " enough to portray Rachel , Cox lobbied in favor of playing Monica instead because she was drawn to the character 's " strong " personality , but the producers feared that she was not " tough " enough for the role , which was offered to actress Jennifer Aniston , alongside whom Cox would eventually co @-@ star . Meanwhile , a close competitor for the role was actress Nancy McKeon ; Littlefield recalled having greatly enjoyed both actress ' auditions equally , and left the final decision up to Crane and Kauffman . Ultimately , Cox won the role over McKeon because the creators noticed " something fresh " in her audition ; Kauffman elaborated that Cox ultimately " brought a whole bunch of other colors " to Monica than what they had first envisioned back when they were considering Garofalo for the part . Meanwhile , Aniston ultimately won the role of Rachel . 
 Each main cast member auditioned for Friends having had some degree of prior sitcom experience . Before finally being cast in Friends , Cox 's burgeoning success as an actress had heavily relied on her physical appearance . Unlike her previous roles in projects such as Family Ties and Ace Ventura : Pet Detective , the Los Angeles Times Steve Weinstein believes that Monica was the first major role in which Cox was cast based on her abilities as a comedic actress as opposed to her beauty . Cox believes that she owes winning the role to her brief stint as Gabriella <unk> on the short @-@ lived sitcom The Trouble With Larry , which she considers to be the first time she played a character who " was the funny one " , which in turn earned the actress a recommendation for Friends following its cancellation . When Friends premiered , Cox was the show 's most famous main cast member among a cast of young , relatively unknown actors , and was thus initially perceived by critics and audiences as the show 's star , despite Crane and Kauffman 's efforts to promote Friends as an ensemble comedy . According to actress Lisa Kudrow , who portrays Phoebe , Cox is responsible for suggesting that the entire cast work together as a team . As the most experienced cast member at the time , Cox advised her co @-@ stars to remain open to each other 's ideas , notes and suggestions , while giving them permission to tell her " If I could do anything funnier " . Preferring to be treated as equals , the entire cast negotiated for universal salaries , demanding that Warner Bros. accommodate their request of $ 100 @,@ 000 per episode in season three , increased from their original inaugural season salary of $ 22 @,@ 000 per episode . At one point , the actors went as far as threatening to boycott their own show should their demands be denied , temporarily refusing to renew their expired contracts . The studio eventually complied , and by season 10 each actor was being paid $ 1 million per episode , making Cox and her female co @-@ stars the highest @-@ paid television actresses of all time . 
 Cox was 30 years old at the time she was cast , making her the show 's oldest main cast member , and was 39 by the beginning of Friends ' final season . Additionally , this distinction makes Cox older than her on @-@ screen brother , actor David Schwimmer , who portrays her older brother Ross , who is one year her senior . The actress would deliver Monica 's lines emphatically . Although each character is depicted as an avid coffee drinker , spending much of their free time in a coffee house , Cox herself does not drink coffee , and was only pretending to drink it out of mugs on the show . Kauffman believes that Cox 's own cleanliness closely resembles her character 's ; at times the actress would clean her co @-@ stars ' dressing rooms . Cox also shares the character 's motherly nature . The actress enjoyed portraying Monica she was able to " bring more of my own personality to her , and I 've never really been able to do that before . " Starpulse.com observed that " As Monica , Cox never quite enjoyed the sort of watercooler storylines that co @-@ star ... Jennifer Aniston had with David Schwimmer as the on @-@ again , off @-@ again Rachel and Ross . " At one point , Cox had begun to regret her decision to accept the role of Monica over Rachel due to the character 's lack of strong storylines ; she eventually relented once Monica and Chandler became romantically involved , thus her character 's storylines gradually began to improve . 
 Cox married actor David Arquette in 1999 while the show was on hiatus between seasons five and six , hence the actress legally changed her full name to Courteney Cox Arquette . The opening credits of the season six premiere " The One After Vegas " features an inside joke in which Cox 's new surname " Arquette " is attached to the surnames of each cast and crew member . The episode is dedicated to Cox and Arquette , reading , " For Courteney and David , who did get married . " Before marrying Cox , Arquette had guest starred in an episode of Friends as Phoebe 's love interest . During season 10 , Cox got pregnant with her and Arquette 's child . At that same time , her character and on @-@ screen husband were going through the process of adopting a child . Like Monica and Chandler , Cox and Arquette had also struggled with conceiving in real life . Although Kudrow 's real @-@ life pregnancy had successfully been written into the show , the same could not have been done for Cox because Friends had already long @-@ established that Monica is incapable of having children . Therefore , the crew attempted to conceal Cox 's pregnancy using a combination of baggy , loose @-@ fitting costumes and props instead . However , at times the actress ' growing belly was still detectable by viewers in spite of the crew 's best efforts . 
 = = Characterization and themes = = 
 = = = <unk> and neuroticism = = = 
 At the beginning of season one , Monica is 25 years old . Rita Loiacono of SheKnows Media believes that Monica is the show 's most fully realized character from the very beginning of the series because her " quirks were developed to a tee . " Like several strong female sitcom characters who were popular throughout the 1980s and 1990s , Monica possesses a natural maternal instinct , constantly " vocalising a desire for motherhood . " As the group 's " unofficial den mother , " Monica occupies the role of their mother hen , and is thus often perceived as the most level @-@ headed member of the sextet , with Ken Parish Perkins of the Chicago Tribune identifying Monica as the show 's most grounded character . Jill O 'Rourke of <unk> described her as " the glue that held the group together . " Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly believes that Monica serves as " the solid center in a circle of wacky pals " due to her " sunny " personality , combined with the fact that she maintains a secure job while appearing to possess the most common sense . Furthermore , Tucker identified Monica as the show 's " straight woman . " Writing for The New York Times , John J. O 'Connor believes that Monica exhibits " the strongest ties to reality " as the sitcom 's most realistically portrayed character . Bustle 's James Tison agreed that Monica is the show 's most relatable character . Referring to Monica as one @-@ half of the series ' " head friends , " the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette 's Robert Bianco described the character as sensible , explaining that both her and brother Ross represent " the relatively stable centers around which the other friends rotate . " Describing her as " ultra @-@ competent , " Natural Living Today 's Emily Nussbaum likened Monica to the fairy tale character Snow White , on whose homemaking skills the five other main characters heavily rely , similar to the relationship between Snow White and the seven dwarfs . Although Monica began Friends as the show 's straight person , the writers eventually made her funnier by incorporating aspects of Cox 's own personality into the character , in addition to writing wittier material for her . 
 Identified by Ayn <unk> of Thought Catalog as " the epitome of a ... control freak " , Refinery29 's Kelsey Miller summarized Monica 's personality as funny , uptight , loving and competitive . A very organized character with a signature Type A personality who enjoys being in charge , Monica is known for being a " neat freak " obsessed with cleanliness – especially when it comes to maintaining the impeccable condition of her apartment – neurotic , extremely obsessive @-@ compulsive and competitive in nature , personality traits that are exaggerated for humor and comic relief ; the writers did not begin to take full comedic advantage of Monica 's neuroses until the show 's first Thanksgiving episode . The character is also the loudest of her friends . In her book Writing With Emotion , Tension , and Conflict : Techniques for Crafting an Expressive and Compelling Novel , author Cheryl St. John wrote that Monica exhibits qualities commonly associated with perfectionism and bossiness . James Tison of Bustle wrote that Monica 's cleanliness and bossiness often relinquishes her to being " the lame one " among her friends , although " she proved that sometimes rules and responsibility were important " . However , the Los Angeles Times Steve Weinstein observed that Monica 's actions often tend to contradict her " Miss Perfect " image and reputation , explaining that the character frequently " makes a fool of herself " in addition to being " so compulsively neat that just her facial expressions of discomfort at one of her friends ' messing things up in her apartment is enough to provoke genuine chuckles . " Although several of Monica 's personality traits and mannerisms make the character a strong candidate for obsessive @-@ compulsive disorder , they are treated as " quirky and amusing " as opposed to a disability or disease ; her friends either ignore or find humor in her peculiarities . 
 As creator and writer , Kauffman confirmed that Monica 's extremely organized personality is based on her own , explaining , " I have a lot of Monica in me , in terms of everything having to be a certain way . " Writing about the development of Monica 's personality in USA Today , Robert Bianco observed that the character gradually evolves from " the caring , nurturing mother figure ... into a slightly off @-@ the @-@ beam benevolent monarch . " By the show 's final season , Monica 's personality has been " exacerbated for comedy " to the point of which she becomes borderline " cartoonish . " 
 = = = Family and childhood ; career and love life = = = 
 Monica has a complicated relationship with her parents Jack ( Elliot Gould ) and Judy Geller ( Christina Pickles ) , more @-@ so with her mother . Entertainment Weekly referred to the character 's relationship with her parents as " esteem @-@ sucking . " In fact , the majority of Friends main characters have " strained relationships " with their parents . Described as " hypercritical , " Judy enjoys constantly criticizing her daughter 's appearance , career and love life , while acting much kinder towards her son , who she favors . Chelsea Mize of Bustle wrote that Monica and Ross ' " wacky quirks become all the more understandable after ... seeing them with their parents . " Encyclopedia of Television Shows , 1925 through 2010 author Vincent Terrance believes that Monica 's competitiveness originates from having grown up with Ross as a brother , against whom she often competed as a child . Kriti <unk> of IBNLive described Monica and Ross ' relationship as " A blend of love and sibling jealousy with an urge to irritate each other to the deepest core of existence " , with Ross often making fun of his sister 's weight and Monica teasing him about his several failed marriages in return . In terms of religion and ethnicity , Crane confirmed that both Monica and Ross are half @-@ Jewish , with their father being Jewish and their mother being of non @-@ Jewish European ancestry . However , Television 's Changing Image of American Jews categorized Monica as a " masked " Jew , explaining that " the smart , funny , and insecure Ross seems more Jewish " than Monica , who the author dismissed as " china @-@ doll like " in appearance and demeanor . In his book Encyclopedia of American Jewish History , Volume 1 , author Stephen Harlan Norwood agrees that , unlike the show 's male Jews , Monica 's Jewish " markers " have been virtually removed . 
 Although Monica and Rachel have remained best friends since high school , they are very much opposites . While both characters share similar economic backgrounds , they grew up on " different ends of the high school social order , " with Rachel being a popular cheerleader and Monica " deal [ ing ] with body and control issues due to being an overweight child and teen . " <unk> Bowman of This Was TV observed that " Monica ’ s struggles ultimately left her more confident than Rachel , as well as more prepared for adulthood . " Among her defining qualities , Monica has had a passion for cooking ever since childhood , stemming from when she received her first Easy @-@ Bake Oven . A chef , the character has had several cooking @-@ related jobs throughout the series , having worked at five different restaurants , a trend that nearly coincides with her constant rotation of boyfriends in an ongoing search for the " perfect match " . Michael Hogan of The Guardian believes that the character 's " competitive , perfectionist , obsessive @-@ compulsive nature made her ideally suited to a career as a chef . " However , her love of cooking and food is also responsible for her having been extremely overweight as a child , throughout high school and college . The running gag of an overweight Monica is often used as a recurring backstory for the character throughout the series , first explored in the second season episode " The One With the Prom Video " via flashback . One of the character 's childhood nicknames was " Big Fat Goalie " when she played field hockey . While overweight , Monica is depicted as having very low self @-@ esteem , binge eating often , and constantly seeking attention . While in college , Monica is embarrassed into losing weight permanently after overhearing her then @-@ crush Chandler make fun of her appearance . Media and the Rhetoric of Body Perfection : Cosmetic Surgery , Weight Loss and Beauty in Popular Culture author Dr. Deborah Harris @-@ Moore believes that Monica 's tendency to come off as a control freak originates from her childhood struggles with weight gain , explaining that the character ate excessively in order " to cope with her emotions . " 
 Possessing a very strong will , the character tends to exhibit outstanding perseverance when it comes to what she expects out of her relationships , jobs and life in general , oftentimes refusing to settle for anything less than what satisfies her . Early in the series , Monica develops a reputation for experiencing bad luck and encountering rather unfortunate circumstances when it comes to dating , romantic relationships and her love life . Nick at Nite joked that the character " likes to keep things tidy in her home and love life , although the latter is a bit more difficult . " This motif is frequently explored as a source of comic relief ; the character 's friends would often " pick apart " her new dates and boyfriends . In his review of the series , David Hiltbrand of People referred to the character as " an unlucky @-@ in @-@ love <unk> , " while the Chicago Tribune 's Ken Parish Perkins observed that Monica " often misfires when shooting for Mr. Right . " According to Mike D 'Avria of Splitsider , Monica " never shied away from jumping into the sac with both random guys and people she worked with " – among them a high school senior , an old high school crush and an alcoholic – prior to dating Chandler , and of the show 's six main characters maintains the highest total of serious relationships . Cox described Monica as goofy , angry and sarcastic , while referring to her as the show 's most sexually active character despite her " goody two shoes " image . 
 Out of Friends ' female characters , Monica 's style took the longest to establish . InStyle wrote that Monica 's combination of short , wavy hair and dark lipstick evoked " a ' 90s take on ' 40s style . " Ashley Hoffman of <unk> believes that character initially " dressed like a tourist trying to look like a New Yorker , " frequently sporting jeans , overalls and cargo shorts . With a wardrobe comprised almost equally of dresses and pants , Monica 's fashion sense , much like Rachel and Phoebe 's , " was a little bit <unk> , a little bit corporate @-@ casual . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Four months before its premiere , Friends failed NBC 's confidential research report , which cited the <unk> of its six main characters as a possible factor . Although the report acknowledged Monica as the only character with whom test audiences identified somewhat positively , NBC admitted that reception towards the character was " well below desirable levels for a lead " nonetheless . In retrospect , The New Republic 's Andrew Harrison believes that although Monica and her friends " were superficial , self @-@ absorbed and at first difficult to like ... in their solipsism and neurosis they reflected and sent up the world emerging around them ... far more accurately than any conventional gooey @-@ hearted family sitcom " , ultimately " creat [ ing ] a coffee @-@ scented cocoon that millions wanted to enter " . Reviews gradually improved ; an early critical evaluation of Friends , which had pegged Cox as the show 's star , read , " As Monica , [ Cox ] came across as charming , attractive , confident , and motivated – the leader of the group " . While men found the actress attractive , women appreciated her sense of humor . 
 When Friends premiered in September 1994 , critics initially perceived Monica as the show 's main character ; Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker attributes this to the fact that Cox was the show 's most famous cast member at the time . The actress has garnered largely positive reviews for her performance , with Tucker concluding that Cox successfully " plays straight woman ... with alluring modesty " . Tony Scott of Variety commended the entire cast for " appear [ ing ] resourceful and display [ ing ] sharp sitcom skills ... especially Cox " , while The Baltimore Sun 's David Zurawik described her acting as " terrific " . John Kiesewetter of The Cincinnati Enquirer praised Cox 's ability to " deliver both verbal and physical comedy " . Contactmusic.com 's Sophie <unk> commended Cox for portraying Monica with " endearing neurosis " . As a character , Lifetime described Monica as " neurotic yet lovable " . Bustle 's Emma Lord wrote , " I can 't imagine why anyone wouldn 't want to be Monica Geller " , describing her as a " smart " and " savvy " character . Admitting that Monica is " probably not our favourite character " , TalkTalk described the character as " wonderfully neurotic , " while Nick at Nite reviewed her as " just as lovable as she is neurotic " despite her overbearing personality . Howard Rosenberg of the Los Angeles Times was receptive towards the entire cast , especially Cox and her character , both of whom he described as " strong " and " likable and funny " . Also writing for the Los Angeles Times , Glenn Whipp lauded Cox 's tenure on Friends , enthusing that the actress successfully " took a character loaded with obsessive @-@ compulsive quirks and a goofy , overly competitive nature and fashioned a flesh @-@ and @-@ blood woman " . Describing the actress ' comic timing as " impeccable " , Whipp went on to write that Cox " brought out Monica 's insecurities in a way that turned self @-@ deprecation into an art form " . Jenna Mullins of E ! dubbed Cox " a fantastic comedic actress " . Alec Harvey of The Birmingham News described Monica as a " very , very funny " character . Kayla Upadhyaya of The Michigan Daily appreciated the fact that " Cox brought moments of sincerity and severity to Monica " . However , The Washington Post panned Cox 's performance as " degrading " , while Mike Ryan of ScreenCrush dismissed Monica as a " fairly normal , but boring " character . 
 In 1999 , Cox was nominated for an American Comedy Award for Funniest Supporting Female Performer in a TV Series . Although continuously praised for her performance , Cox never received an Emmy Award nomination for her role on Friends during its entire run , although each of her five co @-@ stars did . Both female castmates Lisa Kudrow and Jennifer Aniston remain the show 's only main cast members to have won the award , whose multiple nominations Cox especially " had a hard time not taking ... personally " , admitting to having been " hurt " by the snub . A number of media outlets cite Cox among several successful television actors who they believe deserve but yet have to win an Emmy Award . The Academy of Television Arts & Sciences ' failure to acknowledge Cox prompted Jenna Mullins of E ! to ask " if Hollywood has something against honoring a fantastic comedic actress like Cox . " In 2014 , SheKnows Media published an article explaining five reasons author Rita Loiacono believes Monica is " the best character on Friends " , citing her cleanliness , bluntness and role as " the heart of the group " , among others . Loiacono enthused that Monica " didn 't just have one defining aspect ; she had many , and they were all equally hilarious . Not to mention , her ambition and vulnerability resulted in some of the show 's most touching and heartbreaking moments " . Additionally , Loiacono dismissed the fact that Cox has never received an Emmy Award nomination for her performance as Monica as " downright criminal " . In 2015 , HitFix wrote a similar article entitled " 5 Reasons Monica Geller is the Best Friends Friend " , published in tandem with Cox 's 51 birthday . An article in The Birmingham News cited " The One Where it All Began " , " The One With Two Parts : Part 2 " , " The One with the Prom Video " , " The One with Chandler in a Box " , " The One with the Embryos " , " The One with All the Thanksgivings " , " The One Where Everybody Finds Out " , " The One On the Last Night " , " The One with the Proposal " , " The One with Monica and Chandler 's Wedding " and " The Last One " among Monica 's best episodes ; Cox herself acknowledged " The One with the Embryos " as her personal favorite . Meanwhile , <unk> ranked “ The One With The Routine ” , " The One With The Cheap Wedding Dress " , " The One With Monica ’ s Boots " , " The One With the Jellyfish " and " The One Where Monica Sings " among the character 's best . 
 Despite consistently warm reception towards Cox and her character , some aspects of Monica 's characterization have been criticized . The second season episode " The One Where Dr. Ramoray Dies " sparked controversy due to one of its storylines revolving around Monica and Rachel arguing over which roommate will win the last remaining condom in their apartment in order to have sex with their respective boyfriends , Richard and Ross . In her book Narratives , Health , and Healing : Communication Theory , Research , and Practice , author Lynn M. Harter defended the storyline , arguing that it promotes safe sex . Rachel eventually wins the condom in a game of rock , paper , scissors , forcing Monica to abstain for the night . Monica 's overweight alter @-@ ego " Fat Monica " has often been accused of being an offensive stereotype of overweight women exploited for laughs . Although identifying a formerly overweight character as " a standard TV trope " , the New Statesman 's Bim <unk> wrote that Fat Monica " always struck a weird note " with the writer despite the show 's efforts " to pinpoint a solid and satisfying back @-@ story for the character " . Megan Kirby of <unk> questioned the negative effect the show 's fat jokes would have on its overweight viewers , writing , " What does this mean for the girls like me who never become thin ? Are we relegated to side roles and stereotypes in our own lives ? Of course , this isn ’ t true . But I think it sometimes , dark and secret : The fat girl doesn ’ t get to be the protagonist . " Emma Tarver of <unk> complained that Fat Monica " made me think as a child that I was unworthy of love , was going to be mocked relentlessly by my friends and family for my weight , and should never bother flirting because I would just disgust every man I looked at . " Contrarily , Kelsey Miller of Refinery29 received Fat Monica positively as " proof I could overcome my disgusting <unk> and be seen as lovable , too " . In spite of these complaints , Fat Monica proved so popular among audiences that the writers would resurrect the character for a total of four flashback episodes , each of which aired featuring Cox dressed as Fat Monica and eating a doughnut while dancing after the show had finished taping much to the amusement of the studio audience . Although she only appears physically in four , Fat Monica is referenced in approximately half of the show 's episodes , and has since proven popular enough to be adapted into an internet meme . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 While each main character eventually evolved into household names the longer Friends ran , the once @-@ obscure actors by whom they were portrayed gradually established themselves as celebrities . According to Elle , the combined popularity of Monica and Cox established them both as television icons during the 1990s . Additionally , baby name books now commonly associate the name " Monica " with the character . As the role in which Cox " found fame " , Monica remains the actress ' most iconic role to @-@ date , as well as the part for which she remains best known . Us Weekly believes that Cox " made television history during her 10 year stint playing Monica " . Meanwhile , Steve Weinstein of the Los Angeles Times credits Cox 's comedic performance with helping disprove the stereotype that " Pretty women aren 't supposed to be funny " . In 1995 , one year after Friends premiered , Cox appeared on the cover of People 's " 50 Most Beautiful People " . According to Alabama Biographical Dictionary author Jan Onofrio , Monica helped " put [ Cox ] in the television spotlight and provided offers for more desirable roles . " The Daily News referred to Cox as " one of the more successful ' Friends ' since the show ended " thanks in part to her subsequent television and film roles . According to Reed Tucker of the New York Post , " Cox has diversified perhaps more than her former co @-@ stars " by founding her own production company Coquette Productions , exploring directing and obtaining a real estate license . However , the actress has also been criticized for failing to venture into roles that differ from Monica . By both starring in and producing the sitcom Cougar Town , which has been reviewed as the actress ' " best gig since ... Friends " , Cox became the only Friends main cast member to accomplish significant television success post @-@ Friends . 
 <unk> collectively ranked Phoebe , Rachel and Monica the 11th , 12th and 13th best female television characters of all @-@ time , respectively . Maria Tallarico of Cosmopolitan observed that a number of Monica 's storylines , specifically one in which the character unintentionally has sex with a high school senior , " probably wouldn 't fly on TV today " . Writing for <unk> , Samantha Allen believes that Monica helped " set the standard for how sitcoms could and would talk about sex " by both engaging in casual sex and dating a much older man . According to Dustin Levy of The Diamondback , Monica inspired " any ensemble cast in a sitcom with a female character who is bossy or neurotic , " citing Scrubs ’ Elliot Reid and Happy Endings ’ Jane <unk> @-@ Williams as examples of Monica 's influence . Additionally , Levy identified Claire Dunphy from the sitcom Modern Family as Monica 's modern @-@ day equivalent , explaining that the character " acts like Monica plus children " . In spring 2015 , TV Guide published an article entitled " 22 Spring Cleaning Tips From Monica Geller " in recognition of the character 's cleanliness . In her article " 5 Signs You ’ re A Real @-@ Life Monica Geller " , Ayn <unk> of Thought Catalog wrote that the character 's personality is the reason " all perfectionist fans of this iconic TV show have asked themselves this question at least once in their life : ' Oh my god , am I a Monica Geller ? ! ' " Emma Lord of Bustle expounded in her article " 13 Signs You Are The Monica Of Your Friend Group " " that isn 't to say life is easy for the Real Life <unk> of the world . First , there 's all the name calling : ' neat freak ' and ' sore loser ' , to name a few . Second , all of your elaborate , carefully @-@ laid plans inevitably go haywire when people around you don 't respect the obvious beauty and rightness of them . " 
 Friends ' female characters had a profound influence on women 's fashion during the 1990s , becoming household names as well as fashion icons . Monica , Rachel and Phoebe each " became style icons for a generation of young women . " Describing Monica 's wardrobe as " classic and elegant , " Stylist observed that the character 's first season bob cut was imitated by several woman , although its popularity paled in comparison to that of Aniston 's iconic " Rachel " haircut , the widespread success of which Cox was jealous . However , Cosmopolitan identified Monica 's hairstyle as " Iconic in its own right " , including in its list of " 20 iconic Friends hairstyles " . Monica also became well known for accessorizing sweaters using scarves ; on Cox 's 51 birthday in 2015 , Cosmopolitan published an article celebrating her character 's best sweaters . BuzzFeed ranked Monica 's wedding dress seventh on the website 's list of the " 28 TV Show Wedding Dresses You ’ ll Always Envy " , while Brides ranked it the ninth greatest wedding dress in television history . Us Weekly included it on their list of " Celebrity Wedding Dresses : TV & Movies " . Meanwhile , The Daily Telegraph cited several of Monica 's outfits and hairstyles among the newspaper 's list of " Friends best fashion moments " . According to Patricia Murphy of the Irish Independent , Monica " is most definitely one of the most famous fictional telly chefs , " expounding , " her OCD combined with her continuous strive for perfection making her a thoroughly enjoyable watch . " The Guardian ranked Monica fifth on the newspaper 's list of " The 10 best fictional chefs " , while People ranked the character eighth , with author Grace <unk> writing , " She 's the best kind of chef – neurotic in the most entertaining / productive way , and always cleans up the mess in her kitchen . " 
 USA Today 's Robert Bianco credits Monica and Chandler 's relationship and their wedding in the episode " The One With Monica and Chandler 's Wedding " with saving Friends . Prior to the episode , the show had " appeared to be in serious danger of out @-@ staying its welcome . " Although admitting that the overall episode " is not one of Friends ' best " , Bianco explained that " The wedding changed all that , and in remarkable fashion . " While BuzzFeed ranked Monica and Chandler the 23rd best television couple , E ! placed the couple second on its ranking of the greatest Friends couples , with author Sydney <unk> writing , " It 's hard to imagine a time when Monica and Chandler weren 't together , but it took them four seasons to actually get together . From then on , it was clear that they were meant to be . " Tim <unk> of TV Overmind echoed this sentiment by ranking Chandler Monica 's best boyfriend , awarding him an ' A ' grade . <unk> penned , " I would not be able to face myself every day if I did not rank Chandler the best of Monica ’ s boyfriends from Friends . The two ended up getting married , which just goes to show that some one night stands are meant to last . " Monica and Ross ' relationship was also influential . According to Kriti <unk> of IBNLive , the characters " provide a perfect exception to the myth that one cannot find a best friend in their sibling particularly when they are of opposite sex ... they have broken all the conventional boundaries of a brother @-@ sister relationship . " PopSugar ranked Monica and Ross fifth on the website 's list of " The 9 Best Sibling Relationships From ' 90s TV " 
 Immediately established as one of the show 's primary settings , Monica 's large Greenwich Village apartment has since become one of the most famous and iconic television sets in history . Steffani Cameron of <unk> wrote that Monica 's " apartment was unlike anything else on TV . It was full of color , clutter , and personality . It was a space cobbled together of kitsch and class , and it was just magic " , citing its windows , color and openness among her favourite things about the apartment . Harper 's Bazaar magazine ranked it among the " 12 Best Apartments on TV " . Chloe Daley of Refinery29 joked that the apartment serves as both " a lesson in how to decorate with purple " and " a lesson in how not to " . Based on its total number of bedrooms , open kitchen concept , large living space and balcony , real estate agent Sydney Blumstein estimates that the apartment would be worth approximately US $ 2 @.@ 3 million in 2015 . In terms of its size and affordability , the apartment has frequently been the subject of scrutiny ; critics constantly question how Monica , a chef , and Rachel , a waitress , were able to afford such a luxurious home based on their relatively low incomes , often dismissing the show 's explanation that this is due to an illegal sublet courtesy of Monica 's late grandmother . Hollywood.com 's Abbey Stone ranked it television 's 10th " most ridiculous " apartment , while The Village Voice placed it at number four in a similar article . 
 = Carolina Marsh Tacky = 
 The Carolina Marsh Tacky or Marsh Tacky is a rare breed of horse , native to South Carolina . It is a member of the Colonial Spanish group of horse breeds , which also include the Florida Cracker Horse and the Banker horse of North Carolina . It is a small horse , well adapted for use in the lowland swamps of its native South Carolina . The Marsh Tacky developed from Spanish horses brought to the South Carolina coast by Spanish explorers , settlers and traders as early as the 16th century . The horses were used by the colonists during the American Revolution , and by South Carolinians for farm work , herding cattle and hunting throughout the breed 's history . 
 The breed is considered to be critically endangered by both the American Livestock Breeds Conservancy and the Equus Survival Trust , and there are only around 275 Marsh Tackies in existence today . In 2006 and 2007 , the two organizations worked together to complete DNA testing on the breed with the goals of mapping the Marsh Tacky 's place among the horse breeds of the world and beginning a stud book . In 2007 , an association was begun with the objective of preserving and promoting the Marsh Tacky ; and in 2010 a closed stud book was created . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The Marsh Tacky generally stands between 14 and 14 @.@ 2 hands ( 56 and 58 inches , 142 and 147 cm ) high , although the acceptable range is between 13 and 15 hands ( 52 and 60 inches , 132 and 152 cm ) high . Today , the breed comes in a wide variety of colors , including dun , bay , roan , chestnut , black and grullo . Historically , multi @-@ colored patterns such as pinto were found , but they were not selected for when breeding , and today are not seen . The colors today are consistent with those of other Colonial Spanish horses . The profile of the breed 's head is usually flat or somewhat concave , becoming slightly convex from the nasal region to the top of the muzzle . The forehead is wide and the eyes set well apart . The breed typically has a slight ewe neck , and the neck is attached low on the chest compared to many other breeds . The withers are pronounced , the back short and strong , and the croup steeply angled . The chest is deep but narrow and the shoulder long and angled . The legs have long , tapering muscling , with in general no feathering on the lower legs . The Marsh Tacky exhibits a four @-@ beat ambling gait , most similar to the <unk> <unk> of the Brazilian Mangalarga Marchador , another breed with Spanish heritage , although also compared to the fox trot of the Missouri Fox Trotter . However , the Marsh Tacky 's gait shows a period of quadrupedal support where all four feet are planted and diagonal foot pairings , whereas the Fox Trotter shows tripedal support and the Mangalarga Marchador lacks the diagonal foot pairings . 
 The Marsh Tacky is known by owners for its stamina and ability to work in water and swamps without panicking . They tend to be sure @-@ footed , sturdy , smart , and able to survive in challenging coastal environments , as well as being easy keepers . Their small size and gentle nature made them the historically preferred mount for children and women , but they were also used as working animals due to their abilities in the field . Today , they are used in endurance riding , as well as continuing their traditional work assisting humans with hunting wild game and herding cattle . 
 Marsh Tackies have the same ancestral bloodlines as Florida Cracker Horses and North Carolina Banker horses . However , DNA testing has proved that the Marsh Tackies ' relative isolation has made them a separate breed with unique characteristics . 
 = = History = = 
 The Carolina Marsh Tacky developed from Spanish horses brought to the island and coastal areas of South Carolina by Spanish explorers and settlers as early as the 16th century . More horses were added to the population that would become the Marsh Tacky through animals that were purchased in the Spanish settlement of St. Augustine in Florida . They were then used as pack horses on Native American trade routes , and sold when the traders reached Charleston . They were managed mainly as feral herds , rounded up by locals when horses were needed , and this tradition continued into the 20th century . The breed was used during the American Revolution by many of the irregular forces of Francis Marion , nicknamed the " Swamp Fox " . The swamp savvy of the Marsh Tacky may have given Marion 's forces an advantage , as British cavalry mounted on larger European breeds were not as easily able to maneuver in the dense lowland swamps . After the American Civil War , they were commonly used by members of the Gullah community on the islands off the South Carolina shore for use in fields and gardens . The breed derives the " tacky " part of its name from the English word meaning " common " or " cheap " , as these horses were the most common breed in their area of the country for most of their history . During the height of their popularity they ranged from Myrtle Beach , South Carolina to St. Simon 's Island in Georgia . The Tackies continued to be used during World War II by members of the beach patrols tasked with the surveillance of South Carolina beaches against Nazi u @-@ boat attacks and enemy troop or spy landings . During the 1960s , Marsh Tackies were used in races on Hilton Head beaches . This tradition was revived in 2009 during the Gullah Cultural Festival , and the races will be continued at the festival in future years . 
 In 2007 , the Carolina Marsh Tacky Association was formed . The association was developed through the efforts of the American Livestock Breeds Conservancy working with owners and breed enthusiasts , with the goal of preserving and promoting the Marsh Tacky breed . The breed registry became a closed registry on August 18 , 2010 , and is maintained by the American Livestock Breeds Conservancy Pedigree Registry . Although closed , outside horses can be registered upon proof of origin , visual inspection and DNA confirmation of parentage . 
 In 2015 , a complete , articulated horse skeleton believed to be a Marsh Tacky was unearthed at an archaeological dig in St. Augustine , Florida . The approximately 200 @-@ year @-@ old skeleton was found on the site which once housed the Spanish Dragoon Barracks . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 In the lowcountry region of coastal Georgia and South Carolina , the Carolina Marsh Tacky was the most common horse for most of the breed 's history . As the automobile became more common during the 20th century , breed numbers declined , and the Marsh Tacky was thought to have gone extinct during the 1980s and 1990s . Today there are 276 living animals recognized by the breed registry , including 153 mares and 123 stallions and geldings . The Equus Survival Trust considers the breed to be at critical / nearly extinct levels , meaning that there are fewer than 100 breeding mares in existence . The American Livestock Breeds Conservancy considers the Marsh Tacky ( which they consider a strain of the Colonial Spanish horse ) to be at critical levels , meaning that there are fewer than 200 annual registrations in the United States and an estimated global population of less than 2 @,@ 000 . Representatives of the ALBC state that the breed numbers will have to increase to an estimated 1 @,@ 000 members to ensure permanent survival . On June 11 , 2010 , a bill was signed into law that made the Carolina Marsh Tacky the state heritage horse of South Carolina . 
 In 2006 , the ALBC began investigating the Marsh Tacky to see if it was truly a descendent of Spanish stock , and during the organization 's initial field investigations it was found that many surviving members of the breed fit the physical type of Colonial Spanish stock . In 2007 , the American Livestock Breeds Conservancy collaborated with the Equus Survival Trust to collect DNA samples and photo @-@ document the largest herd in South Carolina , considered to be the largest remaining herd , with a heritage tracing back to the American Civil War . DNA testing was undertaken in an effort to identify horses for a new studbook , reveal what DNA markers the breed carries , and map the breed 's genetic place among all other horse breeds worldwide . Sixty horses were tested in the effort . 
 = Asian F = 
 " Asian F " is the third episode of the third season of the American musical television series Glee , and the forty @-@ seventh overall . Written by series co @-@ creator Ian Brennan and directed by Alfonso Gomez @-@ Rejon , it first aired on Fox in the United States on October 4 , 2011 . The episode features the introduction of Emma Pillsbury 's ( Jayma Mays ) and Mike Chang 's ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) parents , and the final auditions for the McKinley High production of West Side Story , in which the competition between Mercedes Jones ( Amber Riley ) and Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) leads the former to quit New Directions . 
 An advance copy of the episode was released to several reviewers , and received a highly enthusiastic response . Once the episode aired many others were equally impressed , though not all . Brittany 's ( Heather Morris ) " Run the World ( Girls ) " performance was hailed , and the entire Mike Chang storyline , especially his rendition of " Cool " and his initial solo dance sequence , also received favorable notice . The musical numbers were generally greeted positively , among them the three that featured Mercedes , particularly " It 's All Over " . However , her storyline had its detractors , mostly due to the recurrence of the Mercedes versus Rachel plot , and the inconsistency of her characterization with past appearances . 
 All six songs were released as singles , available for download , and two , " Fix You " and " Run the World ( Girls ) " , charted on the Billboard Hot 100 , and " Fix You " also charted on the Canadian Hot 100 . Upon its initial airing , this episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 42 million American viewers and garnered a 3 @.@ 6 / 10 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The total viewership and ratings for this episode were down slightly from the previous episode , " I Am Unicorn " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After Mike receives an " A − " on a chemistry exam , his father ( Keong Sim ) is upset by this " Asian F " and the danger it poses to his chances of attending Harvard , and insists that Mike focus more on his studies and give up glee club and his girlfriend Tina ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) , who has been helping him improve his singing . Mike begs for one more chance and promises to meet with a tutor , but later decides to follow his dreams and auditions for the role of Riff in West Side Story , performing " Cool " . He misses a tutoring session and is confronted by his mother ( Tamlyn Tomita ) , and when he admits he wants to be a dancer rather than a doctor , she reveals that she gave up dreams of becoming a dancer and doesn ’ t want her son to do the same . 
 To promote her candidacy for senior class president , Brittany ( Heather Morris ) sings a rousing song of female empowerment — " Run the World ( Girls ) " — at an impromptu assembly , with the help of the Cheerios and Santana ( Naya Rivera ) , who has rejoined New Directions unbeknownst to cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) . The enormous enthusiasm of the school 's entire female population worries Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) , the other candidate in the race . Kurt has given up his dream to play Tony in the musical , and gives a bouquet of roses to his boyfriend Blaine ( Darren Criss ) , the likely choice as Tony . 
 Will ( Matthew Morrison ) is insecure about his relationship with Emma because she hasn ’ t asked him to meet her parents , so he invites them to dinner without telling her . They mock their daughter ’ s OCD , which angers Will , and display an extreme hair @-@ color obsession — Emma refers to them as " ginger supremacists " . Her OCD suffers a severe resurgence under the stress of their visit . A helpless Will apologizes , and joins Emma when she prays . 
 Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) , supported by her boyfriend Shane ( LaMarcus Tinker ) , auditions for the role of Maria and impresses the directors — Emma , Coach Beiste ( Dot @-@ Marie Jones ) and Artie ( Kevin McHale ) — with her rendition of " Spotlight " . They schedule a callback between her and Rachel ( Lea Michele ) to help them decide who should be cast in the role . Mercedes is angry about what she perceives as continued favoritism shown to Rachel , especially in the awarding of solos , and when Will pushes her in the glee club 's extra dance rehearsals that Rachel is excused from , she decides she has had enough and quits glee club . When Mercedes and Rachel compete by singing " Out Here On My Own " in the callbacks , Mercedes gives a performance that Rachel privately concedes was better , which prompts Rachel to begin a last @-@ minute candidacy for senior class president to improve her college prospects ; this <unk> Kurt , who now has another rival to campaign against . The three directors decide to offer the role of Maria to both contenders , with each to do half the performances , but Mercedes is convinced she deserved to win the part outright and refuses to accept half a role . She withdraws from contention , which leaves Rachel as the sole Maria , and volunteers to join Shelby Corcoran 's ( Idina Menzel ) new glee club . The cast list is posted , with Rachel as Maria , Blaine as Tony , Santana as Anita , Mike as Riff , and Kurt as Officer <unk> . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode began filming on August 29 , 2011 ; the finale was filmed on September 16 , 2011 . The script was written by series co @-@ creator Ian Brennan and the episode was directed by Alfonso Gomez @-@ Rejon . 
 Two new sets of parents are introduced during the episode . Emma 's parents , Rose and Rusty Pillsbury , are played by Valerie Mahaffey and Don Most . Mays was very excited when she learned Most , who played Ralph <unk> on the 1970s sitcom Happy Days , had been cast , and exclaimed , " What ? He 's my father ? ! " Both Most and Mahaffey were so funny during the shooting of their sequence that she had to apologize for causing a portion to have to be reshot , telling them , " I 'm so sorry , the back of my shoulders were shaking because I was laughing so hard . " 
 Mike 's parents , who may become recurring characters , are Tamlyn Tomita in the role of Julia Chang , and Keong Sim as Mike Chang , Sr. Recurring guest stars appearing in the episode include Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) , football coach Shannon Beiste ( Dot @-@ Marie Jones ) , student Lauren Zizes ( Ashley Fink ) , teacher Shelby Corcoran ( Idina Menzel ) and football players Shane Tinsley ( LaMarcus Tinker ) and Azimio ( James Earl ) . 
 This episode features the show 's first Coldplay cover , " Fix You " . Coldplay had previously refused to license their music for use on Glee , but later changed their minds . Five other songs are covered , including Beyoncé 's " Run the World ( Girls ) " sung by Morris , Jennifer Hudson 's " Spotlight " sung by Riley , " Cool " from West Side Story sung by Shum in his first solo , " Out Here On My Own " from Fame sung by Riley and Michele , and " It 's All Over " from Dreamgirls performed by Riley and most of New Directions . Riley appreciated the opportunity to perform " Spotlight " , a modern pop song , " because Mercedes usually does the old diva @-@ ish " songs . She found the episode challenging , as she " really had to think about who Mercedes is . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Asian F " was first broadcast on October 4 , 2011 in the United States on Fox . It garnered a 3 @.@ 6 / 10 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and received 8 @.@ 42 million American viewers during its initial airing . It was second for the third week in a row in its timeslot to NCIS on CBS , which earned a 4 @.@ 2 / 12 rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and also by the third episode of New Girl , which follows Glee on Fox , and brought in a 4 @.@ 3 / 11 rating / share and 8 @.@ 65 million viewers . The Glee numbers were down slightly from the previous week 's episode , " I Am Unicorn " , which netted a 3 @.@ 7 / 11 rating / share and 8 @.@ 60 million viewers . 
 Viewership increased markedly in other countries . In the United Kingdom , " Asian F " was watched on Sky1 by 1 @.@ 10 million viewers , up over 10 % compared to " I Am Unicorn " in the previous week , when 995 @,@ 000 viewers were watching . In Australia , " Asian F " was watched by 843 @,@ 000 viewers , which made Glee the eleventh most @-@ watched program of the night . The viewership was up significantly from " I Am Unicorn " the week before , which drew 729 @,@ 000 viewers , and also an improvement over the season premiere 's 760 @,@ 000 . In Canada , 1 @.@ 82 million viewers watched the episode , and it was the fourteenth most @-@ viewed show of the week , up four slots and 21 % from the 1 @.@ 50 million viewers who watched " I Am Unicorn " . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Kristin dos Santos of E ! Online and Michael Ausiello of TVLine heavily praised screener copies of the episode . Dos Santos called it " arguably the best episode of Glee , not just this season but in the history of the series " , while Ausiello praised the episode as " a standout hour " . Tim Stack of Entertainment Weekly also viewed the episode in advance , and was similarly impressed ; he wrote that it was " one of the series ' best episodes ever " . 
 A number of critics who viewed the episode when it aired were equally taken with " Asian F " . The Atlantic 's Kevin Fallon called it Glee 's " best ever " , while others , including Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone and Abby West of Entertainment Weekly said it was the best one of the new third season . Vanity Fair 's Brett Berk wrote , " This week 's episode stands out as one of the most cohesive and well acted in the series 's pantheon " , though he wondered what had happened to the show 's humorous side , something also noted by Futterman , who found it to be a significant problem : " Glee 's own identity crisis of not knowing whether or not it 's a sitcom has made it hard to get deeply invested in its characters . " Amy Reiter of The Los Angeles Times wrote that " the producers hit every note ( emotional , musical , character , plot ) as squarely as Rachel Berry auditioning for a coveted role " , and the episode " had emotional truth , character growth , new revelations and really good musical numbers : the kind that seem to emerge organically from the plot and deepen and advance it . " AOLTV 's Crystal Bell said the episode delivered on the setup in the previous " I Am Unicorn " outing , and said " it definitely seems to echo the glory days " of the first season . TV Guide later included " Asian F " in its list of 2011 's Top TV Episodes . 
 Others were not as impressed . Although he praised " fantastic performances by Harry Shum as Mike Chang and Jayma Mays as Emma " , Anthony Benigno of The Faster Times criticized the " hackneyed storytelling that moves nobody forward " , and IGN 's Robert Canning noted that the show 's " inconsistent character development " was on display , though he gave the episode his best grade so far in the season , a " great " 8 out of 10 . Samantha Urban of The Dallas Morning News likened " Asian F " to a " half @-@ hearted meal " : while she said the subplots featuring Mike and Emma " worked really well " , the main storyline featuring Mercedes " was offensive in how lazily it was executed " . 
 The Mercedes storyline was met with widely divergent reactions , though her musical numbers were generally given high marks . In addition to Urban , many reviewers were unhappy with the return of the Rachel versus Mercedes rivalry , including Bell , who lamented that it had " been done every season " . Nearly as many expressed the hope that Mercedes was not pregnant given her nausea in the first " booty camp " scene , including Vicki Hyman of The Star @-@ Ledger , BuddyTV 's John Kubicek , and West . Benigno felt Mercedes was acting " wildly out of character " in the episode . Michael Slezak of TVLine was also puzzled at her change , and asked , " When has Mercedes ever been anything other than a team player and New Directions MVP ? Seriously , nobody 's going to cut her slack for a bad week ? " Canning agreed , and wrote : " Schue 's tough love with Mercedes came out of left field " , and felt it added to the " inconsistency of these characters " , even though " it ultimately made sense " in the context of setup for " It 's All Over " . Time 's James Poniewozik wrote that having the story " turn on her resentment at being overlooked by the glee club is an apt meta @-@ touch , since she 's been overlooked by the show for some time now . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club was the most enthusiastic about her storyline , and called it " the best part of the episode " : it was " all about how she now feels appreciated — because she has a boyfriend , sigh — and so she 's willing to take on Rachel for the role of Maria ( and , actually , beat her ) and push for what she feels is rightfully hers , which involves more respect from New Directions . " 
 Mike Chang 's first major storyline was the most widely praised of the episode . West said Shum " really showed his acting chops " , and Urban thought the " plot worked well " , though she heaped scorn on the notion that " any college would consider glee club a detriment " in an application . Mike 's " Cool " performance was very well received . Berk called it a " spectacular audition " and Bell said it was " one of the highlights of the episode " ; she also noted that the episode " really solidified " Mike and Tina 's relationship , though she also pointed out that Tina was " the most neglected member of the entire cast " . Mike 's scenes in the dance studio were even more highly praised than " Cool " . The first , when Mike " dances alone and imagines Tina and his dad in the room with him " was described as " really beautiful " by Benigno . Fallon characterized it as " a standout scene " : " the performer dances out his life frustrations , pirouetting @-@ as @-@ catharsis until he realizes that the only place he feels happy is on stage . It 's a trademark Glee moment . " Hyman agreed , and wrote , " When he ducked into the studio and started dancing by himself , without music , it reminded me of how special a show Glee can be " . Lesley Goldberg of The Hollywood Reporter lauded the subsequent scene in the studio with his mother as the " most touching part " of the storyline , and more than one reviewer admitted shedding tears , including Reiter . 
 Poniewozik stated that the Will and Emma storyline " again shows how Glee handles adults much worse than teens " , and added , " there 's no reason this couldn 't have been a rewarding plot " . Hyman called it a " bizarre subplot " , and Berk stated that the " patent absurdity " of the " ginger eugenics " of Emma 's parents " felt out of whack , tonally , with the rest of the episode " . VanDerWerff felt that the story failed to work " despite featuring Don Most and Valerie Mahaffey doing their very best " . Canning thought Most 's role as Emma 's " racist Ginger <unk> father was perhaps the greatest bit of casting I 've seen on television all year " . Urban thought the subplot " worked really well " , though she added that there were " missteps " . Brittany 's campaign rally flash mob , complete with her performance of " Run the World ( Girls ) " , was a huge favorite ; Poniewozik called it " an excellent Brittany dance showcase " . Hyman was critical of the " ridiculousness " of Rachel 's run for senior class president , a development Urban said " made absolutely zero sense " . VanDerWerff lauded the " montage of the kids finding out who was cast " in West Side Story , and said it " might be the best thing the show has ever done . " Amy Lee of The Huffington Post wrote , " The football team is dancing again . This can only be good . " Urban mentioned that seeing " Cool " performed by the football players made her realize that " we haven 't seen Karofsky this season . " Benigno was more direct : " where the hell is Karofsky ? " 
 = = = Music and performances = = = 
 The episode 's musical performances were generally well @-@ received , though a few reviewers , including Benigno , chafed at the continued emphasis on Broadway showtunes . Both of the major dance numbers came in for considerable praise , and " Run the World ( Girls ) " garnered the most superlatives : Fallon wrote , " Brittany 's performance of " Run the World ( Girls ) " was thrilling . It was the most adrenaline @-@ pumping musical number the series has produced : intricately choreographed , expertly shot and edited , perfectly woven into the story , and performed exquisitely by Heather Morris . " VanDerWerff " enjoyed the ginormous production number built around it quite a bit " , and The Wall Street Journal 's Raymund Flandez called it a " stellar performance " . Kubicek stated , " this was unbelievably superb , easily my favorite performance of the entire season " . Futterman noted that " Brittany 's vocals are nowhere near the power of Beyoncé 's , but they 're just fine for this performance , the real focus of which is the dancing . " 
 Mercedes featured in three of the episode 's musical numbers . Flandez said of her solo , " She blew Jennifer Hudson 's ' Spotlight ' out of this world . " Benigno wrote that it was " great " , but added that it was " not much of a stretch for Amber Riley to hit this one " . Berk praised her " amazing voice " and gave the performance four stars out of five , and Goldberg characterized the rendition as " flawless " . Other reviewers were more critical , including VanDerWerff , who said that this was the only song in the episode that " really didn 't work " . Slezak felt that the arrangement used was not distinct enough from the original , though he gave the performance a " B + " , as did West , who wrote , " Mercedes looked fantastic and carried herself well , and her voice was as strong as ever but it felt a little lacking . " In her " Maria @-@ off " with Rachel , Benigno said they " both kill it " , characterized it as " easy but fun " , and gave it an " A − " , as did Slezak and West , the latter of whom " didn 't feel that Mercedes was the clear winner " but thought both singers were " fantastic " . Kubicek thought that " Mercedes clearly won " and Flandez maintained that she " clearly outshone her rival " , and continued , " You just believe so much of what she sings . " Berk agreed , and contrasted the two singers with his rating scale of one to five stars : " Two stars for Rachel , who sang this like Barry Manilow ; four for Mercedes , who sang this like she lived it . " Futterman had a slightly different take : " Rachel puts on a diva front , but inside she 's scared and nervous , while Mercedes is just a diva . " However , Hyman thought that the two " were evenly matched " , while Canning and Billboard 's Rae Votta both thought Rachel was the victor ; Votta stated , " While the show wants us to believe otherwise , Rachel clearly <unk> Mercedes " . " It 's All Over " from Dreamgirls received the most enthusiastic commentary , including an " A + " from West , who wrote " Mercedes was at her best in this performance " , a sentiment echoed by Benigno when he awarded the song an " A " . Hyman called it " pretty awesome " and Flandez a " cleverly amusing take " , while Futterman said Mercedes " fully embraces her inner Effie White " and that the song was " on par with the best of Glee 's Broadway songs in terms of plot relevancy and vocal arrangements " . She also praised " the first group showtune the New Directions have done " and added , " we want more " . Votta characterized it as " a flawless fantasy homage " and stated , " It 's the perfect use of the non @-@ realism of " Glee " and the power of musical theater to express a storyline " . Kubicek agreed it was " like a real musical " in these regards and praised Mike 's short solo , and West liked the segment where Santana confronts Mercedes in the number . Slezak was not enthusiastic about the rendition , and wrote that he wished that the " scene gelled better than it did " , and questioned why Mercedes was the character Effie while all the other members of New Directions were themselves . He gave the number a " C + " . 
 Votta wrote of " Cool " that " for Mike Chang 's first solo it 's impressive " , and added , " maybe he should play Tony instead of Blaine " ; Slezak also thought he should have been considered for Tony since it was " performed with such verve and swagger and charisma " . Even so , he conceded that Mike ( and Shum ) was " not the strongest singer " , an assessment echoed in the " decent singer " characterizations from Hyman and Kubicek , and the former called the performance a fine job while the latter wrote that " Mike Chang is the total package " . Flandez said Mike 's singing " wasn 't so terrible " , but while Lee said his is " not , by any means , a wonderful voice " she also said " he still pirouettes with the kind of easy grace that makes each move a joy to watch . " Futterman wrote , " He 's got the smooth dance moves down ... but , most impressively , his slick vocals are on point , hitting nice rises and falls at certain moments but mostly staying ' real cool ' , as the song calls for " , and Berk gave the performance five of five stars . " Fix You " received the least warm reception of the songs in the episode . Benigno criticized it for being " exactly like the original " , though he gave it a " B " and noted that the " last bit is kind of chillingly good in Matthew Morrison 's hands " . Flandez felt that the show 's version " pales in imitation to the original " . Futterman thought it was " thematically appropriate " but " not Schuester 's finest singing moment " , and Lee stated that " the song does not fit Morrison 's range comfortably " . Kevin P. Sullivan of MTV called it a " surprisingly tragic and moving rendition " , but Kubicek characterized it as an " emotionally manipulative song " , and West did not like the " implied condescension " of Will singing the song to Emma and gave it a " B " , though she thought Morrison " sounded good " and it was a " good way to close out the show " . In December 2012 , TV Guide listed the rendition as one of Glee 's worst performances . 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 Two of the six cover versions released as singles debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 : " Fix You " debuted at number fifty @-@ three and " Run the World ( Girls ) " at number ninety @-@ one . " Fix You " debuted at number seventy @-@ six on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 , and was the one song from the episode to appear on that chart . Both " Fix You " and " Run the World ( Girls ) " were featured on the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 7 . 
 = Battle of Albulena = 
 The Battle of Albulena , also known as the Battle of Ujëbardha , was fought on 2 September 1457 between Albanian forces led by Skanderbeg and an Ottoman army under Isak bey <unk> and Skanderbeg 's nephew , Hamza Kastrioti . 
 Skanderbeg had been the leader of the Albanians for over a decade and had seen many victories over Ottoman arms . However , after his loss at Berat in 1455 at the hands of Isak bey , Skanderbeg was betrayed by some of his most trusted officers , among them Moisi Arianit Golemi . Golemi returned the next year with an Ottoman force under his command , but was defeated at the Battle of <unk> and rejoined Skanderbeg 's army . Later , the dissatisfied Hamza Kastrioti betrayed Skanderbeg and was offered joint @-@ command with Isak bey over a second Ottoman invasion force . 
 The Ottomans arrived in late May 1457 and marched through the Mat River Valley . Skanderbeg tried to delay the vanguard , composed of <unk> cavalrymen , but upon the approach of the main force , decided to retreat . Both Isak bey and Hamza were familiar with Skanderbeg 's tactics so the Albanian leader adopted a new one . He split his army into several groups and ordered them to march in separate directions through the mountains and remain unseen by the Ottoman forces until the signal to reassemble was given . The Albanians remained in separate formations until September , by which time the Ottomans had become both exasperated and convinced that Skanderbeg had been defeated . On 2 September 1457 , Skanderbeg finally gave the order for his armies to regroup and launched a surprise attack on the Ottoman camp , killing and capturing up to 30 @,@ 000 men . Among them was Hamza who was later sent as a prisoner to Naples in Italy . 
 The victory strengthened the morale of the Albanians . There were few , if not any , officers and soldiers who deserted afterwards . The battle of Albulena has been seen as Skanderbeg 's most brilliant victory over the Ottomans . However , it also marked the high point of the Albanian resistance , beginning a new phase in Skanderbeg 's quarter @-@ century long war which would include its fiercest Ottoman invasions . Even though Skanderbeg himself had died in January 1468 , the war would drag on until 1478 and later in the same year the main Albanian fortress at Krujë fell , finally effecting the annexation of Skanderbeg 's Albania by the Ottoman Empire . 
 = = Background = = 
 Skanderbeg , the ruler of Albania ( Latin : dominus <unk> ) , had served for several years in the Ottoman army , as both soldier and commander , before returning to his homeland and beginning an uprising against the Ottoman Empire in 1444 . The Second Battle of Kosovo in 1448 had ended with the defeat of John Hunyadi , voivode of Transylvania while Skanderbeg and his forces were on their way ; but did not arrive due to his army being blocked off by Đurađ Branković , and so he was unable to provide help ; Hunyadi engaged the Ottomans thinking Skanderbeg was not coming . In reparation , Skanderbeg ravaged Brankovic 's domains . As a result of the defeat , the Ottomans were free from Hungarian pressure , which had been limited to Belgrade and its environs . In 1455 , Skanderbeg laid siege to Berat , a fortress which had been seized from his control in 1450 . The result was catastrophic for the Albanians who succumbed to an Ottoman counterattack upon Skanderbeg 's temporary departure from the main force . Alfonso V of Aragon , Skanderbeg 's most helpful and important ally , also suffered a blow to his ambitions which included a pan @-@ Mediterranean empire . The Albanians , however , were able to recover their morale when Pope Calixtus III , who had begun to worry that his plans for crusade would be undermined , promised to aid Skanderbeg . 
 Before the planned crusade commenced , Sultan Mehmed II the Conqueror ( Turkish : el @-@ <unk> ) decided to march against Hungary and Albania . In April 1456 , Skanderbeg sent Pal Engjëlli , his ambassador to the West , with a letter to Cardinal Domenico Capranica informing the Holy See of his need for aid . The Ottoman invasion came in May 1456 when Moses Golemi , Skanderbeg 's former captain who had deserted after loss of Berat , met Skanderbeg 's men at the Battle of <unk> . The force was defeated and , through a show of mercy , Golemi was allowed to return to the Albanian ranks without punishment . In July 1456 Mehmed marched a large army to besiege Hungarian @-@ held Belgrade in Serbia , but was defeated by Hunyadi . Later that year , İbrahim II of the <unk> Dynasty tried to create an anti @-@ Ottoman alliance which would include his realm , Skanderbeg , Hunyadi , Calixtus , and Alfonso , all of whom would act in concert to defeat the sultan . The plans were never put to practice , however . 
 Skanderbeg 's resources were worn out after over a decade of continuous war . Alfonso and the pope could not provide for him fully , while Venice continued to undermine Skanderbeg . The latter considered war with Skanderbeg since he maintained his alliance with Aragon . Relations with the Italian state worsened further when Lekë Dukagjini , Skanderbeg 's elusive ally in the north , captured <unk> . Even though Skanderbeg did not participate in this , Venice used it as a casus belli to launch an expedition against Skanderbeg . War never started but Albanian @-@ Venetian relations sunk to their lowest point . The Venetian rectors continued to provoke Skanderbeg at a time when he had grown relatively weak due to his nephew and one of his most important officers , Hamza Kastrioti , deserting and joining the Ottomans . Hamza had become dissatisfied with Skanderbeg 's growing power and , upon being received by the sultan , was offered control over much of Albania once conquered . Stung by the betrayal , Skanderbeg offered an ultimatum to Venice where they had to halt their provocations or begin war . Since a crusade was anticipated against the Ottomans , Venice did not want to seem pro @-@ Ottoman and eased their stance towards Albania . 
 = = Campaign = = 
 By the end of May 1457 , a large Ottoman army was seen approaching Albania . Skanderbeg sent a letter to Calixtus informing him of the Ottoman arrival and the dire need for military aid . The pope responded with a promise to send a fleet to Albania – even though the enemy was on land – but it did not arrive . Skanderbeg was thus left to fight the oncoming Ottoman army alone . Mehmed II had placed Isak Bey <unk> and Hamza Kastrioti in command of the force . Isak bey was an experienced commander who had crushed John Kastrioti 's rebellion in 1430 and led the Ottoman counterattack at the Siege of Berat . Hamza brought along with him several disaffected Albanian nobles and personal knowledge of the tactics they could expect from Skanderbeg . In total , Ottoman forces numbered between 50 @,@ 000 and 80 @,@ 000 men . Armies of this size were usually commanded by the sultan himself so rumors spread that Mehmed was leading the campaign . In contrast , Skanderbeg had between 8 @,@ 000 and 10 @,@ 000 men to stand in opposition . 
 = = = Skanderbeg 's " disappearance " = = = 
 The Ottoman army did not march into Albania in one group . The first detachments to arrive were the <unk> who marched through Dibra . Skanderbeg stalled this force 's advance , but , once the main force arrived , the Albanians were not able to offer further resistance and withdrew . Realizing that both Ottoman commanders , Isak bey and Hamza , were familiar with the Albanian terrain and his tactics , Skanderbeg decided to adopt a new means of engagement . Normally , he would lure his enemy into a trap and then ambush them . His new tactic was very similar to his normal ; however , he chose to approach it in a different manner . To make it impossible to be followed , Skanderbeg split his forces into several groups and ordered their respective commanders to march through the forests and mountains in different directions and to never assemble or assault the Ottomans unless instructed to do so . The Albanian warriors were supplied by the locals and supply depots set throughout the mountains as they marched . 
 The Ottomans marched through Mat and pillaged the area . Skanderbeg took parallel routes through the mountains . Since he had not yet engaged Skanderbeg , Isak bey decided not to besiege Krujë , Albania 's main fortress , until he was sure of the Albanian 's fate . He thus camped with his men in the area north of Mount Tumenishta ( Skënderbeu ) to wait for Skanderbeg 's appearance . This region was called Albulena ( Albanian : Uji i <unk> ) , located south of modern @-@ day <unk> . It was surrounded by a series of protective hills where guards were placed . Since Tumenishta had served as the main base for Skanderbeg 's forays into the Ottoman camp at the Siege of Krujë ( 1450 ) , Isak bey and Hamza prepared to annihilate any resistance they would find there . This effort came in vain , however , as they were not challenged by any Albanian forces . Still unsure of Skanderbeg 's dispositions , the Ottoman commanders strengthened the camp 's northern defenses , while the eastern side , in the direction of Tumenishta , remained lightly defended . Ottoman scouts crossed the Mat River into northern Albania . They were seen at the gates of Venetian @-@ held Alessio ( Lezhë ) and ventured deeper into Venetian territory . 
 Due to Skanderbeg 's " disappearance , " rumors began to spread that he had fled since he was unable to confront the Ottomans and that his men had betrayed him . This was further upheld by the Venetians in Durazzo ( Durrës ) . Isak bey and Hamza continued to be wary , however , and their reconnaissance forces reached as far north as Scutari ( Shkodër ) . Skanderbeg remained in the mountains throughout July and August . It is not known with certainty what his army did while in the mountains , but he planned to wear the Ottomans out by forcing them to wait and to make them believe that he had been decisively defeated . Skanderbeg then sent Gjergj ( George ) <unk> to Rome as an ambassador to give the Pope the impression that Albania had been decisively conquered and that aid was necessary to force the Ottomans out of Albania . On 17 September 1457 , Calixtus notified Skanderbeg that he had sent Johan Navarre to help fund the crusade . By the time he arrived , however , the situation had already changed . 
 = = = Battle = = = 
 The local population remained faithful to Skanderbeg and did not reveal his whereabouts . Isak bey and Hamza grew confident that Skanderbeg had been defeated and had thus began to withdraw . When he judged the time right , Skanderbeg gave the signal for the army , which had up until then been in separate groups , to assemble without being seen by the Ottomans . The army gathered by the hills at Tumenishta – as the weakest point in the Ottoman camp was in this direction – and on 2 September 1457 , it was split again into three groups to assault the Ottoman camp . With some of his most trusted men , he climbed to a high peak to scout on the Ottoman camp and saw that the Ottomans were resting . He descended with his chosen band to eliminate any watching guards , but one saw Skanderbeg and fled into the camp yelling that Skanderbeg had arrived . In order to maintain the surprise , Skanderbeg ordered his men to get ready for battle . 
 With the accompaniment of loud noise made from metallic tools and weapons being clapped together , the Albanians charged into the Turkish camp . The Ottomans were caught by surprise and , despite their large numbers , were terrified by the fury of the Albanian assault , thinking they were attacking in larger numbers than they actually had . Hamza tried to reorder his men , assuring them that the Albanians were few . Isak bey , tried to send reinforcements to Hamza 's men , but the arrival of new Albanian contingents forced him to turn his attention . A series of cavalry charges and counter @-@ charges kept the battle moving with a rain of missiles and arquebusiers forcing the Ottomans into the heart of the camp . Seeing that they were surrounded , the Ottoman force began to panic and melted away . Hamza was thus captured , though Isak bey fled . The Ottoman dead may have been as high as 30 @,@ 000 , but it is unlikely that they suffered more than 15 @,@ 000 deaths . In addition , 15 @,@ 000 men were taken prisoner , twenty @-@ four standards were captured , and all the riches in the camp were lost to the Albanians . A multitude of men were also captured , among them Hamza Kastrioti . The fallen Albanian warriors were buried in the Cathedral of St. Mary in the village of <unk> ( 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) east of <unk> ) near the battlefield . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Battle of Albulena was significant for the southern resistance against the Ottoman Empire . Franz <unk> , a historian of the Ottoman Empire , describes the battle as Skanderbeg 's most brilliant victory . The battle of Albulena strengthened the morale of Skanderbeg 's men who afterwards rarely , if at all , deserted his army as Hamza had . Hamza himself was sent as a prisoner to Naples in Alfonso 's realm after being captured . An Ottoman envoy was sent to ransom the standard bearers and forty of the distinguished prisoners . The envoy also tried to settle for a truce between Mehmed and Skanderbeg , but the latter responded that he would only accept if Svetigrad and Berat , which had been lost in 1448 and 1450 respectively , were restored to his state . Seeing that Mehmed would not accept such terms , Skanderbeg strengthened his garrisons in the area around Svetigrad . The victory still bought Albania and Italy time ; in 1460 , Mehmed and Skanderbeg signed an armistice that lasted three years . This gave Skanderbeg the opportunity to land in Italy and help out Alfonso 's son , Ferdinand I of Naples , who had been crowned after his father had died . The battle thus opened a new phase in the Ottoman @-@ Albanian war which saw the high @-@ water mark of the Albanian resistance and the fiercest Ottoman invasions of Albania in the war . The war would last until the fall of Krujë in 1478 . 
 = Don Kent ( wrestler ) = 
 Leo Joseph " Joe " Smith Jr . ( June 24 , 1933 – June 7 , 1993 ) was an American professional wrestler who wrestled as Don Kent and also as The Black Dragon , Doug Kent , Joe Smith and Super Medico III during his 20 years in professional wrestling . 
 Don Kent is one half of The Fabulous Kangaroos alongside partners Al Costello , Bruno Bekkar or Johnny Heffernan . Despite being born in America , Kent was billed as Australian when he competed as a Kangaroo using the Kangaroos ' " Ultra Australian " gimmick , complete with boomerangs , bush hats and " Waltzing Matilda " as their entrance music . 
 When Kent was not one half of the Kangaroos , he mainly worked as " Bulldog " Don Kent in NWA Mid @-@ America and NWA Detroit in the singles and the tag team divisions until his retirement in 1986 . 
 = = Career = = 
 Kent attended St. Philip Catholic Central High School in Battle Creek , Michigan . He was recruited by the Boston Red Sox as a catcher right out of high school . Kent ’ s father thought that Kent was too young to play professional baseball and insisted that he go to St. Benedict ’ s College in Kansas . After graduating , Kent worked at a Veterans Administration Medical Center in his hometown of Battle Creek while being trained by Leapin ’ Larry Chene for a professional wrestling career . 
 = = = Starting out = = = 
 Kent made his professional wrestling debut in 1956 working under such names as " Don Kent " , " Joe Smith " and " The Black Dragon " , generally working as a heel ( bad guy ) in the Michigan area . In the first half of the 1960s Don Kent went to Arizona and worked in the local wrestling promotion , where he was booked as a sadistic heel . In Arizona , Kent worked a storyline that drew full houses at the Phoenix Madison Square Garden against local face ( good guy ) Tito Montez . The two faced off week after week in a variety of specialty matches such as a chain match , " Arizona death match " and falls count anywhere match . The angle ended with a steel cage match that saw Montez win after overcoming Kent ’ s cheating ways . One week after the storyline ended , attendance dropped by half and Don Kent soon left the area . 
 = = = Fabulous Kangaroos = = = 
 In 1967 , Al Costello reformed the tag team The Fabulous Kangaroos with Ray St. Clair who retired after six months with knee problems . A few months after St. Clair retired , Costello found Don Kent to don the bush hat . Kent , who was from Michigan , adopted the Ultra @-@ Australian gimmick ( but retained his American accent ) and a second version of the Fabulous Kangaroos was formed . Costello and Kent teamed together on a regular basis from 1968 until 1974 , approximately the same amount of time that Costello spent teaming with his original partner Roy Heffernan . The Kangaroos won their first tag team championship a few months after teaming up , during a tour of Japan for “ International Wrestling Enterprise " . Over the years , they defended their title in promotions around the globe . In Canada , they were the first Eastern Sports Association International Tag Team Champions ; in the World Wrestling Association , they held the WWA World Tag Team Championship twice . In addition to winning titles all over North America , they also made appearances for the World Wide Wrestling Federation ( now known as World Wrestling Entertainment . 
 The Kangaroos frequented NWA Detroit , where they held the Detroit version of the NWA World Tag Team Championship for most of 1971 . By the end of 1972 , the Kangaroos began working for Nick Gulas ’ NWA Mid @-@ America . In Mid @-@ America , they held the local version of the NWA World Tag Team Championship , the Mid @-@ America version , on three occasions . 
 After a match in the Cincinnati Gardens , Costello 's hip was damaged when an enraged fan threw a fire extinguisher from the balcony . Costello had hip replacement surgery later that year . The fan was arrested , served 15 days in jail , and was fined fifty dollars for damaging the fire extinguisher . With Costello unable to compete , the Fabulous Kangaroos split up . After the Kangaroos went their separate ways Don Kent returned to NWA Mid @-@ America as a singles wrestler . 
 = = = Working alone = = = 
 When Costello retired , Kent remained with Mid @-@ America where he developed into a main heel as the " Dog Collar " wearing , barking " Bulldog " Don Kent . Kent teamed with Chris Gallagher and won the NWA Mid @-@ America Tag Team Championship on two occasions , beating the teams of Frank Monte and Nick DeCarlo as well as Steve Kovac and Ricky Gibson for the title . Kent teamed up with Count Drummer to win the Mid America Tag Team title once more , defeating Jackie Fargo and George Gulas on November 6 , 1974 , losing the title to Fargo and Gulas three weeks later . Kent won the NWA Mid @-@ America Heavyweight Championship , the main title of the promotion , in October 1974 by defeating Tony Charles . Kent lost his first Mid @-@ America title to Jackie Fargo and won it twice more in 1975 , first from Fargo and then later from " Crazy " Luke Graham . Graham defeated Kent on May 7 , 1975 to end his third and final reign with the title . 
 In late 1975 , Kent moved closer to home and work for The Sheik ’ s " NWA Detroit " ( also known as " Big Time Wrestling " ) using his " Bulldog " Don Kent persona . On November 1 , 1975 , Kent defeated Mark Lewin to win the Detroit version of the NWA United States Heavyweight Championship . Lewin regained the title in December . On October 16 , 1976 , Kent regained the title in a bloody brawl against Pampero Firpo and held on to it until January 8 , 1977 , when he lost it to Gino Hernandez . Kent developed into a long running enemy of the Sheik , who was the most popular man in the promotion , with the two clashing many times in wild and bloody brawls . 
 In 1977 , having recovered from hip surgery , Al Costello teamed up with Kent as The Fabulous Kangaroos for a tour of Puerto Rico with the World Wrestling Council ( WWC ) . In Puerto Rico , the Kangaroos were billed on arrival as the WWC World Tag Team Champions . The Kangaroos lost the title to Carlos Colón and Jose Rivera on March 12 , 1977 . The Kangaroos remained in WWC throughout 1977 and into 1978 , never regaining the WWC World Tag Team Championship . After their tour in Puerto Rico ended , Don Kent returned to singles wrestling and Costello focused more on managing due to his bad hip . 
 In 1977 Kent returned to the Alabama area to work for NWA Mid @-@ America once more . Kent defeated Lanny Poffo to win his fourth Mid @-@ America Heavyweight title in December 1977 and lost it to Poffo ’ s brother Randy Savage on January 3 , 1978 . In 1979 , Kent wrestled in Puerto Rico as a singles wrestler , winning the WWC Caribbean Heavyweight Championship from Chief War Cloud on January 6 , 1979 and holding it for over 6 months until he lost it to Hurricane Castillo on July 21 , 1979 . Shortly after losing the Caribbean title , Kent moved up a level and defeated Puerto Rican legend Carlos Colón on August 3 , 1979 only to lose the title to Invader I three weeks later in Ponce , Puerto Rico . 
 In the early to mid 80s , Don Kent returned sporadically to Big Time Wrestling to wrestle the Sheik 's nephew Sabu . 
 = = = Kangaroo return = = = 
 In 1981 , Costello teamed Kent with Bruno Bekkar , who was best known for working in his native New Zealand and Australia , and work a tour as The Kangaroos for the WWC with Costello serving as their manager . Kent and Bekkar won the WWC North American Tag Team title from the team of Jack and Jerry Brisco on October 22 , 1981 . This version of the Kangaroos first lost to , then regained the titles from , Invader I and Super Gladiador before losing them for good on January 26 , 1982 to Invader and Gladiador . After this tour of the Caribbean , Bruno Bekkar returned to Australia and New Zealand to work for the local promotions there . 
 Bekkar was replaced with " Johnny Heffernan " ( Canadian Bob Della Serra ) , a storyline cousin of Roy Heffernan for what was the final Kangaroo version to compete . The team ended Terry and Dory Funk , Jr . ’ s year and a half long run with the WWC World Tag Team championship when they defeated them on May 1 , 1982 . The team held the gold for less than 2 months before losing the belts again . After ending their tour in Puerto Rico , Kent and Heffernan returned to mainland USA to work for Championship Wrestling from Florida , a promotion the Kangaroos had worked in 1962 . In Florida , The Kangaroos won the NWA Florida Global Tag Team Championship four times . The final storyline involving the Fabulous Kangaroos saw Al Costello bring in J.J. Dillon to act as his short term replacement as he " took care of business " . When Costello returned from his business trip , Dillon refused to give up the Kangaroos ' contracts and was backed up by both Kent and Heffernan ( in storyline terms ) . This storyline was designed to write Al Costello out of The Fabulous Kangaroos storyline and allow him to retire from wrestling altogether . Not long after Costello retired , Kent and Della Serra went their separate ways . 
 = = = After The Kangaroos = = = 
 After The Kangaroos split up for the last time , Kent worked mainly in Michigan with tours of Puerto Rico . In Puerto Rico , Don Kent donned a mask and worked under the name " Super Médico III " alongside Super Médico I. Kent was brought in as a storyline replacement for the real Super Médico III , who was played by Jose Estrada , Jr . <unk> I & III won the WWC World Tag Team Championship on August 4 , 1984 from King Tonga and Gran Apollo . When Super Médico III was unmasked in October and revealed to NOT be Jose Estrada , Jr . , the team was stripped of their titles because they used an illegal man to help defend the title . After being exposed as the fake " Medico III " Kent returned to the United States and worked primarily in the Indianapolis @-@ based World Wrestling Association where he continued to wrestle until 1986 , when he went into semi @-@ retirement . By 1988 , Kent was back wrestling tours of Puerto Rico 's WWC as a single . He would continue to wrestle sporadically over the years to follow , stepping into the ring as late as 1992 at the age of 59 . Don Kent died on June 14 , 1993 after suffering from Leukemia for a long period of time . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Bulldog 
 Managers 
 George " Crybaby " Cannon 
 Sir Dudley Clement 
 Al Costello 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Central States Wrestling 
 NWA Central States Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Championship Wrestling from Florida 
 NWA Florida Global Tag Team Championship ( 4 times ) – with Johnny Heffernan 
 Eastern Sports Association 
 ESA International Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Al Costello 
 International Wrestling Enterprise 
 Trans @-@ World Wrestling Alliance World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Al Costello 
 NWA Detroit 
 NWA United States Heavyweight Championship ( Detroit version ) ( 2 times ) 
 NWA Mid @-@ America 
 NWA Mid @-@ America Heavyweight Championship ( 4 times ) 
 NWA Mid @-@ America Tag Team Championship ( 3 times ) – with Chris Gallager ( 2 ) and Count Drummer ( 1 ) 
 NWA World Tag Team Championship ( Mid @-@ America version ) ( 3 times ) – with Al Costello 
 World Wrestling Association 
 WWA World Tag Team Championship ( 5 times ) – with Al Costello ( 2 ) , Dr. Jerry Graham ( 2 ) and Chris Carter ( 1 ) 
 World Wrestling Council 
 WWC Caribbean Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWC Caribbean Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Bruno Bekkar 
 WWC North American Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWC North American Tag Team Championship ( 4 times ) – with Bruno Bekkar ( 1 ) , Johnny Heffernan ( 2 ) and Super Médico I ( 1 ) 
 WWC World Junior Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWC World Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Al Costello ( 1 ) 
 = M @-@ 53 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 53 is a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan that connects Detroit to The Thumb region . The highway starts in Detroit at a connection with M @-@ 3 and ends in Port Austin , Michigan at M @-@ 25 . In between , the trunkline passes through the northern suburbs of Metro Detroit , connects to freeways like Interstate 69 ( I @-@ 69 ) and provides access to rural farmland . In Macomb County , M @-@ 53 follows the Christopher Columbus Freeway , while the remainder of the highway is known as Van Dyke Avenue in the metro area or Van Dyke Road elsewhere . The highway has also been named the Earle Memorial Highway for one of the pioneers of the Good Roads Movement and Michigan 's highway system . 
 When the first state highways were signed in the field in 1919 , M @-@ 53 was one of them , running from Detroit to Elkton . In the 1920s , the highway was extended northward to connect with Port Austin . Later improvements through 1940 realigned a section of the roadway near Imlay City and completed paving . With planning and construction during the 1950s and 1960s , the state converted portions of the road north of Detroit to have divided highway and freeway segments . The freeway bypass of Romeo was started in the 1990s and finished to its current state in 2003 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Starting at the intersection between Van Dyke Avenue and M @-@ 3 ( Gratiot Avenue ) , M @-@ 53 runs north @-@ northwesterly along Van Dyke in the city of Detroit . The four @-@ lane roadway passes through residential neighborhoods on the city 's east side . About a half mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) north of its start , M @-@ 53 meets I @-@ 94 at the latter 's exit 218 . On the opposite side of the freeway interchange , Van Dyke Avenue turns due north and continues through a mix of residential and industrial areas near Coleman A. Young International Airport . In this area , the highway crosses branch lines for both the Conrail Shared Assets Operations and the Canadian National Railway . M @-@ 53 continues northward through residential areas north of 6 Mile Road and crosses from Detroit into Warren at the junction with 8 Mile Road ; that road also marks the Wayne – Macomb county line . The highway passes through the middle of Center Line , an enclave surrounded by Warren . On the northern edge of Center Line , M @-@ 53 meets exit 23 along I @-@ 696 , the Walter Reuther Freeway . North of this interchange , Van Dyke Avenue crosses back into Warren and continues northward . The highway is paralleled by a Conrail line as they both pass through the northern Detroit suburbs . Between 12 Mile and 14 Mile roads , M @-@ 53 passes next to the General Motors Technical Center and through the center of a suburban shopping district . The roadway widens out into a divided highway as it continues northward , crossing into Sterling Heights at 14 Mile Road . The highway is bounded by additional commercial and light industrial properties as it intersects Metropolitan Parkway ( 16 Mile Road ) . 
 Near 18 Mile Road , M @-@ 53 curves to the northeast and separates from Van Dyke Avenue . This separation is marked by an interchange as M @-@ 53 also transitions into a full , four @-@ lane freeway . The interchange , numbered exit 15 , connects to a roundabout junction with 18 ½ Mile Road and Van Dyke Avenue . M @-@ 53 , now named either the Van Dyke Freeway or the Christopher Columbus Freeway , crosses the Clinton River before resuming a northward course , passing to the east side of Utica in Shelby Township . M @-@ 53 runs about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the east of Van Dyke Avenue through the area , and north of the 23 Mile Road interchange , it curves northwesterly to draw closer to Van Dyke . The landscape is mostly residential subdivisions with parks and golf courses as the freeway exits Metro Detroit proper . There is one last interchange near 28 Mile Road where the freeway meets Van Dyke Road , as it is now called . M @-@ 53 turns northeasterly , running as an expressway , with at @-@ grade intersections for access at the key cross roads instead of full interchanges . The expressway section bypasses Romeo to its east , passing between the city and the Romeo State Airport . There are intersections for 30 and 32 Mile roads before the highway curves to the northwest and transitions back to a rural undivided , two @-@ lane , highway near 34 Mile Road . The Columbus Freeway designation drops at this point , and M @-@ 53 follows Van Dyke Road north and northwesterly through rural northern Macomb County . 
 North of Romeo , the trunkline passes through agricultural areas of The Thumb region of the state . M @-@ 53 crosses into Lapeer County south of <unk> . Further north , Van Dyke Road meets I @-@ 69 in Imlay City , running through the downtown area north of the Interstate ; Imlay City is also the location of a crossing of the Canadian National Railway line that carries Amtrak 's Blue Water service between Flint and Port Huron . In the unincorporated community of Burnside , M @-@ 53 intersects M @-@ 90 . The two highways run concurrently for about a mile and a half ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) before separating . M @-@ 53 continues northward and crosses into Sanilac County near Marlette . In that city , the highway crosses a branch line of the Huron and Eastern Railway ( HESR ) before continuing through downtown . From Marlette northward , M @-@ 53 runs parallel to , and about a mile east of , the Sanilac – Tuscola county line . The highway follows Van Dyke Road through rural farming country past intersections with M @-@ 46 and M @-@ 81 and across the Cass River before crossing into Huron County . 
 About six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) into Huron County , the highway turns to the northeast . Near Bad Axe , Van Dyke Road curves again , turning due east into town where it becomes Huron Street . At downtown , M @-@ 53 turns north on Port Crescent Street , joining with M @-@ 142 . The two highways cross another branch line of the HESR . Outside of town , the street name changes back to Van Dyke Road , and M @-@ 142 separates to the west . M @-@ 53 now follows Van Dyke Road , which is paralleled by a HESR line as far north as Kinde . The highway continues further along , meandering toward the northeast as it approaches Port Austin . M @-@ 25 merges in from the east at Grindstone Road , and the two highways run together north along Lake Street into town . At the intersection with Spring Street , M @-@ 25 turns west to follow the shoreline of Saginaw Bay , and M @-@ 53 terminates . 
 M @-@ 53 is maintained by MDOT like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2010 showed that the highest traffic levels along M @-@ 53 were the 62 @,@ 594 vehicles daily between the southern end of the freeway and M @-@ 59 ; the lowest counts were the 1 @,@ 964 vehicles per day north of Kinde . M @-@ 53 between M @-@ 3 in Detroit and the northern M @-@ 142 junction near Bad Axe has been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 53 was first designated by 1919 ; it started at Gratiot Avenue in Detroit running north through Centerline , and Utica to eventually end east of Elkton on M @-@ 31 . An extension in 1926 moved the northern terminus to Port Austin along the former M @-@ 19 . A new route near Imlay City was opened in 1932 , with the southern section of the bypass opened in 1937 . The trunkline was completely paved by 1940 when the last 11 miles ( 18 km ) were paved in Huron and Sanilac counties . 
 The first divided highway section was completed in 1952 in Warren , with an additional two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) completed the following year , completing the divided highway between 12 Mile and 17 Mile roads . Full freeway segments were built in 1965 between 18 Mile and 27 ½ Mile roads near Utica and Romeo . The plans at the time were to extend the freeway west one mile to Mound Road and then have it continue south along the Mound Road corridor into Detroit to connect with the Davison Freeway and I @-@ 96 . In fact , a four @-@ level freeway @-@ to @-@ freeway interchange had already been completed at the intersection of Mound Road and I @-@ 696 in Warren . Construction started on the Romeo Bypass in 1989 . Completed in 1992 , the bypass extended a two @-@ lane expressway to 34 Mile Road . Further construction on the remaining two lanes was started in 2002 . When it was finished in 2003 , the highway had two remaining intersections but is otherwise a limited @-@ access freeway . The old highway was transferred to local control and removed from the state trunkline highway system . 
 = = Memorial highway designations = = 
 The freeway and expressway sections of M @-@ 53 are officially known as the Christopher Columbus Freeway as a nod to Macomb County 's large Italian American population . This designation was approved by the Michigan Legislature in 1978 . The remainder has been named Van Dyke Avenue or Van Dyke Road . That name honors James A. Van Dyke , a prominent attorney in Detroit in the 19th century . Van Dyke was the prosecutor for Wayne County , as well as both city attorney and mayor of Detroit . The street through Detroit was named in his honor , and as the highway was extended northward , the name was carried with it . 
 The last name applied to M @-@ 53 is the Earle Memorial Highway , named in honor of Horatio Earle , Michigan 's first State Highway Commissioner . Earle was instrumental in the early Good Roads Movement in the state and the creation of the Michigan State Highway Department , which is now MDOT . When the original legislation creating a highway agency was declared unconstitutional in 1903 , he kept the job in an unofficial capacity until the Legislature could rectify the situation . Earle designated that the first mile of state reward road in The Thumb , and residents formed a group to lobby to have the road named in his honor . The State Highway Commissioner Murray Van Wagoner designated M @-@ 53 in Earle 's memory in April 1939 , and the Legislature legislation two years later honoring him , but not officially naming the road . That was corrected in 2001 when the statutes naming various highways in the state were consolidated , and M @-@ 53 was officially designated the Earle Memorial Highway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Lessons for Children = 
 Lessons for Children is a series of four age @-@ adapted reading primers written by the prominent 18th @-@ century British poet and essayist Anna Laetitia Barbauld . Published in 1778 and 1779 , the books initiated a revolution in children 's literature in the Anglo @-@ American world . For the first time , the needs of the child reader were seriously considered : the typographically simple texts progress in difficulty as the child learns . In perhaps the first demonstration of experiential pedagogy in Anglo @-@ American children 's literature , Barbauld 's books use a conversational style , which depicts a mother and her son discussing the natural world . Based on the educational theories of John Locke , Barbauld 's books emphasise learning through the senses . 
 One of the primary morals of Barbauld 's lessons is that individuals are part of a community ; in this she was part of a tradition of female writing that emphasised the interconnectedness of society . Charles , the hero of the texts , explores his relationship to nature , to animals , to people , and finally to God . 
 Lessons had a significant effect on the development of children 's literature in Britain and the United States . Maria Edgeworth , Sarah Trimmer , Jane Taylor , and Ellenor Fenn , to name a few of the most illustrious , were inspired to become children 's authors because of Lessons and their works dominated children 's literature for several generations . Lessons itself was reprinted for over a century . However , because of the disrepute that educational writings fell into , largely due to the low esteem awarded Barbauld , Trimmer , and others by contemporary male Romantic writers , Barbauld 's Lessons has rarely been studied by scholars . In fact , it has only been analysed in depth since the 1990s . 
 = = Publication , structure , and pedagogical theory = = 
 = = = Publication and structure = = = 
 Lessons depicts a mother teaching her son . Presumably , many of the events were inspired by Barbauld 's experiences of teaching her own adopted son , her nephew Charles , as the events correlate with his age and growth . Although there are no surviving first edition copies of the works , children 's literature scholar Mitzi Myers has reconstructed the probable publication dates from Barbauld 's letters and the books ' earliest reviews as follows : Lessons for Children of two to three ( 1778 ) ; Lessons for Children of three , part I ( 1778 ) ; Lessons for Children of three , part II ( 1778 ) ; and Lessons for Children of three to four ( 1779 ) . After its initial publication , the series was often published as a single volume . 
 Barbauld demanded that her books be printed in large type with wide margins , so that children could easily read them ; she was more than likely the " originator " of this practice , according to Barbauld scholar William McCarthy , and " almost certainly [ its ] popularizer " . In her history of children 's literature in The Guardian of Education ( 1802 – 1806 ) , Sarah Trimmer noted these innovations , as well as the use of good @-@ quality paper and large spaces between words . While making reading easier , these production changes also made the books too expensive for the children of the poor , therefore Barbauld 's books helped to create a distinct aesthetic for the middle @-@ class children 's book . 
 Barbauld 's texts were designed for the developing reader , beginning with words of one syllable and progressing to multi @-@ syllabic words . The first part of Lessons includes simple statements such as : " Ink is black , and papa 's shoes are black . Paper is white , and Charles 's frock is white . " The second part increases in difficulty : " February is very cold too , but the days are longer , and there is a yellow crocus coming up , and the <unk> tree is in blossom , and there are some white snow @-@ drops peeking up their little heads . " 
 Barbauld also " departs from previous reading primers by introducing elements of story , or narrative , piecemeal before introducing her first story " : the narrator explains the idea of " sequentiality " to Charles , and implicitly to the reader , before ever telling him a story . For example , the days of the week are explained before Charles 's trip to France . 
 = = = Pedagogical theory = = = 
