 Barbauld 's Lessons emphasises the value of all kinds of language and literacy ; not only do readers learn how to read but they also acquire the ability to understand metaphors and analogies . The fourth volume in particular fosters poetic thinking and as McCarthy points out , its passages on the moon mimic Barbauld 's poem " A Summer Evening 's Meditation " : 
 Barbauld also developed a particular style that would dominate British and American children 's literature for a generation : an " informal dialogue between parent and child " , a conversational style that emphasised linguistic communication . Lessons starts out monopolised by the mother 's voice but slowly , over the course of the volumes , Charles 's voice is increasingly heard as he gains confidence in his own ability to read and speak . This style was an implicit critique of late 18th @-@ century pedagogy , which typically employed rote learning and memorisation . 
 Barbauld 's Lessons also illustrates mother and child engaging in quotidian activities and taking nature walks . Through these activities , the mother teaches Charles about the world around him and he explores it . This , too , was a challenge to the pedagogical orthodoxy of the day , which did not encourage experiential learning . The mother shows Charles the seasons , the times of the day , and different minerals by bringing him to them rather than simply describing them and having him recite those descriptions . Charles learns the principles of " botany , zoology , numbers , change of state in chemistry ... the money system , the calendar , geography , meteorology , agriculture , political economy , geology , [ and ] astronomy " . He also inquires about all of them , making the learning process dynamic . 
 Barbauld 's pedagogy was fundamentally based on John Locke 's Some Thoughts Concerning Education ( 1693 ) , the most influential pedagogical treatise in 18th @-@ century Britain . Building on Locke 's theory of the Association of Ideas , which he had outlined in Some Thoughts , philosopher David Hartley had developed an associationist psychology that greatly influenced writers such as Barbauld ( who had read Joseph Priestley 's redaction of it ) . For the first time , educational theorists and practitioners were thinking in terms of developmental psychology . As a result , Barbauld and the women writers she influenced produced the first graded texts and the first body of literature designed for an age @-@ specific readership . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Lessons not only teaches literacy , " it also initiates the child [ reader ] into the elements of society 's symbol @-@ systems and conceptual structures , inculcates an ethics , and encourages him to develop a certain kind of sensibility " . One of the series ' overall aims is to demonstrate that Charles is superior to the animals he encounters — because he can speak and reason , he is better than they are . Lessons for Children , of Three Years Old , part 2 begins : 
 Do you know why you are better than Puss ? Puss can play as well as you ; and Puss can drink milk , and lie upon the carpet ; and she can run as fast as you , and faster too , a great deal ; and she can climb trees better ; and she can catch mice , which you cannot do . But can Puss talk ? No . Can Puss read ? No . Then that is the reason why you are better than Puss — because you can talk and read . 
 Andrew O 'Malley writes in his survey of 18th @-@ century children 's literature , " from helping poor animals [ Charles ] eventually makes a seamless transition to performing small acts of charity for the poor children he encounters " . Charles learns to care for his fellow human beings through his exposure to animals . Barbauld 's Lessons is not , therefore , Romantic in the traditional sense ; it does not emphasise the solitary self or the individual . As McCarthy puts it , " every human being needs other human beings in order to live . Humans are communal entities " . 
 Lessons was probably meant to be paired with Barbauld 's Hymns in Prose for Children ( 1781 ) , which were both written for Charles . As F. J. Harvey Darton , an early scholar of children 's literature , explains , they " have the same ideal , in one aspect held by Rousseau , in another wholly rejected by him : the belief that a child should steadily contemplate Nature , and the conviction that by so doing he will be led to contemplate the traditional God " . However , some modern scholars have pointed to the lack of overt religious references in Lessons , particularly in contrast to Hymns , to make the claim that it is secular . 
 One important theme in Lessons is restriction of the child , a theme which has been interpreted both positively and negatively by critics . In what Mary Jackson has called the " new child " of the 18th century , she describes " a fondly sentimentalized state of childishness rooted in material and emotional dependency on adults " and she argues that the " new good child seldom made important , real decisions without parental approval ... In short , the new good child was a paragon of dutiful submissiveness , refined virtue , and appropriate sensibility . " Other scholars , such as Sarah Robbins , have maintained that Barbauld presents images of constraint only to offer images of liberation later in the series : education for Barbauld , in this interpretation , is a progression from restraint to liberation , physically represented by Charles ' slow movement from his mother 's lap in the opening scene of first book , to a stool next to her in the opening of the subsequent volume , to his detachment from her side in the final book . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Lessons for Children and Barbauld 's other popular children 's book , Hymns in Prose for Children , had an unprecedented impact ; not only did they influence the poetry of William Wordsworth and William Blake , particularly Blake 's Songs of Innocence and Experience ( 1789 – 94 ) , they were also used to teach several generations of schoolchildren both in Britain and the United States . Barbauld 's texts were used to perpetuate the ideal of Republican motherhood in 19th @-@ century America , particularly the notion of the mother as the educator of the nation . British children 's author and critic Charlotte Yonge wrote in 1869 that the books had taught " three @-@ quarters of the gentry of the last three generations " to read . Poet Elizabeth Barrett Browning could still recite the beginning of Lessons at age thirty @-@ nine . 
 Writers of all stamps immediately recognised the revolutionary nature of Barbauld 's books . After meeting Barbauld , the famous 18th @-@ century novelist Frances Burney described her and her books : 
 ... the authoress of the most useful books , next to Mrs. Trimmer 's , that have been yet written for dear little children ; though this for the world is probably her very secondary merit , her many pretty poems , and particularly songs , being generally esteemed . But many more have written those as well , and not a few better ; for children 's books she began the new walk , which has since been so well cultivated , to the great information as well as utility of parents . 
 Barbauld herself believed that her writing was noble and she encouraged others to follow in her footsteps . As Betsy Rodgers , her biographer , explains : " she gave prestige to the writing of juvenile literature , and by not lowering her standard of writing for children , she inspired others to write on a similar high standard " . In fact , because of Barbauld , Sarah Trimmer and Hannah More were galvanised to write for poor children and to organise a large @-@ scale Sunday School movement . Ann and Jane Taylor began writing children 's poetry , the most famous of which is " Twinkle , Twinkle , Little Star " . Ellenor Fenn wrote and designed a series of readers and games for middle @-@ class children , including the best @-@ selling Cobwebs to Catch Flies ( 1784 ) . Richard Lovell Edgeworth began one of the first systematic studies of childhood development which would culminate not only in an educational treatise co @-@ authored with Maria Edgeworth entitled Practical Education ( 1798 ) , but also in a large body of children 's stories by Maria , beginning with The Parent 's Assistant ( 1798 ) . Thomas Day originally began his important The History of Sandford and Merton ( 1783 – 89 ) for Edgeworth 's collection , but it grew too long and was published separately . 
 In the second half of the 1790s , Barbauld and her brother , the physician John Aikin , wrote a second series of books , Evenings at Home , aimed at more advanced readers , ages eight to twelve . While not as influential , these were also popular and remained in print for decades . Lessons was reprinted , translated , pirated , and imitated until the 20th century ; according to Myers , it helped found a female tradition of educational writing . 
 While Day , for example , has been hailed as an educational innovator , Barbauld has most often been described through the unsympathetic words of her detractors . The politician Charles James Fox and the writer and critic Samuel Johnson ridiculed Barbauld 's children 's books and believed that she was wasting her poetic talents . In his Life of Johnson ( 1791 ) , James Boswell recorded Johnson 's thoughts : 
 <unk> to make children prematurely wise is useless labour ... Too much is expected from precocity , and too little performed . [ Barbauld ] was an instance of early cultivation , but in what did it terminate ? In marrying a little Presbyterian parson , who keeps an infant boarding @-@ school , so that all her employment now is , ' To suckle fools , and chronicle small beer . ' She tells the children ' This is a cat , and that is a dog , with four legs and a tail ; see there ! you are much better than a cat or a dog , for you can <unk> 
 Barbauld had published a successful book of poetry in 1773 which Johnson greatly admired ; he viewed her switch to children 's literature as a descent . The most damning and lasting criticism , however , came from the Romantic essayist Charles Lamb in a letter to the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge : 
 Mrs. Barbauld [ ' s ] stuff has banished all the old classics of the nursery ... Mrs. B 's and Mrs. Trimmer 's nonsense lay in piles about . Knowledge insignificant & vapid as Mrs. B 's books convey , it seems , must come to a child in the shape of knowledge , & his empty <unk> must be turned with conceit of his own powers , when he has learnt , that a Horse is an animal , & billy is better than a Horse , & such like : instead of that beautiful Interest which made the child a man , while all the time he suspected himself to be no bigger than a child . Science has succeeded to Poetry no less in the little walks of Children than with Men . ― : Is there no possibility of averting this sore evil ? Think what you would have been now , if instead of being fed with Tales and old wives fables in childhood , you had been crammed with Geography & Natural History ? Damn them . I mean the cursed Barbauld Crew , those <unk> & <unk> of all that is Human in man & child . [ emphasis Lamb 's ] 
 This quote was used by writers and scholars to condemn Barbauld and other educational writers for a century . As Myers argues : 
 [ Lamb ] expresses in embryonic form ways of thinking about children , teaching , and literature that have long since been institutionalized in historical account and classroom practice : the privileging of an imaginative canon and its separation from all the cultural knowledge that had previously been thought of as literature ; the binary opposition of scientific , empiricist ways of knowing and intuitive , imaginative insights ; even the two @-@ tiered structure of most modern English departments , with male @-@ dominated imaginative literature on the upper @-@ deck and practical reading and writing instruction , taught most often by women and the untenured , relegated to the lower levels . 
 It is only in the 1990s and 2000s that Barbauld and other female educational writers are beginning to be acknowledged in the history of children 's literature and , indeed , in the history of literature itself . As Myers points out , " the writing woman as teacher has not captured the imagination of feminist scholars " , and Barbauld 's children 's works are usually consigned to " the backwaters of children 's literature surveys , usually deplored for their pernicious effect on the emergent cultural construction of Romantic childhood , or in the margins of commentary on male high Romanticism , a minor inspiration for Blake or Wordsworth perhaps " . The male Romantics did not explore didactic genres that illustrated educational progress ; rather , as Myers explains , their works embodied a " nostalgia for lost youth and [ a ] pervasive valorization of instinctive juvenile wisdom " not shared by many female writers at this time . 
 Serious scholarship is just beginning to investigate the complexities of Barbauld 's Lessons ; McCarthy , for example , has noted the resonances between Lessons and T. S. Eliot 's The Wasteland that have yet to be explored : 
 = Urquhart Castle = 
 Urquhart Castle ( listen ; Scottish Gaelic : Caisteal na <unk> ) sits beside Loch Ness in the Highlands of Scotland . The castle is on the A82 road , 21 kilometres ( 13 mi ) south @-@ west of Inverness and 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) east of the village of <unk> . 
 The present ruins date from the 13th to the 16th centuries , though built on the site of an early medieval fortification . Founded in the 13th century , Urquhart played a role in the Wars of Scottish Independence in the 14th century . It was subsequently held as a royal castle , and was raided on several occasions by the MacDonald Earls of Ross . The castle was granted to the Clan Grant in 1509 , though conflict with the MacDonalds continued . Despite a series of further raids the castle was strengthened , only to be largely abandoned by the middle of the 17th century . Urquhart was partially destroyed in 1692 to prevent its use by Jacobite forces , and subsequently decayed . In the 20th century it was placed in state care and opened to the public : it is now one of the most @-@ visited castles in Scotland . 
 The castle , situated on a headland overlooking Loch Ness , is one of the largest in Scotland in area . It was approached from the west and defended by a ditch and drawbridge . The buildings of the castle were laid out around two main enclosures on the shore . The northern enclosure or Nether Bailey includes most of the more intact structures , including the gatehouse , and the five @-@ storey Grant Tower at the north end of the castle . The southern enclosure or Upper Bailey , sited on higher ground , comprises the scant remains of earlier buildings . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early Middle Ages = = = 
 The name Urquhart derives from the 7th @-@ century form <unk> , itself a mix of Gaelic air ( by ) and Old Welsh <unk> ( thicket or wood ) . Pieces of vitrified stone , subjected to intense heat and characteristic of early medieval fortification , had been discovered at Urquhart from the early 20th century . Speculation that Urquhart may have been the fortress of Bridei son of Maelchon , king of the northern Picts , led Professor Leslie Alcock to undertake excavations in 1983 . Adomnán 's Life of Columba records that St. Columba visited Bridei some time between 562 and 586 , though little geographical detail is given . Adomnán also relates that during the visit , Columba converted a Pictish nobleman named <unk> , who was on his deathbed , his son <unk> , and their household , at a place called <unk> . The excavations , supported by radiocarbon dating , indicated that the rocky knoll at the south @-@ west corner of the castle had been the site of an extensive fort between the 5th and 11th centuries . The findings led Professor Alcock to conclude that Urquhart is most likely to have been the site of <unk> 's residence , rather than that of Bridei who is more likely to have been based at Inverness , either at the site of the castle or at Craig Phadrig to the west . 
 = = = The early castle = = = 
 Some sources state that William the Lion had a royal castle at Urquhart in the 12th century , though Professor Alcock finds no evidence for this . In the 12th and 13th centuries , the Meic Uilleim ( MacWilliams ) , descendents of Malcolm III , staged a series of rebellions against David I and his successors . The last of these rebellions was put down in 1229 , and to maintain order Alexander II granted Urquhart to his <unk> ( usher or door @-@ ward ) , Thomas de Lundin . On de Lundin 's death a few years later it passed to his son Alan Durward . It is considered likely that the original castle was built soon after this time , centred on the motte at the south @-@ west of the site . In 1275 , after Alan 's death , the king granted Urquhart to John II Comyn , Lord of Badenoch . 
 The first documentary record of Urquhart Castle occurs in 1296 , when it was captured by Edward I of England . Edward 's invasion marked the beginning of the Wars of Scottish Independence , which would go on intermittently until 1357 . Edward appointed Sir William fitz Warin as constable to hold the castle for the English . In 1297 he was ambushed by Sir Andrew de Moray while returning from Inverness , and Moray subsequently laid siege to the castle , launching an unsuccessful night attack . The English must have been dislodged soon after , since in 1298 Urquhart was again controlled by the Scots . In 1303 Sir Alexander de Forbes failed to hold off another English assault . This time Edward installed as governor Alexander Comyn , brother of John , as the family had sided with the English against Robert Bruce . Following his murder of the Red Comyn in 1306 , Bruce completed his defeat of the Comyns when he marched through the Great Glen in 1307 , taking the castles of Inverlochy , Urquhart and Inverness . After this time Urquhart became a royal castle , held for the crown by a series of constables . 
 Sir Robert Lauder of <unk> was constable of Urquhart Castle in 1329 . After fighting at the Battle of Halidon Hill in 1333 , where the Scots were defeated , Lauder returned to hold Urquhart against another threatened English invasion . It is recorded as being one of only five castles in Scotland held by the Scots at this time . In 1342 , David II spent the summer hunting at Urquhart , the only king to have stayed here . 
 Over the next two hundred years , the Great Glen was raided frequently by the MacDonald Lords of the Isles , powerful rulers of a semi @-@ independent kingdom in western Scotland , with a claim to the earldom of Ross . In 1395 , Domhnall of Islay seized Urquhart Castle from the crown , and managed to retain it for more than 15 years . In 1411 , he marched through the glen to take on the king 's supporters at the Battle of Harlaw . Although an indecisive battle , Domhnall subsequently lost the initiative and the crown was soon back in control of Urquhart . In 1437 Domhnall 's son Alexander , now Earl of Ross , raided around Glen Urquhart but could not take the castle . Royal funds were granted to shore up the castle 's defences . Alexander 's son John succeeded his father in 1449 , aged 16 . In 1452 he too led a raid up the Great Glen , seizing Urquhart , and subsequently obtained a grant of the lands and castle of Urquhart for life . However , in 1462 John made an agreement with Edward IV of England against the Scottish King James III . When this became known to James in 1476 , John was stripped of his titles , and Urquhart was turned over to an ally , the Earl of Huntly . 
 = = = The Grants = = = 
 Huntly brought in Sir Duncan Grant of Freuchie to restore order to the area around Urquhart Castle . His son John Grant of Freuchie ( <unk> ) was given a five @-@ year lease of the Glen Urquhart estate in 1502 . In 1509 , Urquhart Castle , along with the estates of Glen Urquhart and Glenmoriston , was granted by James IV to John Grant in perpetuity , on condition that he repair and rebuild the castle . The Grants maintained their ownership of the castle until 1912 , although the raids from the west continued . In 1513 , following the disaster of Flodden , Sir Donald MacDonald of Lochalsh attempted to gain from the disarray in Scotland by claiming the Lordship of the Isles and occupying Urquhart Castle . Grant regained the castle before 1517 , but not before the MacDonalds had driven off 300 cattle and 1 @,@ 000 sheep , as well as looting the castle of provisions . Grant unsuccessfully attempted to claim damages from MacDonald . James Grant of Freuchie ( <unk> ) succeeded his father , and in 1544 became involved with Huntly and Clan Fraser in a feud with the Macdonalds of Clanranald , which culminated in the Battle of the Shirts . In retaliation , the MacDonalds and their allies the Camerons attacked and captured Urquhart in 1545 . Known as the " Great Raid " , this time the MacDonalds succeeded in taking 2 @,@ 000 cattle , as well as hundreds of other animals , and stripped the castle of its furniture , cannon , and even the gates . Grant regained the castle , and was also awarded Cameron lands as recompense . 
 The Great Raid proved to be the last raid . In 1527 , the historian Hector Boece wrote of the " <unk> <unk> " of Urquhart , but by the close of the 16th century Urquhart had been rebuilt by the Grants , now a powerful force in the Highlands . Repairs and remodelling continued as late as 1623 , although the castle was no longer a favoured residence . In 1644 a mob of Covenanters ( Presbyterian agitators ) broke into the castle when Lady Mary Grant was staying , robbing her and turning her out for her adherence to Episcopalianism . An inventory taken in 1647 shows the castle virtually empty . When Oliver Cromwell invaded Scotland in 1650 , he disregarded Urquhart in favour of building forts at either end of the Great Glen . 
 When James VII was deposed in the Revolution of 1688 , Ludovic Grant of Freuchie sided with William of Orange and garrisoned the castle with 200 of his own soldiers . Though lacking weapons they were well @-@ provisioned and , when a force of 500 Jacobites ( supporters of the exiled James ) laid siege , the garrison were able to hold out until after the defeat of the main Jacobite force at <unk> in May 1690 . When the soldiers finally left they blew up the gatehouse to prevent reoccupation of the castle by the Jacobites . Large blocks of collapsed masonry are still visible beside the remains of the gatehouse . Parliament ordered £ 2 @,@ 000 compensation to be paid to Grant , but no repairs were undertaken . Subsequent plundering of the stonework and other materials for re @-@ use by locals further reduced the ruins , and the Grant Tower partially collapsed following a storm in 1715 . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 By the 1770s the castle was roofless , and was regarded as a romantic ruin by 19th @-@ century painters and visitors to the Highlands . In 1884 the castle came under the control of Caroline , Dowager Countess of Seafield , widow of the 7th Earl of Seafield , on the death of her son the 8th Earl . On Lady Seafield 's death in 1911 her will instructed that Urquhart Castle be entrusted into state care , and in October 1913 responsibility for the castle 's upkeep was transferred to the Commissioners of His Majesty 's Works and Public Buildings . Historic Scotland , the successor to the Office of Works , continues to maintain the castle , which is a category A listed building and a scheduled monument in recognition of its national significance . 
 In 1994 Historic Scotland proposed construction of a new visitor centre and car park to alleviate the problems of parking on the main A82 road . Strong local opposition led to a public inquiry , which approved the proposals in 1998 . The new building is sunk into the embankment below the road , with provision for parking on the roof of the structure . The visitor centre includes a display on the history of the site , including a series of replicas from the medieval period ; a cinema ; a restaurant ; and shop . The castle is open all year , and can also host wedding ceremonies . In 2011 more than 315 @,@ 000 people visited Urquhart Castle , making it Historic Scotland 's third most visited site after the castles of Edinburgh and Stirling . 
 = = Description = = 
 Urquhart Castle is sited on <unk> Point , a triangular promontory on the north @-@ western shore of Loch Ness , and commands the route along this side of the Great Glen as well as the entrance to Glen Urquhart . The castle is quite close to water level , though there are low cliffs along the north @-@ east sides of the promontory . There is considerable room for muster on the inland side , where a " castle @-@ toun " of service buildings would originally have stood , as well as gardens and orchards in the 17th century . Beyond this area the ground rises steeply to the north @-@ west , up to the visitor centre and the A82 . A dry moat , 30 metres ( 98 ft ) across at its widest , defends the landward approach , possibly excavated in the early Middle Ages . A stone @-@ built causeway provides access , with a drawbridge formerly crossing the gap at the centre . The castle side of the causeway was formerly walled @-@ in , forming an enclosed space similar to a barbican . 
 Urquhart is one of the largest castles in Scotland in area . The walled portion of the castle is shaped roughly like a figure @-@ 8 aligned northeast @-@ southwest along the bank of the loch , around 150 by 46 metres ( 492 by 151 ft ) , forming two baileys ( enclosures ) : the Nether Bailey to the north , and the Upper Bailey to the south . The curtain walls of both enclosures date largely to the 14th century , though much augmented by later building , particularly to the north where most of the remaining structures are located . 
 = = = Nether Bailey = = = 
 The 16th @-@ century gatehouse is on the inland side of the Nether Bailey , and comprises twin D @-@ plan towers flanking an arched entrance passage . Formerly the passage was defended by a portcullis and a double set of doors , with guard rooms either side . Over the entrance are a series of rooms which may have served as accommodation for the castle 's keeper . Collapsed masonry surrounds the gatehouse , dating from its destruction after 1690 . 
 The Nether Bailey , the main focus of activity in the castle since around 1400 , is anchored at its northern tip by the Grant Tower , the main tower house or keep . The tower measures 12 by 11 metres ( 39 by 36 ft ) , and has walls up to 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) thick . The tower rests on 14th @-@ century foundations , but is largely the result of 16th @-@ century rebuilding . Originally of five storeys , it remains the tallest portion of the castle despite the southern wall collapsing in a storm in the early 18th century . The standing parts of the parapet , remodelled in the 1620s , show that the corners of the tower were topped by corbelled bartizans ( turrets ) . Above the main door on the west , and the postern to the east , are machicolations , narrow slots through which objects could be dropped on attackers . The western door is also protected by its own ditch and drawbridge , accessed from a cobbled " Inner Close " separated from the main bailey by a gate . The surviving interior sections can still be accessed via the circular staircase built into the east wall of the tower . The interior would have comprised a hall on the first floor , with rooms on another two floors above , and attic chambers in the turrets . Rooms on the main floors have large 16th @-@ century windows , though with small pistol @-@ holes below to allow for defence . 
 To the south of the tower is a range of buildings built against the thick , buttressed , 14th @-@ century curtain wall . The great hall occupied the central part of this range , with the lord 's private apartments of great chamber and solar in the block to the north , and kitchens to the south . The foundations of a rectangular building stand on a rocky mound within the Nether Bailey , tentatively identified as a chapel . 
 = = = Upper Bailey = = = 
 The Upper Bailey is focused on the rocky mound at the south @-@ west corner of the castle . The highest part of the headland , this mound is the site of the earliest defences at Urquhart . <unk> material , characteristic of early medieval fortification , was discovered on the slopes of the mound , indicating the site of the early medieval fortification identified by Professor Alcock . In the 13th century , the mound became the motte of the original castle built by the <unk> , and the surviving walls represent a " shell keep " ( a hollow enclosure ) of this date . These ruins are fragmentary , but indicate that there were towers to the north and south of the shell keep . 
 A 16th @-@ century water gate in the eastern wall of the Upper Bailey gives access to the shore of the loch . The adjacent buildings may have housed the stables . To the south of this , opposite the motte , is the base of a doocot ( pigeon house ) and the scant remains of 13th @-@ century buildings , possibly once a great hall but more recently re @-@ used as a smithy . 
 = <unk> = 
 A crinoline / <unk> / is a stiffened or structured petticoat designed to hold out a woman 's skirt , popular at various times since the mid @-@ 19th century . Originally , crinoline described a stiff fabric made of horsehair ( " crin " ) and cotton or linen which was used to make <unk> and as a dress lining . 
 By the 1850s the term crinoline was more usually applied to the fashionable silhouette provided by horsehair petticoats , and to the hoop skirts that replaced them in the mid @-@ 1850s . In form and function these hoop skirts were similar to the 16th- and 17th @-@ century farthingale and to 18th @-@ century panniers , in that they too enabled skirts to spread even wider and more fully . 
 The steel @-@ hooped cage crinoline , first patented in April 1856 by R.C. Milliet in Paris , and by their agent in Britain a few months later , became extremely popular . Steel cage crinolines were mass @-@ produced in huge quantity , with factories across the Western world producing tens of thousands in a year . Alternative materials , such as whalebone , cane , gutta @-@ percha and even inflatable caoutchouc ( natural rubber ) were all used for hoops , although steel was the most popular . At its widest point , the crinoline could reach a circumference of up to six yards , although by the late 1860s , crinolines were beginning to reduce in size . By the early 1870s , the smaller crinolette and the bustle had largely replaced the crinoline . 
 Crinolines were worn by women of every social standing and class across the Western world , from royalty to factory workers . This led to widespread media scrutiny and criticism , particularly in satirical magazines such as Punch . They were also hazardous if worn without due care . Thousands of women died in the mid @-@ 19th century as a result of their hooped skirts catching fire . Alongside fire , other hazards included the hoops being caught in machinery , carriage wheels , gusts of wind , or other obstacles . 
 The crinoline silhouette was revived several times in the 20th century , particularly in the late 1940s as a result of Christian Dior 's " New Look " of 1947 . The <unk> nylon and net petticoats worn in the 1950s and 1960s to poof out skirts also became known as crinolines even when there were no hoops in their construction . In the mid @-@ 1980s Vivienne Westwood designed the mini @-@ crini , a mini @-@ length crinoline which was highly influential on 1980s fashion . Late 20th and early 21st century designers such as John Galliano and Alexander McQueen have become famous for their updated crinoline designs . Since the 1980s and well into the 21st century the crinoline has remained a popular option for formal evening dresses , wedding dresses , and ball gowns . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name crinoline is often described as a combination of the Latin word crinis ( " hair " ) and / or the French word crin ( " horsehair " ) ; with the Latin word <unk> ( " thread " or " flax , " which was used to make linen ) , describing the materials used in the original textile . 
 = = Pre @-@ 1850 = = 
 The crinoline was not the first garment designed to support the wearer 's skirts in a fashionable shape . Whilst the bell @-@ shaped skirts seen on statuettes from the ancient Minoan civilization are often compared to crinolines , particularly under the assumption that hoops were required to retain their shape , there is no evidence to confirm this and the theory is usually dismissed . The crinoline 's ancestors are more typically recognised as the Spanish <unk> , later known as the farthingale , widely worn in Europe from the late 15th century to the early 17th century , and the side @-@ hoops and panniers worn throughout the 18th century . 
 The horsehair fabric called crinoline was first noted by 1829 , when it was offered for lining and dress @-@ making . That year , Rudolph Ackermann 's Repository of Fashions described the new textile as a " fine clear stuff , not unlike in appearance to <unk> , but of a very strong and durable description : it is made in different colours ; grey , and the colour of unbleached cambric are most in favour . " 
 Petticoats made of horsehair crinoline appeared around 1839 , proving so successful that the name ' crinoline ' began to refer to supportive petticoats in general , rather than solely to the material . By 1847 , crinoline fabric was being used as a stiffening for skirt linings , although English women preferred separate crinoline fabric petticoats which were beginning to collapse under the increasing weight of the skirts . One alternative to horsehair crinoline was the quilted petticoat stuffed with down or feathers , such as that reportedly worn in 1842 by Lady Aylesbury . However , quilted skirts were not widely produced until the early 1850s . In about 1849 , it was possible to buy stiffened and corded cotton fabric for making petticoats , marketed as ' crinoline , ' and designed as a substitute for the horsehair textile . The artificial crinoline with hoops did not emerge until the 1850s . 
 = = Late 19th century = = 
 = = = 1850s – 60s = = = 
 The cage crinoline made out of spring steel wire was first introduced in the 1850s , with the earliest British patent for a metal crinoline ( described as a ' skeleton petticoat of steel springs fastened to tape . ' ) granted in July 1856 . Alison Gernsheim suggests that the unidentified French inventor was probably R. C. Milliet of Besançon , as the July 1856 patent was filed by their British agent , C. Amet . Milliet had already patented a ' <unk> de femme ' in Paris on 24 April 1856 which was described as comprising ' elastic extensible circles joined together by vertical bands . ' Following its introduction , the women 's rights advocate Amelia Bloomer felt that her concerns about the hampering nature of multiple petticoats had been resolved , and dropped dress reform as an issue . Diana de Marly , in her biography of the <unk> Charles Frederick Worth noted that by 1858 there existed steel factories catering solely to crinoline manufacturers , and shops that sold nothing else but crinolines . One of the most significant manufacturers of crinolines was that of Thomson & Co . , founded by an American with branches across Europe and the United States . At the height of their success , up to four thousand crinolines were produced by Thomson 's London factory in a day , whilst another plant in Saxony manufactured 9 @.@ 5 million crinolines over a twelve @-@ year period . In 1859 the New York factory , which employed about a thousand girls , used 300 @,@ 000 yards of steel wire every week to produce between three and four thousand crinolines per day , while the rival Douglas & Sherwood factory in Manhattan used a ton of steel each week in manufacturing hoop skirts . 
 The crinoline needed to be rigid enough to support the skirts in their accustomed shape , but also flexible enough to be temporarily pressed out of shape and spring back afterwards . Other materials used for crinolines included whalebone , gutta @-@ percha and <unk> caoutchouc ( natural rubber ) . The idea of inflatable hoops was short @-@ lived as they were easily punctured , prone to collapse , and due to the use of brimstone in the manufacture of rubber , they smelled unpleasant . Although hard rubber hoops of gutta @-@ percha worked satisfactorily at first , they were brittle and easily crushed without recovering their form . Despite objections that the sharp points of snapped steels were hazardous , lightweight steel was clearly the most successful option . It reduced the number of petticoats and their weight , and offered increased freedom of movement of the legs . However , hasty or careless movements in a hoop skirt could lead to accidentally revealing more than intended . An advertisement published in The Lady 's Newspaper in 1863 for a cage crinoline with waved hoops attempted to reassure the potential customer that while wearing it , activities such as climbing stairs , passing to her theatre seat , dropping into armchairs and leaning against furniture would be possible without hindrance either to herself or to others around her . 
 Despite some claims , such as that by the historian Max von Boehm , that the largest crinolines measured up to ten yards ( 30 feet ) around , the <unk> Alison Gernsheim concluded that the maximum realistic circumference was in fact between five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half and six yards . Whilst a loosely gathered skirt draped over a large hoop would certainly require a higher yardage , Gernsheim noted that ten yard hems were highly improbable . Staged photographs showing women wearing exaggeratedly large crinolines were quite popular , such as a widely published sequence of five <unk> views showing a woman dressing with the assistance of several maids who require long poles to lift her dress over her head and other ingenious means of navigating her enormous <unk> . Such photographs , which re @-@ enacted contemporary caricatures rather than accurately reflecting reality , were aimed towards the voyeur 's market . However , it was a fact that the size of the crinoline often caused difficulties in passing through doors , boarding carriages and generally moving about . By the late 1860s many crinolines were of a significantly reduced size , as noted by a Victoria and Albert Museum curator observing the sizes of cage crinolines in the Museum 's collection . 
 = = = <unk> and 1880s revival = = = 
 The crinoline began to fall out of fashion from about 1866 . A modified version , the crinolette , was a transitional garment bridging the gap between the cage crinoline and the bustle . Fashionable from 1867 through to the mid @-@ 1870s , the crinolette was typically composed of half @-@ hoops , sometimes with internal lacing or ties designed to allow adjustment of fullness and shape . The crinolette was still worn in the early 1880s , with an 1881 article describing it as sticking out solely behind , as opposed to projecting " hideously at the side " like the crinoline . It is possible that some of the smaller crinolines that survive were worn in combination with separate bustles , rather than in isolation . During the 1880s the cage crinoline was revived , with hoop petticoats designed to accommodate the extremely large bustles of the period and support the skirt hems . One of the mid @-@ 1880s styles was called the lobster pot due to its resemblance to a lobster trap . Due to the extreme weight of the fabrics of the decade , the hoops of the crinolines were crossed over each other behind the legs in order to support and hold the skirts firmly in place . As with the earlier cage crinolines , sprung steel , wire and cane were used . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Unlike the <unk> and panniers , the crinoline was worn by women of every social class ; and the fashion swiftly became the subject of intense scrutiny in Western media . Critical articles on the crinoline were published by the Hungarian journal Az <unk> ( 1858 ) and the Bulgarian journalist <unk> Slaveykov in 1864 . In the 1850s , the Welsh poet Dafydd Jones wrote a ballad decrying the fashion . A similar sentiment was expressed by a Russian song published in 1854 , where the singer complains about his wife having assumed the fashion . In 1855 , an observer of Queen Victoria 's state visit to Paris complained that despite the number of foreigners present , Western fashions such as the crinoline had diluted national dress to such an extent that everyone , whether Turkish , Scottish , Spanish or Tyrolean , dressed alike . Victoria herself is popularly said to have detested the fashion , inspiring a song in Punch that started : " Long live our gracious Queen / Who won 't wear crinoline ! " Gernsheim has noted that the Queen was often photographed in crinolines , and suggests that this misapprehension came from a request made by Victoria that female guests attending her daughter 's marriage in 1858 should leave their hoops off due to limited space in the Chapel Royal at St James 's Palace . 
 The crinoline was perceived as a signifier of social identity , with a popular subject for cartoons being that of maids wearing crinolines like their mistresses , much to the higher @-@ class ladies ' disapproval . The questions of servants in crinoline and the related social concerns were raised by George Routledge in an etiquette manual published in 1875 , where he criticised London housemaids for wearing hoops at work . As the girls knelt to scrub the doorsteps , Routledge described how their hoops rose to expose their lower bodies , inspiring street harassment from errand boys and other male passers @-@ by . Routledge firmly opined that servants ought to save their fashionable garments for their leisure periods , and dress appropriately for their work . However , this was challenged by some servants who saw attempts to control their dress as equivalent to controlling their liberty , and refused to work for employers who tried to forbid crinolines . 
 Arthur <unk> observed that in the " barbarous locality " of Wigan , the sight of a female colliery worker wearing trousers was " not half as odd as a woman wearing a crinoline , " exposing his own upper @-@ class attitudes . In Australia , poorer rural women were photographed posing outside their slab huts , wearing their best dresses with crinolines . The French sociologist and economist Frédéric le Play carried out surveys of French working @-@ class families ' wardrobes from 1850 – 75 , in which he found that two women had crinolines in their wardrobe , both wives of skilled workers . One , the fashion @-@ conscious wife of a glove @-@ maker , owned two crinolines and eleven dresses , although for everyday she wore wooden shoes and printed aprons . In America , the mid @-@ 19th century crinoline has become popularly associated with the image of the Southern Belle , a young woman from the American Deep South 's upper socioeconomic , slave @-@ owning classes . However , as in Europe and elsewhere , the crinoline was far from exclusively worn by wealthy white women . Both black and white women in America of all classes and social standings wore hooped skirts , including First Lady Mary Todd Lincoln and her African @-@ American dressmaker , Elizabeth <unk> , who created many of Todd Lincoln 's own extravagant crinolines . 
 The difficulties associated with the garment , such as its size , the problems and hazards associated with wearing and moving about in it , and the fact that it was worn so widely by women of all social classes , were frequently exaggerated and parodied in satirical articles and illustrations such as those in Punch . Alexander Maxwell has summarised crinoline mockery as expressing the male authors ' insecurity and fears that women , whose crinolines took up " enough space for five , " would eventually " conquer " mankind . Julia Thomas , observing the extent of Punch 's anti @-@ crinoline sentiment and mockery , noted that the magazine 's attacks , rather than crushing the fashion , exacerbated and even invented the phenomenon of " <unk> . " 
 = = = = Hazards = = = = 
 The flammability of the crinoline was widely reported . It is estimated that , during the late 1850s and late 1860s in England , about 3 @,@ 000 women were killed in crinoline @-@ related fires . One such incident , the death of a 14 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> called Margaret Davey was reported in The Times on 13 February 1863 . Her dress , " distended by a crinoline , " ignited as she stood on the fender of the fireplace to reach some spoons on the mantelpiece , and she died as a result of extensive burns . The Deputy @-@ Coroner , commenting that he was " astonished to think that the mortality from such a fashion was not brought more conspicuously under the notice of the Registrar @-@ General , " passed a verdict of " Accidental death by fire , caused through crinoline . " A similar case was reported later that year , when 16 @-@ year @-@ old Emma Musson died after a piece of burning coke rolled from the kitchen fire to ignite her crinoline . A month later , on 8 December 1863 , a serious fire at the Church of the Company of Jesus in Santiago , Chile , killed between two and three thousand people . The severity of the death toll is credited in part to the large amounts of flammable fabric that made up the women 's crinoline dresses . Two notable victims of crinoline fires were William Wilde 's illegitimate daughters , Emily and Mary , who died in November 1871 of burns sustained after their evening gowns caught fire . Slaveykov reported in 1864 that over the last 14 years , at least 39 @,@ 927 women worldwide had died in crinoline @-@ related fires , opining that it was more deadly than the practice of sati or the auto @-@ da @-@ fé . Although flame @-@ retardant fabrics were available , these were thought unattractive and were unpopular . 
 Other risks associated with the crinoline were that it could get caught in other people 's feet , carriage wheels or furniture , or be caught by sudden gusts of wind , blowing the wearer off their feet . In 1859 , while participating in a paper chase , Louisa , Duchess of Manchester , caught her hoop while climbing over a stile , and was left with the entirety of her crinoline and skirts thrown over her head , revealing her scarlet drawers to the assembled company . 
 The crinoline was worn by some factory workers , leading to the textiles firm Courtaulds instructing female employees in 1860 to leave their hoops and crinolines at home . Cunnington described seeing a photograph of female employees in the Bryant and May match factories wearing crinolines while at work . A report in The Cork Examiner of 2 June 1864 recorded the death of Ann <unk> from injuries sustained after her crinoline was caught by a revolving machinery shaft in a mangling room at Firwood bleach works . 
 = = 20th and 21st centuries = = 
 During World War I the " war crinoline " became fashionable from 1915 – 1917 . This style featured wide , full mid @-@ calf length skirts , and was described as practical ( for enabling freedom of walking and movement ) and patriotic , as the sight of attractively dressed women was expected to cheer up soldiers on leave . The full skirts of the war crinoline endured in the robe de style of the 1920s . 
 In the late 1930s , just before the outbreak of World War II , there was a revival of the hooped crinoline from designers such as Edward Molyneux , who put hoops in both day skirts and evening gowns , and Norman Hartnell , whose late 1930s Winterhalter @-@ inspired crinoline designs for Queen Elizabeth were so successful that the Queen is popularly ( if inaccurately ) credited with having single @-@ handedly brought crinolines back into fashion . Both as Queen , and as the Queen Mother , Elizabeth adopted the traditional bell @-@ shaped crinoline as her signature look for evening wear and state occasions . The film Gone With The Wind , released in 1939 , inspired the American fashion for prom dresses with crinolines in Spring 1940 . 
 Following the Second World War , crinolines were once again revived by designers such as Christian Dior , whose 1947 " New Look " featured full skirts supported by stiffened <unk> . <unk> has suggested that , by explicitly referencing the Belle Époque era and reviving historic styles of corsets and crinolines in his " New Look , " Dior was the first designer to introduce the idea of postmodernism to fashion , albeit unconsciously . Crinolines were popular throughout the 1950s and into the early 1960s . The American designer Anne Fogarty was particularly noted for her full @-@ skirted designs worn over crinoline petticoats , which were always separate garments from the dress to enable ease of movement and travelling . Life reported in 1953 on how one of Fogarty 's crinoline designs from 1951 was almost exactly duplicated by a design in Dior 's latest collection . <unk> , tiered and / or ruffled crinoline petticoats in nylon , net and cotton were widely worn , as were skirts with integrated hoops . 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s Vivienne Westwood revisited the crinoline , taking inspiration from the ballet Petrushka to produce miniskirt length versions that she christened the " mini @-@ crini . " The mini @-@ crini silhouette influenced the work of other designers such as Christian Lacroix 's " puffball " skirts . The Westwood mini @-@ crini was described in 1989 as a combination of two conflicting ideals – the crinoline , representing a " mythology of restriction and encumbrance , " and the miniskirt , representing an " mythology of liberation . " 
 Late 20th and early 21st @-@ century fashion designers such as Alexander McQueen and John Galliano often used crinolines in their designs , with the skirt of one of Galliano 's ballgowns for Dior in 1998 reaching a width of 9 feet . Galliano specifically visited the original crinoline manufacturers that Christian Dior himself had used in order to inform and influence his own designs . McQueen was fascinated by the crinoline and often referenced it in his collections , cutting away leather ballgowns to reveal the cage beneath , or making it out of silver @-@ decorated cut metal . One of McQueen 's most notable crinoline designs was modelled by the amputee model Aimee Mullins in a series of photographs by Nick Knight for Dazed and Confused , in which Mullin 's cage crinoline , deliberately worn without <unk> in order to reveal her prosthetic legs , was described as suggesting both a walking frame and a cage to " contain the unruliness of the <unk> " . The images from this shoot were declared among the most significant commercial images of 1998 , representing Knight and McQueen 's dedication to presenting alternatives to the traditional concepts of fashion and physical beauty . After McQueen 's death in 2010 , his successor , Sarah Burton , continued the tradition of designing crinolines for the McQueen brand . 
 Crinolines continue to be worn well into the 21st century , typically as part of formal outfits such as evening gowns , prom dresses , or wedding dresses . 1950s and 1960s style net crinolines are a traditional element of costumes for square dancing and clogging . They are also popular garments for attending 1950s and 1960s influenced rockabilly events such as Viva Las Vegas . The steampunk movement has also appropriated cage crinolines along with other elements of 19th century fashion such as corsets and the top hat for its costuming . 
 In some contexts , the traditional hooped crinoline may be seen as controversial , as in early 2015 when the University of Georgia reportedly requested hoop skirts not be worn to certain fraternity events due to their perceived association with Southern Belles and the slave @-@ owning , upper socioeconomic classes of the American Deep South . The reason for the proposed ban was linked to the SAE racism incident earlier that year , with several articles noting it was a well @-@ intentioned attempt to avoid the University of Georgia fraternities facing charges of racial insensitivity . It was noted that hoop skirts and crinolines had been worn by both black and white women of all classes and social standings during the historical period in question , and that despite popular associations , they were not exclusive to the image of the Southern Belle . 
 = Operation Jackal = 
 Operation Jackal ( Croatian : Operacija <unk> ) , also known as Operation June Dawns ( Croatian : Operacija <unk> <unk> ) , was an offensive of the Bosnian War fought between a combined Croatian Army ( HV ) and Croatian Defence Council ( HVO ) army against the Army of Republika Srpska ( VRS ) from 7 – 26 June 1992 . The offensive was a Croatian pre @-@ emptive strike against the VRS , a Bosnian Serb military formed in May 1992 from JNA units that were stationed in Bosnia and Herzegovina . The HV concluded that the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) offensive operations of April and May 1992 , resulting in the capture of Kupres and much of the Neretva River valley south of Mostar , were aimed at capturing or threatening the Croatian Port of Ploče and possibly Split . To counter this threat , the Croatian leadership deployed the HV , under the command of General Janko Bobetko , to the " Southern Front " including the area in which Operation Jackal was to be conducted . 
 The offensive marked the first significant Bosnian Serb defeat in the war and placed the HV in a favourable position to push back the VRS and remnants of the JNA holding positions north and east of Dubrovnik . The HV later re @-@ established overland links with the city which had been under siege by the JNA since late 1991 . The attack resulted in an HV / HVO victory and the capture of approximately 1 @,@ 800 square kilometres ( 690 square miles ) of territory in and around Mostar and Stolac . 
 = = Background = = 
 In August 1990 , a Serbian uprising occurred in Croatia centred on the Dalmatian hinterland around the city of Knin , parts of the Lika , Kordun , and Banovina regions , as well as in settlements in eastern Croatia with significant Serb populations . The areas were subsequently named the Republic of Serbian Krajina ( RSK ) . The RSK , supported by Serbia , declared its intention to integrate with Serbia , and was denounced by the Government of Croatia as a rebellion . Tensions rose and by March 1991 the Croatian War of Independence had broken out . With the disintegration of Yugoslavia , in June 1991 Croatia issued its declaration of independence which became official on 8 October after a three @-@ month moratorium . The RSK then initiated a campaign of ethnic cleansing against Croatian civilians and most non @-@ Serbs were expelled by early 1993 . 
 In May 1991 , the Croatian National Guard ( ZNG ) , subsequently renamed the Croatian Army ( HV ) in November , was formed as a result of growing support for the RSK from the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) and the inability of the Croatian Police to cope with the situation . The establishment of the military of Croatia was hampered by a UN arms embargo introduced in September . The final months of 1991 saw the fiercest fighting of the war culminating in the Battle of the Barracks , the Siege of Dubrovnik , and the Battle of Vukovar . 
 In January 1992 , the Sarajevo Agreement was signed by representatives of Croatia , the JNA and the UN , and a ceasefire called . After a series of unsuccessful ceasefires , the United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) was deployed to Croatia to supervise and maintain the agreement . The conflict largely passed on to entrenched positions , and the JNA soon retreated from Croatia into Bosnia and Herzegovina , where a new conflict was anticipated . 
 As the Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska narodna armija – JNA ) withdrew from Croatia following the acceptance and start of implementation of the Vance plan , its 55 @,@ 000 officers and soldiers born in Bosnia and Herzegovina were transferred to a new Bosnian Serb army , which was later renamed the Army of Republika Srpska ( VRS ) . This reorganisation followed the declaration of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 9 January 1992 , ahead of the 29 February – 1 March 1992 referendum on independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina . This declaration would later be cited as a pretext for the Bosnian War . Bosnian Serbs began fortifying the capital , Sarajevo , and other areas on 1 March . On the following day , the first fatalities of the war were recorded in Sarajevo and Doboj . In the final days of March , the Bosnian Serb army bombarded Bosanski Brod with artillery , drawing a border crossing by the HV 108th Brigade in response . On 4 April , JNA artillery began shelling Sarajevo . The JNA and the VRS in Bosnia and Herzegovina faced the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( ARBiH ) and the Croatian Defence Council ( HVO ) , reporting to the Bosniak @-@ dominated central government and the Bosnian Croat leadership respectively , as well as the HV , which occasionally supported HVO operations . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In April 1992 , the JNA renewed offensive operations against the HV and the HVO in areas of western and southern Herzegovina near Kupres and Stolac . The JNA 's 2nd Military District , commanded by Colonel General Milutin <unk> , deployed elements of the 5th Banja Luka Corps and the 9th Knin Corps to the Kupres region , capturing the town from the HV and the HVO jointly defending the area in the 1992 Battle of Kupres on 7 April and threatening Livno and Tomislavgrad to the southwest . The 4th Military District of the JNA , commanded by General Pavle Strugar , employed the 13th Bileća Corps and the 2nd Titograd Corps to capture Stolac and most of the eastern bank of the Neretva River south of Mostar . The fighting around Mostar and JNA artillery attacks on the city started on 6 April , with the town of Široki Brijeg coming under attack by the Yugoslav Air Force on 7 – 8 April . While a Croatian attack of 9 April failed to capture a JNA @-@ controlled airfield in Mostar , the Bosnian Serb Territorial Defence Force captured two nearby hydroelectric power plants on the Neretva River and the JNA pushed the HV / HVO force from Stolac on 11 April . Čapljina , 25 kilometres ( 16 miles ) southwest from Mostar , came under intermittent JNA artillery and air attacks . A ceasefire was arranged on 7 May , but the JNA and the Bosnian Serb forces resumed the attack the next day . The attack succeeded in capturing a large part of Mostar and some territory on the west bank of the Neretva River . On 12 May , the transfer of JNA forces based in Bosnia and Herzegovina to the VRS was completed , and those JNA units which had not been transferred to the VRS withdrew from Bosnia and Herzegovina to the newly declared Federal Republic of Yugoslavia 
 While the JNA planned the offensive to pre @-@ empt a Croatian attack on Serb @-@ held territory , Croatia saw the moves as a prelude to JNA attacks on southern Croatia , specifically aimed at the Port of Ploče and possibly Split . To counter the perceived threat , the HV deployed additional troops to the area redesignated as the " Southern Front " . HV General Janko Bobetko , appointed to command the Southern Front , reorganised the HVO command structure and assumed command of the HVO in the area to stop the expected JNA / VRS offensive and regain the lost territory along the Neretva River . In late May , Bobetko launched an attack along the Adriatic coast , and in its immediate hinterland , towards besieged Dubrovnik linking up with the HV force in the city and breaking the JNA encirclement of the city by 1 June . The attack coincided with a JNA withdrawal towards Dubrovnik Airport in Konavle and positions within Bosnia and Herzegovina borders , 2 to 10 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 to 6 @.@ 2 miles ) away from the coast . On 23 May , the HV / HVO captured the Hum Mountain south of Mostar . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 The HV and the HVO committed 4 @,@ 670 troops to Operation Jackal . The HVO deployed various units stationed or raised in the area , mostly drawn from Mostar , Široki Brijeg , and <unk> . The HV contributed the 4th Guards Brigade , elements of the 116th Infantry Brigade and the 156th Infantry Brigade . The HV troops were deployed around Čapljina , for the main attack across the Neretva River and on the right flank of the axis , while the HVO troops were deployed to their left , as well as in the Čapljina area . The VRS Herzegovina Corps ( former JNA 13th Bileća Corps ) , commanded by Major General Radovan <unk> , consisted of the 10th and 13th Brigades as well as Ljubinje Territorial Defence troops in the area of Mostar and Stolac . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 Operation Jackal , or alternatively Operation June Dawns , commenced on 7 June 1992 . The attacking HV / HVO force moved east and north from Čapljina towards Stolac and Mostar aiming to push the VRS back from the Neretva River and capture positions around Mostar . The HV / HVO force captured the first objective of the offensive , the town of Tasovčići located across the Neretva River , opposite Čapljina , on 8 June . The HV component of the force which captured Tasovčići , the 156th Infantry Brigade , was detached from the force tasked with continued advance to capture <unk> and <unk> to protect the right flank of the Neretva bridgehead . The HV 116th Infantry Brigade held the Neretva River valley south of the bridgehead and east of Metković . 
 As the VRS Herzegovina Corps positions around Tasovčići collapsed , the attacking forces were able to quickly move east along its planned line of advance . On 11 June , the Mostar HVO forces attacked VRS positions on the west bank of the Neretva River , south of the city of Mostar in support of the main attack . The advance was immediately successful , capturing the villages of Varda , Kruševo , Jasenica , <unk> and the <unk> Mountain . The HVO captured JNA / VRS Heliport Barracks in Mostar the same day . On 12 June , the HVO pushed all remaining VRS forces east across the river . 
 The 1st Herzegovina Brigade of the HVO and the 156th Infantry Brigade advanced northeast from Čapljina and captured villages of <unk> Brdo and Lokve ten kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 miles ) away from the Neretva crossing point . The 116th Infantry Brigade , spearheading the Tactical Group @-@ 2 , consisting of the brigade and supporting HVO troops , staged a rapid breakthrough and reached outskirts of Stolac , approximately 20 kilometres ( 12 miles ) east of the Neretva crossing . The advance northeast towards Mostar continued north through <unk> and <unk> and reached the southern approaches to Mostar on 14 June . HVO units attacking from Čapljina secured Stolac by capturing VRS positions in <unk> , approximately eight kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 miles ) north of Stolac , on 15 June . The same day , the 4th Battalion of the Mostar HVO captured JNA " <unk> <unk> " barracks in Mostar while other elements of the HVO Mostar force captured nearby <unk> Hill overlooking the city . The final part of the northward advance of the force that set off from Čapljina was routed through Buna and Blagaj villages , which were also captured on 15 June . In order to complete a link up with the advancing HV and HVO units , the Mostar HVO forces , supported by the HV 's 4th Battalion of the 4th Guards Brigade , moved south from the city through Jasenica . The two advancing forces met at the Mostar International Airport on 17 June . 
 The HV and the HVO completely pushed the VRS from Mostar , advancing further east along the slopes of the Velež Mountain and capturing high ground overlooking the city by 21 June . The ARBiH supported the eastward push from the city only in a secondary role . Even though the front lines did not move significantly to the east , the city of Mostar was relatively secure from future VRS attacks . The offensive is considered to have ended on 26 June , when the HVO captured the <unk> Glava peak of the Velež Mountain . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The HV and the HVO captured approximately 1 @,@ 800 square kilometres ( 690 square miles ) of territory during Operation Jackal , and the supporting attacks around Mostar , as well as handing the VRS their first significant defeat in the Bosnian War . The offensive removed a direct threat posed by the JNA and the VRS to Metković , and it accomplished the Croatian objective of capturing positions that were favourable to staging further offensives against JNA and VRS forces still positioned near Dubrovnik . The follow @-@ up Operation Tiger was the first HV offensive to exploit the success of Operation Jackal and improve Croatian military positions on the Southern Front in general but specifically around Dubrovnik . HV deployment to Bosnia and Herzegovina not only gained them significant experience in the execution of large @-@ scale military offensives , but also denied the Bosnian Serb VRS forces the chance to pursue a decisive victory . 
 = Alligator gar = 
 Alligator gar ( Atractosteus spatula ) are ray @-@ finned euryhaline fish related to bowfin in the infraclass Holostei ( ho ' <unk> @-@ te @-@ i ) . The fossil record traces their existence to the Early Cretaceous over a hundred million years ago . They are the largest species in the gar family , and among the largest freshwater fishes in North America . Gars are often referred to as " primitive fishes " , or " living fossils " because they have retained some morphological characters of their earliest ancestors , such as a spiral valve intestine which is also common to the digestive system of sharks , and they can breathe both air and water . Their common name was derived from their resemblance to American alligator , particularly their broad snout and long sharp teeth . Anecdotal evidence in several scientific reports suggest that an alligator gar can grow up to 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in length and weigh as much as 300 lb ( 140 kg ) ; however in 2011 the largest alligator gar ever caught and officially recorded was 8 ft 5 1 ⁄ 4 in ( 2 @.@ 572 m ) long , weighed 327 lb ( 148 kg ) , and was 47 in ( 120 cm ) around the girth . 
 The body of an alligator gar is torpedo shaped , usually brown or olive fading to a lighter gray or yellow ventral surface . Their scales are not like the scales of other fishes , rather they have ganoid scales which are hard , enamel @-@ like , diamond @-@ shaped scales , often with serrated edges . <unk> scales are nearly impenetrable and have served the fish well as protection against predation . Unlike other gar species , the upper jaw of an alligator gar has a dual row of large sharp teeth which are used to impale and hold prey . Alligator gar are stalking , ambush predators , primarily piscivores , but they will also ambush and eat water fowl and small mammals they find floating on the water 's surface . 
 Populations of alligator gar have been extirpated from much of their historic range as a result of habitat destruction , indiscriminate culling , and unrestricted harvests . Populations are now located primarily in the southern portions of the United States extending into Mexico . They are considered euryhaline because they can adapt to varying salinities ranging from freshwater lakes and swamps to brackish marshes , estuaries , and bays along the Gulf of Mexico . 
 For nearly a half @-@ century , alligator gar were considered " trash fish " , or a " nuisance species " detrimental to sport fisheries ; therefore , were targeted for elimination by state and federal authorities in the United States . The 1980s brought a better understanding of the ecological balance necessary to sustain an ecosystem , and eventually an awareness that alligator gar were no less important than any other living organism in the ecosystems they inhabit . Over time , alligator gar were afforded some protection by state and federal resource agencies . They are also protected under the Lacey Act which makes it illegal to transport certain species of fish in interstate commerce when in violation of state law or regulation . Several state and federal resource agencies are monitoring populations in the wild , and have initiated outreach programs to educate the public . Alligator gar are being cultured in ponds , pools , raceways and tanks by federal hatcheries for mitigation stocking , by universities for research purposes , and in Mexico for consumption . 
 = = Anatomy = = 
 Alligator gar are the largest species in the gar family , and among the largest freshwater fishes found in North America . Mature alligator gar commonly measure 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) in length , and weigh over 100 lbs . ( 45 kg ) . However , anecdotal reports suggest they can grow up to 10 ft ( 3m ) in length , and weigh as much as 350 lbs . ( 159 kg ) . The largest alligator gar officially recorded was inadvertently caught in the net of fisherman Kenny Williams of Vicksburg , Mississippi while he was fishing the oxbow lakes of the Mississippi River on February 14 , 2011 . Williams was pulling up his net on Lake <unk> expecting to find buffalo fish , but instead discovered a large alligator gar tangled in his net . The gar was 8 ft 5 1 ⁄ 4 in ( 2 @.@ 572 m ) long , weighed 327 lb ( 148 kg ) , and its girth was 47 in ( 120 cm ) . According to wildlife officials , the fish was estimated to be somewhere between 50 and 70 years old ; one report estimated the gar 's age to be at least 95 . Williams donated it to the Mississippi Museum of Natural Science in Jackson where it will remain on display . 
 All gars have torpedo @-@ shaped bodies , but some distinguishing characteristics of adult alligator gar include their large size , heavy bodies , broad heads , short broad snouts , large sharp teeth and double row of teeth on their upper jaw . They are usually brown or olive fading to a lighter gray or yellow ventral surface . The dorsal and anal fins are positioned toward the back of their bodies , and their caudal fin is abbreviate @-@ heterocercal , or non @-@ symmetrical . 
 = = Physiology = = 
 Alligator gar have gills , but unlike other species of fish , with few exceptions , they also have a highly vascularized swim bladder lung that supplements gill respiration . The bladder not only provides buoyancy but also enables them to breathe in air which is why they are able to inhabit bodies of water in which most other fishes would die of suffocation . The swim bladder is connected to their foregut by a small pneumatic duct which allows them to breathe or gulp air when they break the surface , an action that is seen quite frequently on lakes in the southern United States during the hot summer months . The scales of alligator gar are not like the scales of other fishes which have flexible <unk> scales ; their bodies are protected by inflexible and articulated ganoid scales that are diamond @-@ shaped and may have a serrated edge . These scales are designed for toughness and strength when under attack , and are composed of a tough inner layer of bone and a hard outer layer of <unk> that is nearly impenetrable . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 Lacépède first described the alligator gar in 1803 . The original name was Lepisosteus spatula , but was later changed by E.O. Wiley in 1976 to Atractosteus spatula in order to recognize two distinct extant taxon of gars . Synonyms of Atractosteus spatula include <unk> [ sic ] ferox ( Rafinesque 1820 ) , and Lepisosteus spatula ( <unk> 1803 ) . Fossils from the order <unk> have been collected in Europe from the Cretaceous to Oligocene periods , in Africa and India from the Cretaceous , and in North America from the Cretaceous to recent times . Lepisosteidae is the only extant family of gar which has seven species all located in North and Central America . The fossil record traces the existence of alligator gar back to the Early Cretaceous over a hundred million years ago . Despite being a highly evolved species , alligator gar are often referred to as " primitive fishes " , or " living fossils " because they have retained a few morphological characteristics of their earliest ancestors with seemingly little to no apparent changes , such as a spiral valve intestine which is also common to the digestive system of sharks , an abbreviate @-@ heterocercal tail , and a swim bladder lung for breathing in both air and water . 
 = = Feeding behavior = = 
 Alligator gar are relatively passive , seemingly sluggish solitary fish , but voracious ambush predators . They are opportunistic night predators and are primarily piscivores , but they will also ambush and eat water fowl and small mammals that may be floating on the surface . Their method of ambush is to float a few feet below the surface , and wait for unsuspecting prey to swim within reach . They lunge forward , and with a sweeping motion grab their prey , impaling it on their double rows of sharp teeth . 
 Diet studies have shown alligator gar to be opportunistic piscivores , and even scavengers depending on the availability of their preferred food source . They occasionally ingest sport fish , but the majority of stomach content studies suggest they feed predominately on forage fishes such as gizzard shad as well as invertebrates , and water fowl . Diet studies have also revealed fishing tackle and boat engine parts in their stomachs . 
 = = Spawning = = 
 As with most ancestral species , alligator gar are long living , and sexually late maturing . Most females do not reach sexual maturity until after their first decade of life while males reach sexual maturity in half that time . The conditions must be precise for a successful spawning to occur . Preparation for spawning begins in the spring with the extended photoperiod and rising water temperatures , but flooding is also necessary to trigger the event . When rivers rise and spread over the floodplain , they create oxbow lakes and sloughs , and inundate terrestrial vegetation which in turn provides protection and a nutrient rich habitat for larval fishes , and fry . Once the water temperature has reached 68 to 82 ° F ( 20 to 28 ° C ) , and all the other criteria are met , gars will move into the grassy , weed @-@ laden shallows to spawn . 
 Actual spawning occurs when a collection of males gather around gravid females , and begin writhing , twisting , bumping into and slithering over the tops of females , an activity which triggers the release of eggs . Males release clouds of milt to fertilize the eggs as they are released into the water column . The sticky eggs then attach to submerged vegetation , and development begins . It takes only a few days for the eggs to hatch into larval fish , and another ten days or so for the larval fish to detach from the vegetation and start moving about as young fry . Egg production is variable , and believed to be dependent on the size of the female . A common formula used for predicting the volume of eggs a female can produce is 4 @.@ 1 eggs / gram of body weight which gives an average of about 150 @,@ 000 eggs per spawn . The eggs of alligator gar are bright red and poisonous to humans if ingested . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 = = = Natural range = = = 
 Alligator gar inhabit a wide variety of aquatic habitats , but most are found in the Southern United States in reservoirs and lakes , in the backwaters of lowland rivers , and in the brackish waters of estuaries , bayous and bays . They have occasionally been seen in the Gulf of Mexico . In Texas and Louisiana it is common to see large gars breaking the surface in reservoirs , bayous , and brackish marshes . They are found throughout the lower Mississippi River Valley and Gulf Coast states of the Southern United States and Mexico as far south as Veracruz , encompassing the following states in the United States : Texas , Oklahoma , , Louisiana , Kentucky , Mississippi , Alabama , Tennessee , Arkansas , Missouri , Illinois , Florida , and Georgia . Reports suggest alligator gar were once numerous throughout much of their northern range , however valid sightings today are rare , and may occur once every few years . Records of historical distribution indicate alligator gar once inhabited regions as far north as central Kansas , Nebraska , Ohio , Iowa , and west @-@ central Illinois where they are now listed as extirpated . The most northerly verified catch was in <unk> , Illinois in 1922 . 
 = = = Outside natural range = = = 
 A few notable sightings of alligator gar have been reported outside North America . In November 2008 , a <unk> gar , genus Atractosteus , measuring 5 @.@ 2 to 6 @.@ 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 6 to 2 @.@ 0 m ) was caught in the Caspian Sea north of <unk> , Turkmenistan by two officials of Turkmenistan Fishery Protection . Its species is unconfirmed but is believed to be an alligator gar . 
 On September 4 , 2009 a 3 ft 3 in ( 0 @.@ 99 m ) alligator gar was found in Tak Wah Park in Tsuen Wan , Hong Kong . Over the next two days , at least 16 other alligator gar , the largest measuring 4 @.@ 9 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) , were found in ponds in public parks in Hong Kong . Nearby residents reported the alligator gar had been released into the ponds by aquarium hobbyists , and had lived there for several years . However , after a complaint made by a citizen who falsely identified alligator gar as crocodiles , the use of terms like " horrible man @-@ eating fish " had begun appearing in the headlines of some major local newspapers . Officials with Leisure and Cultural Services in Tak Wah Park removed all the alligator gar from the ponds because they were concerned the large , carnivorous fish might harm children . It is not unusual for the large sharp teeth and outward appearance of alligator gar to precipitate unreasonable fear in those unfamiliar with the species . <unk> reports have contributed to the misconception of predatory attacks by alligator gar on humans even though none of the reports have been confirmed . 
 On January 21 , 2011 , an alligator gar measuring 4 feet 11 inches ( 1 @.@ 50 m ) was caught in a canal in Pasir Ris , Singapore by two recreational fishermen . The fish was taken to a nearby pond where the owner confirmed it was an alligator gar rather than an <unk> as the men had initially thought . 
 There have been anecdotal reports of alligator gar captured in various parts of India but are believed to be the result of incidental releases by aquarium hobbyists and the like . In August 2015 , an alligator gar was found entangled in cloth inside a well in Dadar where it had been living for quite some time . It was rescued by animal activists and returned to the well unharmed . In June 2016 , a 3 @.@ 5 ft Alligator Gar was caught from Subhash Sarovar Lake in Kolkata . Other incidents over the years have been random , ranging anywhere from captures in coastal waters during environmental assessments to captures in private ponds . 
 = = Human utilization = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Native Americans in the south , and Caribbean peoples used the alligator gar 's ganoid scales for arrow heads , breastplates , and as shielding to cover plows . Early settlers tanned the skins to make a strong , durable leather to cover their wooden plows , make purses , and various other items . Gar oil was also used by the people of Arkansas as a repellent for buffalo @-@ gnats . 
 For nearly half a century , alligator gar were considered " trash fish " , or a " nuisance species " by state and federal authorities who targeted them for elimination to protect game fish populations , and to prevent alleged attacks on humans , a claim that remains unsubstantiated with the exception of occasional injuries sustained from captured alligator gar thrashing around on the decks of boats . Fishermen participated in the slaughter of thousands of alligator gar believing they were providing a great service . In 1995 , KUHT channel 8 , a member PBS television station located on the campus of the University of Houston in Texas , distributed and broadcast the first video documentary ever produced on alligator gar . The documentary , " Alligator Gar : Predator or Prey ? " , debuted nationally in prime time during the July Sweeps , and according to the Nielsen rating report provided to KUHT , was the number one rated program of the evening . The documentary focused on the physiology and life cycle of alligator gar , addressed the destruction of habitat , the unregulated culling and over harvesting of alligator gar from various lakes in Texas and Louisiana , and expressed concerns for the future of the species at a time when they were still considered a " trash fish " . A decade passed before any significant action was taken to protect and preserve the remaining populations of alligator gar in the United States . The Missouri Department of Conservation has since partnered with Tennessee , Arkansas , Kentucky , Illinois , Alabama , Mississippi , Texas , Oklahoma , and Louisiana in restoration and management activities . 
 = = = Sport fish = = = 
 The long time public perception of alligator gar as " trash fish " , or a " nuisance species " has changed with increasing national and international attention on the species as a sport fish which some have attributed to features on popular television shows . Oklahoma , Texas , Arkansas , Mississippi , and Louisiana allow regulated sport fishing of alligator gar . Texas has one of the best remaining fisheries for alligator gar , and in concert with its efforts to maintain a viable fishery , imposed a one @-@ per @-@ day bag limit on them in 2009 . The Texas state record , and world record for the largest alligator gar caught on rod and reel is 279 lb ( 127 kg ) , taken by Bill Valverde on January 1 , 1951 on the Rio Grande in Texas . Alligator gar are also quite popular among <unk> because of their large size , trophy potential , and fighting ability . The Texas state <unk> record was set In 2001 by Marty McClellan with a 290 pounds ( 130 kg ) alligator gar from the Trinity River . The all @-@ tackle record was a 302 pounds ( 137 kg ) alligator gar caught on a <unk> in 1953 by T.C. Pierce , Jr . In 1991 , fishing guide , Kirk Kirkland , anecdotally reported catching an alligator gar measuring 9 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 90 m ) on rod and line from the Trinity River . 
 = = = Commercialization and aquaculture = = = 
 Declining populations of alligator gar throughout their historic range has resulted in the need to monitor wild populations and regulate commercial harvests . Alligator gar have a high yield of white meat fillets and a small percentage of waste relative to body weight . The meat is sold to wholesale distributors , and also sold retail by a few supermarkets with prices starting at around $ 3 @.@ 00 / lb . Fried gar balls , grilled fillets , and fillets boiled in water with crab boil seasoning are popular dishes in the south . There is also a small cottage industry that makes jewelry out of ganoid scales , and tans gar hides to produce leather for making lamp shades , purses , and a host of novelty items . 
 Atractosteus gars , including alligator gar , tropical gars , and Cuban gars are considered good candidates for aquaculture particularly in developing regions where their rapid growth , disease resistance , easy adaptation to artificial feeds as juveniles , and ability to tolerate low water quality are essential . Their ability to breathe in both air and water eliminates the need for costly aeration systems and other technology commonly used in aquaculture . In the Southern United States , as well as in parts of Mexico and Cuba , <unk> have already been established , and are being maintained in their respective regions where they already are a popular food fish . 
 = = = Aquaria = = = 
 Despite the large size alligator gar can attain , they are kept as aquarium fish , though many fish labeled as " alligator gar " in the aquarium trade are actually smaller species . Alligator gar require a very large aquarium or pond , and ample resources in order for them to thrive in captivity . They are also a popular fish for public aquaria , and zoos . It is illegal in many areas to keep alligator gar as pets , but they will occasionally show up in fish stores . Alligator gar are highly prized and sought after for private aquaria , particularly in Japan . According to some reports , large alligator gar could fetch as much as US $ 40 @,@ 000 in what some consider the " Japanese black market " . In June 2011 , three men from Florida and Louisiana were indicted on charges of illegally removing wild alligator gar from the Trinity River in Texas , and attempting to ship them to Japan for private collectors . The indictments resulted from an undercover sting operation by special agents with the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service , the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department , and the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission . The charges included violations of three separate provisions of the Lacey Act , specifically conspiracy to submit a false label for fish transported in interstate commerce ; conspiracy to transport fish in interstate commerce in violation of state law or regulation ; and conspiracy to transport and sell fish in interstate commerce in violation of state law or regulation . Two of the conspirators entered guilty pleas to one count , and the government dropped the other two charges against them . A third conspirator went to trial on all three counts , was acquitted on one count , and found guilty on two . The district court sentenced him to serve nine months in prison followed by one year of supervised release . The case was appealed , and on April 15 , 2014 , the appellate court affirmed the judgment of the district court . 
 = StarCraft : Brood War = 
 StarCraft : Brood War is the expansion pack for the award winning military science fiction , real @-@ time strategy video game StarCraft . Released in 1998 for Windows and Mac OS , it was co @-@ developed by Saffire and Blizzard Entertainment . The expansion pack introduced new campaigns , map tilesets , music , extra units for each race , and upgrade advancements . The campaigns continue the story from where the original StarCraft ended , with the sequel StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty continuing from the conclusion of Brood War . The expansion was released in the United States on 30 November 1998 . 
 Brood War was critically well received , with reviewers praising it for being developed with the care of a full game rather than as an uninspired extra . As of 31 May 2007 , StarCraft and Brood War have sold almost ten million copies combined . The game is especially popular in South Korea , where professional players and teams participated in matches , earned sponsorships , and competed in televised matches . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 StarCraft focuses around three distinct interstellar species : the psionic Protoss , the adaptable Terrans , and the insectoid Zerg . The game revolves around players collecting resources to construct a base , upgrade their militaries , and ultimately conquer opponents . Brood War 's gameplay remains fundamentally unchanged from that of StarCraft , although it made small alterations to unit costs and some abilities . These changes make rushing tactics — a factor that gained some criticism in the original StarCraft — less practical . The single @-@ player campaign has an increased difficulty ; missions are no longer entirely linear , and a greater focus on strategy is needed to complete missions . In addition , the game 's artificial intelligence ( AI ) has been augmented so that AI @-@ controlled players are more intelligent and tend to use tactics more effectively . 
 Brood War introduces seven new units . Each race is given access to a unique ground unit : the Zerg can create a defensive unit that can attack from the concealment of its burrow , while the Terrans can train combat medics . The Protoss are able to produce dark templar units , a powerful cloaked melee unit only given to the player in special missions of StarCraft . Protoss players can merge two of these units to create a special spellcaster unit . Each race is also given access to a dedicated air @-@ to @-@ air attack unit . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Brood War takes place in Chris Metzen 's StarCraft universe , set around the early 26th century . Terran exiles from Earth have colonized a distant area of the Milky Way galaxy called the Koprulu Sector , having established several governments . Eventually , a civil war breaks out and ends with the formation of the Terran Dominion . However , humanity soon becomes caught in a war between the Protoss and the Zerg , which culminates at the end of StarCraft with the death of the Zerg leader , the Overmind , on the Protoss homeworld of Aiur . Without the Overmind to command , the Zerg rampage mindlessly across Aiur , while the cerebrates — the secondary commanders of the Swarm — attempt to regain control . After the discovery of alien life in the Koprulu Sector , the United Earth Directorate ( UED ) — the international body governing Earth — decides to send an expeditionary force to secure the sector and prevent the aliens from finding Earth . Brood War begins two days after the conclusion of StarCraft . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The player assumes the roles of three anonymous characters over the course of the game . In the first campaign , the player assumes the role of a Protoss fleet commander . The player 's character is commanded by Zeratul and Aldaris , two adversaries from StarCraft who have since reconciled their differences to lead their people in the face of the rampaging Zerg . They are joined by Jim Raynor , a Terran rebel on the run from the Dominion , Artanis , the previous Executor of the third campaign of StarCraft who has recently been promoted , and Raszagal , the matriarch of the dissident dark templar faction in Protoss society . The second campaign sees the player as a captain in the UED expeditionary force , reporting to the fleet 's admiral Gerard DuGalle and his vice @-@ admiral Alexei Stukov . To secure the sector , the UED plans to overthrow the Terran Dominion and its emperor Arcturus Mengsk , and are assisted in this by Samir Duran , a mysterious psionic ghost espionage agent , and his group of anti @-@ Dominion rebels . The final campaign has the player assume the position of a Zerg cerebrate , a commander within the Zerg Swarm . The player is put under the control of Sarah Kerrigan , a Terran who was infested by the Zerg in StarCraft . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The story of Brood War is presented through its instruction manual , the briefings to each mission , and conversations within the missions themselves , along with the use of cinematic cut scenes at the end of each campaign . The game itself is split into three new episodes , one for the player to command each race . 
 In the first episode , Aldaris , Zeratul , and the newly promoted Artanis work to evacuate the surviving Protoss from their devastated homeworld through a warp gate to a dark templar colony on Shakuras , where they meet the matriarch of the dark templar , Raszagal . Although the Zerg are able to follow the Protoss to Shakuras , Raszagal informs the survivors of a Xel 'Naga temple on the surface of the planet with the power to scour the Zerg from the surface if activated . Reluctantly partnering with Sarah Kerrigan , who informs them of a new Overmind growing on Char , the player joins Zeratul and Artanis in an operation to recover two key crystals ( <unk> and <unk> ) necessary to operate the temple . Upon their return , it is revealed that Aldaris has begun an uprising against the dark templar over their alliance with Kerrigan . The uprising is crushed , and Aldaris is killed by Kerrigan , who reveals that her motives are to ensure the destruction of the Zerg cerebrates on Shakuras so she can gain control of the Zerg herself before departing the planet . Despite knowing that activating the temple will accomplish Kerrigan 's objectives , Zeratul and Artanis proceed with little other choice , wiping the Zerg off Shakuras ' surface . 
 In the second episode , the player leads the United Earth Directorate 's initial incursions against the Terran Dominion . Upon meeting Samir Duran , the fleet 's vice @-@ admiral Alexei Stukov conscripts Duran as a special advisor . The UED soon discovers a " psi disrupter " — a device capable of disrupting Zerg communications — on the former Confederate capital Tarsonis . Although Duran persuades admiral Gerard DuGalle to have the anti @-@ Zerg device destroyed , Stukov 's forces relieve Duran at the last moment . The UED proceeds to the Dominion throne world Korhal IV where the player defeats Arcturus Mengsk 's armies , although Mengsk is rescued when a Protoss fleet commanded by Jim Raynor arrives . The UED tracks Raynor and Mengsk to the Protoss homeworld of Aiur , but the two escape the massive UED assault when Duran inexplicably moves his forces out of position and allows the Zerg to interfere with the operation . Having understood that the UED invasion had caused Mengsk , Raynor , and the Protoss to band together against a common foe , Stukov realizes that Duran 's actions and the Zerg attack were too much to be a coincidence — the Zerg were also allied with the Terran Dominion and the Protoss , and Duran had been working to undermine the UED . While Stukov takes a contingent of troops and reconstructs the psi disrupter on Braxis , DuGalle is unaware of his intentions and becomes convinced that he is a traitor . The player helps Duran hunt down Stukov inside the psi disrupter , but before he dies , Stukov reveals to DuGalle that Duran is the real enemy . Duran flees after the player foils his attempt to sabotage the psi disrupter . Using the psi disrupter 's capabilities , DuGalle and the UED are able to assault the Zerg world Char and take control of the new Overmind growing there . 
 The final section of Brood War sees the player helping Sarah Kerrigan defeat the UED . With the Overmind falling under the United Earth Directorate 's command , all operations amongst native factions in the sector are damaged , including Kerrigan 's forces . To begin the campaign against the Directorate forces , Kerrigan and Samir Duran form a reluctant alliance with Jim Raynor , Protoss praetor Fenix , and Arcturus Mengsk to destroy the psi disrupter . After destroying the psi disrupter , the player leads Kerrigan 's forces in a full @-@ scale assault on Korhal , quickly breaking the UED 's hold over the planet . In the aftermath , Kerrigan betrays her allies , destroying a large number of Dominion forces and killing both Fenix and Mengsk 's right @-@ hand man , Edmund Duke . Angry at Kerrigan 's betrayal , Raynor promises that he will kill her one @-@ day and then retreats . Kerrigan travels with Duran to Shakuras and abducts Raszagal , who she uses to blackmail Zeratul into killing the Overmind on Char , thus bringing all Zerg forces under Kerrigan 's control . Zeratul attempts to rescue Raszagal , but the player prevents their escape , and Zeratul eventually kills Raszagal when it becomes clear she has been irreversibly brainwashed by Kerrigan . At that moment it became clear that Aldaris 's uprising in the first episode was an attempt to stop the brainwashed Raszagal from betraying her people any further . Upon leaving Char in search of Artanis , Zeratul stumbles upon a genetics facility run by Duran without Kerrigan 's knowledge where a Protoss / Zerg hybrid is being developed . At the same time , Kerrigan is attacked on Char by the Dominion , the UED , and a vengeful fleet commanded by Artanis . Despite being outnumbered , Kerrigan defeats all three fleets and eradicates the surviving UED fleet , leaving her the dominant power in the sector . Before the UED fleet was wiped out , Admiral DuGalle sent a final message back to his family before committing suicide with his pistol . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development on Brood War began shortly after the release of StarCraft in 1998 , and was announced after the release of StarCraft 's first two expansion packs , Insurrection and Retribution . Most of the team at Blizzard Entertainment responsible for StarCraft returned to work on Brood War . They were assisted by members of Saffire , who were contracted for a variety of tasks consisting of programming and design for levels , visuals , and audio effects . According to Shane <unk> , the game 's producer , Brood War aimed to drastically increase the significance of the story within gameplay , stating that the team was adding scripting that would allow " Final Fantasy type events " to be played out during the course of a level . <unk> further explained that the objectives in the missions would also reflect the story in a far more interactive way , with players being presented with tactical decisions over which objectives to pursue and with fewer missions revolving around simple annihilation of the enemy . Although originally slated for release in the US in October 1998 , Brood War 's release was delayed by a month for a November release . 
 As with StarCraft , an exemplar campaign showcasing the methods of creating a custom campaign for Brood War is available . Entitled <unk> : Dark Vengeance , the campaign follows the actions of a rogue dark templar , Ulrezaj , and his attempts to remove the Khalai Protoss from his homeworld of Shakuras , with the player and Zeratul trying to stop him . However , it is not included in the release and must be downloaded separately from Battle.net. 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 StarCraft : Brood War was critically acclaimed . The magazine PC Zone gave Brood War a short but flattering review , describing it as having " definitely been worth the wait " . PC Zone praised the inclusion of new units and the balancing tweaks as transforming the original StarCraft " from an okay game into something akin to the mutt 's nuts " . The review also drew note to the cinematic cut scenes , stating that they " actually feel like part of the story rather than an afterthought " . 
 IGN praised Brood War as a " carefully designed " expansion , " with a surfeit of new features that will satisfy even the <unk> of gamers " . Although stating that there was " enough to enrich the core gameplay without losing the flavor " , IGN presented concern over the difficulty of the game : " Brood War 's difficulty is an order of magnitude higher than StarCraft . [ Players will ] barely have enough time to acquaint [ themselves ] with the new units before the enemy starts coming at [ them ] full bore . " However , IGN praised the plot as " compelling " and described the extended multiplayer as " one of the best features " of the game , ultimately rating the expansion as " impressive " . 
 GameSpot was also positive in its review , stating that the design of Brood War " contains all the care , detail , and ingenuity of a true sequel " that " completely revitalizes " the original game . The reviewer praises the " seemingly minor but terribly significant modifications " to the balance of the game , putting the results as " outstanding " , but draws concern to the interface 's shortfalls in coping with these changes . GameSpot also notes the music and audio work on Brood War as a bold improvement , describing the voice acting as " completely convincing " in a heavily story @-@ driven single @-@ player campaign that although becoming less innovative in the latter stages , " remains captivating to the end " . The review concludes that Brood War is a " more @-@ than @-@ worthy successor to StarCraft and one of the finest computer game expansion sets of all time " , and gave a special achievement award of " Best Expansion Pack " to the game . 
 In its review , The Cincinnati Enquirer commended Brood War 's new content , praising the efforts gone to in the development of the expansion . Noting the increased difficulty of the expansion and its multiplayer success , The Cincinnati Enquirer stated that " While it ’ s rare that an expansion pack reawakens the joy birthed from the original , Brood War proves it ’ s not impossible " and concluding that the expansion was a " worthwhile choice " . 
 However , the critical response to Brood War was not universal . Game Revolution described the gameplay as " identical to StarCraft in almost every way " and displaying mixed feelings towards the new units . The reviewer continued by stating that " while the unit upgrades are good , the scenarios still don 't cut it " , describing the single @-@ player mission design as an " afterthought " despite the expansion possessing an " interesting " storyline . Dismissing the multiplayer additions as unimportant , Game Revolution summarized that while " a fun expansion " , Brood War was " a mixed bag " . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 After its release , StarCraft , along with its expansion Brood War , rapidly grew in popularity in South Korea , establishing a successful professional gaming scene . Some pro @-@ gamers have gained television contracts , sponsorships , and tournament prizes , allowing the most famous player , Lim Yo @-@ <unk> , who is known in @-@ game as <unk> <unk> , to gain a fanclub of over a half million people . Professional gamers dedicate many hours each day to playing StarCraft when preparing for the highly competitive leagues . Lee Yun @-@ <unk> , a Terran player known as [ Red ] <unk> , reported earnings in 2005 of US $ 200 @,@ 000 . In April 2009 , a Collegiate Star League was formed in the U.S. to facilitate inter @-@ collegiate competition amongst university teams and clubs . On October 2009 , the first ever live collegiate Starcraft match occurred between Rutgers University and Princeton University in a best @-@ of @-@ five series . 
 On May 2 , 2012 , KeSPA , Ongamenet , Blizzard Entertainment , and GomTV announced the introduction of StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty to professional competitions in South Korea with StarCraft : Brood War being completely phased out in October . 
 However , even after being supplanted by its successor , Brood War competition remained popular for part of an audience and streaming channels of retired professional gamers kept popularity . Outside governance of Korean eSports Professional Association , amateur competitions started to gain popularity , and in 2014 , few higher profile tournaments were announced - with prize pool matching competitions from the peak of popularity and one even returning to the television channel - OGN . 
 = French battleship Danton = 
 Danton was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the French Navy and the lead ship of her class . She was a technological leap in battleship development for the French Navy , as she was the first ship in the fleet with turbine engines . However , like all battleships of her type , she was completed after the Royal Navy battleship HMS Dreadnought , and as such she was outclassed before she was even commissioned . 
 During her career Danton was sent to Great Britain to honor the coronation of George V , and later served in World War I as an escort for supply ships and troop transports , guarding them from elements of the German Navy . While en route to aid a blockade , she was torpedoed and sunk on 19 March 1917 by a German U @-@ boat , leaving 296 men dead . The location of the wreck remained a mystery until an underwater survey team inadvertently discovered the battleship in December 2007 . In February 2009 , the wreck was confirmed to be Danton . The ship is in remarkably good shape for her age . Danton rests upright on the ocean floor , and most of the original equipment is reported to be intact . 
 = = Design = = 
 Although the Danton @-@ class battleships were a significant improvement from the preceding Liberté class , especially with the 3 @,@ 000 @-@ ton displacement increase , they were outclassed by the advent of the dreadnought well before they were completed . This , combined with other poor traits , including the great weight in coal they had to carry , made them rather unsuccessful ships , though their numerous rapid @-@ firing guns were of some use in the Mediterranean . 
 Danton was laid down at the Arsenal de Brest in February 1906 , launched on 4 July 1909 , and commissioned into the French Navy on 1 June 1911 . The ship was 146 @.@ 6 meters ( 481 ft 0 in ) long overall and had a beam of 25 @.@ 8 m ( 84 ft 8 in ) and a full @-@ load draft of 9 @.@ 2 m ( 30 ft 2 in ) . She displaced 19 @,@ 736 metric tons ( 19 @,@ 424 long tons ; 21 @,@ 755 short tons ) at full load and had a crew of 681 officers and enlisted men . She was powered by four Parsons steam turbines with twenty @-@ six Belleville boilers , the first French warship to use turbines . They were rated at 22 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 16 @,@ 800 kW ) and provided a top speed of around 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . Coal storage amounted to 2 @,@ 027 t ( 1 @,@ 995 long tons ; 2 @,@ 234 short tons ) . 
 Danton 's main battery consisted of four 305mm / 45 Modèle 1906 guns mounted in two twin gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The secondary battery consisted of twelve 240mm / 50 Modèle 1902 guns in twin turrets , three on either side of the ship . A number of smaller guns were carried for defense against torpedo boats . These included sixteen 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) L / 65 guns and ten 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) guns . The ship was also armed with two 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . The ship 's main belt was 270 mm ( 10 @.@ 6 in ) thick and the main battery was protected by up to 300 mm ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) of armor . The conning tower also had 300 mm thick sides . 
 = = Service = = 
 In May 1909 , at the launching ceremony for Danton , socialist activists prevented the ship from leaving the stocks . The ship was eventually launched on 4 July 1909 . A week after she was completed , she was sent to the United Kingdom in honour of the Coronation of George V in 1911 . Upon her return to France , Danton was assigned to the 1st Battle Squadron , along with her sister ships and the two powerful dreadnoughts Courbet and Jean Bart. In 1913 , while off Hyères in the Mediterranean , Danton suffered an explosion in one of her gun turrets , which killed three men and injured several others . 
 Danton served in World War I in the French Mediterranean Fleet . At the outbreak of the war in early August 1914 , she was assigned to guard convoys bringing French soldiers from North Africa , to protect from attack by the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben and light cruiser SMS Breslau , which were operating in the area . At the time , she remained in the 1st Battle Squadron alongside her sister ships , under the command of Vice Admiral <unk> . By 16 August , the French naval commander , Admiral de Lapeyrère , took the bulk of the French fleet from Malta to the entrance of the Adriatic to keep the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy bottled up . 
 = = = Sinking = = = 
 Danton , commanded by Captain Delage , was torpedoed by U @-@ 64 , commanded by Kapitänleutnant Robert <unk> , at 13 : 17 on 19 March 1917 , 22 miles ( 19 nmi ; 35 km ) south @-@ west of Sardinia . The battleship was returning to duty from a refit in Toulon and was bound for the Greek island of Corfu to join the Allied blockade of the Strait of Otranto . Danton was carrying more men than normal , as many were crew members of other ships at Corfu , and had been zig @-@ zagging to foil enemy submarines . The ship sank in 45 minutes ; 806 men were rescued by the destroyer <unk> and nearby patrol boats , but 296 , including Captain Delage , went down with the ship . <unk> attacked U @-@ 64 with depth charges , but the U @-@ boat successfully evaded her attacker . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 In February 2009 , it was made public that in late 2007 the wreck of the ship was discovered " in remarkable condition " during an underwater survey between Italy and Algeria for the <unk> gas pipeline . The wreck lies at 38 ° 45 ′ 35 ″ N 8 ° 3 ′ 30 ″ E , a few kilometres away from where it had been thought she sank , sitting upright with many of her gun turrets intact at a depth of over 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 550 fathoms ; 3 @,@ 300 ft ) . 
 = Hungry Bay Nature Reserve = 
 Hungry Bay Nature Reserve is a nature reserve on the east coast of Bermuda . It was established in 1986 . It is considered the best example of coastal mangrove swamp on the island . It includes the Hungry Bay area and the largest mangrove coastal swamp in Bermuda . It is protected by a Tree preservation order ( <unk> ) and designated as an official Nature Reserve within the Parks system of Bermuda . 
 The Hungry Bay Mangrove Swamp Reserve , a wetland site , is one of the seven Ramsar Sites in Bermuda . This designation recognises its international importance as a northerly mangrove swamp , as a habitat for its native crustaceans and as an important destination for migratory birds . Most of the reserve consists of mangrove swamp , while in the southern part there is a small area of saltmarsh . Much damage was done to the site by a storm in 2003 and residents have expressed concern about possible environmental damage resulting from pollution from the village of Seabright . 
 = = History = = 
 The reserve was proposed as a National Nature Reserve under the Development and Planning Act of 1974 . It was part of the Development Plan of 1983 . While the mangroves are under the Tree Preservation Order , the reserve in general is decreed as a National Reserve under the Bermuda National Parks Act of 1986 . The Hungry Bay Mangrove Swamp Reserve is one of the seven Ramsar Sites in Bermuda . It was approved as a Ramsar site of international importance on 10 May 1999 , meeting the criteria ( 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 and 8 ) for its unique characteristics . Its significance is due to being the largest northerly mangrove swamp in the Atlantic Ocean , the many migratory bird species which visit during winter , and the many native crustacean species , including the endangered terrestrial hermit crab ( Coenobita <unk> ) and giant land crab ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 During Hurricane Fabian in September 2003 , the outer ( western ) third of the swamp , accounting for 25 @-@ 30 % of the total area of mangroves , suffered total destruction . Global warming has also caused rise in tidal levels resulting in damage to the swamps . More recently , residents have begun to voice concerns over the Seabright sewage outflow , which enters Hungry Bay itself . A resident of the Bay noted the persistent appearance of a " shiny slick " emanating from Seabright extending to the " reef @-@ line a few hundred yards off " . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Bermuda ’ s largest tidal mangrove swamp is situated in a sea bay on the east coast of Bermuda , in an enclosed coast with a narrow opening from the sea , Hungry Bay . Reported as the most northerly mangrove swamp in the world , it is shallow with a depth of about 1 metre ( 3 ft 3 in ) during high tide . The area is small at 2 @.@ 01 hectares ( 5 @.@ 0 acres ) , of which 99 % is of tidal mangrove forest and the balance 1 % is made up of permanent brackish marshes . The soil conditions comprise clay , mud , peat and sand . It has perennial source of water and is of water quality varying from brackish to <unk> , saline and <unk> in different zones . 
 Climatic conditions in the reserve is subtropical with mild temperatures with humidity . Storms and gales are a common feature during winter . The reserve consists of dense forest of red and black mangrove trees . A large number of sea water channels flow through the area which rise and fall with the tides . These tidal channels are an important habitat for small fish . Crabs and other marine creatures are found here . The trees are the habitat for many species of birds . Snails and insects are commonly found in the reserve . 
 The reserve can be reached by road , though access is limited , or by boat traveling directly through the bay . The reserve operates a small wharf capable of receiving boat traffic . 
 = = Flora = = 
 Vegetation in the mangrove swamps consists primarily of black mangrove ( Avicennia germinans ) and red mangrove ( Rhizophora mangle ) . Other species of trees reported around the mangroves are <unk> ( <unk> erectus ) , rush ( Juncus acutus ) , sea purslane ( <unk> <unk> ) , sea ox @-@ eye ( <unk> arborescens ) , sea lavender ( Limonium <unk> ) , <unk> vaginatum , Sporobolus <unk> , woody glasswort ( <unk> perennis ) and West Indian grass ( <unk> petraea ) . Tropical mangrove swamp characterizes the northern areas of the reserve while the southern areas primarily represent temperate saltmarsh . 
 Invasive plants , notably among them casuarina , are adversely affecting the growth of the mangrove swamp , and therefore in addition giant land and hermit crabs , endemic snail species . Habitat restoration measures are underway to retain the mangroves and other native species . 
 = = Fauna = = 
 The faunal species reported from the mangrove swamp include several species of crabs : the giant land crab ( <unk> <unk> ) ( only two colonies exists in the upper regions of the swamp ) , the terrestrial hermit crab ( Coenobita <unk> ) ( 54 individuals recorded in 1990 ) , and the mangrove crab ( <unk> cruentatus ) . 
 = = = Avifauna = = = 
 Significant avifauna reported in the reserve are the great blue heron ( Ardea herodias ) , yellow @-@ crowned night heron ( <unk> violacea ) , snowy egret ( Egretta thula ) , mallard ( Anas platyrhynchus ) , belted kingfisher , Megaceryle alcyon and northern waterthrush ( <unk> <unk> ) , which are all wintering bird species . Feral pigeons , which are displacing tropic birds from their nesting sites in cliff @-@ holes and ledges , need to be eliminated from the reserve to preserve the native species of birds , according to efforts made to control their population thus far . 
 = Croatian submarine Velebit ( P @-@ 01 ) = 
 Velebit ( pennant number P @-@ 01 ) was a modified Una @-@ class midget submarine and the only submarine to see service with the Croatian Navy . It was built for the Yugoslav Navy during the 1980s where it was named Soča . At the outbreak of the Croatian War of Independence Soča was being overhauled in the Brodogradilište specijalnih objekata division of Brodosplit shipyard in Split , Croatia . Although stripped of all equipment , it was preserved from the retreating Yugoslav forces by the shipyard workers . 
 With modifications that were aimed at improving the ships endurance by including a diesel generator , it was launched as Velebit ( P @-@ 01 ) in 1996 . A few years later it was out of service because of the need to acquire a new set of batteries , which in turn , never happened . After unsuccessful attempts of selling it to a foreign buyer , it was offered to various museums in Croatia with a final destination still pending . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Velebit was completed as Soča in 1987 at the Brodogradilište specijalnih objekata division of Brodosplit shipyard in Split , Croatia , as the fourth boat in its class . It measures 21 @.@ 09 metres ( 69 @.@ 2 feet ) in length , has a draft of 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) , a 2 @.@ 7 m ( 8 @.@ 9 ft ) beam and displaces 88 tonnes ( 87 long tons ) when surfaced or 98 @.@ 5 tonnes ( 96 @.@ 9 long tons ) when submerged . It was constructed as a single hull design with the internal compartment divided into three sections : forward ( command / steering ) position , exit chamber and the propulsion section in the back . During underwater operations two battery groups with a total of 256 cells power two 20 kW Končar electric motors mounted on a single shaft that spins a five blade propeller . Surface propulsion and battery recharging is provided by a single diesel generator . 
 Maximum speed is eight knots ( 15 kilometres per hour ; 9 @.@ 2 miles per hour ) underwater and seven knots ( 13 kilometres per hour ; 8 @.@ 1 miles per hour ) surfaced . The boat 's range is 250 nautical miles ( 460 kilometres ; 290 miles ) with a speed of four knots ( 7 @.@ 4 kilometres per hour ; 4 @.@ 6 miles per hour ) . It has an underwater endurance of up to 6 – 7 days which is an improvement compared to 96 hours of other Una @-@ class boats . Maximum diving depth is 120 metres ( 390 ft ) . 
 Because the class was designed with reconnaissance , small scale minelaying and special operations in mind , it does not possess any offensive weapons such as torpedoes . The submarine was to use its small dimensions to easily maneuver in the relatively shallow waters of the Adriatic sea , staying undetected and transporting up to six special forces personnel who had 6 – 12 limpet mines and four AIM @-@ M70 ( M70 / 1 ) bottom mines or four R @-@ 1 submersibles at their disposal . Velebit had a crew of four . 
 = = Service = = 
 Before the Croatian War of Independence Velebit served with the 88th Submarine Flotilla of the Yugoslav Navy entering service during the late 1980s . Velebit , then named Soča , was like other Una @-@ class submarines , named after rivers in Yugoslavia . In 1991 , it was being overhauled in Brodogradilište specijalnih objekata until the beginning of the war , when Croatian forces captured it . In 1993 , Brodarski Institut ( BI ) of Zagreb started a modification program to improve the operational capabilities of the submarine captured two years earlier . The hull was <unk> to create space needed for the installation of a single MTU 105 kW diesel generator , a feature the original Una @-@ class design lacked . A new steering system developed by BI was also installed . 
 It was recommissioned as Velebit in 1996 . According to the 2007 edition of The Naval Institute Guide to Combat Fleets of the World , Velebit was fitted with a <unk> @-@ Atlas Elektronik PP @-@ 10 active and PSU @-@ 1 @-@ 2 passive sonar and a portable navigational radar may have been used on board along with the GPS . The claim is contradicted by other sources with news reports stating the submarine was completed without an active sonar , effectively being " blind " underwater . During the 1990s Velebit had the pennant number " 3 " painted on its side . After the existing battery set needed for underwater propulsion expired and needed replacement , crew training and boat operations were limited to surface drives . 
 = = Decommissioning and aftermath = = 
 In February 2005 Velebit was raised from the sea , placed on a small platform within the Lora Naval Base and has remained there since . In June 2006 the Croatian Ministry of Defence released the Croatian Armed Forces Long Term Development Plan 2006 – 2015 ( Croatian : <unk> plan <unk> <unk> <unk> Republike Hrvatske 2006 – 2015 ) in which it was stated that : 
 The HRM [ Croatian Navy ] does not possess anti @-@ submarine warfare capabilities . It possesses one submarine which is not operationally usable . It 's designed for offensive minelaying and transporting underwater special forces . The Armed Forces of Croatia will not keep its submarine capabilities and the submarine will be decommissioned . 
 - Croatian Armed Forces Long Term Development Plan 2006 – 2015 
 The defence minister at the time , <unk> <unk> , explained that because Croatia was to join NATO in the spring 2008 , it would be a part of the collective defense of the entire alliance , and the need to develop all aspects of the defence system , including a submarine force , would be unnecessary . In 2007 it was confirmed that the submarine was put up for sale through the state @-@ owned " Alan Agency " that deals with weapons sales , with a starting price of 8 million Croatian kunas ( approximately 1 @.@ 07 million Euros ) . Acting commander of the Croatian Navy at the time , Ante <unk> , among other propositions , mentioned the possibility of installing a new set of batteries , sonar and overhauling the submarine . Fully operational , Velebit would then be sold for a much higher price of around 15 million euros . Considering the potential overhaul and sale didn 't happen , a decision was made to donate the submarine to a museum . 
 In 2009 it appeared that the submarine would be given to the Technical Museum in Zagreb under an agreement between mayor Milan Bandić and the government agencies , but this project was canceled due to the difficulty of transporting the 4 @.@ 42 metres ( 14 @.@ 5 feet ) tall submarine through the city center to the museum . The Croatian Maritime Museum in Split also expressed interest in obtaining Velebit as a part of its display , especially considering it was built in Split and homeported in the city throughout its service career . The main obstacle to this option is that the Maritime Museum is located in the <unk> fortress ; because the plans for moving the Maritime Museum to the more spacious port of Split have been put on hold , a new option that includes moving Velebit to the Military Museum that 's being created in Zagreb , has also appeared . As of November 2013 , the final location has yet to be decided . 
 = The History of British Political Parties = 
 The History of British Political Parties , also referred to as Politico 's Guide to the History of British Political Parties , is a reference book about political parties in the United Kingdom . Written by David Boothroyd , it was published in 2001 by Politico 's Publishing Ltd and distributed in the United States by International Specialized Book Services ( <unk> ) . At the time of the book 's publication , Boothroyd worked as a researcher with Parliamentary Monitoring Services . The book contains entries on over 250 UK political parties that have participated in parliamentary elections . It is structured alphabetically by entry , with the size of each entry relative to the history and influence of the individual political party . Boothroyd includes information about the history and election statistics of each party , as well as a brief narrative . He focuses on the Conservative , Liberal , and Labour parties ; the parties with the most significant histories in British politics . 
 Boothroyd 's work received positive reviews in book journals . The book was recommended by The School Librarian and Choice : Current Reviews for Academic Libraries ; although the latter criticised it for not including bibliographical aids . The authors of the bibliographical work Information Sources of Political Science described it as a " handy guide " , and it was used as a reference in Third Force Politics : Liberal Democrats at the Grassroots . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The History of British Political Parties is a comprehensive work which lists and describes over 250 political parties in the United Kingdom that have participated in parliamentary elections since 1832 . Entries are organised alphabetically , and most descriptions of the political parties span a few paragraphs or pages . Space is allotted to each entry based on the individual party 's history and influence ; 34 pages are devoted to the Conservative Party , whereas only two paragraphs are given to the Captain Beany 's New Millennium Bean Party . 
 Each entry contains objective information on the party including its history , address , the number of registered members , election statistics , and their email address and website if these exist . The author provides a detailed , narrative description of each party . Boothroyd writes , " Only three parties out of the 250 ... have ever formed a government in the United Kingdom . " He devotes the most discussion in the book to the Conservative , Liberal and Labour parties . The book includes cross @-@ references to enable the reader to easily locate political parties that have had changes over time . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a review of the book for The School Librarian , Valerie <unk> wrote , " Overall , this is a thorough historical guide to the political parties , and will serve as a very useful reference book for students of both history and politics at all levels . A glossary or ' concepts ' guide would have been a bonus for the new or less patient student . " N.W. Polsby of the University of California , Berkeley reviewed the book for Choice : Current Reviews for Academic Libraries , and wrote , " The total absence of bibliographical aids is a weakness of this book . Its strengths are its plainly factual and accessible writing . This is a book to be consulted , not read straight through . Recommended at all levels . " A review in Reference & Research Book News said , " The book is intended as an affordable reference book for the general reader interested in British politics " . The History of British Political Parties was also reviewed in Parliamentary Affairs . 
 In the 2003 book The Times House of Commons Guide : 1929 , 1931 , 1935 , Boothroyd is mentioned as the author of The History of British Political Parties and referred to as " an elections specialist " . In the 2005 bibliographical work Information Sources of Political Science , authors Stephen W. Green , Douglas Ernest , and Frederick L. Holler described Boothroyd 's book as " a handy guide to approximately 250 British political parties , " and wrote , " Even some of the more humorous and tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek political parties are included in this handbook , such as the Official Monster Raving Loony Party " . 
 The book is used as a reference in the works Third Force Politics : Liberal Democrats at the Grassroots ( 2006 ) by Paul Whiteley , Patrick Seyd and Antony <unk> , published by Oxford University Press ; The Logic of Pre @-@ Electoral Coalition Formation ( 2006 ) by Sona <unk> Golder , published by Ohio State University Press ; and in Posters , Propaganda , and Persuasion in Election Campaigns Around the World and Through History ( 2008 ) by Steven A. Seidman . Nicholas Whyte of the website Northern Ireland Access Research Knowledge ( ARK ) wrote , " For general information about political parties in Northern Ireland since 1922 , the whole of Ireland 1801 – 1922 , England , Scotland , and Wales , I urge you to get hold of Politico 's Guide to the History of British Political Parties by David Boothroyd available from Politico 's . " 
 = Paul Dickov = 
 Paul Dickov ( born 1 November 1972 ) is a Scottish former professional footballer and former manager of League One side Doncaster Rovers . 
 Dickov played as a forward from 1990 to 2011 , starting his career with Arsenal , where he won the UEFA Cup Winners Cup in 1994 , but often struggled to hold a place in the first team and spent time on loan with Luton Town and Brighton & Hove Albion before moving to Manchester City in 1996 who were then in Division One . Over six seasons at the club , Dickov experienced two promotions and two relegations , playing in three different divisions . Dickov left in 2002 to join Leicester City , where he stayed for two seasons and , in 2004 , he signed for Blackburn Rovers , and was part of the team which qualified for the UEFA Cup in 2005 – 06 . Upon the expiry of his Blackburn contract in 2006 , he rejoined Manchester City and later went on to play for Crystal Palace , Blackpool , Leicester City , Derby County and Leeds United . He joined Oldham Athletic in 2010 as Player / Manager and later retired from the playing side of the game to concentrate on the managerial side of his position . He held the position at Oldham until he resigned in February 2013 . He became manager of Doncaster Rovers in May 2013 . 
 In 2000 , he made his debut for Scotland , against San Marino . In total he represented his country ten times , scoring one goal . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Arsenal = = = 
 Born in Livingston , West Lothian , Paul started playing football around the age of nine years playing for his local under @-@ 11 team Livingston United . Paul continued to play for Livingston United each year and when he played in under @-@ 13 this is when he caught the eye of Arsenal Scout Malcolm McGregor . Dickov joined the youth ranks of Arsenal in 1989 , before being promoted to the first team in 1990 . Under George Graham chances were limited for Dickov as he struggled to break into the Arsenal team who were rich in talent with players such as Ian Wright . He helped the club win the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup in 1994 , and beforehand he had been a member of Arsenal 's squad during its first season in the Premier League . Whilst at Highbury he spent several loan spells at both Luton Town and Brighton & Hove Albion . He left Arsenal in 1996 having made 26 appearances in all competitions , scoring seven goals . 
 = = = Manchester City = = = 
 Dickov joined Manchester City on 22 August 1996 in a transfer valued between £ 750 @,@ 000 and £ 1 million , the final signing of Alan Ball 's Manchester City management . He made his debut as a substitute against Stoke City on 24 August , a 2 – 1 defeat which was Ball 's final match . Dickov made his first Manchester City start in the next match , in a 2 – 1 win over Charlton Athletic . Dickov joined the club in a period of turmoil ; in his first season at Manchester City he played under five different managers ( three full @-@ time appointments and two caretakers ) . A regular starter under Asa Hartford , Steve Coppell and Phil Neal , he played less frequently under Frank Clark , and finished the season with five goals from 25 League starts . At the start of the 1997 – 98 season , Dickov did not feature in the first team , but was restored to the starting line @-@ up following injuries to Uwe Rösler and Lee Bradbury . Dickov finished the season as the City 's top scorer with nine goals , but the club were relegated to the third tier of English football for the first time in their history after finishing in 22nd place . 
 Dickov , wearing the number 9 shirt , played a supporting role in a striking partnership with Shaun Goater in the 1998 – 99 season , scoring 16 goals in all competitions , including a hat @-@ trick against Lincoln City . He scored an important equaliser against Wigan Athletic in the play off semi final first leg ( which was also the last ever goal to be scored at Springfield Park ) . The sixteenth goal was particularly crucial , a 15 @-@ yard , top corner injury time equaliser in the final of the promotion playoffs against Gillingham . Dickov 's 95th @-@ minute goal took the game to extra time , and the Manchester team ultimately won to earn promotion to the First Division . This goal , scored past Vince Bartram , the best man at Dickov 's wedding , was voted City 's Greatest Ever Goal in a 2005 poll conducted by Manchester City . 
 Dickov retained his place in the first team at the start of the 1999 – 2000 season . He started each of the first fifteen League games , despite suffering a facial injury on 26 September 1999 in which he lost a tooth . The run of starting appearances came to an end on 27 October , when he damaged knee ligaments in a match against Ipswich Town . During the subsequent absence , Manchester City signed Robert Taylor , and most of Dickov 's appearances in the second half of the season were as a substitute . One of these substitute appearances was the final match of the season , a 4 – 1 win at Blackburn . Dickov scored the third Manchester City goal as City clinched promotion to the Premier League . 
 When Manchester City returned to the Premier League for the 2000 – 01 season , it appeared that Dickov 's chances of playing would be limited as City signed former FIFA World Player of the Year George Weah and Costa Rican international Paulo Wanchope . However , Dickov earned a place in the team , his performances attracting the attention of Scotland manager Craig Brown , who called him up to the Scotland squad for the first time . 
 City were relegated back into the First Division for the 2001 – 02 season and Kevin Keegan replaced Joe Royle as manager . Dickov found his first team opportunities at the club limited especially as the team had other strikers such as Paulo Wanchope , Shaun Goater and Darren Huckerby . Having fallen out of favour , on 22 February 2002 he moved to Leicester City for £ 150 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Leicester City = = = 
 Dickov 's Leicester debut came in a 3 – 0 defeat against Derby County . His first goals for Leicester came in his sixth appearance , when he scored both Leicester goals in a 2 – 1 victory against Blackburn Rovers , the club 's first win for four months . However , Dickov only scored two more goals that season . Leicester finished bottom and were relegated . 
 He scored a career @-@ high of 20 goals in the 2002 – 03 season as Leicester made an immediate return to the top flight , finishing runners @-@ up in Division One behind Portsmouth . 
 He managed to score 13 goals in the 2003 – 04 season . Leicester were subsequently relegated to the First Division and Dickov moved to Blackburn Rovers , declining an offer of an improved contract from Leicester and exercising a contractual clause which allowed him to join a Premier League club for a nominal fee . 
 = = = Blackburn Rovers = = = 
 Dickov debuted for Blackburn Rovers as a half @-@ time substitute against West Bromwich Albion on 14 August 2004 . He scored his first goal for the club in the following match , a 3 – 2 defeat to Southampton . Dickov was involved in the majority of matches in the 2004 – 05 season , until a knee injury caused him to miss the last few weeks of the season . He finished the season with ten league goals . In 2005 – 06 , Dickov found it hard to retain a regular place in the side , with manager Mark Hughes having signed forwards Craig Bellamy and <unk> <unk> during the summer . A red card against West Ham United caused him to miss most of the first month of the season . He had a run of first team games in the autumn but starting appearances became fewer as the season progressed . He left the club in the summer of 2006 following the expiry of his contract . 
 = = = Return to Manchester City = = = 
 Dickov re @-@ joined Manchester City on 26 May 2006 , signing a two @-@ year contract . He came on as a substitute in City 's first game of the 2006 – 07 season against Chelsea , a 3 – 0 defeat . He then started the next three matches , including a 1 – 0 win over his former club Arsenal . 
 Dickov suffered several injuries over the course of the season , including a back problem , a knee injury and a toe injury , the latter sidelining him for four months . Dickov made nine starts and seven substitute appearances in 2006 – 07 , but failed to score a single goal . In May 2007 he announced his interest in pursuing a coaching role when he retires . He was transfer listed by Manchester City in August . He joined Crystal Palace on a three @-@ month loan on 31 August 2007 . He played his first game for the Eagles in a friendly against Crystal Palace Baltimore , Crystal Palace 's American counterparts , on Friday 7 September , playing the full 90 minutes . On 31 January 2008 , Dickov joined Blackpool managed by Simon Grayson on loan until May . Two days later he scored on his debut for Blackpool , what proved to be the winning goal in the Seasiders ' 2 – 1 victory against Leicester City , one of his former clubs , at Bloomfield Road . He had come on as a 70th @-@ minute substitute and scored the winning goal in the 89th minute . It was his first goal since 2 January 2006 . He went on to score five goals in his first five appearances for the club , and on 4 March he was named as the Professional Footballers ' Association ( PFA ) ' s Fans Championship Player of the Month for February . By the end of his loan , Dickov had scored six goals in eleven appearances . He returned to Manchester City after his loan before then being released at the end of the season . 
 = = = Return to Leicester City = = = 
 An initial bid from his former club Leicester City was rejected a week earlier , and after pondering other offers from Toronto FC and Blackpool , Dickov decided to rejoin Leicester on 7 August 2008 , signing a two @-@ year contract . He made his debut in a 2 – 0 home win over Milton Keynes Dons on 9 August 2008 , scoring his first goal in a 3 – 2 League Cup defeat to Fulham on 27 August . He made a total of 20 league games , scoring two goals as Leicester finished the 2008 – 09 season as League One champions . On 28 August 2009 , Dickov joined Derby County on loan until January as cover . Due to an injury crisis Dickov found himself playing regularly at Derby , where his dogged style won over the support of the Derby fans . Dickov scored his first goal for Derby against Queens Park Rangers on 24 October 2009 . After his loan spell at Derby ended , Dickov returned to Leicester in January 2010 . He was released from his contract by Leicester on 1 February 2010 to find a new club . 
 = = = Leeds United = = = 
 On 3 March 2010 Dickov signed for Leeds United until the end of the season . It was initially thought that MLS side Toronto had beaten Leeds to Dickov 's signature , however United eventually won the race for the Scot . Leeds also had to receive special dispensation from FIFA to sign Dickov due to the fact he had already played for two clubs this season , the maximum permitted . Dickov was named on Leeds ' bench against Brentford and made his debut for Leeds when he came on as a late substitute . Made his impact as a Leeds player by getting booked immediately , scrapping with Brentford winger Ryan Dickson before the ball had come into play . 
 Dickov made his first start for Leeds in a defeat against Millwall , after replacing the injured Jermaine Beckford in the starting line @-@ up . At the end of the 2009 – 10 season Leeds finished second thus earning promotion to the Championship . Dickov 's contract wasn 't renewed after promotion . 
 = = International career = = 
 Dickov played in Scotland 's run in the 1989 FIFA U @-@ 16 World Championship , where he scored in the final , but went on to miss in the penalty shoot @-@ out as Scotland lost to Saudi Arabia . He made his senior international debut on 7 October 2000 , coming on as a substitute in a World Cup qualifier against San Marino . He made two further substitute appearances that year , against Croatia and Australia . Limited first @-@ team opportunities at club level then meant Dickov was not selected for international duty for another two years . Good form at Leicester earned him a recall in September 2002 . He made his first international start against the Faroe Islands . However , playing out of position on the wing , he was substituted at half @-@ time as the faltering Scotland team drew 2 – 2 against a nation 62 places lower in the world rankings . In the return fixture a year later , Dickov scored his first international goal in a 3 – 1 win . His last cap came in a 1 – 0 defeat against Norway in October 2004 . In total , Dickov earned ten Scotland caps and scored one goal . 
 = = Management career = = 
 = = = Oldham Athletic = = = 
 On 9 June 2010 , Dickov agreed a one @-@ year rolling contract with Oldham Athletic to become player @-@ manager following the departure of previous manager Dave Penney . It was Dickov 's first attempt at managing and expected to be his last club as a player . His first competitive game as Oldham manager ended in a 2 – 1 victory at rivals Tranmere with Dale Stephens scoring both goals , Dickov also praised the travelling army of Oldham Fans . On 4 September 2010 , he made his debut coming on as a second @-@ half substitute against Bristol Rovers . 
 Dickov opted to build a youthful side and made controversial decisions at the start of the season to offload 2009 – 10 player of the year and club captain Sean Gregan as well as top scorer Paweł Abbott amongst other first team players . The team went into the New Year in ninth position , with games in hand on the teams above them , and being unbeaten at home in the league . Results in the second half of the season were less consistent and the team finished the season in the bottom half of the table . On 6 May 2011 Dickov announced that he would make only his second appearance of the season for the first team in the final match of the season , and would then end his playing career to concentrate on management . He then came on as a 77th @-@ minute substitute the following day against Milton Keynes Dons . 
 They finished the 2011 – 12 Season in 16th position in League One , one place higher than the previous season . 
 On 27 January 2013 , Dickov lead Oldham to a shock 3 – 2 victory against Premier League side Liverpool in the FA Cup fourth round but resigned on 3 February , primarily due to the team 's poor league form . 
 = = = Doncaster Rovers = = = 
 On 20 May 2013 , Dickov was appointed manager of Doncaster Rovers , who were promoted to the Championship having won the League One title in the 2012 – 13 season . Doncaster were relegated back to League One after just one season following a 1 @-@ 0 final day defeat to Leicester City . On 8 September 2015 , Dickov was sacked as Doncaster manager due to poor performances . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Although he was a striker , Dickov was better known for his tenacity than his goal @-@ scoring exploits . In a 2003 interview with the Independent on Sunday he provided a summary of his playing style : " The ability to battle is one of the main parts of my game . I know my limits . I am not the sort who gets the ball and is then going to beat five or six players and stick it in the top corner from God knows where . But , whether I 'm playing well or not , the one thing you will get from me is 110 per cent , upsetting defenders and basically giving them pain . " Rio Ferdinand was mentioning his name as the biggest headache to deal with on the pitch . His combative approach resulted in Manchester City manager Joe Royle naming him " The Wasp " , and during his time at Leicester he was known as " The Pest " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Dickov is married to Janet and the couple have had three children together , Lauren , Max and Sam . The family live in Cheshire . 
 Later describing it as the " darkest period " of his footballing career , in March 2004 , he , and team @-@ mates Keith Gillespie and Frank Sinclair were falsely accused of sexual assault while at a training camp in La Manga , Spain with Leicester City . All three were subsequently cleared when forensic tests showed the allegations were false . 
 According to a media source in Bulgaria , Dickov owes his family name to a Bulgarian grandfather . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Player = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 Scores and results list Scotland 's goal tally first . 
 = = = Manager = = = 
 As of 5 September 2015 
 = = Honours = = 
 Arsenal 
 UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup : 1994 
 Manchester City 
 Football League Second Division play @-@ offs : 1998 – 99 
 Football League First Division promotion : 1999 – 2000 
 Leicester City 
 Football League First Division runners @-@ up ( promoted ) : 2002 – 03 
 Football League One : 2008 – 09 
 Leeds United 
 Football League One runners @-@ up ( promoted ) : 2009 – 10 
 = 1940 Brocklesby mid @-@ air collision = 
 On 29 September 1940 , a mid @-@ air collision occurred over Brocklesby , New South Wales , Australia . The accident was unusual in that the aircraft involved , two Avro Ansons of No. 2 Service Flying Training School RAAF , remained locked together after colliding , and then landed safely . The collision stopped the engines of the upper Anson , but those of the machine underneath continued to run , allowing the pair of aircraft to keep flying . Both navigators and the pilot of the lower Anson bailed out . The pilot of the upper Anson found that he was able to control the interlocked aircraft with his ailerons and flaps , and made an emergency landing in a nearby paddock . All four crewmen survived the incident , and the upper Anson was repaired and returned to flight service . 
 = = Training school and flight details = = 
 No. 2 Service Flying Training School ( SFTS ) , based at RAAF Station Forest Hill near Wagga Wagga , New South Wales , was one of several pilot training facilities formed in the early years of World War II as part of Australia 's contribution to the Empire Air Training Scheme . After basic aeronautical instruction at an elementary flying training school , pupils went on to an SFTS to learn techniques they would require as operational ( or " service " ) pilots , including instrument flying , night flying , cross @-@ country navigation , advanced aerobatics , formation flying , dive bombing , and aerial gunnery . No. 2 SFTS 's facilities were still under construction when its first course commenced with Avro Ansons on 29 July 1940 . 
 On 29 September 1940 , two Ansons took off from the Forest Hill air base for a cross @-@ country training exercise over southern New South Wales . Tail number <unk> was piloted by Leading Aircraftman Leonard Graham Fuller , 22 , from Cootamundra , with Leading Aircraftman Ian Menzies Sinclair , 27 , from Glen Innes , as navigator . Tail number <unk> was piloted by Leading Aircraftman Jack Inglis Hewson , 19 , from Newcastle , with Leading Aircraftman Hugh Gavin Fraser , 27 , from Melbourne , as navigator . Their planned route was expected to take them first to Corowa , then to Narrandera , and finally back to Forest Hill . 
 = = Collision and emergency landing = = 
 The Ansons were at an altitude of 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 metres ) over the township of Brocklesby , near Albury , when they made a banking turn . Fuller lost sight of Hewson 's aircraft beneath him and the two Ansons collided amid what Fuller later described as a " grinding crash and a bang as roaring <unk> struck each other and bit into the engine cowlings " . The aircraft remained jammed together , the lower Anson 's turret wedged into the other 's port wing root , and its fin and rudder balancing the upper Anson 's port tailplane . 
 Both of the upper aircraft 's engines had been knocked out in the collision but those of the one below continued to turn at full power as the interlocked Ansons began to slowly circle . Fuller described the " freak combination " as " lumping along like a brick " . He nevertheless found that he was able to control the piggybacking pair of aircraft with his ailerons and flaps , and began searching for a place to land . The two navigators , Sinclair and Fraser , bailed out , followed soon after by the lower Anson 's pilot , Hewson , whose back had been injured when the spinning blades of the other aircraft sliced through his fuselage . 
 Fuller travelled five miles ( eight kilometres ) after the collision , then successfully made an emergency pancake landing in a large paddock 6 kilometres ( 4 mi ) south @-@ west of Brocklesby . The locked aircraft slid 180 metres ( 200 yards ) across the grass before coming to rest . As far as Fuller was concerned , the touchdown was better than any he had made when practising circuits and bumps at Forest Hill airfield the previous day . His acting commanding officer , Squadron Leader Cooper , declared the choice of improvised runway " perfect " , and the landing itself as a " wonderful effort " . The RAAF 's Inspector of Air Accidents , Group Captain Arthur " Spud " Murphy , flew straight to the scene from Air Force Headquarters in Melbourne , accompanied by his deputy Henry Winneke . Fuller told Murphy : 
 Well , sir , I did everything we 've been told to do in a forced landing — land as close as possible to habitation or a farmhouse and , if possible , land into the wind . I did all that . There 's the farmhouse , and I did a couple of circuits and landed into the wind . She was pretty heavy on the controls , though ! 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The freak accident garnered news coverage around the world , and cast a spotlight on the small town of Brocklesby . In preventing the destruction of the Ansons , Fuller was credited not only with avoiding possible damage to Brocklesby , but with saving approximately £ 40 @,@ 000 worth of military hardware . Both Ansons were repaired ; the top aircraft ( <unk> ) returned to flight service , and the lower ( <unk> ) was used as an instructional airframe . Hewson was treated for his back injury at Albury District Hospital and returned to active duty ; he graduated from No. 2 SFTS in October 1940 . He was discharged from the Air Force as a flight lieutenant in 1946 . Sinclair was discharged in 1945 , also a flight lieutenant . Fraser was posted to Britain and flew as a pilot officer with No. 206 Squadron RAF , based in <unk> , Northern Ireland . He and his crew of three died on 1 January 1942 during a routine training flight , when their Lockheed Hudson collided with a tree . 
 Fuller was promoted to sergeant after his successful landing , but also confined to barracks for fourteen days and docked seven days ' pay for speaking about the incident to newspapers without authorisation . He graduated from No. 2 SFTS in October 1940 , and subsequently received a commendation from the Australian Air Board for his " presence of mind , courage and determination in landing the locked Ansons without serious damage to the aircraft under difficult conditions " . Fuller saw active service first in the Middle East , and then in Europe with No. 37 Squadron RAF . He earned the Distinguished Flying Medal for his actions over Palermo in March 1942 . Commissioned later that year , Fuller was posted back to Australia as a flying officer , and became an instructor at No. 1 Operational Training Unit in Sale , Victoria . He died near Sale on 18 March 1944 , when he was hit by a bus while riding his bicycle . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 According to the Greater Hume Shire Council , the 1940 mid @-@ air collision remains Brocklesby 's " main claim to fame " . Local residents commemorated the 50th anniversary of the event by erecting a marker near the site of the crash landing ; it was unveiled by Tim Fischer , the Federal Member for Farrer and Leader of the National Party , on 29 September 1990 . On 26 January 2007 , a memorial featuring an Avro Anson engine was opened during Brocklesby 's Australia Day celebrations . 
 = Digital forensics = 
 Digital forensics ( sometimes known as digital forensic science ) is a branch of forensic science encompassing the recovery and investigation of material found in digital devices , often in relation to computer crime . The term digital forensics was originally used as a synonym for computer forensics but has expanded to cover investigation of all devices capable of storing digital data . With roots in the personal computing revolution of the late 1970s and early 1980s , the discipline evolved in a haphazard manner during the 1990s , and it was not until the early 21st century that national policies emerged . 
 Digital forensics investigations have a variety of applications . The most common is to support or refute a hypothesis before criminal or civil ( as part of the electronic discovery process ) courts . Forensics may also feature in the private sector ; such as during internal corporate investigations or intrusion investigation ( a specialist probe into the nature and extent of an unauthorized network intrusion ) . 
 The technical aspect of an investigation is divided into several sub @-@ branches , relating to the type of digital devices involved ; computer forensics , network forensics , forensic data analysis and mobile device forensics . The typical forensic process encompasses the seizure , forensic imaging ( acquisition ) and analysis of digital media and the production of a report into collected evidence . 
 As well as identifying direct evidence of a crime , digital forensics can be used to attribute evidence to specific suspects , confirm alibis or statements , determine intent , identify sources ( for example , in copyright cases ) , or authenticate documents . Investigations are much broader in scope than other areas of forensic analysis ( where the usual aim is to provide answers to a series of simpler questions ) often involving complex time @-@ lines or hypotheses . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to the 1980s crimes involving computers were dealt with using existing laws . The first computer crimes were recognized in the 1978 Florida Computer Crimes Act , which included legislation against the unauthorized modification or deletion of data on a computer system . Over the next few years the range of computer crimes being committed increased , and laws were passed to deal with issues of copyright , privacy / harassment ( e.g. , cyber bullying , cyber stalking , and online predators ) and child pornography . It was not until the 1980s that federal laws began to incorporate computer offences . Canada was the first country to pass legislation in 1983 . This was followed by the US Federal Computer Fraud and Abuse Act in 1986 , Australian amendments to their crimes acts in 1989 and the British Computer Misuse Act in 1990 . 
 = = = 1980s – 1990s : Growth of the field = = = 
 The growth in computer crime during the 1980s and 1990s caused law enforcement agencies to begin establishing specialized groups , usually at the national level , to handle the technical aspects of investigations . For example , in 1984 the FBI launched a Computer Analysis and Response Team and the following year a computer crime department was set up within the British Metropolitan Police fraud squad . As well as being law enforcement professionals , many of the early members of these groups were also computer hobbyists and became responsible for the field 's initial research and direction . 
 One of the first practical ( or at least publicized ) examples of digital forensics was Cliff Stoll 's pursuit of hacker Markus Hess in 1986 . Stoll , whose investigation made use of computer and network forensic techniques , was not a specialized examiner . Many of the earliest forensic examinations followed the same profile . 
 Throughout the 1990s there was high demand for these new , and basic , investigative resources . The strain on central units lead to the creation of regional , and even local , level groups to help handle the load . For example , the British National Hi @-@ Tech Crime Unit was set up in 2001 to provide a national infrastructure for computer crime ; with personnel located both centrally in London and with the various regional police forces ( the unit was folded into the Serious Organised Crime Agency ( <unk> ) in 2006 ) . 
 During this period the science of digital forensics grew from the ad @-@ hoc tools and techniques developed by these hobbyist practitioners . This is in contrast to other forensics disciplines which developed from work by the scientific community . It was not until 1992 that the term " computer forensics " was used in academic literature ( although prior to this it had been in informal use ) ; a paper by Collier and <unk> attempted to justify this new discipline to the forensic science world . This swift development resulted in a lack of standardization and training . In his 1995 book , " High @-@ Technology Crime : Investigating Cases Involving Computers " , K Rosenblatt wrote : 
 Seizing , preserving , and analyzing evidence stored on a computer is the greatest forensic challenge facing law enforcement in the 1990s . Although most forensic tests , such as fingerprinting and DNA testing , are performed by specially trained experts the task of collecting and analyzing computer evidence is often assigned to patrol officers and detectives . 
 = = = 2000s : Developing standards = = = 
 Since 2000 , in response to the need for standardization , various bodies and agencies have published guidelines for digital forensics . The Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence ( <unk> ) produced a 2002 paper , " Best practices for Computer Forensics " , this was followed , in 2005 , by the publication of an ISO standard ( ISO <unk> , General requirements for the competence of testing and calibration laboratories ) . A European lead international treaty , the Convention on <unk> , came into force in 2004 with the aim of reconciling national computer crime laws , investigative techniques and international co @-@ operation . The treaty has been signed by 43 nations ( including the US , Canada , Japan , South Africa , UK and other European nations ) and ratified by 16 . 
 The issue of training also received attention . Commercial companies ( often forensic software developers ) began to offer certification programs and digital forensic analysis was included as a topic at the UK specialist investigator training facility , <unk> . 
 Since the late 1990s mobile devices have become more widely available , advancing beyond simple communication devices , and have been found to be rich forms of information , even for crime not traditionally associated with digital forensics . Despite this , digital analysis of phones has lagged behind traditional computer media , largely due to problems over the proprietary nature of devices . 
 Focus has also shifted onto internet crime , particularly the risk of cyber warfare and cyberterrorism . A February 2010 report by the United States Joint Forces Command concluded : 
 Through cyberspace , enemies will target industry , academia , government , as well as the military in the air , land , maritime , and space domains . In much the same way that airpower transformed the battlefield of World War II , cyberspace has fractured the physical barriers that shield a nation from attacks on its commerce and communication . 
 The field of digital forensics still faces unresolved issues . A 2009 paper , " Digital Forensic Research : The Good , the Bad and the <unk> " , by Peterson and Shenoi identified a bias towards Windows operating systems in digital forensics research . In 2010 Simson Garfinkel identified issues facing digital investigations in the future , including the increasing size of digital media , the wide availability of encryption to consumers , a growing variety of operating systems and file formats , an increasing number of individuals owning multiple devices , and legal limitations on investigators . The paper also identified continued training issues , as well as the prohibitively high cost of entering the field . 
 = = = Development of forensic tools = = = 
 During the 1980s very few specialized digital forensic tools existed , and consequently investigators often performed live analysis on media , examining computers from within the operating system using existing <unk> tools to extract evidence . This practice carried the risk of modifying data on the disk , either inadvertently or otherwise , which led to claims of evidence tampering . A number of tools were created during the early 1990s to address the problem . 
 The need for such software was first recognized in 1989 at the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center , resulting in the creation of <unk> ( by Michael White ) and in 1990 , <unk> ( developed by <unk> ) . Similar software was developed in other countries ; <unk> ( a hardware and software solution ) was released commercially in the UK in 1991 , and Rob <unk> released Fixed Disk Image free to Australian law enforcement . These tools allowed examiners to create an exact copy of a piece of digital media to work on , leaving the original disk intact for verification . By the end of the 1990s , as demand for digital evidence grew more advanced commercial tools such as <unk> and <unk> were developed , allowing analysts to examine copies of media without using any live forensics . More recently , a trend towards " live memory forensics " has grown resulting in the availability of tools such as <unk> . 
 More recently the same progression of tool development has occurred for mobile devices ; initially investigators accessed data directly on the device , but soon specialist tools such as <unk> or Radio Tactics <unk> appeared . 
 = = Forensic process = = 
 A digital forensic investigation commonly consists of 3 stages : acquisition or imaging of exhibits , analysis , and reporting . Ideally acquisition involves capturing an image of the computer 's volatile memory ( RAM ) and creating an exact sector level duplicate ( or " forensic duplicate " ) of the media , often using a write blocking device to prevent modification of the original . However , the growth in size of storage media and developments such as cloud computing have led to more use of ' live ' acquisitions whereby a ' logical ' copy of the data is acquired rather than a complete image of the physical storage device . Both acquired image ( or logical copy ) and original media / data are hashed ( using an algorithm such as <unk> @-@ 1 or <unk> ) and the values compared to verify the copy is accurate . 
 During the analysis phase an investigator recovers evidence material using a number of different methodologies and tools . In 2002 , an article in the International Journal of Digital Evidence referred to this step as " an in @-@ depth systematic search of evidence related to the suspected crime . " In 2006 , forensics researcher Brian Carrier described an " intuitive procedure " in which obvious evidence is first identified and then " exhaustive searches are conducted to start filling in the holes . " 
 The actual process of analysis can vary between investigations , but common methodologies include conducting keyword searches across the digital media ( within files as well as unallocated and slack space ) , recovering deleted files and extraction of registry information ( for example to list user accounts , or attached USB devices ) . 
 The evidence recovered is analysed to reconstruct events or actions and to reach conclusions , work that can often be performed by less specialised staff . When an investigation is complete the data is presented , usually in the form of a written report , in lay persons ' terms . 
 = = Application = = 
 Digital forensics is commonly used in both criminal law and private investigation . Traditionally it has been associated with criminal law , where evidence is collected to support or oppose a hypothesis before the courts . As with other areas of forensics this is often as part of a wider investigation spanning a number of disciplines . In some cases the collected evidence is used as a form of intelligence gathering , used for other purposes than court proceedings ( for example to locate , identify or halt other crimes ) . As a result , intelligence gathering is sometimes held to a less strict forensic standard . 
 In civil litigation or corporate matters digital forensics forms part of the electronic discovery ( or <unk> ) process . Forensic procedures are similar to those used in criminal investigations , often with different legal requirements and limitations . Outside of the courts digital forensics can form a part of internal corporate investigations . 
 A common example might be following unauthorized network intrusion . A specialist forensic examination into the nature and extent of the attack is performed as a damage limitation exercise . Both to establish the extent of any intrusion and in an attempt to identify the attacker . Such attacks were commonly conducted over phone lines during the 1980s , but in the modern era are usually propagated over the Internet . 
 The main focus of digital forensics investigations is to recover objective evidence of a criminal activity ( termed actus reus in legal parlance ) . However , the diverse range of data held in digital devices can help with other areas of inquiry . 
 Attribution 
 Meta data and other logs can be used to attribute actions to an individual . For example , personal documents on a computer drive might identify its owner . 
 <unk> and statements 
 Information provided by those involved can be cross checked with digital evidence . For example , during the investigation into the Soham murders the offender 's alibi was disproved when mobile phone records of the person he claimed to be with showed she was out of town at the time . 
 Intent 
 As well as finding objective evidence of a crime being committed , investigations can also be used to prove the intent ( known by the legal term mens rea ) . For example , the Internet history of convicted killer Neil Entwistle included references to a site discussing How to kill people . 
 Evaluation of source 
 File artifacts and meta @-@ data can be used to identify the origin of a particular piece of data ; for example , older versions of Microsoft Word embedded a Global Unique <unk> into files which identified the computer it had been created on . Proving whether a file was produced on the digital device being examined or obtained from elsewhere ( e.g. , the Internet ) can be very important . 
 Document authentication 
 Related to " Evaluation of source , " meta data associated with digital documents can be easily modified ( for example , by changing the computer clock you can affect the creation date of a file ) . Document authentication relates to detecting and identifying falsification of such details . 
 = = = Limitations = = = 
 One major limitation to a forensic investigation is the use of encryption ; this disrupts initial examination where pertinent evidence might be located using keywords . Laws to compel individuals to disclose encryption keys are still relatively new and controversial . 
 = = Legal considerations = = 
 The examination of digital media is covered by national and international legislation . For civil investigations , in particular , laws may restrict the abilities of analysts to undertake examinations . Restrictions against network monitoring , or reading of personal communications often exist . During criminal investigation , national laws restrict how much information can be seized . For example , in the United Kingdom seizure of evidence by law enforcement is governed by the PACE act . During its existence early in the field , the " International Organization on Computer Evidence " ( <unk> ) was one agency that worked to establish compatible international standards for the seizure of evidence . 
 In the UK the same laws covering computer crime can also affect forensic investigators . The 1990 computer misuse act <unk> against unauthorised access to computer material ; this is a particular concern for civil investigators who have more limitations than law enforcement . 
 An individuals right to privacy is one area of digital forensics which is still largely undecided by courts . The US Electronic Communications Privacy Act places limitations on the ability of law enforcement or civil investigators to intercept and access evidence . The act makes a distinction between stored communication ( e.g. email archives ) and transmitted communication ( such as VOIP ) . The latter , being considered more of a privacy invasion , is harder to obtain a warrant for . The <unk> also affects the ability of companies to investigate the computers and communications of their employees , an aspect that is still under debate as to the extent to which a company can perform such monitoring . 
 Article 5 of the European Convention on Human Rights asserts similar privacy limitations to the <unk> and limits the processing and sharing of personal data both within the EU and with external countries . The ability of UK law enforcement to conduct digital forensics investigations is legislated by the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act . 
 = = = Digital evidence = = = 
 When used in a court of law digital evidence falls under the same legal guidelines as other forms of evidence ; courts do not usually require more stringent guidelines . In the United States the Federal Rules of Evidence are used to evaluate the admissibility of digital evidence , the United Kingdom PACE and Civil Evidence acts have similar guidelines and many other countries have their own laws . US federal laws restrict seizures to items with only obvious evidential value . This is acknowledged as not always being possible to establish with digital media prior to an examination . 
 Laws dealing with digital evidence are concerned with two issues : integrity and authenticity . Integrity is ensuring that the act of seizing and acquiring digital media does not modify the evidence ( either the original or the copy ) . Authenticity refers to the ability to confirm the integrity of information ; for example that the imaged media matches the original evidence . The ease with which digital media can be modified means that documenting the chain of custody from the crime scene , through analysis and , ultimately , to the court , ( a form of audit trail ) is important to establish the authenticity of evidence . 
 Attorneys have argued that because digital evidence can theoretically be altered it undermines the reliability of the evidence . US judges are beginning to reject this theory , in the case US v. <unk> the court ruled that " the fact that it is possible to alter data contained in a computer is plainly insufficient to establish <unk> . " In the United Kingdom guidelines such as those issued by <unk> are followed to help document the authenticity and integrity of evidence . 
 Digital investigators , particularly in criminal investigations , have to ensure that conclusions are based upon factual evidence and their own expert knowledge . In the US , for example , Federal Rules of Evidence state that a qualified expert may testify “ in the form of an opinion or otherwise ” so long as : 
 ( 1 ) the testimony is based upon sufficient facts or data , ( 2 ) the testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods , and ( 3 ) the witness has applied the principles and methods reliably to the facts of the case . 
 The sub @-@ branches of digital forensics may each have their own specific guidelines for the conduct of investigations and the handling of evidence . For example , mobile phones may be required to be placed in a Faraday shield during seizure or acquisition to prevent further radio traffic to the device . In the UK forensic examination of computers in criminal matters is subject to <unk> guidelines . There are also international approaches to providing guidance on how to handle electronic evidence . The " Electronic Evidence Guide " by the Council of Europe offers a framework for law enforcement and judicial authorities in countries who seek to set up or enhance their own guidelines for the identification and handling of electronic evidence . 
 = = = Investigative tools = = = 
 The admissibility of digital evidence relies on the tools used to extract it . In the US , forensic tools are subjected to the Daubert standard , where the judge is responsible for ensuring that the processes and software used were acceptable . In a 2003 paper Brian Carrier argued that the Daubert guidelines required the code of forensic tools to be published and peer reviewed . He concluded that " open source tools may more clearly and comprehensively meet the guideline requirements than would closed source tools . " 
 = = Branches = = 
 Digital forensics includes several sub @-@ branches relating to the investigation of various types of devices , media or artifacts . 
 = = = Computer forensics = = = 
 The goal of computer forensics is to explain the current state of a digital artifact ; such as a computer system , storage medium or electronic document . The discipline usually covers computers , embedded systems ( digital devices with rudimentary computing power and onboard memory ) and static memory ( such as USB pen drives ) . 
 Computer forensics can deal with a broad range of information ; from logs ( such as internet history ) through to the actual files on the drive . In 2007 prosecutors used a spreadsheet recovered from the computer of Joseph E. Duncan III to show premeditation and secure the death penalty . Sharon <unk> 's killer was identified in 2006 after email messages from him detailing torture and death fantasies were found on her computer . 
 = = = Mobile device forensics = = = 
 Mobile device forensics is a sub @-@ branch of digital forensics relating to recovery of digital evidence or data from a mobile device . It differs from Computer forensics in that a mobile device will have an inbuilt communication system ( e.g. GSM ) and , usually , proprietary storage mechanisms . Investigations usually focus on simple data such as call data and communications ( SMS / Email ) rather than in @-@ depth recovery of deleted data . SMS data from a mobile device investigation helped to exonerate Patrick Lumumba in the murder of Meredith Kercher . 
 Mobile devices are also useful for providing location information ; either from inbuilt <unk> / location tracking or via cell site logs , which track the devices within their range . Such information was used to track down the kidnappers of Thomas <unk> in 2006 . 
 = = = Network forensics = = = 
 Network forensics is concerned with the monitoring and analysis of computer network traffic , both local and WAN / internet , for the purposes of information gathering , evidence collection , or intrusion detection . Traffic is usually intercepted at the packet level , and either stored for later analysis or filtered in real @-@ time . Unlike other areas of digital forensics network data is often volatile and rarely logged , making the discipline often reactionary . 
 In 2000 the FBI lured computer hackers Aleksey Ivanov and <unk> to the United States for a fake job interview . By monitoring network traffic from the pair 's computers , the FBI identified passwords allowing them to collect evidence directly from Russian @-@ based computers . 
 = = = Forensic data analysis = = = 
 Forensic Data Analysis is a branch of digital forensics . It examines structured data with the aim to discover and analyse patterns of fraudulent activities resulting from financial crime . 
 = = = Database forensics = = = 
 Database forensics is a branch of digital forensics relating to the forensic study of databases and their metadata . Investigations use database contents , log files and in @-@ RAM data to build a timeline or recover relevant information . 
 = = Education and Research = = 
 Academic centre of education and research in forensic sciences : 
 North America : Penn State University offers Security and Risk Analysis Major , Master of Professional Studies in Information Sciences , Master of Professional Studies in Homeland Security , and Ph.D. in Information Sciences and Technology in the digital forensics area . 
 = = Related journals = = 
 Journal of Digital Forensics , Security and Law 
 International Journal of Digital Crime and Forensics 
 Journal of Digital Investigation 
 International Journal of Digital Evidence 
 International Journal of Forensic Computer Science 
 Journal of Digital Forensic Practice 
 Small Scale Digital Device Forensic Journal 
 = Wasting Light = 
 Wasting Light is the seventh studio album by American rock band Foo Fighters . It was released on April 12 , 2011 on RCA Records , and is the first album to feature rhythm guitarist Pat Smear since The Colour and the Shape ( 1997 ) , making the band a five piece with the album . Wishing to capture the essence of the group 's earlier work and avoid the artificiality of digital recording , frontman Dave Grohl arranged for the band to record in his garage in Encino , California using only analog equipment . The sessions were supervised by producer Butch Vig , with whom Grohl had worked on Nirvana 's Nevermind . Since the old equipment did not allow for many mistakes to be corrected in post @-@ production , the band spent three weeks rehearsing the songs , and Vig had to relearn outdated editing techniques . The band went for a heavier and rawer sound to contrast with the musical experiments from their previous albums , and most of the lyrics were written as Grohl reflected upon his life and possible future . Guest musicians include Bob Mould , Krist Novoselic , Jessy Greene , Rami Jaffe and Fee Waybill . 
 The recording sessions were documented for fans on the band 's website and Twitter , and the album 's promotion included the documentary Back and Forth and a worldwide concert tour that included concerts played in fans ' garages . Wasting Light was preceded by the successful single " Rope " , which became only the second song ever to debut at number one on Billboard 's Rock Songs chart . The follow @-@ up single , " Walk " , also charted highly . The album was a commercial success , debuting at number one in eleven countries , and it received positive reviews from most music critics , who complimented its production and the band 's songwriting . In 2012 , Wasting Light and its songs earned Foo Fighters five Grammy Awards , including Best Rock Album . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the Echoes , Silence , Patience & Grace tour ended in 2008 , the Foo Fighters went to Grandmaster Recorders in Hollywood to record 14 compositions written during the tours so as to possibly release a new album without much promotion and touring . The band eventually decided to take a break instead of continuing to work on those recordings . Three songs from those sessions saw a later release : " Wheels " and " Word Forward " , were rerecorded for the band 's Greatest Hits album , and " Rope " became a part of Wasting Light . As " Wheels " and " Word Forward " were the reunion of frontman Dave Grohl with producer Butch Vig , who had previously worked with Nirvana on their breakthrough album Nevermind , Grohl thought it was finally time to bring Vig to produce the next Foo Fighters album . 
 The idea of a new album came back in 2010 , as frontman Dave Grohl was touring Australia with Them Crooked Vultures . Grohl decided that " we should make a documentary about the recording of this new album and make it a history of the band too . Rather than just record the album in the most expensive studio with the most state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art equipment , what if Butch and I were to get back together after 20 years and dust off the tape machines and put them in my garage ? " Grohl later elaborated that Vig was brought in so the record could be " that one album that kinda defines the band : it might not be their best album , but it 's the one people identify the band with the most , like Back In Black or the Metallica Black Album . It 's like you take all of the things that people consider your band 's signature characteristics and just amplify them and make one simple album with that . And that 's sorta what I thought we could do with Butch , because Butch has a great way of trimming all the fat and making sense of it all . " Grohl also used the tour with the Vultures to turn song ideas into demos , which were then brought to drummer Taylor Hawkins to be further developed . The album would also mark the return of guitarist Pat Smear as a permanent member ; Smear left the Foo Fighters after the release of The Colour and the Shape , but had been part of the touring band since 2006 . 
 Unlike the band 's previous two albums , Wasting Light was recorded in Dave Grohl 's garage in Encino , California , as opposed to the band 's home @-@ built studio , Studio 606 . Regarding this decision , Grohl states : " There 's poetry in being the band that can sell out Wembley but also makes a record in a garage . Why go into the most expensive studio with the biggest producer and use the best state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art equipment ? Where 's the rock 'n'roll in that ? " Grohl added it was a way to " do something really primal sounding " , innovate , break people 's expectations and " make records the way we used to fucking make records " . 
 The album was recorded using entirely analogue equipment until post @-@ mastering . Grohl said it was done that way because he felt digital recording was getting out of control : " when I listen to music these days , and I hear Pro Tools and drums that sound like a <unk> it kinda sucks the life out of music . " According to Grohl , the analog strategy would make the record " sound rawer and somewhat imperfect " , something which guitarist Chris Shiflett agreed was beneficial , declaring that " rock n <unk> is about flaws and imperfections " . Bassist Nate Mendel added that " we grew up making records on tape , which has a certain sound , certain limitations " , and drummer Taylor Hawkins said that the digital recording in contemporary rock n ' roll lead to an artificial sound : " they kinda played it and then how someone else manipulated it in a computer , to make them sound a certain way . " Hawkins believed an analog project would help the band reclaim its artistic freedom . 
 Once Vig learned about the analog project , at first he considered Grohl was joking , but then replied that " You guys have to play really well , because nothing is gonna be fixed " since mistakes are not as easily correctable as in a digital recording . With that in mind , the band spent three weeks doing pre @-@ production and rehearsals at Studio 606 , where the composition was completed , going " from forty songs to fourteen " , and said songs were rehearsed to be recorded live , while in previous records , as put by Mendel , " we 'd often come up with parts in the studio , and the songs would evolve " . Smear added that the band committed to not change what would end recorded : " Whatever we did , we didn ’ t change it . If a distorted vocal went through a pedal , that ’ s what it was going to be . ” 
 = = Recording = = 
 Grohl 's garage was equipped with microphones , sound baffles on the garage door and behind the drums to prevent sound <unk> , and a carpet under the drum kit to make it sound less " loud and bright " . To reduce the cymbal bleed , the microphones were rearranged and the crash cymbal was traded for a " shorter @-@ decay Zildjian cymbal with holes drilled in it " . A room next to the study was turned into an isolation booth to record the vocals . For the recording itself a makeshift control room was built inside a tent on the backyard , and a system of two cameras and a television provided the communication between the garage and the control room . The equipment was the same the band employed to record the albums There Is Nothing Left to Lose and One by One at Grohl 's former house in Alexandria , Virginia . 
 Recording of the album began September 6 , 2010 , lasting for eleven weeks , each one focusing on a particular song , something Vig stated " was good because each song kinda had its own life " . The recordings started with Grohl 's rhythm guitar and Taylor Hawkins ' drumming to provide the foundations and see if both could " lock in " . Hawkins usually played for hours before he got " a drum track I 'd be proud of " . Click tracks were used , but Vig said that there was not a worry for the drums to follow it exactly as they " wanted it to groove " and " we realized that when everything is off just a few milliseconds , the sound gets wider and thicker . " After the guitar and drum track , Mendel would play his basslines , which were practiced enough for them to be recorded perfectly on the first take . The following day , Shiflett and Smear would play guitars , with the latter being the last and usually being given a baritone guitar to have a different sound from the other guitarists . After the instrumental backing was ready , Grohl did the vocals either on the control room or the isolation booth . As Grohl wanted the songs " to have maximum emotional potential " , the vocals were screamed to the point he had headaches — " when the mic is picking up every tiny inconsistency , you really strain to make it sound right . " 
 Bob Mould of Hüsker Dü , one of Grohl 's idols , was brought in to do vocals in a song Grohl conceived as a duet with him , " Dear Rosemary " . Mould also played guitar on the track , even though Vig 's plans had him just singing . Grohl 's and Smear 's former Nirvana bandmate Krist Novoselic appeared in " I Should Have Known " as Grohl thought " it would be nice to have him come down and share the experience " and that the song would be enhanced by his bass and accordion @-@ playing . " " Miss the Misery " features Fee Waybill of The Tubes , a personal friend of Grohl who said that the frontman invited him because " the background vocal sounded like him " . Other guest musicians included three members of the expanded touring band , keyboardist Rami Jaffee , violinist Jessy Greene and percussionist Drew Hester . 
 Vig started doubting it could be done fully analog once the tapes for the first song recorded , " Miss the Misery " , started falling apart , but Grohl reassured him " no , Butch , I don 't want any computer in this house at all . " The producer said that during recording he " had to force my brain to fire different synapses " to remember how to deal with the analog equipment and the lack of a digital display . One of the habits Vig had to call back was editing using a razor blade — " I used to be able to do 20 edits in half an hour if need be . It took me about 20 minutes to do the first edit ! " — a technique he employed for the first songs recorded . Eventually he gave up and decided to punch in and punch out tapes instead , as the process was time @-@ consuming and a more editable tape sent to Vig from Smart Studios was mostly ruined by one of Grohl 's daughters . While many recordings had inserts and some parts rerecorded , the only song that had to be redone from scratch was " I Should Have Known " , as Grohl felt Vig was " trying to make this into a radio single " when the singer wanted it " to sound really raw and primal " . 
 The mixing started at Chalice Recording Studios , but moved to Grohl 's house as engineer Alan Moulder said it was the way " to make it sound like your garage . " Since Grohl 's mixing console was not automated , at times four people — Vig , Grohl , Moulder and engineer James Brown — had to work simultaneously on the board , something Grohl found interesting because every song was done differently and " even the mixes sounded like performances " The mixes were tested out in the cars of the band members and Vig , as they felt that " if it sounds good on a lousy stereo , it will sound good anywhere " . 
 The recording of the album was filmed as part of a career @-@ spanning documentary called Back and Forth , which Grohl said was essential to make audiences understand the decision to record the album in his garage . The album name , taken from a lyric in " Miss the Misery " , was chosen by Grohl because " it seemed to resonate with me : ' OK , that 's what we 're here doing ' " , as the band always " recorded each album thinking it could be our last " and tried to take the most of their tenure together — " we 're only here for a short time , we 're lucky to be alive , lucky to be a band ; I don 't take any of this for granted ; I don 't want to spend my time looking backwards , I want to look forwards " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 For Wasting Light , Grohl stated that they would go back to a rawer and heavier sound after " exploring new musical ground " on the previous records , adding that " with the last album we were too concerned with being musical , now it 's time for us to be a rock band again " . To contrast with the " seven or eight minute @-@ long songs , with seven or eight sections , and two or three time changes " Grohl played with Them Crooked Vultures , he instead tried to compose the " tightest , catchiest four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ minute ' softball bat to your face ' songs " . Hawkins added that he liked Wasting Light for being " straightforward , and that ’ s a good thing for us right now . The last couple [ records ] had some big dynamic changes . " Grohl described the effort as their heaviest yet , later saying it was done because " I 'm 42 now . I don 't know if I 'm going to be able to make this record when I 'm 46 or 49 . It 's my last chance . " While the demos that prompted Grohl to say the album would be their heaviest yet were not used on the album , Vig took the declarations to heart , following three criteria while recording : " It 's got to be hooky , heavy , and we 're going analog all the way . " 
 For the guitar sound , the group tried to balance Grohl 's " playing the rhythm straight up the middle " , Shiflett 's " sharp and clean sense of melodic playing " , and Smear 's more aggressive sound , with Grohl declaring that " with three guitars , you have to be careful that it doesn 't become a huge fucking mess . But when everybody 's playing their thing really well , it sounds perfectly orchestrated . " Smear would usually play his parts on a baritone guitar , which would both contrast with Grohl and Shiflett and add a heavier sound - as Grohl declared , " if we ever felt like a section wasn 't heavy enough , we put the fuckin ' baritone on it , and it became huge . " Hawkins added many buzz rolls to his drum fills at the suggestion of Vig , as buzz rolls were a trademark of one of the producer 's favorite drummers , Ian Paice . 
 The lyrics for Wasting Light were completed during the week each song was being recorded . Grohl said that the words were " what was on my mind each week " , most being " written from the perspective of who I was then and who I am now " , with references to the past , life and death , and " time , but questioning whether it matters at all . There 's so much focus on the before that people forget there 's an after . " The frontman said this was helped by the environment - " a lot of retrospection and introspection and nostalgia going back to the way we used to make records " - and working with Vig again , which " made me think a lot about starting over , and rebirth , and making your way through tragedy and coming out the other side . " An example was " I Should Have Known " , partially inspired by former Nirvana bandmate Kurt Cobain - " a song like ' I Should Have Known ' is about all the people I 've lost , not just Kurt " . Grohl still tried to do laid @-@ back songs such as " White Limo " , which had its lyrics written in just two minutes , specially after Mendel sent him an e @-@ mail saying , " I really like it when you write songs that are silly and mean nothing , too . You don 't have to try to write ' Imagine ' every time you sit down with a pen and paper " . 
 = = Packaging and versions = = 
 The first CD copies of the album contain a small section of the original analogue master tape . Grohl decided to it both for thinking it " would be an extraordinary move to destroy all the masters and give the pieces of the tapes to the fans " , as the digital recording does not allow for such a memento , and also due to every technician involved with Wasting Light being overtly worried about the tapes . The art direction was done by New York studio Morning Breath Inc . , and keeping with the album 's analog recording , the images did not use computer graphics , instead being created with " old tools of the trade " such as copy machines , transparent ink and X @-@ Acto blades , and the end result was not printed in CMYK . 
 The album was issued on CD , a double vinyl record and digital download . The pre @-@ orders had the option for both the CD and LP with a T @-@ shirt , and a Deluxe packaging that came with both the CD and LP , a T @-@ shirt , a beer coaster , an iron @-@ on patch , a wristband and a signed lithograph of the album <unk> iTunes in turn issued a deluxe edition that included a remix of " Rope " made by Deadmau5 , the outtake " Better Off " , the video for " White Limo " and a live performance of " Walk " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Extensive updates on the production of Wasting Light were up on the band 's website and Twitter , because , as put by RCA Records executive Aaron <unk> , " the band wanted to be more engaged with the fans earlier this time . " Along with images of the sessions themselves and both a whiteboard and papers that showed the progress in recording , a live feed of the tape machine would be put on the Foo Fighters website . 
 On December 21 , 2010 , the same day the album was finished , the band played a secret gig at the Tarzana , California bar Paladino ’ s , on which four songs from the new record made their live debuts . The Wasting Light World Tour started in 2011 , with some concerts having the album played in its entirety along with other hit songs by the band . Given the album was recorded in a garage , the band held a contest for which some shows of the promotional tour would be performed in eight fans ' garages . 
 On January 17 , 2011 , the band released a 30 @-@ second teaser of the song " Bridge Burning " on their website , and on February 1 , the band revealed a teaser for " Miss the Misery " along with the album name and an April 12 release date . On February 12 , a music video was released for " White Limo " , featuring Lemmy of Motörhead . On February 23 , 2011 , " Rope " was made available for online stream . It debuted at # 1 on Billboard 's Rock Chart , making it only the second single to do so since the chart 's advent in 2009 , and would later top the Alternative Songs chart as well . Another part of the promotional campaign was a contest held by Fuse TV where fans created their own videos for the Wasting Light tracks . 
 After " Rope " , four other songs were issued as singles : " Walk " , " <unk> " , " These Days " , and " Bridge Burning " . The most successful was " Walk " , which also topped the Rock and Alternative charts . Five songs on the album were licensed for ESPN and two others were featured in movies , " Miss the Misery " in Real Steel and " Walk " in Thor . In addition , " Bridge Burning " appears in the video game Madden NFL 12 . " Walk " was also featured in a video package that was put together by the WWE to be included for Edge 's induction into the 2012 WWE Hall of Fame and it was played again after he said he wanted real rock n ' roll to close out the ceremony . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The album debuted at number one in twelve countries . Wasting Light was the first Foo Fighters album to top the United States ' Billboard 200 chart , with first @-@ week sales of 235 @,@ 000 copies , their second @-@ highest sales week , following In Your Honor 's first @-@ week sales of 311 @,@ 000 copies in 2005 . In Canada , the album debuted at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart , selling 21 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . In the UK , the album 's 114 @,@ 000 units broke Adele 's 11 @-@ week run atop the UK Album Charts . 
 On the week of Wasting Light 's release , 6 different tracks from the album made the UK Top 40 Rock Chart . These were the iTunes bonus track " Better Off " at number 5 , " Bridge Burning " at number 14 , " Walk " at number 24 , " White Limo " at number 28 , " <unk> " at number 35 and " These Days " at number 39 . In both Australia and New Zealand Wasting Light had the biggest first week digital album sales in their chart histories . The album also topped the charts in Germany , Austria , Switzerland , Sweden , Finland , Norway , New Zealand , and Singapore . Wasting Light has sold 663 @,@ 000 copies in the US as of January 6 , 2012 , and closed 2011 with 380 @,@ 000 units sold in the UK . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Wasting Light received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 78 , based on 37 reviews . Andrew Perry of The Daily Telegraph viewed it as by far the band 's best album and found it " tough but accessible , reliably catchy , yet also surprising at the last . " Allmusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine called its rock sound " untrammeled " and cited it as " the fiercest album they 've ever made ... the kind of record they 've always seemed on the verge of delivering but never have . " Mikael Wood of Spin observed a " back @-@ to @-@ basics aspiration " and dubbed the album " Grohl 's most memorable set of songs since 1997 's The Colour and the Shape . " Rob Parker of NME said that it " sounds phenomenal " on headphones or sound systems and is " both broad and focused enough to appeal to casuals and longhairs alike " . Paul Brannigan of Q praised Grohl 's lyrics and called Wasting Light " the most life @-@ affirming , positively @-@ charged album of his career . " David Fricke , writing for Rolling Stone , commended Grohl 's themes and Butch Vig 's " nuanced approach to weight and release . " Kyle Ryan of The A.V. Club said that , although it lacks recognizable hooks , the album also lacks the filler of the band 's previous albums and stated , " As a return to Foo Fighters ' specialty — melodic , hard @-@ hitting rock with soaring choruses — Wasting Light is a success . " 
 In a mixed review , Slant Magazine 's Kevin Liedel criticized the band 's " growing aversion to anthemic songs , " writing that " the obvious high points of Wasting Light are those that strive for stadium @-@ pleasing melodies . " Dave Simpson of The Guardian noted an " undue " arena influence and called the album " a typically supersized arena @-@ rock barrage , with lots of howling and wailing , every chorus tailored to imaginary walls of pyrotechnics and some tracks seemingly specifically constructed to accommodate a guitar spot or drum solo . " Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune felt that , although it is " competently " performed , the songs are not innovative and suffer from " clichés " , including " hardcore punk screed " , " streamlined rocker " , and " melodramatic power ballad " . Pitchfork Media 's David Bevan commented that " there just isn 't a melody or hook to really amplify . " Andy Gill of The Independent criticized its " bombastic level " and stated " the presumed desire for back @-@ to @-@ the @-@ roots simplicity ... jettisons the diversity of Echoes , Silence , Patience & Grace . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Wasting Light and its songs were nominated for five Grammy Awards , including Album of the Year . The record won the Best Rock Album award , while " White Limo " was chosen as the Best Hard Rock / Metal Performance and " Walk " won both Best Rock Performance and Best Rock Song . The album was chosen as the 4th best album of 2011 by Kerrang ! , and listed in three rankings of the 50 best albums of the year : 20th by Rolling Stone , 43rd by NME , and 46th by Spin . It was also listed among The Hollywood Reporter 's ten best albums of 2011 , and chosen as the album of the year by iTunes . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Dave Grohl , Taylor Hawkins , Nate Mendel , Chris Shiflett and Pat Smear . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 A ^ " Rope " and " These Days " charted only on the Belgian combined sales and airplay chart ( Ultratip ) . " Walk " charted on the Belgian singles sales chart ( Ultratop 50 ) . 
 B ^ " These Days " did not enter the Billboard Hot 100 but peaked on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart at number 11 . 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 | } 
 = Hurricane Ginny = 
 Hurricane Ginny in the 1963 Atlantic hurricane season was the latest North Atlantic hurricane on record to affect the U.S. state of Maine . It developed on October 16 over the Bahamas , although it was not initially a fully tropical cyclone . As it moved to the North and later northwest , Ginny intensified to hurricane status as it became more tropical . For eight days , it was located within 250 mi ( 400 km ) of the United States coastline . After approaching North Carolina , Ginny looped to the southwest and approached within 50 mi ( 80 km ) of the Florida coastline . It turned to the North , to the East , and later to the northeast , strengthening late in its duration to peak winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) . Ginny became an extratropical cyclone shortly before striking Nova Scotia on October 29 . 
 Although it remained close to the United States coastline , its impact was minor . Beach erosion and light rainfall was reported along much of the coastline , although the precipitation was beneficial in ending droughts in South Carolina and New England . High waves destroyed one house in North Carolina . Damage was heaviest in New England , where several buildings were damaged and thousands were left without power . The passage of Ginny resulted in a snow storm across eastern New England , particularly in northern Maine , where it killed two people . In Atlantic Canada , the extratropical storm produced high wind and waves , causing damage to boats and resulting in power outages . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Ginny were from a trough that extended from the Bahamas to Bermuda in the middle of October . On October 16 , a depression formed near the Turks and Caicos islands after a tropical wave interacted with the trough , although initially it was not tropical in nature due to the widespread presence of cold air . The system initially moved generally northward , attaining gale – force winds on October 19 as it turned to the northwest . For several days , Ginny maintained a hybrid @-@ type structure , and although it attained winds of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) on October 20 , it was not a true hurricane . It closely approached the North Carolina coastline , passing 135 mi ( 220 km ) southeast of Cape Lookout before turning abruptly to the northeast . It executed a small loop and began a steady motion to the southeast while located over the Gulf Stream . This motion was due to a large ridge located over New England . On October 21 , the hurricane became better organized and began transitioning into a tropical cyclone . By early on October 22 , Hurricane Hunters indicated that Ginny completed the transition into a fully tropical cyclone , observing an eye 20 mi ( 32 km ) in diameter . 
 On October 23 , Ginny briefly weakened to tropical storm status as it was moving toward Florida , although within 10 hours it regained hurricane intensity . Its motion to the southwest was unusual but not unique , and resembled the tracks of the 1935 Yankee hurricane and Hurricane Able in 1951 . On October 24 , it turned sharply northeastward off the northeast Florida coast , coming within 50 mi ( 80 km ) of Daytona Beach . The hurricane continued paralleling the coast of the Southeastern United States , turning northeast away from Georgia and South Carolina . On October 26 , Ginny turned to the east away from the United States , having been located within 250 mi ( 400 km ) of the country 's coast for eight consecutive days . The next day , the hurricane began a motion to the northeast , accelerating in advance of an approaching trough . It gradually intensified , reaching peak winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) on October 29 . Later that day , Ginny became extratropical before making landfall on southwestern Nova Scotia ; its remnants dissipated on October 30 in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Early in its duration , the precursor to Ginny dropped high amounts of rainfall . <unk> in the Dominican Republic reported 6 @.@ 83 in ( 173 mm ) , and Green Turtle Cay in the Bahamas reported 4 @.@ 20 in ( 107 mm ) . 
 Despite Ginny 's proximity to the United States for over a week , a hurricane warning was only issued from Charleston , South Carolina , and Cape Fear , North Carolina , as well as Cape Hatteras . This represented about one @-@ sixth of the entire coastline that was threatened by the storm . In Jacksonville , Florida , Ginny produced winds of 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) . Rainfall in the state peaked at 1 @.@ 32 in ( 34 mm ) at Saint Augustine . Tides in Daytona Beach were 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) above normal , which caused beach erosion and minor property damage . Further north , minor damage and beach erosion was likewise reported in Georgia . Along the South Carolina coast , Ginny dropped beneficial rainfall , which alleviated the state 's worst drought conditions on record . The rainfall peaked at 5 @.@ 06 in ( 129 mm ) in Isle of Pines . 
 The hurricane approached North Carolina twice . During the second time , residents in low @-@ lying areas and along the coast evacuated . As it passed the area , Ginny produced sustained winds that were estimated at 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) on Cape Fear , with gusts to 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . These were the highest winds related to the hurricane , although they may have been overestimated . In addition , the heaviest rainfall related to the storm occurred near Southport , where 6 @.@ 71 in ( 170 mm ) of precipitation fell . Tides along the coast were 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) above normal , which caused minor flooding and destroyed one house in Carolina Beach . In Virginia , the hurricane caused minor flooding and minimal beach erosion . During Ginny 's first approach through the region , it produced gale force winds along the Virginia coast , although it did not do so during its second approach . 
 Later , a gale warning was issued for New England due to Ginny 's threat , as well as a hurricane watch for Long Island and southern New England . Across the region , the strongest winds on land were 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) along Nantucket , where a gust of 76 mph ( 122 km / h ) was also reported . However , a boat offshore Portland , Maine reported 40 ft ( 12 m ) seas and winds of at least 105 mph ( 169 km / h ) . In New York City , the outskirts of the storm dropped 0 @.@ 10 in ( 2 @.@ 5 mm ) of precipitation , and tides were 1 ft ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) above normal . Rainfall in eastern New England surpassed 1 in ( 25 mm ) , peaking at 3 @.@ 92 in ( 100 mm ) in Machias , Maine . The rainfall was beneficial across the region , ending a 28 @-@ day drought . Along Cape Cod and in Maine , high winds from the storm downed several trees , some of which fell onto power lines . About 1 @,@ 000 homes in Chatham , Massachusetts lost power . In Nantucket , high waves caused additional erosion in an area affected by Hurricane Esther two years prior . Damage was heavier in Maine , where many boats were damaged or broke from their moorings . One person died from a heart attack while trying to rescue his boat . Several small buildings in the state were destroyed , and the post office in Calais , Maine lost its roof . Ginny was the latest hurricane on record to affect Maine . During its passage , Ginny brought an influx of cold air over New England that produced the first snowfall of the season across Massachusetts , Maine , and New Hampshire . In most locations , the snow quickly melted , although higher totals occurred in northern Maine , the highest being 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) on Mount Katahdin . The snow killed a mountain climber and a park ranger . Damage from Ginny in the United States was estimated at $ 400 @,@ 000 . 
 As the remnants of Ginny moved across Atlantic Canada , they produced heavy rainfall , peaking at 4 @.@ 53 in ( 113 mm ) in southern New Brunswick . Winds peaked at 99 mph ( 160 km / h ) in Greenwood , Nova Scotia . The winds blew down trees in the Halifax area , and there were power outages reported there and in Antigonish . High waves broke boats from their moorings , causing them to either wash ashore or float out to sea . Ferry service across the region was canceled . In neighboring New Brunswick , the storm caused outages to telephone and electric services . Several injuries were reported , although there were no fatalities . The entirety of Prince Edward Island was also left without power . 
 = Harriet Frank , Jr . = 
 Harriet Frank , Jr . ( born March 2 , 1917 ) is an American film writer and producer . Working alongside her husband , Irving Ravetch , Frank received numerous awards during her lengthy career , including the New York Film Critics Circle Awards and the Writers Guild of America Award , and several nominations . Frank and Ravetch are considered one of the all @-@ time great screenwriting couples , and many of their works are recognised classics of their genres . 
 Frank began her writing career after World War II , under Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer 's young writer 's training program , where she first met her future husband . She married Ravetch in 1946 but worked independently for ten years , finally collaborating with him in 1957 , a relationship that continued for the remainder of her career . During 33 years of collaboration , they created the screenplays for a variety of films , mainly adaptations of the works of American authors . 
 Frank and Ravetch maintained a close working relationship with director Martin Ritt throughout their career , collaborating with him on eight occasions ; after initially being suggested by Ravetch to direct The Long , Hot Summer ( 1958 ) , Ritt would eventually draw the couple out of inactivity on three occasions , hiring them to write the screenplays for Norma Rae ( 1979 ) , Murphy 's Romance ( 1985 ) and Stanley & Iris ( 1990 ) . The latter was both the last film directed by Ritt ( who died later that year ) and the last for which Frank and Ravetch wrote the screenplay . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Harriet Frank , Jr. was born and raised in Portland , Oregon . While her mother worked as a Hollywood story editor , Frank attended the University of California , Los Angeles ( UCLA ) , at the same time as her future husband , Irving Ravetch . Having graduated at different times from UCLA , the two met in the Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer young writer 's training program after World War II . 
 The couple soon married in 1946 , but worked independently for over ten years , with Frank writing for projects such as A Really Important Person ( 1947 ) , Whiplash ( 1948 ) and Run for Cover ( 1955 ) . The couple first collaborated on the script of an adaptation of William Faulkner 's novel The Hamlet in 1957 ( released as The Long , Hot Summer ) , although Frank later said , " ... in the end , we created mostly new material , so it wasn 't really a true adaptation " . 
 = = = Collaborations and awards = = = 
 Martin Ritt , having directed The Long , Hot Summer on suggestion by Ravetch , then directed the couple 's next collaboration , The Sound and the Fury ( 1959 ) , once again an adaptation of a William Faulkner novel . In 1960 , Frank and Ravetch collaborated on two films , Home from the Hill , an adaptation of the novel of the same name , and The Dark at the Top of the Stairs , an adaptation of a Tony award @-@ winning play . 
 In 1963 , Frank and Ravetch reunited with Martin Ritt to write the screenplay for Hud , adapted from the novel Horseman , Pass By . The film garnered critical acclaim , with the couple sharing a New York Film Critics Circle Award for " Best Screenplay " and a Writers Guild of America Award ( WGA Award ) for " Best Written American Drama " . They were also nominated for an Academy Award in the category of " Best Writing , Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium " . 
 In 1967 , Frank worked alongside her husband and Ritt on Hombre , a Revisionist Western film based on the novel of the same name . The next year , Frank and Ravetch wrote the screenplay for House of Cards , a mystery film directed by John Guillermin . For House of Cards , Frank was credited , together with her husband , under the pen name of " James P. Bonner " . In 1969 , Frank and <unk> returned to the works of William Faulkner , writing the screenplay for a film adaptation of his last novel The <unk> . 
 1972 saw Frank and Ravetch write the screenplay for The Cowboys , based on the novel of the same name , and The Carey Treatment , based on the novel A Case of Need by Michael Crichton . For the latter , the couple were credited under " James P. Bonner " , the last time they would adopt the pen name . Two years later , the couple reunited once again with Martin Ritt to write the screenplay for <unk> , based on the autobiographical book The Water Is Wide , with Frank also working as producer . The film was commercially and critically well @-@ received , winning a BAFTA award . In the same year the couple wrote for an adaptation of the novel The Bank Robber , released as The Spikes Gang . Around this time , Frank also wrote two novels , Single : a novel ( 1977 ) , and Special Effects ( 1979 ) . 
 = = = Return to screenwriting = = = 
 In 1979 , following five years of inactivity , Frank and Ravetch returned to screen writing for Norma Rae , with Martin Ritt directing . The film tells the story of a factory worker from the Southern United States who becomes involved in labour union activities . Unusually , for the couple , the film was based on a true story , that of Crystal Lee Jordan . It was arguably their best received film , winning numerous awards , including two Academy Awards . 
 Six years passed before the couple returned to screen writing , this time for the romantic comedy Murphy 's Romance , based on a novel by Max Schott . Once again they worked with director Martin Ritt , their seventh project together , and Sally Field , who had played the titular lead role in Norma Rae . Despite Murphy 's Romance being well @-@ received ( it was nominated for two Academy Awards ) it would be another five years before Frank and Ravetch wrote another screenplay ; hired by Martin Ritt , the couple wrote the screenplay for Stanley & Iris , loosely based on the novel Union Street . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Ten months after the release of Stanley & Iris , on December 8 , 1990 , Martin Ritt died . Together , the trio of Frank , Ravetch and Ritt had collaborated on eight films and achieved considerable successes . As well as being the last film Ritt worked on , Stanley & Iris also marked the end of Frank and Ravetch 's writing careers . 
 In a career spanning 43 years and 21 film productions ( despite lengthy periods of absence ) , Harriet Frank , Jr. won 4 awards and received many more nominations , sharing them all with her husband . As well as with her husband and Martin Ritt , Frank collaborated extensively with other well @-@ known actors , such as Paul Newman , writing for three of his film appearances ( The Long , Hot Summer , Hud and Hombre ) . 
 Many of their films not only received critical acclaim upon release , in the form of awards ( Norma Rae and Stanley & Iris ) , but those such as Hud ( 1963 ) are considered classics of their genres . The legacy of Harriet Frank , Jr. is today considered inseparable with that of her husband , Ravetch , and together they are considered one of the all @-@ time great screenwriting teams . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Bahamas at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 The Bahamas sent a delegation of athletes to compete in the 2008 Summer Olympics , which were held in Beijing , People 's Republic of China from 8 to 24 August 2008 . Its Beijing appearance marked its fourteenth time at the Olympics since its début at the 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki . The delegation included 25 athletes across four sports ( track and field , boxing , swimming and tennis ) and nineteen distinct events . Its athletes advanced to semifinals in eight events and finals in five events , medaling in two of them ( a silver in men 's 4x400 meters relay by Andretti Bain , Michael Mathieu , Andrae Williams , Chris Brown , Avard Moncur and Ramon Miller , and a bronze in men 's triple jump by <unk> Sands ) . The Bahamian delegation was one of the largest sent between its début and 2008 . The country 's flag bearer was Debbie Ferguson @-@ McKenzie . 
 = = Background = = 
 Before Beijing , the Bahamas had participated in the Summer Olympics thirteen times . This included every single Summer Olympics starting from the 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki , Finland , but excluding the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow , the Soviet Union . The Bahamas had , as of 2008 , never had an appearance in any Winter Olympics . The Bahamian delegation in Beijing included twenty @-@ five athletes , one of its largest delegations in its history up to that point . Prior to Beijing , Bahamian athletes had won four gold medals , one silver and four bronze ; a total of nine medals . Bahama 's delegation in Beijing added one silver and one bronze medal to the tally , increasing the total number of Bahamian medals to eleven . The flag bearer at ceremonies was Debbie Ferguson @-@ McKenzie . The Bahamian delegation was 41st in line during the <unk> ceremonies . 
 Bahamian Olympic coach Keith Parker , prior to the start of the Olympic track events , said that Derrick Atkins held a strong chance of medaling in his events , having considered Atkin 's unexpected medaling at the 2007 World Championships , tying Jamaica 's Asafa Powell and the United States ' Tyson Gay for second place . Similar expectations were held for Chris Brown . Henry Rolle , the track coach at Auburn University , traveled to Beijing to train former athletes at Tianjin University . Several Bahamians were included in this group . 
 = = Medalists = = 
 = = Athletics = = 
 = = = Men 's competition = = = 
 Eleven male athletes competed in track and field events on behalf of the Bahamas . Of those athletes , three participated in the 4 × 400 meters relay only ( Williams , Moncur , Miller ) ; five participated only in events other than the 4 × 400 meters relay ( Atkins , Rolle , L. Sands , S. Sands , and Thomas ) , and three participated in both an individual event and the 4 × 400 meters relay . Of the individual events , Bahamian athletes were involved in six distinct events ( 100 meters , 40 meters , 200 meters , triple jump , 110 meters hurdles , and high jump ) . The two Bahamian medals won at Beijing were won by men in track and field events ( 4 × 400 meters relay and triple jump ) . 
 = = = = Men 's high jump = = = = 
 Donald Thomas was the sole Bahamian athlete participating in the men 's high jump event of the Beijing Olympics . During the event 's qualification round on 17 August , Thomas was placed in the first heat versus competitors that included the Czech Republic 's Jaroslav Baba and Great Britain 's Germaine Mason . Thomas ' best height cleared during this preliminary round was 2 @.@ 20 meters , the same height as Israeli Nikita Palli ; Pole Michal Bieniek ; Syrian Majed Aldin <unk> ; and American Dusty Jonas . However , Thomas tied Palli for twelfth place and scored ahead of Bieniek , <unk> and Jonas because Palli and Thomas had no misses at the high jump bar ; the other three athletes did . Overall , Thomas tied Ukrainian Dmytro Dem <unk> and also Palli for twenty @-@ first place out of the forty competing athletes . Thomas did not advance to the final round . 
 = = = = Men 's 200 meters = = = = 
 Jamaal Rolle ( or <unk> Rolle ) competed on behalf of the Bahamas in the men 's 200 meters . Rolle was placed in the seventh heat of eight heats during the 17 August qualification round . Facing competitors that included the Dutch Antillean Churandy Martina , Azerbaijani Ramil <unk> , and Nigerian Obinna <unk> , Rolle ranked fifth out of eight athletes in his heat after completing his event in 20 @.@ 93 seconds . Rolle scored ahead of sixth @-@ place finalist Shingo <unk> of Japan , and behind fourth @-@ place finalist Sandro Viana of Brazil , falling 0 @.@ 09 seconds behind the latter . Overall , Rolle ranked thirty @-@ fourth out of the sixty @-@ six athletes who participated in the first round . He did not progress to further rounds . 
 = = = = Men 's 110 meters hurdles = = = = 
 Auburn University graduate Shamar Sands reached the quarterfinals in the 110 meter hurdles . During the qualification round on 17 August , Sands was placed in the second heat , facing competitors that included America 's David Oliver and Spain 's Jackson <unk> . Sands ranked third out of seven athletes , completing his event in 13 @.@ 45 seconds . He placed 0 @.@ 04 seconds behind second @-@ place heat finalist <unk> , and 0 @.@ 15 seconds behind heat leader Oliver . Overall , Sands ranked eighth out of the forty @-@ three athletes who participated in the qualification round . Sands progressed to quarterfinals , where he was again placed in the second heat . Completing the event with a time of 13 @.@ 55 seconds , Sands ranked seventh in the heat of eight athletes behind South Korea 's Lee Jeong @-@ Jun and ahead of Georgia 's David <unk> . Sands fell behind heat leader Dayron Robles of Cuba by 0 @.@ 36 seconds and did not progress further . 
 = = = = Men 's 100 meters = = = = 
 Jamaican @-@ born runner Derrick Atkins was the only Bahamian to participate in the men 's 100 meters race at the Beijing Olympics . Atkins was placed in the eighth heat during the 14 August qualification round , facing athletes that included Russia 's Andrey Epishin and Norway 's <unk> Saidy Ndure . Atkins ranked first in his heat of eight athletes with a time of 10 @.@ 28 seconds , defeating second @-@ place heat finalist Epishin by 0 @.@ 06 seconds . Of the 80 athletes who participated in the qualification round of the event , Atkins tied Cuban <unk> Vizcaino for eighteenth place . He advanced to quarterfinals on 15 August . At quarterfinals , Atkins participated in the fifth heat against athletes that included Walter Dix of the United States and Asafa Powell of Jamaica . Atkins finished in third place in his heat with a time of 10 @.@ 14 seconds , falling behind Walter Dix , who ranked second with a time of 10 @.@ 08 seconds ; and placing ahead of Antigua and Barbuda 's Daniel Bailey , who ranked fourth with a time of 10 @.@ 23 seconds . Of the forth quarterfinalists , Atkins tied Ndure for fourteenth place , and advanced to the 16 August semifinals . Atkins competed in the first heat against , among other athletes , Dix and Usain Bolt . With a time of 10 @.@ 13 seconds , Atkins finished in sixth place in his heat , behind Saint Kitts and Nevis ' Kim Collins ( who earned a time of 10 @.@ 05 seconds ) and ahead of Great Britain 's Tyrone Edgar ( who earned a time of 10 @.@ 18 seconds ) . Overall , Atkins ranked twelfth out of sixteen athletes in semifinals , and did not advance to the final round . 
 = = = = Men 's triple jump = = = = 
 Auburn University graduate and two @-@ time Olympian <unk> Sands , the cousin of Shamar Sands , was the sole Bahamian participant in the men 's triple jump event . During the qualification round on 17 August , Sands was placed in the second heat against competitors that included Li <unk> of China , <unk> <unk> of Great Britain , and Hector Fuentes of Cuba . Sands ranked second in his heat of twenty athletes , jumping a distance of 17 @.@ 25 meters . Li , the heat leader , beat Sands by 0 @.@ 05 meters , while <unk> del behind Sands by 0 @.@ 07 meters . Overall , Sands ranked fifth out of the thirty @-@ nine participating athletes . He progressed to the final round on 21 August . During that round , Sands jumped a distance of 17 @.@ 59 meters , medaling bronze behind silver medalist Phillips <unk> of Great Britain ( who jumped 17 @.@ 62 meters ) and gold medalist Nelson <unk> of Portugal ( who jumped 17 @.@ 67 meters ) . 
 = = = = Men 's 400 meters = = = = 
 Oral Roberts University athlete Andretti " <unk> " Bain , two @-@ time medalist and three @-@ time Olympian Chris Brown , and Adidas @-@ sponsored athlete Michael Mathieu participated in the men 's 400 meters dash . Brown was placed in the second heat , and finished first with a time of 44 @.@ 79 seconds , ahead of second @-@ place finalist Australian Joel Milburn . Bain was placed in the third heat , and placed third out of eight athletes after gaining a time of 45 @.@ 96 seconds , placing behind Nigeria 's <unk> James ( who finished with 45 @.@ 49 seconds ) and ahead of Fiji 's Niko <unk> ( who finished with 46 @.@ 32 seconds ) . Mathieu participated in the sixth heat and ranked third out of eight athletes , earning a time of 45 @.@ 17 seconds . He placed ahead of Jamaica 's Michael Blackwood ( who earned 45 @.@ 56 seconds ) and behind Trinidad and Tobago 's Renny <unk> ( who earned 45 @.@ 13 seconds ) . Out of all fifty @-@ six athletes participating in the event , Chris Brown ranked first ; Michael Mathieu tied Australia 's Sean Wroe for tenth ; and Bain ranked thirty @-@ first . All three advanced to semifinals , which took place on 19 August . During the course of semifinals , Brown was placed in the first heat ; Bain was placed in the second ; and Mathieu was placed in the third . Chris Brown finished the event in 44 @.@ 59 seconds , ranking second in the heat behind American Jeremy Wariner and ahead of Belgian Kevin <unk> . Bain completed the event in 45 @.@ 42 seconds , placing seventh in his heat , ahead of Briton Andrew Steele and Nigerian <unk> James . Mathieu completed the race in 45 @.@ 56 seconds , placing sixth in his heat out of eight competitors . Mathieu ranked ahead of seventh @-@ place finisher Wroe and behind Congolese competitor Senga Gary <unk> . Out of the 24 competitors who advanced to semifinals , Brown finished third ; Bain finished nineteenth ; and Mathieu finished twentieth . Only Brown advanced to the final round on 21 August . Brown finished the event in 44 @.@ 84 seconds , placing forth behind the three American medalists ( <unk> Merritt , Jeremy Wariner and David Neville ) . 
 = = = = Men 's 4 × 400 meters relay = = = = 
 The men 's 4 × 400 meters relay included a Bahamian team that , in total , included six Bahamian athletes . Of those athletes , Avard Moncur and Ramon Miller participated only in the qualification round alongside Michael Mathieu and Andrae Williams . In the qualification round , which took place on 22 August , the Bahamian team participated on the second heat against the British , Jamaican , Trinidadian , Japanese , Greek and Dominican teams . Overall , the Bahamian team ranked second in the heat with a time of 2 : 59 @.@ 88 behind the British team ( which earned a time of 2 : 59 @.@ 33 ) and ahead of the Jamaican team ( which earned a time of 3 : 00 @.@ 09 ) . Out of all sixteen teams participating in the event , the Bahamian team ranked second . The Bahamas ' relay proceeded to the final round on 23 August . During the final round , the Bahamian relay replaced Avard Moncur and Ramon Miller with Chris Brown and Andretti Bain . Chris Brown started the relay , followed by Mathieu ; Bain ; and Williams . With a time of 2 : 58 @.@ 03 , the relay medaled silver behind the American relay ( which earned 2 : 55 @.@ 39 and set an Olympic record ) and ahead of the Russian relay ( which earned 2 : 58 @.@ 06 ) . 
 = = = = Summary = = = = 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 Men 
 Track & road events 
 * Runners who participated in the heats only and received medals . 
 Field events 
 = = = Women 's competition = = = 
 = = = = Women 's 400 meters = = = = 
 Southeastern Louisiana University alumnus and three @-@ time Olympian Christine Amertil was the only Bahamian athlete participating in the women 's 400 meters dash during the 2008 Summer Olympics . During the qualification round , which took place on 16 August , Amertil was placed in the first heat , which included seven athletes . Among them were Jamaica 's Rosemarie Whyte and Nigeria 's <unk> <unk> . Amertil ranked second in her heat , with a time of 51 @.@ 25 seconds , between Whyte ( first place at 51 @.@ 00 seconds ) and <unk> ( third place at 51 @.@ 39 seconds ) . Overall , Amertil ranked tenth out of fifty athletes . She advanced to the semifinal round . During the 17 August semifinal round , Amertil was placed in the second heat , which included American Sanya Richards and Russian Anastasia Kapachinskaya . Amertil ranked fourth in the heat of eight athletes , completing her event in 51 @.@ 51 seconds . Jamaica 's Novelene Williams ranked ahead of her ( third place at 51 @.@ 06 seconds ) , and Nigeria 's Joy <unk> Eze ranked behind her ( at 51 @.@ 87 seconds ) . Out of the 24 athletes that progressed to semifinals , Amertil ranked 15th . She did not progress to the final round . 
 = = = = Women 's javelin throw = = = = 
 Five @-@ time Olympian and former Louisiana State University athlete Laverne Eve , the oldest Bahamian athlete in the Beijing delegation , was the sole Bahamian participant in women 's javelin throw . The event 's qualification round , which took place on 18 August , included Eve in its second heat . During qualifications , Eve participated in three rounds . She threw the javelin 55 @.@ 22 meters during the first round ( placing thirteenth ) , and improved to 57 @.@ 36 meters in her second round ( placing fourth ) . She threw 55 @.@ 15 meters the third round , but did not place . Out of the twenty @-@ seven participants in the heat , Eve 's best time placed her ninth in the event between Cuba 's <unk> Cruz ( 58 @.@ 06 meters on her best attempt ) and the Czech Republic 's <unk> <unk> ( 57 @.@ 25 meters on her best attempt ) . Out of all 54 competitors in the qualification round , Eve ranked twentieth . She did not progress to the final round . 
 = = = = Women 's 100 meters = = = = 
 Two @-@ time Olympian <unk> Clarke ( or <unk> Clarke ) two @-@ time medalist and three @-@ time Olympian Chandra Sturrup , and three @-@ time medalist and four @-@ time Olympian Debbie Ferguson @-@ McKenzie participated in the women 's 100 meters race . Clarke was placed in the sixth heat , where she competed against athletes like Jamaica 's Shelly @-@ Ann Frazer . Clarke ranked sixth of eight athletes in the heat when she ran the event in 12 @.@ 16 seconds . Clarke ranked 56th out of 85 athletes , and did not progress . Sturrup , who competed in the fourth heat , defeated Trinidad and Tobago 's Kelly Ann Baptiste and took first with a time of 11 @.@ 30 seconds . Overall , Sturrup tied Great Britain 's Jeanette Kwakye for seventh place . Ferguson participated in the eighth heat and completed the event in 11 @.@ 17 seconds , ranking second behind Nigeria 's Damola Osayomi ( who earned first in 11 @.@ 13 seconds ) . Ferguson placed second overall out of all combined heats . Both Sturrup and Ferguson progressed to quarterfinals , which took place later that day . 
 Sturrup was placed in the second heat and completed the event in 11 @.@ 16 seconds . Out of the eight heat competitors , Sturrup ranked third behind Jamaica 's Sherone Simpson ( 11 @.@ 02 seconds ) and the United States ' Muna Lee ( 11 @.@ 18 seconds ) . Out of the forty quarterfinalists , Sturrup ranked ninth . Ferguson competed in the third heat and finished in 11 @.@ 21 seconds and ranked first , defeating Osayomi ( 11 @.@ 28 seconds ) and Ghana 's Vida Anim ( 11 @.@ 32 seconds ) . Overall , Ferguson placed eleventh . Both progressed to semifinals on 17 August . 
 Chandra Sturrup competed in the first heat of the semifinal round and finished the event in 11 @.@ 22 seconds . She placed fifth behind Simpson ( 11 @.@ 11 seconds ) , Lauryn Williams ( 11 @.@ 10 seconds ) , Muna Lee ( 11 @.@ 06 seconds ) , and Frazer ( 11 @.@ 00 seconds ) . Debbie Ferguson competed in the second heat of the semifinal round . She also finished the event in 11 @.@ 22 seconds and took fourth place immediately behind Kwakye ( 11 @.@ 19 seconds ) and also behind the United States ' Torri Edwards ( 11 @.@ 18 seconds ) and heat leader Kerron Stewart of Jamaica ( 11 @.@ 05 seconds ) . The two athletes tied each other for eighth place out of sixteen athletes , although Ferguson progressed to finals . At finals , which took place later on 17 August , Ferguson finished in 11 @.@ 19 seconds and placed seventh in the event ahead of the United States ' Torri Edwards ( 11 @.@ 20 seconds ) and behind Kwakye ( 11 @.@ 14 seconds ) . 
 = = = = Women 's 200 meters = = = = 
 The women 's 200 meters freestyle had two competitors : Sheniqua Ferguson and Debbie Ferguson . Sheniqua Ferguson competed in the fifth heat of the 18 August qualification round , where she competed against athletes like Jamaica 's Veronica Campbell ( 23 @.@ 04 seconds ) , Mali 's <unk> Camara ( 23 @.@ 06 seconds ) , and Russia 's Natalia <unk> ( 23 @.@ 21 seconds ) . Sheniqua Ferguson ranked fourth in her heat , behind the aforementioned athletes . Overall , she tied Colombia 's <unk> Obregon for 24th place out of the qualification round 's 48 competitors . Debbie Ferguson , who was in the third heat , completed her race in 23 @.@ 22 seconds and placed second in her heat behind the United States ' Marshevet Hooker ( 23 @.@ 07 seconds ) and ahead of Nigeria 's Damola Osayomi . Out of all qualification round competitors , Debbie Ferguson placed twentieth . Both Sheniqua and Debbie Ferguson progressed to the quarterfinal round , which took place on 19 August . 
 Sheniqua Ferguson competed in the third heat . She finished last with a time of 23 @.@ 61 seconds , falling behind seventh @-@ place finalist <unk> Cali of Italy ( 23 @.@ 56 seconds ) . The leader of her heat was Russian Yulia <unk> ( at 22 @.@ 63 seconds ) . Sheniqua Ferguson ranked 29th out of the 32 athletes who progressed to quarterfinals . Debbie Ferguson was placed in the first heat , and finished her event in 22 @.@ 77 seconds behind American Allyson Felix ( 22 @.@ 74 seconds ) and Jamaican Veronica Campbell ( 22 @.@ 64 seconds ) . She ranked ninth overall . Although Sheniqua Ferguson did not , Debbie Ferguson progressed to semifinals . 
 Debbie Ferguson competed in the first heat during the 20 August semifinal round . She finished the dash in 22 @.@ 51 seconds , ranking fourth behind American Muna Lee ( 22 @.@ 29 seconds , 3rd place ) , Jamaican Kerron Stewart ( 22 @.@ 29 seconds , 2nd place ) and Jamaican Veronica Campbell ( 22 @.@ 19 seconds , 1st place ) . Out of the sixteen semifinalists , Ferguson ranked seventh , and progressed to finals . At the final round , which took place on 21 August , Ferguson ran her event in 22 @.@ 61 seconds . She ranked seventh in her event overall ahead of the Cayman Islands ' Cydonie Mothersille and behind Jamaica 's Sherone Simpson . 
 = = = = Women 's long jump = = = = 
 Former Stanford University athlete and five @-@ time Olympian ( the first four times for the United States ) Jackie Edwards participated in the Olympics on behalf of the Bahamas in women 's long jump . On 18 August , Edwards was placed in the second qualifying heat with 20 other people , including American Brittney Reese and Russian and eventual silver medalist Tatiana Lebedeva , who were the heat 's leaders . However , Edwards did not receive a mark and , thus , did not score or rank in her heat . She was one of three athletes to receive no mark during the qualification round ( the others were Slovakia 's Jana <unk> and India 's Anju Bobby George ) . 
 = = = = Summary = = = = 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 Women 
 Track & road events 
 Field events 
 = = Boxing = = 
 The Bahamas qualified one boxer for the Olympic boxing tournament . Johnson qualified for the welterweight class at the 2nd American qualifying event . 
 Toureano Johnson was the only boxer to participate on behalf of the Bahamas during the Beijing Olympics . He participated in the welterweight class , which includes competitors of a weight below 69 kilograms . Boxing preliminaries in Beijing took place on 10 August . Johnson was matched with Rolande Moses of Grenada in the second bout of the round . Johnson scored 18 punches on Moses , while Moses only scored three in return . Johnson advanced to the Round of 16 , which was staggered across several days . Toureano Johnson challenged the Ukraine 's <unk> <unk> <unk> during the third bout on 16 August , scoring nine punches on him and receiving four in return and defeating him . He advanced to quarterfinals on 17 August , where he challenged and was defeated by China 's <unk> <unk> during the second bout . Johnson scored four punches on his opponent , who scored 14 in return . 
 = = Swimming = = 
 = = = Men 's competition = = = 
 = = = = Men 's 50 meters freestyle = = = = 
 University of Kentucky student Elvis Burrows was the only Bahamian swimmer to participate in the 50 meters freestyle event during the Beijing Olympics . Burrows participated in the eighth heat of the event during the 14 August preliminary rounds . Other swimmers in his heat included Flori Lang of Switzerland and Jacinto de Jesus Ayala Benjamin of the Dominican Republic , who respectively took first and second in the heat . Burrows ranked seventh , completing his event in 23 @.@ 19 seconds . Burrows ranked ahead of eighth @-@ place heat finisher <unk> <unk> of Lithuania by 0 @.@ 83 seconds and behind sixth @-@ place heat finisher Francisco Picasso of Uruguay by 0 @.@ 18 seconds . Overall , Burrows ranked 52nd out of 97 event participants . He did not progress to the semifinal rounds . 
 = = = = Men 's 100 meters butterfly = = = = 
 Former Auburn University athlete and three @-@ time Olympian Jeremy Knowles competed in three events at the Beijing Olympics : The 100 meters butterfly , the 200 meters butterfly , and the 200 meters individual medley . In the 100 meters butterfly , Knowles participated in the third heat of the 14 August preliminary round , competing against athletes that included Israel 's Alon Mandel and Lithuania 's Rimvydas <unk> . Knowles ranked third in his heat after completing the event in 53 @.@ 72 seconds , falling behind Mandel by 0 @.@ 27 seconds but beating Hungarian Adam <unk> by 0 @.@ 21 seconds . Overall , Knowles ranked 49th out of 66th participating athletes , and did not advance . 
 = = = = Men 's 200 meters butterfly = = = = 
 Jeremy Knowles ' participation in the 200 meters butterfly took place during the 11 August preliminary round . He was placed in the third heat , which was led by Hsu Chi @-@ Chieh of Taiwan and Pedro Oliveira of Portugal . Knowles completed the event in 2 : 01 @.@ 08 , placing sixth in the event . He fell behind Omar <unk> of Columbia ( who finished in 2 : 01 @.@ 08 ) and ahead of Malaysia 's Daniel Bego ( who finished in 2 : 01 @.@ 28 ) . Out of the 44 competitors in the preliminary round , Knowles ranked 35th . He did not advance to further rounds . 
 = = = = Men 's 200 meters individual medley = = = = 
 Knowles competed on behalf of the Bahamas in the 200 meters individual medley , an event that combines all the competitive swimming strokes . The event 's preliminary round took place on 13 August . Knowles competed in the third heat , which was led by Israel 's Gal Nevo ; Bulgaria 's Mihail Alexandrov ' and Greece 's Ioannis <unk> . Knowles ranked fourth in the heat with a time of 2 : 01 @.@ 35 , falling behind <unk> ( who completed the event in 2 : 01 @.@ 22 ) but placing ahead of Croatia 's Sasa <unk> ( who completed the event in 2 : 01 @.@ 83 ) . Out of the 47 competing athletes , Knowles placed 24th . He did not advance . 
 = = = Women 's competition = = = 
 = = = = Women 's 100 meters backstroke = = = = 
 Canada @-@ born Auburn University alumnus Alana Dillette was the only swimmer to participate in the women 's 100 meters backstroke while representing the Bahamas at the Beijing Olympics . Dillette participated in the preliminary rounds of her event on 10 August , when she swam in the third heat versus swimmers that included Columbia 's Carolina Colorado and Israel 's Anna Gostomelsky , who ranked , respectively , first and second in that heat . Dillette ranked fourth in the heat with a time of 1 : 02 @.@ 56 behind Sweden 's Sarah Sjöström by 0 @.@ 24 seconds , and ahead of Hong Kong 's Hiu Wai Sherry Tsai by 0 @.@ 12 seconds . Out of the total of 49 swimmers that took part in the preliminary rounds , Dillette ranked 32nd . She did not advance to semifinals later that day . 
 = = = = Women 's 50 meters freestyle = = = = 
 Auburn University student Arianna Vanderpool @-@ Wallace participated in two events at Beijing : the 50 meters freestyle , and the 100 meters freestyle . In the 50 meters freestyle , preliminary rounds took place on 15 August . Vanderpool @-@ Wallace was placed in the eighth heat , which was led by Israel 's Anna Gostomelsky , Vanderpool @-@ Wallace , and the Czech Republic 's Sandra <unk> . She ranked second with a time of 25 @.@ 40 seconds , whereas heat leader Gostomelsky finished at 25 @.@ 23 seconds , and third @-@ place finalist <unk> finished at 25 @.@ 54 seconds . Overall , out of the 92 participating athletes , Vanderpool @-@ Wallace ranked 24th . She did not advance to later rounds . 
 = = = = Women 's 100 meters freestyle = = = = 
 Vanderpool @-@ Wallace 's performance in the 100 meters freestyle took place during the preliminary round on 13 August . She was placed in the third heat , which included athletes like Hong Kong 's Hannah Jane Arnett Wilson and Austria 's Birgit <unk> . With a time of 55 @.@ 61 seconds , Vanderpool @-@ Wallace placed second , behind heat leader Wilson ( who finished at 55 @.@ 32 seconds ) and ahead of third @-@ place finalist <unk> ( who finished at 55 @.@ 62 seconds ) . Of the 49 participants , Vanderpool @-@ Wallace ranked 28th . She did not advance past preliminaries . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Men 
 Qualifiers for the latter rounds of all events were decided on a time only basis , therefore positions shown are overall results versus competitors in all heats . 
 Women 
 Qualifiers for the latter rounds of all events were decided on a time only basis , therefore positions shown are overall results versus competitors in all heats . 
 = = Tennis = = 
 Mark Knowles ( a five @-@ time Olympian ) and Devin Mullings participated in men 's doubles tennis on behalf of the Bahamas . Their entrance constituted the only Bahamian participation in any tennis event , and the only tennis entry by any nation in the Caribbean . The pair participated in the first match of the event 's first round on 11 August , where they faced a team from the United States that included Bob and Mike Bryan . The Bryan brothers won two sets against the Bahamian team and defeated them , eventually winning the bronze medal in the event . 
 = Lambertia formosa = 
 Lambertia formosa , commonly known as mountain devil , is a shrub of the family Proteaceae , endemic to New South Wales , Australia . First described in 1798 by English botanist James Edward Smith , it is the type species of the small genus Lambertia . It is generally found in heathland or open forest , growing in sandstone @-@ based soils . It grows as a multistemmed shrub to around 2 m ( 7 ft ) with a woody base known as a lignotuber , from which it regrows after bushfire . It has stiff narrow leaves , and the pink to red flowerheads , made up of seven individual tubular flowers , generally appear in spring and summer . It gains its common name from the horned woody follicles , which were used to make small devil @-@ figures . 
 The flowers hold profuse amounts of nectar and are pollinated by honeyeaters . Although L. formosa is uncommon in cultivation , it is straightforward to grow in soils with good drainage and a partly shaded to sunny aspect . It is readily propagated by seed . Unlike all other members of the genus Lambertia , L. formosa is greatly resistant to the soil pathogen Phytophthora cinnamomi . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Specimens of Lambertia formosa were collected by botanists Joseph Banks and Daniel Solander during Lieutenant James Cook 's landing at Botany Bay between April and May in 1770 . These are thought to have been obtained from vegetation currently known as the Eastern Suburbs Banksia Scrub that occurs in sandy areas near present @-@ day La Perouse . The shrub was first described in 1798 by English botanist James Edward Smith who concurrently erected the new genus Lambertia , the name honouring English botanist Aylmer Bourke Lambert . The specific name formosa is the Latin adjective for ' handsome ' . English plantsman Henry Charles Andrews wrote in 1799 , " Of all the plants yet introduced from New Holland , that have hitherto flowered with us , this unquestionably takes the lead for beauty , considering the plant altogether " , although his countryman Joseph Knight in his 1809 work On the cultivation of the plants belonging to the natural order of Proteeae added that the species name " applies only to the flowers , the foliage being generally of a sickly hue " . French botanist Michel Gandoger described specimens collected at Hornsby and Port Jackson as Lambertia <unk> , and material sent to him by plant collector Charles Walter as L. barbata in 1919 ; these turned out to be L. formosa . Gandoger described 212 taxa of Australian plants , almost all of which turned out to be species already described . 
 One of ten species of the genus Lambertia within the family Proteaceae , Lambertia formosa is the only one found in eastern Australia as the others are all restricted to southwest Western Australia . Common names include mountain devil and honey flower , the former from the fruit 's resemblance to a devil 's head . No subspecies are recognised , although plants in the southern part of its range from <unk> River to Braidwood have longer leaves . 
 = = Description = = 
 Lambertia formosa grows as a spreading shrub to 2 m ( 7 ft ) tall , with one or more stems arising from a woody base known as a lignotuber . The new growth is covered with a fine brownish hair . The stiff leaves are arranged in whorls of 3 , or sometimes up to 4 to 6 , on the stems , and are linear to narrow @-@ oblanceolate in shape . Measuring anywhere from 1 to 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 3 in ) in length and 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 7 cm wide , they have a pointed tip or apex . Flowers are seen at any time of the year , but more often over spring and summer ( September to January ) . Their bases are covered by greenish and reddish bracts . The inflorescences are almost always made up of seven smaller individual flowers ( less than 1 % of flowerheads have either six or eight flowers ) , known as florets , and can be shades of red or pink in colour . The tubular perianths are 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) long , with the styles protruding another 1 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) beyond . Flowering is followed by the development of woody fruit which measure 2 – 3 by 1 – 2 cm . They have two 1 – 1 @.@ 5 cm sharp horny protuberances , and a 0 @.@ 5 cm ' beak ' , initially pale green in colour before fading to a grey @-@ brown . These woody follicles each have two flat , winged seeds that are retained until burnt by fire . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Endemic to New South Wales , Lambertia formosa is found on or east of the Great Dividing Range from the vicinity of Braidwood north to Port Stephens , as well as some parts of northern New South Wales around Grafton and between Red Rock and <unk> . In the Sydney Basin , it is found from altitudes of zero to 1100 m ( 3600 ft ) above sea level , and in areas of rainfall from 800 to 1400 mm ( 32 – 55 in ) annually . 
 Lambertia formosa grows in heathland , mallee shrubland and dry sclerophyll forest , predominantly found on sandy or rocky soils . Associated heathland species include dwarf apple ( Angophora hispida ) , paperbark <unk> ( Leptospermum trinervium ) , rusty banksia ( Banksia oblongifolia ) and heath banksia ( Banksia ericifolia ) , while woodland trees include silvertop ash ( Eucalyptus sieberi ) , smooth @-@ barked apple ( Angophora costata ) , narrow @-@ leaved apple ( A. bakeri ) , red bloodwood ( Corymbia gummifera ) , yellow bloodwood ( C. eximia ) , scribbly gum ( Eucalyptus sclerophylla ) , and Sydney peppermint ( E. piperita ) . One heathland community located between Lake <unk> and Redhead grows at least partly on clayey soils . Here , L. formosa grows under mallee forms of brown stringybark ( Eucalyptus <unk> ) and broad @-@ leaved white mahogany ( E. umbra ) and alongside shrubby forms of prickly @-@ leaved paperbark ( Melaleuca nodosa ) , dagger hakea ( Hakea teretifolia ) , scrub she @-@ oak ( Allocasuarina distyla ) , rusty banksia and swathes of kangaroo grass ( Themeda triandra ) . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Lambertia formosa regenerates after bushfire by resprouting from its woody lignotuber , but is also serotinous in that it has a seed bank held in its canopy to be released after fire . The number of flowers produced by plants growing back from fire peaks two or three years afterwards . A field study in Brisbane Water National Park north of Sydney found that plants that had experienced two short ( less than seven @-@ year ) intervals between bushfires had reduced reproductive output as measured by lower numbers of follicles , compared with plants in areas which had had no or one short inter @-@ fire interval . Plants can live for over 60 years . 
 The red / pink colour , length of the tube and properties of the nectar indicate that the flower is pollinated by honeyeaters , which perch as they consume the nectar . Species observed foraging include the white @-@ eared honeyeater ( Lichenostomus leucotis ) , white @-@ cheeked honeyeater ( Phylidonyris niger ) , New Holland honeyeater ( Phylidonyris novaehollandiae ) , noisy miner ( Manorina melanocephala ) , little wattlebird ( <unk> chrysoptera ) , eastern spinebill ( Acanthorhynchus tenuirostris ) , and yellow @-@ faced honeyeater ( Lichenostomus chrysops ) . Honeyeaters are found in greater numbers in the vicinity of plants with more flowers . 
 Caterpillars of the Australian cup moth species Xylorycta <unk> eat the leaves and make burrows in the wood . The plant also hosts caterpillars of the cup moth species <unk> fasciata . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Lambertia formosa was one of the earliest introductions of Australian plant species to cultivation in England . In 1788 , seed was sent from Botany Bay to the Lee and Kennedy 's nursery in Hammersmith , west London . Two varieties were raised , one designated as " var. longifolia " . The first recorded flowering was a plant grown by J. Robertson of Stockwell in July 1798 . Andrews wrote the following year that it is " without difficulty raised by cuttings , and thrives in peat earth . " Knight reported in 1809 that it required more heat and close care than other Australian plants and hence would never be widely cultivated in England . 
 Lambertia formosa is readily grown in cultivation given a sunny position and fair drainage , though it tolerates a range of soils and some shade . Its flowers attract birds , especially important as this can provide a source of food year @-@ round . The plant responds well to pruning . Seeds germinate within 25 to 60 days of sowing , and firm young growth makes the best cutting material for propagation . <unk> generally are not needed , but slow release low @-@ phosphorus fertilisers are tolerated . The species is frost @-@ hardy and grows in temperate to subtropical climates . 
 Inoculation experiments show that Lambertia formosa is resistant to dieback ( Phytophthora cinnamomi ) , unlike all other members of the genus . Hence it has potential as a rootstock for grafting Lambertia species of Western Australian origin , all of which are highly sensitive to root rot . 
 = = Uses and cultural references = = 
 The common name " honey flower " is derived from the flowers which produce a clear nectar in large quantities . This was a source of nourishment for Aborigines and , following European colonisation , explorers , escaped convicts and children were recorded sucking the flowers . Explorer Ludwig Leichhardt wrote that " often when I 've been tired and thirsty , I 've bitten off the base of a tuft of Lambertia formosa flowers to suck the delightfully sweet honey out of them " . Headaches and nausea have been reported from ingesting large quantities of the fluid , though it is not known to contain a toxic substance . 
 The species was the subject of an illustration by Sydney Parkinson , artist on HM Bark Endeavour 's voyage to the Pacific from 1769 to 1771 . A colour botanical engraving based on Parkinson 's work is part of Banks ' <unk> . First Fleet midshipman and artist George Raper depicted the species in two works : an untitled watercolour study ( c . 1788 ) and Bird Of Point Jackson ( 1789 ) . Writer and illustrator George Collingridge incorporated the flower in several of his designs and unsuccessfully championed it as the floral emblem of Australia . 
 Hand @-@ crafted figures have been made utilising the mature woody fruit for a head , together with pipe cleaners , wool and fabric scraps . Known as " mountain devils " , these were sold as tourist souvenirs in the Blue Mountains . 
 = Where No Man Has Gone Before = 
 " Where No Man Has Gone Before " is the second pilot episode of the science fiction television series Star Trek . It was produced in 1965 after the first pilot , " The Cage " , had been rejected by NBC . Reportedly , Lucille Ball , who owned Desilu Studios ( where the pilot was produced ) , persuaded NBC management to consider a second pilot , thereby exercising a special option agreement it had with Desilu , because she liked Gene Roddenberry and believed in the project . The episode was eventually broadcast third in sequence on September 22 , 1966 , and re @-@ aired on April 20 , 1967 . On July 12 , 1969 , it was the first episode to be shown in the UK by the BBC . 
 " Where No Man Has Gone Before " was written by Samuel A. Peeples , directed by James Goldstone , and filmed in July 1965 . It was the first episode of Star Trek to feature William Shatner as Captain James Kirk , James Doohan as Chief Engineer Montgomery Scott ( later called " Scotty " ) , and George Takei as Lt. Sulu ( the ship 's physicist , whose character became helmsman in subsequent episodes ) . The episode title was adopted as the final phrase in the opening voice @-@ over which characterizes the series and has entered popular culture . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The starship USS Enterprise is on an exploratory mission to leave the galaxy . En route , a damaged ship 's recorder of the SS Valiant , an Earth spaceship lost 200 years earlier , is found . Its record is incomplete , but it reveals that the Valiant had been swept from its path by a " magnetic space storm , " and that the crew had frantically searched for information about extra @-@ sensory perception ( ESP ) in the ship 's library computer . The recording ends with the captain of the Valiant apparently giving a self @-@ destruct order . 
 Kirk decides that they need to know what happened to the Valiant , and the Enterprise crosses the edge of the galaxy where it encounters a strange barrier which damages the ship 's systems and warp drive , forcing a retreat . At the same time , nine crewmembers are killed and both helmsman Gary Mitchell and ship 's psychiatrist Dr. Elizabeth Dehner are knocked unconscious by the barrier 's effect . When he awakens , Mitchell 's eyes glow silver , and he begins to display remarkable psychic powers . 
 Mitchell becomes increasingly arrogant and hostile toward the rest of the crew , declaring that he has become godlike , enforcing his desires with fearsome displays of telepathic and telekinetic power . Science Officer Spock ( Leonard Nimoy ) comes to believe that Valiant crew members may have experienced the same phenomenon , and destroyed the ship to keep the power from spreading . He advises Kirk that Mitchell may have to be killed before his powers develop further , but Kirk angrily disagrees . 
 Alarmed that Mitchell may take over the Enterprise , Kirk decides to maroon him on an unmanned lithium @-@ cracking facility on the remote planet of Delta Vega . Once there , the landing party tries to confine Mitchell , but his powers have become great . He goes on a rampage , kills navigator Lt. Lee Kelso and escapes , taking with him Dr. Dehner , who has now developed similar powers . 
 Kirk follows and appeals to Dr. Dehner 's humanity for help . Before Mitchell can kill Kirk , the doctor attacks and weakens him . Mitchell fatally injures Dehner , but before he can recover from the effort , Kirk uses a phaser rifle to create a rock slide , killing Mitchell . 
 Back on the Enterprise , Kirk makes a log entry that both Dehner and Mitchell gave their lives " in performance of duty , " rationalizing that they did not ask for what happened to them . Spock admits to feeling sympathy for Mitchell too , and Kirk comments that there is hope for him . 
 = = Production = = 
 The original pilot of Star Trek , " The Cage " , was rejected in February 1965 by NBC executives . The show had been sold to them as a " Wagon Train to the stars " , and they thought the first pilot did not match the adventure format they had been promised and was " too cerebral " for the general audience . However , NBC , having been persuaded by Desilu management ( and reportedly by Lucille Ball herself ) , maintained sufficient interest in the format to order a second pilot episode in March 1965 . 
 Roddenberry wrote two story outlines , " The Omega Glory " and " Mudd 's Women . " He wrote the teleplay for the former , and gave the latter to Stephen Kandel . Roddenberry asked long @-@ time associate and veteran scriptwriter Samuel Peeples to submit ideas for another . Peeples came up with the premise and episode title for " Where No Man Has Gone Before , " and was assigned to write it . 
 Kandel had fallen ill and his script was not finished in time ; the other two were submitted to NBC for consideration . NBC preferred " Where No Man Has Gone Before " as a pilot . " Mudd 's Women " was later made as the second episode in regular production , and " The Omega Glory " was made towards the end of the second season . 
 While " The Cage " has a running time of approximately 63 minutes , " Where No Man Has Gone Before " , ran just over 55 minutes with additional footage and formatting later cut to reduce it to the usual series running time of around 50 minutes ( excluding commercials ) . 
 Casting took place in June 1965 . Jeffrey Hunter was unwilling to reprise his role as Captain Christopher Pike . Lloyd Bridges and Jack Lord were considered , but William Shatner was finally cast as Pike 's replacement , Captain James Kirk . The character of Number One , the female second @-@ in @-@ command , was dropped on the insistence of the NBC network , and Science Officer Spock was given Number One 's unemotional demeanor . NBC was worried about Leonard Nimoy 's " satanic " appearance and pressured for his removal . 
 Apart from Captain Kirk , the episode introduced two other regular characters to the show : James Doohan , a friend of director James Goldstone , was cast as the Chief Engineer Montgomery Scott ( the name chosen after Doohan had tried various accents , and had decided that an engineer ought to be Scottish ) and George Takei was cast as Ship 's Physicist Sulu , who would become the helmsman in the regular series . Lieutenant Uhura and Dr. Leonard McCoy do not feature ; the ship 's doctor is instead Mark Piper ( Paul Fix ) . Piper was intended as a regular ; DeForest Kelley , who played McCoy in the series proper , had been considered for the role . 
 Gary Lockwood , as Lt. Commander Gary Mitchell , had starred in the title role of Roddenberry 's earlier series on NBC , The Lieutenant ; Sally Kellerman was cast as Dr. Elizabeth Dehner . Both actors needed silver eyes , which were produced by an expert contact lens fabricator who sandwiched wrinkled tinfoil between two sclera contact lenses which covered the entire eye . These were outdated even in the 1960s and dangerous to the health of the actors ' eyes . Although Kellerman could insert and remove the prosthetics easily with no discomfort , Lockwood found them almost impossible to use . He needed to raise his face and sight along his nose in order to see through tiny holes in the foil . He was able to use this to enhance his performance as the mutating Mitchell , the unusual gaze giving him an arrogant and haughty demeanor . 
 Other cast members included Paul Carr as Navigator Lee Kelso , Lloyd Haynes as Communications Officer Alden and Andrea <unk> as Yeoman Smith ( Alden and Smith were intended to be regulars in the show , but were replaced by Uhura and Janice Rand , respectively ) . The episode also is the first time long @-@ running background actor Eddie <unk> appeared ; his character would later be identified as Lt. Leslie . 
 The costumes from the first pilot were used in " Where No Man Has Gone Before " with the exception of the insignias in two respects - the outlines were gold in first pilot but black in the second , and the insignia symbols for engineering and sciences were reversed compared to both the pilot and the series proper . Completely new uniforms and insignias would be unveiled when the series was green @-@ lighted , with the colors altered and black collars introduced . Most of the Enterprise sets were also reused from " The Cage " , while Sickbay was the only major set constructed for the episode . Like " The Cage " , the episode was shot at Desilu 's Culver City studios . 
 The episode was directed by James Goldstone . Ernest Haller , who had won the Oscar for Best Color Cinematography on the movie Gone with the Wind ( 1939 ) , served as director of photography for the episode . He had been brought in out of semi @-@ retirement at Goldstone 's recommendation at the last minute , after attempts to locate a cameraman had proved problematic . Robert H. Justman was credited as assistant director . 
 Shooting started on July 19 , 1965 , several days later than originally scheduled . During the filming of this episode , a wasp 's nest high in the rafters of the studio was somehow disturbed , and many cast and crew members suffered stings as a result . As this happened on a Friday , the weekend break allowed time for the swelling to go down ; Shatner , however , required additional makeup to hide the stings during shooting the following Monday . Filming finished late on July 28 , 1965 ; the final footage filmed was part of the fight between Kirk and Mitchell . While the schedule allowed seven days to shoot the episode , it required nine , which was Justman 's original estimate . The episode cost around $ 300 @,@ 000 , around half the money spent on making " The Cage " . 
 In a 1988 TV special , series creator Gene Roddenberry said that , as with the first pilot , this one still had a lot of science @-@ fiction elements in it , but at least it ended with Kirk in a bare knuckle fistfight with Mitchell and that 's what sold NBC on Star Trek . 
