 = = Original cut = = 
 Post @-@ production on the episode was delayed by Roddenberry 's involvement in another pilot , Police Story . Post @-@ production finished in January 1966 and the episode was presented to NBC for approval ( which finally came in February 1966 ) ; this original version ( production number <unk> ) differed from the later final broadcast cut ( production number <unk> , airing on September 22 , 1966 ) in that each of the four acts had on @-@ screen titles ( " Act I " , " Act II " , etc . ) , as well as an epilogue , in the manner of Quinn Martin 's television productions . It also featured a much longer opening narration by Shatner . In part , also alternate musical scores were used . In total almost 5 minutes of additional footage was removed to accommodate the original series 50 @-@ minute network broadcast format , allowing for commercials . 
 The studio did not retain a print of this original " alternate " version , and it was officially thought to be lost , though many fans knew that it existed somewhere , having purchased a poor quality VHS tape at a convention . In 2009 , a German film collector discovered a print of it and brought it to the attention of CBS / Paramount , which then released it under the title " Where No Fan Has Gone Before " – The Restored , Unaired Alternate Pilot Episode as part of the TOS season 3 box set on Blu @-@ ray ; it has not yet been released on DVD . 
 The original " alternate " version also remains unaired ( in both normal or still undone remastered form ) , thus still awaiting canon status ( both in contrast to TOS 's earlier other concept @-@ as @-@ pilot episode 's version , " The Cage " – later reworked into the two @-@ part " The Menagerie " of the original run of TOS , which was finally broadcast in 1988 during the original run and in the regular time slot of Star Trek : The Next Generation ) . 
 The episode in its original " alternate " version was known to the public before the aired version , having been shown ( receiving a standing ovation ) at the 24th Worldcon in Cleveland , Ohio , on September 3 , 1966 — shortly before the premiere broadcast of Star Trek on NBC . 
 = = Continuity = = 
 The episode 's title is the first usage of the phrase " Where No Man Has Gone Before " in Star Trek . The phrase would be incorporated into the opening credits sequence in following episodes , as part of the " Space : The Final Frontier ... " speech given by Captain Kirk . The phrase would also be used ( with " man " changed to the gender @-@ neutral " one " ) , in the credits voice @-@ over of Star Trek : The Next Generation . That series also referred to it with the title of one of its episodes , " Where No One Has Gone Before " . It was also referred to in the final episode of Star Trek : Enterprise as part of a voice @-@ over spoken by Picard , Kirk , and Archer . 
 Kirk 's middle initial is given as " R. " in " Where No Man Has Gone Before " and is seen clearly on the gravestone fashioned by Mitchell for Kirk ; subsequent episodes use " James T. Kirk " . His middle name was revealed to be " Tiberius " in " Bem " , an episode from the animated series , and in Star Trek VI : The Undiscovered Country . Various suggestions have been made to explain this discrepancy ; Michael Jan Friedman 's My Brother 's Keeper trilogy speculates this results from an in @-@ joke between Mitchell and Kirk . Roddenberry cited human error on Mitchell 's part . 
 The episode contains the first stardate ( 1312 @.@ 4 ) and makes the first reference to the Academy , at which Kirk taught Mitchell . The " lithium crystals " mentioned in the episode would later be renamed to the fictional " dilithium crystals " . The episode opens with Kirk and Spock playing a game of three @-@ dimensional chess . 
 = = Sequels and adaptations = = 
 The episode was adapted into a short story by James Blish for Star Trek 8 , published in 1972 . It also became the second in Bantam 's series of <unk> , published in 1977 . 
 The Galactic Barrier is later associated with the Q , in two unrelated and <unk> novels : 1994 's Q @-@ Squared by Peter David , and Greg Cox 's 1998 Q Continuum novels . 
 Gary Mitchell does not appear again in the show . Several books , including Michael Jan Friedman 's My Brother 's Keeper , Vonda N. McIntyre 's Enterprise : The First Adventure , and Margaret Wander Bonanno 's Strangers from the Sky , feature the Mitchell character in adventures set before the events of the episode . The 2005 Star Trek : Vanguard book Harbinger is set immediately after the events of " Where No Man Has Gone Before " and features a troubled Kirk musing on his friend 's death . Friedman 's Stargazer book The Valiant features two people who claim to be descended from the Valiant 's crew . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club gave the episode a ' B + ' rating , describing it as " an awkward episode " but that " it 's not without its charms . " 
 = Alexander Berkman = 
 Alexander Berkman ( November 21 , 1870 – June 28 , 1936 ) was a leading member of the anarchist movement in the early 20th century , famous for both his political activism and his writing . 
 Berkman was born in Vilna in the Russian Empire ( present @-@ day Vilnius , Lithuania ) and emigrated to the United States in 1888 . He lived in New York City , where he became involved in the anarchist movement . He was the one @-@ time lover and lifelong friend of anarchist Emma Goldman . In 1892 , undertaking an act of propaganda of the deed , Berkman made an unsuccessful attempt to assassinate businessman Henry Clay Frick , for which he served 14 years in prison . His experience in prison was the basis for his first book , Prison Memoirs of an Anarchist . 
 After his release from prison , Berkman served as editor of Goldman 's anarchist journal , Mother Earth , and later established his own journal , The Blast . In 1917 , Berkman and Goldman were sentenced to two years in jail for conspiracy against the newly instated draft . After their release from prison , they were arrested — along with hundreds of others — and deported to Russia . Initially supportive of that country 's Bolshevik revolution , Berkman and Goldman soon became disillusioned , voicing their opposition to the Soviet 's use of terror after seizing power and their repression of fellow revolutionaries . In 1925 , he published a book about his experiences , The Bolshevik Myth . 
 While living in France , Berkman continued his work in support of the anarchist movement , producing the classic exposition of anarchist principles , Now and After : The ABC of Communist Anarchism . Suffering from ill health , Berkman committed suicide in 1936 . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Berkman was born <unk> Osipovich Berkman in the Lithuanian city of Vilnius ( then called Vilna , and part of the Vilna Governorate in the Russian Empire ) . He was the youngest of four children born into a well @-@ off Jewish family . Berkman 's father , Osip Berkman , was a successful leather merchant , and his mother , <unk> Berkman ( née Natanson ) , came from a prosperous family . 
 In 1877 , Osip Berkman was granted the right , as a successful businessman , to move from the Pale of Settlement to which Jews were generally restricted in the Russian Empire . The family moved to Saint Petersburg , a city previously off @-@ limits to Jews . There , <unk> adopted the more Russian name Alexander ; he was known among family and friends as Sasha , a diminutive for Alexander . The <unk> lived comfortably , with servants and a summer house . Berkman attended the gymnasium , where he received a classical education with the youth of Saint Petersburg 's elite . 
 As a youth , Berkman was influenced by the growing radicalism that was spreading among workers in the Russian capital . A wave of political assassinations culminated in a bomb blast that killed Tsar Alexander II in 1881 . While his parents worried — correctly , as it turned out — that the tsar 's death might result in repression of the Jews and other minorities , Berkman became intrigued by the radical ideas of the day , including populism and nihilism . He became very upset when his favorite uncle , his mother 's brother Mark Natanson , was sentenced to death for revolutionary activities . 
 Soon after Berkman turned 12 , his father died . The business had to be sold , and the family lost the right to live in Saint Petersburg . <unk> moved the family to Kovno , where her brother Nathan lived . Berkman had shown great promise as a student at the gymnasium , but his studies began to falter as he spent his time reading novels . One of the books that interested him was Ivan Turgenev 's novel Fathers and Sons ( 1862 ) , with its discussion of nihilist philosophy . But what truly moved him was Nikolay Chernyshevsky 's 1863 novel , What Is to Be Done ? , and Berkman felt inspired by Rakhmetov , its puritanical protagonist who is willing to sacrifice personal pleasure and family ties in single @-@ minded pursuit of his revolutionary aims . 
 Soon , Berkman joined a group at school that was reading and discussing revolutionary literature , which was prohibited under the new tsar , Alexander III . He distributed banned material to other students and wrote some radical tracts of his own , which he printed using supplies pilfered from the school . He turned in a paper titled " There Is No God " , which resulted in a one @-@ year demotion as punishment on the basis of " precocious godlessness , dangerous tendencies and subordination " . 
 Berkman 's mother died in 1887 ( he was 18 ) , and his uncle Nathan Natanson became responsible for him . Berkman had contempt for Natanson for his desire to maintain order and avoid conflict . Natanson could not understand what Berkman found appealing in his radical ideas , and he worried that Berkman would bring shame to the family . Late that year , Berkman was caught stealing copies of the school exams and bribing a handyman . He was expelled and labelled a " nihilist conspirator " . 
 Berkman decided to emigrate to the United States . When his brother left for Germany in early 1888 to study medicine , Berkman took the opportunity to accompany him and from there made his way to New York City . 
 = = = New York City = = = 
 Soon after his arrival in New York , where he knew nobody and spoke no English , Berkman became an anarchist through his involvement with groups that had formed to campaign to free the men convicted of the 1886 Haymarket bombing . He joined the Pioneers of Liberty , the first Jewish anarchist group in the U.S. The group was affiliated with the International Working People 's Association , the organization to which the Haymarket defendants had belonged , and they regarded the Haymarket men as martyrs . Since most of its members worked in the garment industry , the Pioneers of Liberty took part in strikes against sweatshops and helped establish some of the first Jewish labor unions in the city . Before long , Berkman was one of the prominent members of the organization . 
 Berkman soon came under the influence of Johann Most , the best known anarchist in the United States and an advocate of propaganda of the deed — attentat , or violence carried out to encourage the masses to revolt . He became a typesetter for Most 's newspaper Freiheit . 
 In 1889 , Berkman met and began a romance with Emma Goldman , another Russian immigrant . He invited her to Most 's lecture . Soon Berkman and Goldman fell in love and became inseparable . Despite their disagreements and separations , Goldman and Berkman would share a mutual devotion for decades , united by their anarchist principles and love for one another . 
 By the end of the year , they moved into a communal apartment with Berkman 's cousin , Modest Aronstam ( referred to as " Fedya " in both Berkman 's Prison Memoirs of an Anarchist and Goldman 's Living My Life ) , and Goldman 's friend , Helene <unk> , along principles inspired by What Is to Be Done ? Living according to the example of Rakhmetov , Berkman denied himself even the smallest pleasures — and he expected his comrades to be the same . Aronstam , on the other hand , occasionally brought home flowers . <unk> between the two grew : " Every penny spent for ourselves was so much taken from the Cause , " Berkman fumed . " Luxury is a crime , a weakness . " With time , however , the two cousins reconciled . 
 Berkman eventually broke with Most and aligned himself with the autonomists . The autonomists , an anarchist group associated with Josef <unk> , emphasized individual freedom . They feared the dominance of the anarchist movement by a single individual and opposed the establishment of anarchist organizations . Consequently , the autonomists were opposed to Most . Soon , Berkman was working for the autonomists ' publications , Der Anarchist and Die <unk> , but he remained committed to the concept of violent action as a tool for inspiring revolutionary change . 
 At the end of 1891 , Berkman learned that Russian anarchist Peter Kropotkin , whom he admired , had cancelled an American speaking tour on the basis that it was too expensive for the struggling anarchist movement . While Berkman was disappointed , the frugality of the action further elevated Kropotkin 's stature in his eyes . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In 1892 , Berkman , Goldman , and Aronstam relocated to Worcester , Massachusetts , where they operated a successful luncheonette . At the end of June , Goldman saw a newspaper headline that brought to her attention the trio 's first opportunity for political action : the Homestead Strike . In June 1892 , workers at a steel plant in Homestead , Pennsylvania were locked out when negotiations between the Carnegie Steel Company and the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers failed . Henry Clay Frick , the factory 's notoriously anti @-@ union manager , hired 300 armed guards from the Pinkerton Detective Agency to break the union 's picket lines . When the Pinkerton guards arrived at the factory on the morning of July 6 , a gunfight broke out . Nine union workers and seven guards were killed in the 12 @-@ hour fight . 
 Newspapers across the country defended the union workers , and the trio decided to assassinate Frick . They believed the assassination would arouse the working class to unite and revolt against the capitalist system . Berkman 's was to assassinate Frick and then kill himself ; Goldman was to explain Berkman 's motives after his death ; and Aronstam was to follow Berkman in the event that he failed in his mission . Emulating his Russian idols , Berkman tried to make a bomb , but when that failed , he went to Pittsburgh with the plan to use a handgun . 
 Arriving in Pittsburgh on July 14 , Berkman sought out anarchists Henry Bauer and Carl Nold . They were followers of Most , but supported the Homestead strike . Berkman had never met either man but counted on their support . Nold invited Berkman to stay with him , and he and Bauer introduced Berkman to several local anarchists . 
 Berkman was ready to carry out the assassination on July 21 . He wore a new suit and a black derby hat , and in his pockets he had a gun and a dagger fashioned from a steel file . He went to Frick 's office and asked to see him , saying he was the representative of a New York hiring agency , but he was told Frick was too busy to meet him . The following night , Berkman checked into a hotel under the name Rakhmetov , his role model from What Is to Be Done ? On July 23 , he returned to Frick 's office . While the attendant told Frick that the New York employment agent had returned to see him , Berkman burst into the office and took aim at Frick 's head . After two shots , Berkman was tackled to the ground . Still , he managed to pull out the dagger and stab Frick three times . 
 A carpenter who was working nearby heard the commotion and hit Berkman in the head with his hammer , but the blow only stunned him . The gunshots and struggle could be heard and seen from the street , and within minutes Frick 's office had attracted all sorts of people , but Berkman continued to resist . A deputy sheriff aimed his gun at Berkman , but Frick said , " Don 't shoot . Leave him to the law . " As the police led Berkman to the jail , an angry crowd gathered and shouted at Berkman . When he was questioned by police , Berkman said he had arrived in Pittsburgh on July 21 and that he had acted alone . A dynamite capsule was discovered in his mouth after a policeman noticed that he was chewing on something . 
 On July 24 , a police officer took Berkman for a portrait . He lent Berkman his own tie for the picture . The following day , Aronstam arrived in Pittsburgh with pockets full of dynamite to finish Berkman 's botched assassination attempt . Somehow rumors of his arrival had preceded him , and he saw a newspaper headline that read " Was Not Alone . <unk> [ sic ] Had Accomplices in His Mission of Murder . Is Aaron Stamm Here ? " Aronstam became frightened , hid the dynamite in an outhouse , and returned to New York . 
 Berkman stayed in jail for two months awaiting his trial . He had one hour per day of exercise with other prisoners . They could not understand his motive for the attack on Frick . Surely it must have been a personal dispute or a business quarrel . His explanations were met with condescending smiles . One fellow prisoner , a Homestead worker who was about to stand trial for throwing dynamite at the Pinkertons , told him the workers did not believe in violence . Berkman had no connection with Homestead , and the strike was none of his business . He had only hurt the workers ' cause with his action . 
 Most of the anarchists in Pittsburgh were questioned by police . Bauer and Nold were arrested and charged with complicity in Berkman 's plot . Everywhere , anarchists took sides for or against Berkman and his attentat . The autonomists supported him , as did many anarchists across the country . <unk> spoke out in his defense . Also defending Berkman was Dyer Lum , an anarchist who had been a comrade of the Haymarket defendants , and Lucy Parsons . Among those who criticized Berkman were Jo Labadie , Benjamin Tucker , and many other anarchists who believed the anarchist struggle should be peaceful . Berkman 's most prominent critic was Most , who belittled Berkman as a nuisance or a <unk> hired by Frick himself to garner sympathy . Most published an article in his newspaper titled " Reflections on <unk> " in which he wrote that propaganda of the deed was doomed to be misunderstood in the U.S. and that it could only backfire . Most wrote that Berkman 's action had proven this ; while Berkman may have demonstrated a certain heroism , in all other respects his attempt was a " total failure " . 
 Berkman was deeply interested in the debate concerning his action . He was almost heartbroken by the rebuke from Most , who had " preached propaganda by deed all his life — now he repudiates the first attentat in this country " . He was encouraged by the words of Kropotkin , who wrote that " Berkman has done more to spread the anarchist idea among the masses who do not read our papers than all the writings that we may publish . He has shown that there are among the anarchists , men capable of being revolted by the crimes of capitalism to the point of giving their life to put an end to these crimes , or at least to open a way to such an end . " 
 = = = Trial = = = 
 Berkman declined the services of a lawyer for his trial . The warden cautioned him against this choice , but Berkman replied " I don 't believe in your laws . I don 't acknowledge the authority of your courts . I am innocent morally " . Bauer and Nold visited him with their lawyers , who offered to represent him at no charge , but Berkman politely refused . As the trial approached , Berkman drafted a speech that he would read in court . Written in German because his English was still poor , it was 40 pages long and took two hours to read . Berkman tried to learn the date of his trial , but it was kept secret by the district attorney out of fear of an attack by Berkman 's comrades . Berkman therefore was unaware of his trial until the morning it began . 
 When Berkman was brought to the courtroom on September 19 , the jury had already been empaneled . The district attorney had selected the jury without allowing Berkman to examine prospective jurors , and the judge had no objection to the unusual procedure . Berkman was charged with six counts : felonious assault with the intent to kill Frick ; felonious assault with the intent to kill Lawrence Leishman , who had been in Frick 's office at the time of the attack ; feloniously entering the offices of the Carnegie Steel Company on three occasions ; and unlawfully carrying concealed weapons . Berkman pleaded not guilty to all charges . 
 Frick told the jury about the attempt on his life . The clothes he wore that day , bloody and riddled with holes , were shown to the jury . A physician testified that both of Berkman 's weapons , the gun and the dagger , could have caused death . Leishman testified that Berkman fired his pistol at him once and Berkman asked , " Well , did I intend to kill you ? " " I think so " , Leishman replied , to which Berkman said , " Well that 's not true . I didn 't intend to do it . " Several witnesses told the jury that Berkman had visited the Carnegie offices three times . Berkman 's dagger and gun were placed into evidence , and the prosecution rested . 
 Berkman was asked to call his witnesses , but he had none . Instead , he asked to read his statement to the jury . A German translator was brought to the court . As an atheist , Berkman refused to be sworn in . He began reading his prepared statement . When the translator began to speak on his behalf to the jury , Berkman discovered the man was incompetent . He thought the man 's voice was " cracked and shrill " as he spoke to the jury in broken English . The effect of the statement , Berkman thought , was being lost . After about an hour , the judge told Berkman it was time to finish his oration . 
 Without leaving the jury box , the jurors found Berkman guilty on all charges . The judge gave Berkman the maximum sentence for each count : a total of 21 years in prison and one year in the workhouse , to be served consecutively . Berkman argued that he should only be sentenced for the attempt on Frick 's life , that the other charges were elements of the main crime of assault with the intent to kill , but the judge overruled his objection . In four hours , Berkman had been tried , convicted , and sentenced . He was brought to serve his sentence at Pennsylvania 's Western Penitentiary . 
 = = = Prison = = = 
 Within weeks of his arrival at prison , Berkman began planning his suicide . He tried to sharpen a spoon into a blade , but his attempt was discovered by a guard and Berkman spent the night in the dungeon . He thought about beating his head against the bars of his cell , but worried that his efforts might injure him but leave him alive . Berkman wrote a letter to Goldman , asking her to secure a dynamite capsule for him . A letter was smuggled out of the prison and arrangements were made for her to visit Berkman in November 1892 , posing as his sister . Berkman knew as soon as he saw Goldman that she had not brought the dynamite capsule . 
 Between 1893 and 1897 , the years when Bauer and Nold were also in the Western Penitentiary for their part in the assassination attempt , the three men surreptitiously produced 60 issues of a hand @-@ written anarchist newsletter by transferring their work from cell to cell . They managed to send the completed newsletters , which they called Prison Blossoms , to friends outside the prison . Participating in Prison Blossoms , initially written in German and later in English , helped Berkman improve his English . He developed a friendship with the prison chaplain , John Lynn Milligan , who was a strong advocate on behalf of the prison library . Milligan encouraged Berkman to read books from the library , a process that furthered his knowledge of English . 
 Berkman frequently clashed with the prison 's management over the mistreatment of his fellow prisoners . Sometimes he was put into solitary confinement , with one stay lasting 16 months . When Berkman smuggled reports of corruption and brutality outside the prison , resulting in an investigation , he was taken to the dungeon and put in a straitjacket . 
 Letters from friends were like lifelines to Berkman . " The very arrival of a letter is momentous , " he wrote . " It brings a glow into the prisoner 's heart to feel that he is remembered . " Goldman and anarchist Voltairine de Cleyre were regular correspondents , and other friends wrote frequently . 
 In 1897 , as Berkman finished the fifth year of his sentence , he applied to the Pennsylvania Board of Pardons . Having served as his own attorney , Berkman had failed to object to the trial judge 's rulings and thus had no legal basis for an appeal ; a pardon was his only hope for early release . The Board of Pardons denied his application in October 1897 . A second application was rejected in early 1899 . 
 Now an escape seemed like Berkman 's only option . The plan was to rent a house across the street from the prison and dig an underground tunnel from the house to the prison . Berkman had been given access to a large portion of the prison and had grown familiar with its layout . In April 1900 , a house was leased . The tunnel would be dug from the cellar of the house to the stable inside the prison yard . When the digging was complete , Berkman would sneak into the stable , tear open the wooden flooring , and crawl through the tunnel to the house . 
 Digging the tunnel turned out to be more difficult than expected . The soil was rocky , which forced the men to dig deeper than planned . There , they discovered a leaking gas main , which required the installation of special pumps to bring fresh air to the men . To hide the noise from the digging , one of the crew played piano and sang in the house while the others worked below . On July 5 , Berkman visited the prison stable , planning to make his escape . He was horrified to discover that the entrance was blocked by a large load of stones and bricks recently dumped for a construction project . 
 Three weeks later , some children playing in the street wandered into the yard of the now @-@ vacant house . One of them fell into the cellar and discovered the tunnel . While the prison 's Board of Inspectors was unable to identify the inmate involved in the escape attempt , the warden punished Berkman by sending him to solitary confinement for nearly a year . Days after he was released from solitary , Berkman tried to hang himself with a strip of his blanket . 
 Soon things began looking up for Berkman . He received word that his sentence had been reduced by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years , thanks to a new law . He also received his first visitor in nine years . A month later , Goldman was able to visit under an assumed name . The warden retired and his successor improved the prison for all prisoners . 
 Early in his incarceration , Berkman questioned whether two men could love one another . He was aware , as he later wrote , that incidents of rape or attempted rape took place " almost every week , yet no one has ever been taken to court ... on such charges " . Some of Berkman 's own friendships within the prison became physical . He became intimate with one prisoner , " Johnny " , when the two were confined to the dungeon . He discussed homosexuality with another prisoner , " George " , a formerly married physician who told Berkman about his own homosexual prison affair . 
 In 1905 , Berkman was transported from the Western Penitentiary to the Allegheny County Workhouse , where he spent the final 10 months of his sentence . He found conditions in the workhouse " a nightmare of cruelty , infinitely worse than the most inhuman aspects of the penitentiary . " The guards beat inmates for the slightest provocation , and one particularly sadistic guard shoved prisoners down the stairs . Berkman felt mixed emotions ; he was concerned about the friends he had made in the prison , he was excited about the prospect of freedom , and he was worried about what life as a free man would be like . 
 = = = Freedom = = = 
 Berkman was released from the workhouse on May 18 , 1906 , after serving 14 years of his sentence . He was met at the workhouse gates by newspaper reporters and police , who recommended that he leave the area . He took the train to Detroit , where Goldman met him . She found herself " seized by terror and pity " at his gaunt appearance . Later , at a friend 's house , Berkman felt overwhelmed by the presence of well @-@ wishers . He became claustrophobic and almost suicidal . Nevertheless , he agreed to a joint lecture tour with Goldman . 
 Back in New York after the tour , Berkman and Goldman tried to rekindle their intimate relationship , but each had lost passion for the other . Instead , Berkman was attracted to some of the younger women in the movement , including a teenager named Becky <unk> . 
 Berkman continued to suffer from depression and increasingly spoke about committing suicide . He began a new lecture tour , but when he failed to appear in Cleveland , concerned friends sent a telegram to Goldman in New York . She worried that he had killed himself . Anarchists across the country searched for Berkman in police stations , hospitals , and morgues . Even newspapers wondered where he was , speculating that he might have been kidnapped by Pittsburgh detectives , by Secret Service agents , or by " agents of millionaires " who opposed his message . Three days later , Berkman appeared in New York and contacted Goldman . He said the lecture tour had made him feel miserable . He had purchased a handgun in Cleveland with the intention of killing himself in a city where nobody knew him , but he was unable to complete the act . 
 After resting for several months , Berkman began to recover . He remained anxious about his lack of employment . He considered returning to his old job as a printer , but his skills had become obsolete in light of innovations in linotype machines . With Goldman 's encouragement , Berkman began to write an account of his prison years , Prison Memoirs of an Anarchist , and she invited him to become the editor of her journal , Mother Earth . He served as editor from 1907 to 1915 , and took the journal in a more provocative and practical direction , in contrast to the more theoretical approach which had been favored by the previous editor , Max <unk> . Under Berkman 's stewardship , circulation of Mother Earth rose as high as 10 @,@ 000 and it became the leading anarchist publication in the U.S. 
 = = = Ferrer Center = = = 
 Berkman helped establish the Ferrer Center in New York during 1910 and 1911 , and served as one of its teachers . The Ferrer Center , named in honor of Spanish anarchist Francisco Ferrer , included a free school that encouraged independent thinking among its students . The Ferrer Center also served as a community center for adults . 
 = = = The Ludlow massacre and the Lexington Avenue explosion = = = 
 In September 1913 , the United Mine Workers called a strike against coal @-@ mining companies in Ludlow , Colorado . The largest mining company was the Rockefeller family @-@ owned Colorado Fuel & Iron Company . On April 20 , 1914 , the Colorado National Guard attacked a tent colony of striking miners and their families and , during a day @-@ long fight , 26 people were killed . 
 During the strike , Berkman organized demonstrations in New York in support of the miners . In May and June , he and other anarchists led several protests against John D. Rockefeller , Jr . The protests eventually moved from New York City to Rockefeller 's home in Tarrytown , New York , and resulted in the beatings , arrests , and imprisonments of a number of anarchists . The strong police response to the Tarrytown protests led to a bomb plot by several Ferrer Center anarchists . 
 In July , three associates of Berkman — Charles Berg , Arthur Caron , and Carl Hanson — began collecting dynamite and storing it at the apartment of another conspirator , Louise Berger . Some sources , including Charles Plunkett , one of the surviving conspirators , say that Berkman was the chief conspirator , the oldest and most experienced member of the group . Berkman denied any involvement or knowledge of the plan . 
 At 9 a.m. on July 4 , Berger left her apartment for the Mother Earth offices . Fifteen minutes later a deadly explosion took place . The bomb had exploded prematurely , shaking the sixth story of Berger 's tenement building , wrecking the three upper floors and killing Berg , Caron , Hanson , and a woman , Marie Chavez , who apparently was not involved in the conspiracy . Berkman arranged the dead men 's funerals . 
 = = = The Blast and the Preparedness Day Bombing = = = 
 In late 1915 , Berkman left New York and went to California . In San Francisco the following year , he started his own anarchist journal , The Blast . Although it was published for just 18 months , The Blast was considered second only to Mother Earth in its influence among U.S. anarchists . 
 On July 22 , 1916 , a bomb exploded during the San Francisco Preparedness Day Parade , killing ten people and wounding 40 . Police suspected Berkman , although there was no evidence , and ultimately their investigation focused on two local labor activists , Thomas Mooney and Warren Billings . Although neither Mooney nor Billings were anarchists , Berkman came to their aid : raising a defense fund , hiring lawyers , and beginning a national campaign on their behalf . Mooney and Billings were convicted , with Mooney sentenced to death and Billings to life imprisonment . 
 Berkman arranged for Russian anarchists to protest outside the American embassy in Petrograd during the Russian Revolution , which led U.S. President Woodrow Wilson to ask California 's governor to commute Mooney 's death sentence . When the governor reluctantly did so , he said that " the propaganda in [ Mooney 's ] behalf following the plan outlined by Berkman has been so effective as to become world @-@ wide . " Billings and Mooney both were pardoned in 1939 . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 In 1917 the U.S. entered World War I and Congress enacted the Selective Service Act , which required all men between the ages of 21 and 30 to register for military conscription . Berkman moved back to New York , where he and Goldman organized the No Conscription League of New York , which proclaimed : " We oppose conscription because we are internationalists , anti @-@ militarists , and opposed to all wars waged by capitalistic governments . " The organization was at the forefront of anti @-@ draft activism , and chapters were established in other cities . The No Conscription League changed its focus from public meetings to disseminating pamphlets after police started disrupting the group 's public events in search of young men who had not registered for the draft . 
 Berkman and Goldman were arrested during a raid of their offices on June 15 , 1917 , during which police seized what The New York Times described as " a wagon load of anarchist records and propaganda material " . The pair were charged under Espionage Act of 1917 with " conspiracy to induce persons not to register " , and were held on $ 25 @,@ 000 bail each . 
 Berkman and Goldman defended themselves during their trial . Berkman invoked the First Amendment , asking how the government could claim to fight for " liberty and democracy " in Europe while suppressing free speech at home : 
 Will you proclaim to the world that you who carry liberty and democracy to Europe have no liberty here , that you who are fighting for democracy in Germany , suppress democracy right here in New York , in the United States ? Are you going to suppress free speech and liberty in this country , and still pretend that you love liberty so much that you will fight for it five thousand miles away ? 
 The jury found them guilty and Judge Julius M. Mayer imposed the maximum sentence : two years ' imprisonment , a $ 10 @,@ 000 fine , and the possibility of deportation after their release from prison . Berkman served his sentence in the Atlanta Federal Penitentiary , seven months of which were in solitary confinement for protesting the beating of other inmates . When he was released on October 1 , 1919 , Berkman looked " haggard and pale " ; according to Goldman , the 21 months Berkman served in Atlanta took a greater toll on him than his 14 @-@ year incarceration in Pennsylvania . 
 = = = Russia = = = 
 Berkman and Goldman were released at the height of the first U.S. Red Scare ; the Russian Revolutions of 1917 , combined with anxiety about the war , produced a climate of anti @-@ radical and anti @-@ foreign sentiment . The U.S. Justice Department 's General Intelligence Division , headed by J. Edgar Hoover and under the direction of Attorney General Alexander Mitchell Palmer , initiated a series of raids to arrest leftists . While they were in prison , Hoover wrote : " Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman are , beyond doubt , two of the most dangerous anarchists in this country and if permitted to return to the community will result in undue harm . " Under the 1918 Anarchist Exclusion Act , the government deported Berkman , who had never applied for U.S. citizenship , along with Goldman and more than two hundred others , to Russia aboard the Buford . 
 At a farewell banquet in Chicago , Berkman and Goldman were told the news of the death of Henry Clay Frick , whom Berkman had tried to kill more than 25 years earlier . Asked for a comment by a reporter , Berkman said Frick had been " deported by God " . 
 Berkman 's initial reaction to the Bolshevik revolution was enthusiastic . When he first heard of their coup , he exclaimed " this is the happiest moment of my life " , and he wrote that the Bolsheviks were the " expression of the most fundamental longing of the human soul " . Arrival in Russia stirred great emotions in Berkman , and he described it as " the most sublime day in my life " , surpassing even his release after 14 years in prison . 
 Berkman and Goldman spent much of 1920 traveling through Russia collecting material for a proposed Museum of the Revolution . As the pair traveled around the country , they found repression , mismanagement , and corruption instead of the equality and worker empowerment they had dreamed of . Those who questioned the government were demonized as counter @-@ revolutionaries , and workers labored under severe conditions . They met with Lenin , who assured them that government suppression of press liberties was justified . " When the Revolution is out of danger , " he told them , " then free speech might be indulged in " . 
 Strikes broke out in Petrograd in March 1921 when workers demonstrated for better food rations and more autonomy for their unions . Berkman and Goldman supported the strikers , writing : " To remain silent now is impossible , even criminal . " The unrest spread to the port of Kronstadt , where Trotsky ordered a military response . In the battle that ensued , 600 sailors were killed ; 2 @,@ 000 more were arrested ; and 500 to 1 @,@ 500 Soviet troops died . In the wake of these events , Berkman and Goldman decided there was no future in the country for them . Berkman wrote in his diary : 
 Gray are the passing days . One by one the embers of hope have died out . Terror and despotism have crushed the life born in October . ... Dictatorship is trampling the masses under foot . The Revolution is dead ; its spirit cries in the wilderness . ... I have decided to leave Russia . 
 Berkman and Goldman left the country in December 1921 . Berkman moved to Berlin and almost immediately began to write a series of pamphlets about the Russian Revolution . " The Russian Tragedy " , " The Russian Revolution and the Communist Party " , and " The Kronstadt Rebellion " were published during the summer of 1922 . 
 Berkman planned to write a book about his experience in Russia , but he postponed it while he assisted Goldman as she wrote a similar book , using as sources material he had collected . Work on Goldman 's book , My Two Years in Russia , was completed in December 1922 , and the book was published in two parts with titles not of her choosing : My Disillusionment in Russia ( 1923 ) and My Further Disillusionment in Russia ( 1924 ) . Berkman worked on his book , The Bolshevik Myth , throughout 1923 and it was published in January 1925 . 
 = = = Now and After = = = 
 Berkman moved to Saint @-@ Cloud , France , in 1925 . He organized a fund for aging anarchists including Sébastien Faure , Errico Malatesta , and Max Nettlau . He continued to fight on behalf of anarchist prisoners in the Soviet Union , and arranged the publication of Letters from Russian Prisons , which detailed their persecution . 
 In 1926 , the Jewish Anarchist Federation of New York asked Berkman to write an introduction to anarchism intended for the general public . By presenting the principles of anarchism in plain language , the New York anarchists hoped that readers might be swayed to support the movement or , at a minimum , that the book might improve the image of anarchism and anarchists in the public 's eyes . Berkman produced Now and After : The ABC of Communist Anarchism , first published in 1929 and reprinted many times since ( often under the title What Is Communist Anarchism ? or What Is Anarchism ? ) . Anarchist Stuart Christie wrote that Now and After is " among the best introductions to the ideas of anarchism in the English language " and historian Paul Avrich described it as " the clearest exposition of communist anarchism in English or any other language " . 
 = = = Final years and death = = = 
 Berkman spent his last years eking out a precarious living as an editor and translator . He and his companion , Emmy Eckstein , relocated frequently within Nice in search of smaller and less expensive quarters . Aronstam , who had changed his name to Modest Stein and attained success as an artist , became a benefactor , sending Berkman a monthly sum to help with expenses . In the 1930s his health began to deteriorate , and he underwent two unsuccessful operations for a prostate condition in early 1936 . After the second surgery , he was bed @-@ ridden for months . In constant pain , forced to rely on the financial help of friends and dependent on Eckstein 's care , Berkman decided to commit suicide . In the early hours of June 28 , 1936 , unable to endure the physical pain of his ailment , Berkman tried to shoot himself in the heart with a handgun , but he failed to make a clean job of it . The bullet punctured a lung and his stomach and lodged in his spinal column , paralyzing him . Goldman rushed to Nice to be at his side . Berkman recognized her but was unable to speak . He sank into a coma in the afternoon , and died at 10 o 'clock that night . 
 Goldman made funeral arrangements for Berkman . It had been his desire to be cremated and have his ashes buried in Waldheim Cemetery in Chicago , near the graves of the Haymarket defendants who had inspired him , but she could not afford the expense . Instead , Berkman was buried in a common grave in <unk> Cemetery in Nice . 
 Berkman died weeks before the start of the Spanish Revolution , modern history 's clearest example of an anarcho @-@ syndicalist revolution . In July 1937 , Goldman wrote that seeing his principles in practice in Spain " would have rejuvenated [ Berkman ] and given him new strength , new hope . If only he had lived a little longer ! " 
 = = = Books by Berkman = = = 
 Prison Memoirs of an Anarchist . New York : Mother Earth Publishing Association . 1912 . OCLC <unk> . 
 The Bolshevik Myth ( Diary 1920 @-@ 1922 ) . New York : Boni and Liveright . 1925 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Now and After : The ABC of Communist Anarchism . New York : Vanguard Press . 1929 . OCLC <unk> . 
 = = = Edited collections = = = 
 Berkman , Alexander , ed . ( 2005 ) . The Blast : Complete Collection of the Incendiary San Francisco Bi @-@ Monthly Anarchist Newspaper . Introduction by Barry Pateman . Oakland , Calif . : AK Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 08 @-@ 6 . 
 Berkman , Alexander ; et al . , eds . ( 2010 ) . The Tragic Procession : Alexander Berkman and Russian Prisoner Aid . Kate Sharpley Library and Alexander Berkman Social Club . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 90 @-@ 5 . 
 Berkman , Alexander ; Bauer , Henry ; Nold , Carl ( 2011 ) . Brody , Miriam ; Buettner , Bonnie , eds . Prison Blossoms : Anarchist Voices from the American Past . Cambridge , Mass . : Harvard University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Fellner , Gene , ed . ( 1992 ) . Life of an Anarchist : The Alexander Berkman Reader . New York : Four Walls Eight Windows . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 78 @-@ 6 . 
 = Maryland Route 410 = 
 Maryland Route 410 ( MD 410 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . Known for most of its length as East – West Highway , the highway runs 13 @.@ 92 miles ( 22 @.@ 40 km ) from MD 355 in Bethesda east to Pennsy Drive in Landover Hills . MD 410 serves as a major east – west commuter route through the inner suburbs on the north side of Washington , D.C. ( hence its name ) , connecting the commercial districts of Bethesda , Silver Spring , and Hyattsville ; in addition , the highway serves the industrial area of Landover Hills and the residential suburbs of Chevy Chase , Takoma Park , Chillum , <unk> and East Riverdale . The road connects many of the arterial highways and freeways that head out of Washington as well as transit hubs centered on stations of the Washington Metro in Bethesda , Silver Spring , Hyattsville , and New Carrollton , with additional connections to MARC and Amtrak . 
 MD 410 was originally built along mostly new alignment between Bethesda and Silver Spring in the late 1920s . The highway was extended east to Hyattsville in the mid @-@ 1930s . While the Montgomery County portion has not changed much in the ensuing decades , MD 410 has been realigned and extended multiple times within Prince George 's County . These changes include an extension along existing roads further into Hyattsville in the mid @-@ 1940s , a realignment within Hyattsville in the mid @-@ 1950s , an extension through Riverdale in the late 1960s , and the final extension to Landover Hills in the early 1990s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 410 is maintained by the Maryland State Highway Administration ( MDSHA ) except for three municipally maintained segments in the city of Takoma Park and a short stretch maintained by Prince George 's County in East Riverdale . The segments maintained by the city of Takoma Park run from Chestnut Avenue to near Cedar Avenue for 0 @.@ 17 miles ( 0 @.@ 27 km ) ; from Maple Avenue to MD 195 for 0 @.@ 27 miles ( 0 @.@ 43 km ) ; and from the second junction with MD 195 to Elm Avenue , the longest non – state maintained portion with a length of 0 @.@ 53 miles ( 0 @.@ 85 km ) . MD 410 is county maintained for 0 @.@ 35 miles ( 0 @.@ 56 km ) from the Baltimore – Washington Parkway to its turn onto Veterans Parkway in East Riverdale . The highway is a part of the National Highway System as a principal arterial for its entire length except for between US 50 and its eastern terminus at Pennsy Drive . 
 = = = Montgomery County = = = 
 MD 410 begins at a pair of junctions with MD 355 ( Wisconsin Avenue ) and MD 187 ( Old Georgetown Road ) on either side of Bethesda Station on the Washington Metro 's Red Line in downtown Bethesda . Westbound MD 410 ends at the intersection of two @-@ way MD 355 and the southern terminus of MD 187 , which begins one @-@ way northbound along Old Georgetown Road . Traffic from the southbound direction of MD 187 follows Woodmont Avenue and Montgomery Lane to the start of eastbound MD 410 at the intersection of MD 355 and Montgomery Avenue . MD 410 heads east as a one @-@ way pair — East – West Highway westbound and Montgomery Avenue eastbound — to the eastern edge of downtown Bethesda , where the two directions converge east of Bethesda @-@ Chevy Chase High School . From that intersection , which includes a U @-@ turn ramp from Montgomery Avenue to westbound East – West Highway , the state highway continues east as four @-@ lane undivided East – West Highway and crosses over the Capital Crescent Trail . 
 MD 410 follows the northern edge of the town of Chevy Chase and crosses <unk> Run , then follows the southern edge of Columbia Country Club to its intersection with MD 185 ( Connecticut Avenue ) . The highway leaves the town of Chevy Chase and passes through an unincorporated area of Chevy Chase , within which the highway meets the northern end of MD 186 ( Brookville Road ) and descends into the valley of Rock Creek . At the bottom of the hill , MD 410 intersects Jones Mill Road and Beach Drive , the main road through Rock Creek Park . The state highway crosses Rock Creek , passes to the north of Meadowbrook Park and leaves the valley as a four @-@ lane road with narrow median and flanking service roads . MD 410 reaches the top of the hill at Grubb Road and descends into the valley of a branch of Rock Creek . The highway becomes undivided at <unk> Drive and crosses the stream just west of the northern corner of the District of Columbia and its attendant boundary marker , then leaves the stream valley and ascends to an intersection with MD 390 ( 16th Street ) at the western edge of downtown Silver Spring . 
 MD 410 intersects MD 384 ( Colesville Road ) next to the headquarters of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and just south of Silver Spring Station , which serves the Washington Metro 's Red Line and the MARC Brunswick Line . The highway parallels CSX 's Metropolitan Subdivision and the Red Line southeast to a five @-@ way intersection with US 29 ( Georgia Avenue ) and 13th Street ; there is no direct access from eastbound MD 410 to northbound US 29 or from southbound US 29 to eastbound MD 410 . MD 410 continues east on three @-@ lane Burlington Avenue – two lanes westbound and one lane eastbound — to cross the rail and metro lines . At Fenton Street , the highway veers southeast onto two @-@ lane Philadelphia Avenue and enters the city of Takoma Park as it passes by the Takoma Park / Silver Spring campus of Montgomery College . MD 410 intersects MD 320 ( Piney Branch Road ) and has a four @-@ way stop at Holly Avenue next to Takoma Park Elementary School . The highway continues through an intersection with Maple Avenue next to the Takoma Park Library , then follows Philadelphia Avenue to its end at MD 195 ( Carroll Avenue ) at Takoma Junction . MD 410 runs concurrently with MD 195 for one block , then continues east along Ethan Allen Avenue , which the highway follows through a three @-@ way stop at Jackson Avenue to the eastern city limit of Takoma Park and the Montgomery — Prince George 's county line at MD 650 ( New Hampshire Avenue ) . 
 = = = Prince George 's County = = = 
 MD 410 's name becomes East – West Highway again as it heads east from MD 650 as a four @-@ lane undivided highway through the northern part of Chillum . The highway has frontage roads on either side of its crossing of Sligo Creek , then becomes divided ahead of its intersection with MD 212 ( Riggs Road ) . MD 410 briefly has six lanes as it heads southeast to Ager Road , which leads toward the West Hyattsville Station on the Washington Metro 's Green Line . MD 410 has a partial intersection with Ager Road ; the missing movements between MD 410 and Ager Road are made via 23rd Avenue to the east . MD 410 crosses Northwest Branch Anacostia River and enters the city of Hyattsville . The highway expands to six lanes as it passes between The Mall at Prince George 's and Prince George 's Plaza Station on the Green Line . East of University Town Center and the headquarters of the National Center for Health Statistics , MD 410 has a four @-@ way intersection with the northern end of MD 500 ( Queens Chapel Road ) and the southern end of Adelphi Road . 
 MD 410 continues east between Hyattsville to the south and the town of University Park to the north ; the south side of the six @-@ lane divided highway becomes flanked by the town of Riverdale Park ahead of its intersection with US 1 ( Baltimore Avenue ) . The highway fully enters Riverdale Park east of US 1 , where it reduces to four lanes and crosses over CSX 's Capital Subdivision , which carries MARC 's Camden Line . The Camden Line is accessed by the Riverdale railroad station within the Riverdale Park Historic District to the south , which contains the Riversdale Mansion . A tributary of Northeast Branch Anacostia River briefly runs within the median of the highway shortly before the highway crosses over Northeast Branch . MD 410 intersects MD 201 ( Kenilworth Avenue ) and leaves the town of Riverdale Park . The highway continues as Riverdale Road , a four @-@ lane road with center turn lane , through the unincorporated area of East Riverdale on its way to a diamond interchange with the Baltimore – Washington Parkway ( unsigned MD 295 ) . 
 MD 410 continues east on Riverdale Road then turns southeast onto Veterans Parkway , a four @-@ lane divided highway , while Riverdale Road continues toward New Carrollton . The highway briefly enters the city of New Carrollton around its intersection with MD 450 ( Annapolis Road ) . MD 410 continues south and intersects Ellin Road before passing through a diamond interchange with US 50 ( John Hanson Highway ) . The highway crosses over the Amtrak Northeast Corridor , MARC 's Penn Line , and the Washington Metro 's Orange Line . South of the railroad tracks , MD 410 reaches its eastern terminus at Pennsy Drive , which leads to Ardwick Ardmore Road and the primary entrance to New Carrollton Station , which serves as the eastern terminus of the Orange Line and hosts MARC and Amtrak service . Secondary access to the station is provided by Ellin Road north of US 50 . 
 = = History = = 
 The Bethesda – Silver Spring Highway was conceived in the late 1920s as a means of directly connecting the two inner suburbs on the north side of Washington . The highway was under construction between 1927 and 1929 and signed as MD 410 by 1930 . When completed , MD 410 extended between what was then US 240 in Bethesda and 16th Street in Silver Spring , which had been extended north from the District of Columbia in 1928 . Continuing to the present center of Silver Spring required heading south on 16th Street to Blair Portal , then east on Colesville Road , which had been extended to Blair Portal in 1927 , to Georgia Avenue . Most of MD 410 was built on a new alignment with the exception of the part between present day MD 186 and Jones Mill Road , which followed the old Brookville Road . 
 By 1933 , the new state highway was the busiest road in Montgomery County . The road , which became known as East – West Highway , was originally built with a width of 20 feet , but the heavy traffic led the Maryland State Roads Commission ( SRC ) , the predecessor of MDSHA , to suggest in 1934 that the road be widened to 40 feet in the near future . SRC also recommended extending East – West Highway through Silver Spring and Takoma Park to Hyattsville . By 1935 , the highway was extended along new alignment east from 16th Street to Takoma Park , then placed on Philadelphia Avenue and Ethan Allen Avenue within Takoma Park . The extension to MD 212 in Hyattsville was completed in 1936 . 
 After World War II , MD 410 was extended even further east and saw significant improvement on its extant sections . By 1946 , MD 410 was extended over Ager Road , Hamilton Street , 38th Avenue , and Jefferson Avenue , roads then designated MD 209 , to a new eastern terminus at US 1 in Hyattsville . In addition , the pre @-@ 1946 course saw completion of efforts to widen the road to 40 feet . The highway between Connecticut Avenue ( then MD 193 ) and Georgia Avenue ( US 29 ) was widened in 1946 and 1947 . The two segments between Wisconsin Avenue ( US 240 ) and Connecticut Avenue ( MD 193 ) and between MD 650 in Takoma Park and US 1 in Hyattsville were widened in 1950 . 
 Beyond minor improvements , MD 410 in Montgomery County has remained in much the same state since 1950 . The only major change was the highway being split onto a one @-@ way pair of streets in Bethesda in 1988 . The Prince George 's County section has seen more substantial changes over the intervening decades . The first major change in alignment occurred in 1956 , when MD 410 was completed on a new alignment as a four @-@ lane divided highway between Ager Road just east of MD 212 and MD 500 at what is now Adelphi Road . The state highway was subsequently extended east over what was previously MD 403 , known as Colesville Road , to US 1 in Riverdale . 
 The next change occurred between 1967 and 1970 , when MD 410 was extended as a four @-@ lane divided highway on a new alignment east past MD 201 to the Baltimore – Washington Parkway . This extension bypassed and replaced MD 412 between US 1 and the B @-@ W Parkway . The adjoining segment of MD 410 between MD 500 and US 1 was also upgraded to a multi @-@ lane divided highway by 1970 . Finally , MD 410 was extended east on Veterans Parkway past US 50 to its current terminus at Pennsy Drive when that section of highway was completed in 1991 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = = Auxiliary route = = 
 MD 410 has one former auxiliary route . MD <unk> was the designation for the 0 @.@ 25 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) portion of Belcrest Road between MD 500 and MD 410 in Hyattsville . The route was assigned by 1999 . MD <unk> was transferred to county maintenance in 2004 . 
 = Negro Casas = 
 José Casas Ruiz ( born January 10 , 1960 ) is a Mexican professional wrestler ( called a Luchador in Spanish ) and trainer working for Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre ( CMLL ) under the ring name Negro Casas . He is the son of former wrestler turned referee Pepe Casas , and part of the large Casas wrestling family ; brother of professional wrestlers El Felino and Heavy Metal and uncle of Puma , Tiger , Canelo Casas , Rocky Casas , Danny Casas and many more . 
 Casas has trained several wrestlers , including Mephisto , Kazushige <unk> , T.J. Perkins , Rocky Romero , and Ricky Marvin . Casas has worked all over the world , making appearances for the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) in the United States of America as well as touring with New Japan Pro Wrestling ( NJPW ) in Japan for over a decade . 
 In Mexico Casas has worked for CMLL since the 1990s but has also wrestled for the Universal Wrestling Association ( UWA ) , World Wrestling Association ( WWA ) and International Wrestling Revolution Group ( IWRG ) . In 2008 Negro Casas joined with Mr. Niebla and Heavy Metal to form the group La Peste Negra ( Spanish for " the Black Plague " ) , a group that would later be joined by El Felino . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Casas was born in 1960 , the son of professional wrestler Pepe " Tropi " Casas , and grew up around <unk> . Casas described his childhood as a happy and normal one , even though his father would be away from home for long stretches as he wrestled all over Mexico and the United States . Casas ' father first took him to a wrestling show when Casas was five years old , bringing him to an event across the border in the United States . Casas became hooked on wrestling from the moment he saw the first match , with his first idols being his father , Aníbal and El <unk> . Casas played football , soccer , volleyball and baseball while still in school and even started training in professional wrestling classes taught by his father and Raúl Reyes . José and his brothers , Heavy Metal and El Felino , often sat at ringside during their father 's matches , pretending to be upset or cry whenever their father looked like he was getting beat up in the ring , a ploy that their father had taught them to help gain crowd sympathy . 
 = = = Professional wrestling career = = = 
 Casas debut came in 1979 as a bit of a strange turn of events . José Casas was in an arena where his father was supposed to compete when the promoter told Casas that his father had not shown and that he needed the young Casas to fill in for him or he would have Pepe Casas banned from wrestling . Casas wrestled and won his first match using the ring name " Pepe Casas Jr . " , wearing street clothes only to discover Pepe Casas and Raúl Reyes waiting in the dressing room . The two had played a joke on Casas to see how he handled himself in the ring . Casas chose the name " Negro Casas " ( " Black Casas " ) as his ring name and decided not to wear a mask . In 1980 Casas worked a low card match at a " Coliseo <unk> " against an equally young Fuerza Guerrera , the match was so well liked by the audience that they threw money into the ring to show their appreciation . Promoter Paco Alonso even entered the ring and asked the crowd to show their appreciation for the match they just saw , earning both Negro Casas and Fuerza Guerrera a regular job with Empresa Mexicana de Lucha Libre ( EMLL ) . By 1984 Casas had begun working for Universal Wrestling Association , winning the UWA World Lightweight Championship from Black Terry on January 1 , 1984 . Casas held the championship for 301 days before losing it to El Hijo del Santo . The loss to El Hijo del Santo was part of a long running , very intense storyline between Casas and Hijo del Santo that drew favorable reviews and helped establish both wrestlers as future main eventers . The storyline included Hijo del Santo forcing Negro Casas to be shaved bald after losing a Luchas de Apuestas , or bet match . 
 In the late 1980s Negro Casas began working for the Mexican @-@ based World Wrestling Association ( WWA ) where he became the first man to hold the WWA Welterweight Championship , holding it from sometime in 1987 until he was defeated by Tornado Negro on April 14 , 1989 . Casas regained the title , but only held it briefly before losing again as he was leaving the WWA . Casas returned to the UWA in 1990 and on January 29 , 1991 , he won the UWA World Middleweight Championship from Super Astro . Casas held the title for 787 days , finally losing it to Último Dragón . 
 = = = Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre = = = 
 By the mid 1990s Casas worked regularly for CMLL and toured Japan several times a year , wrestling for New Japan Pro Wrestling ( NJPW ) . In April 1994 Casas took part in the first Super J @-@ Cup tournament ; he lost to Ricky Fuji in the first round . On December 1 , 1995 , Negro Casas defeated longtime rival Hijo del Santo in the finals of a tournament to crown a new NWA World Welterweight Championship . Casas held the title for over 200 days , rarely defending until he participated in a tournament to unify 8 lightweight titles in NJPW 's J @-@ Crown tournament . Casas put the Welterweight title on the line but lost to Shinjiro Otani in the first round . Casas and El Hijo del Santo resumed their feud in 1997 , culminating in another Lucha de Apuestas between the two . Negro Casas once again ended up on the losing side , losing two falls to one in the main event of the CMLL 63rd Anniversary Show . Negro Casas would later state that El Hijo del Santo was one of his favorite rivals and good friends backstage . Following the Apuesta loss Negro Casas and El Hijo del Santo began teaming together in 1998 and in early 1999 the team defeated Bestia Salvaje and Scorpio Jr. by disqualification , but refused to accept the CMLL World Tag Team Championship as they did not win by pinfall . After the refusal the title the two teams faced a few weeks later and this time Casas and Hijo del Santo won by pinfall to claim the title . The team reigned for over 400 days , until El Hijo del Santo left CMLL ; forcing Negro Casas to vacate the title . When El Hijo del Santo returned in 2001 the duo picked up where they left off by defeating Último Guerrero and Rey Bucanero to win the tag team championship once again . After 210 days and several title defenses Guerrero and Bucanero finally regained the titles , ending the third and final reign of the Casas / Hijo del Santo team . Following the loss of the tag team title Negro Casas began focusing on his singles career once again , winning the CMLL World Middleweight Championship from Emilio Charles Jr. on April 26 , 2004 . On August 28 , 2005 , Negro Casas became a double champion when he won the IWRG Intercontinental Trios Championship , teaming with his brothers El Felino and Heavy Metal to defeat Black Tiger III , Pentagon Black , and El Pantera to win the title . The trios title reign lasted 129 days , ended by the team of Cerebro Negro , Veneno , and Scorpio Jr . In 2006 Negro Casas was teamed up with CMLL 's rising star Místico , working together in a style very similar to Casas and Hijo del Santo . The two defeated Averno and Mephisto to win the CMLL Tag Team Championship , Casas ' fourth and Místico 's first , on April 14 , 2006 . On September 17 , 2006 , Negro Casas ' 874 day CMLL World Middleweight Championship reign ended at the hands of Averno . Casas and Místico lost the tag team titles to Último Guerrero and Dr. Wagner Jr. on July 13 , 2007 but quickly regained them a week later . The team of Último Guerrero and Atlantis finally dethroned the duo , keeping them away from the title in subsequent rematches . On November 11 , 2007 , Negro Casas won the IWRG Intercontinental Middleweight Championship by defeating Villano III in the finals of a tournament to find a new champion . Casas has not lost the title , but since CMLL and IWRG stopped working together in 2008 he is no longer promoted as the champion with the title technically being inactive . 
 = = = = La Peste Negra = = = = 
 In July 2008 Mr. Niebla returned to CMLL , forming a group with Negro Casas and Heavy Metal called La Peste Negra ( Spanish for " the Black Plague " ) , a Rudo group that had a more comical approach to wrestling . The trio started wearing large afro wigs , painting their faces black and dancing during their entrances and generally worked a less serious style of match than was unusual , especially for a serious wrestler like Negro Casas . On September 2 , 2008 , the last Casas brother , El <unk> turned Rudo as well and joined La Peste Negra . After Felino joined the group Heavy Metal was quietly phased out as he was not comfortable working the comedic style . Felino 's wife Princesa Blanca joined the group in early 2009 , turning Rudo to work with La <unk> , the turn led to Princesa Blanca winning the Mexican National Women 's Championship from Marcela on January 30 , 2009 . La Pesta Negra 's biggest triumph to date is Negro Casas ' title win over Místico that brought the CMLL World Welterweight Championship into the group . After the title win , La Peste Negra continued their feud with Místico and his various allies . The feud led to Místico and Negro Casas facing off in a Lucha de Apuesta on the CMLL 76th Anniversary Show , where Casas lost two falls to one and had his hair shaved off . After the match Místico challenged El Felino , Casas ' cornerman , to an Apuesta some time in the future . 
 On January 29 , 2010 , Negro Casas teamed up with La Máscara to participate in CMLL 's " Torneo Nacional de Pareja <unk> " ( " National Amazing Pairs tournament " ) , a tournament where CMLL teams up a Tecnico ( La Máscara ) and a Rudo ( Casas ) for a tournament . The two defeated El Texano Jr. and Rouge in the opening round , El Sagrado and Shocker in the second round , and Héctor Garza and Toscano in the semi @-@ final to earn a spot in the final of the tournament . On February 5 , 2010 , Casas and La Máscara lost to Máscara Dorada and Atlantis in the finals . On February 14 , 2010 , Casas defeated El Hijo del Fantasma to win the CMLL World Middleweight Championship for the second time . During most of April and into May Negro Casas <unk> with NJPW in Japan . On May 3 , 2010 Casas lost the CMLL World Middleweight title to Jushin Thunder Liger during NJPW 's Wrestling Dontaku 2010 show . On October 15 , 2010 , Charly Manson defeated Negro Casas in a Lucha de Apuesta to take his hair . On February 14 , 2012 , Casas defeated La Sombra to win the NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship for the first time . On March 2 at Homenaje a Dos Leyendas , Casas and Blue Panther wrestled to a draw in a Lucha de Apuesta and were , as a result , both shaved bald . On October 21 , Casas returned to NJPW , when he and Bushi entered the 2012 Super Jr . Tag Tournament as " Grupo Cibernetico " . The team was eliminated from the tournament in the first round by Suzuki @-@ gun ( Taichi and Taka Michinoku ) . On December 25 , 2012 , Negro Casas successfully defended the NWA Historic Welterweight Championship against Guerrero Maya Jr. on a special Christmas show in Arena Mexico after Maya Jr. had defeated Casas in a series of matches leading up to the show . In early 2013 Negro Casas and Guerrero Maya Jr. were teamed up for the 2013 CMLL Torneo Nacional de Parejas Increibles , a tournament where the concept was that rivals or at least wrestlers from opposite sides of the tecnico / rudo divide . The team lost in the first round to eventual tournament winners La Sombra and Volador Jr . On June 2 , Casas lost the NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship to Máscara Dorada , ending his reign at 475 days , the longest in the title 's history . On January 3 , 2014 , Casas defeated Titán in the finals to win the 2014 Leyenda de Plata . On February 18 , Casas , El Felino and Mr. Niebla defeated La Máscara , Rush and Titán to win the Mexican National Trios Championship . On June 13 , Casas and Shocker defeated La Máscara and Rush to win the CMLL World Tag Team Championship . On August 1 at El Juicio Final , Casas lost his hair to Rush in a Lucha de Apuestas . On April 26 , 2015 , La Peste Negra lost the Mexican National Trios Championship to Los Reyes de la Atlantida ( Atlantis , Delta and Guerrero Maya Jr . ) . On May 22 , Casas defeated Dragon Lee to win the 2015 Leyenda de Plata , his second in a row and third overall . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 José Casas is a member of an extensive wrestling family , founded by his father Pepe " Tropi " Casas and also consists of his brothers Erick , who wrestles as " Heavy Metal " and El Felino ( real name unrevealed ) , and a brother who is not a professional wrestler . Casas ' sister @-@ in @-@ law ( Felino 's wife ) is former Mexican National Women 's Champion Princessa Blanca . Casas ' wife is the daughter of a <unk> wrestling promoter that Casas once worked for , currently working for CMLL as well , using the ring name <unk> la <unk> . His two daughters are training in Olympic style wrestling , also hoping to turn professional one day . José Casas does not train his daughters , entrusting that task to Ringo Mendoza , Tony Salazar , Arturo Beristain and Franco Colombo . One of Casas ' daughters is married to professional wrestler Diamante who works for CMLL . Casas also has two nephews who work as Tiger and Puma , the sons of El Felino . Wrestler Canelo Casas is also credited with being a nephew of Negro Casas , but it is unclear if he is the son of Erick Casas or the son of one of their non @-@ wrestling brothers or sisters . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 La Casita ( Arm wrench inside cradle ) 
 <unk> ( Lariat ) 
 Scorpion <unk> 
 Signature moves 
 Arm trap crossface 
 Black Fantasy ( Matrix evasion ) 
 Black Pain ( Casas applies an Ankle lock and then drops and smashes the leg onto his knee ) 
 Jab 
 Kneeling jawbreaker 
 La Silla ( seated senton onto the shoulders of a standing opponent at ringside ) 
 Multiple kick variations : 
 4 : 40 <unk> ( Running corner drop to a seated opponent ) 
 Drop 
 Missile drop 
 <unk> a la <unk> ( Low @-@ angle drop to the opponent 's knee ) 
 <unk> 
 Shoot 
 Soccer 
 Spinning back 
 Multiple knife – edged chops & overhand slaps to the chest of a cornered opponent 
 Running ankle pick 
 Senton 
 Nickname 
 " El 4 : 40 " 
 Wrestlers trained 
 Mephisto 
 Kazushige <unk> 
 T.J. Perkins 
 Rocky Romero 
 Ricky Marvin 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre 
 CMLL World Middleweight Championship ( 2 times ) 
 CMLL World Tag Team Championship ( 6 times , current ) – with El Hijo del Santo ( 3 ) , Místico ( 2 ) , and Shocker ( 1 , current ) 
 CMLL World Trios Championship ( 1 time ) – with último Guerrero and Atlantis 
 CMLL World Welterweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Mexican National Trios Championship ( 1 time ) - with El Felino and Mr. Niebla 
 NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA World Welterweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Torneo Gran Alternativa ( 1994 ) – with Héctor Garza 
 Leyenda de Plata ( 2000 , 2014 , 2015 ) 
 Copa Bobby <unk> ( 2010 ) 
 International Wrestling Revolution Group 
 IWRG Intercontinental Middleweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 IWRG Intercontinental Trios Championship ( 1 time ) – with El Felino and Heavy Metal 
 Mexican Provincial Championships 
 Estado de Guerrero Lightweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Estado de México heavyweight championship ( 42 times ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked him # 33 of the 500 best singles wrestlers of the PWI 500 in 1999 
 PWI ranked him # 148 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the " PWI Years " in 2003 
 Universal Wrestling Association 
 UWA World Lightweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 UWA World Middleweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 World Wrestling Association 
 WWA World Welterweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame ( Class of 1996 ) 
 5 Star Match ( 1992 ) with Tim Patterson and Horace Boulder vs. El Hijo del Santo , Atsushi <unk> and Tarzan Goto on May 16 
 = = = Luchas de Apuestas record = = = 
 = Washington State Route 410 = 
 State Route 410 ( SR 410 , partially named the Chinook Scenic Byway , and also named the Stephen Mather Memorial Parkway ) is a 107 @.@ 44 @-@ mile ( 172 @.@ 91 km ) long state highway that traverses Pierce , King , and Yakima counties in the US state of Washington . It begins at an interchange with SR 167 in Sumner and travels southeast across the Cascade Range to a junction with U.S. Route 12 ( US 12 ) in Naches . While the western part of SR 410 is a freeway that serves built @-@ up , urban areas , the remainder of the route is a surface road that traverses mostly rural areas as it passes through the mountains . 
 The route starts as a limited @-@ access southerly bypass of Downtown Sumner , but becomes a surface road east of the city . Traveling eastward , the roadway serves Bonney Lake and Buckley , and crosses and eventually parallels the White River into Enumclaw and Greenwater . SR 410 enters the Mount Baker @-@ Snoqualmie National Forest and later heads into Mount Rainier National Park , crossing the Cayuse and Chinook passes , and leaves the park southeast along the American River into Wenatchee National Forest . SR 410 leaves the national forest and travels parallel to the Naches River to end in Naches , a city located west of Yakima . The Chinook Scenic Byway begins in Enumclaw and follows the highway through the two national forests and Mount Rainier National Park to US 12 in Naches . 
 Modern SR 410 was parts of various state wagon roads until 1926 when US 410 was established , extending from Aberdeen to Lewiston , Idaho . US 410 was decommissioned after US 12 was extended over the majority of the highway in 1967 , bypassing Olympia and Chinook Pass . A segment of former US 410 from Elma to Olympia became SR 8 and the Tacoma to Naches segment became SR 410 . The highway was later shortened to end in Sumner and was replaced by SR 167 from Tacoma to Sumner . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 410 begins as a freeway at an interchange with SR 167 near Downtown Sumner . The highway travels southeast across suburban areas , crossing the Stuck River and passing a partial cloverleaf interchange with Linden Drive , also named Traffic Avenue . After a second partial cloverleaf interchange with Thompson Avenue , SR 410 goes under a railroad trestle owned by BNSF Railway and used by Amtrak 's Cascades rail service , near the northern bank of the Puyallup River . After turning northeast , SR 410 encounters the western terminus of SR 162 by way of a diamond interchange . SR 162 travels north into Downtown Sumner as Valley Avenue and south over the Puyallup River towards Orting . The freeway section near the interchange was the busiest recorded part of SR 410 in 2008 with a daily average of 59 @,@ 000 motorists using the freeway . Continuing northeast , SR 410 connects to 166th Avenue and turns southeast as an undivided highway into the community of Bonney Lake . East of Bonney Lake , the roadway heads east , passing two shopping centers before entering Buckley and intersecting SR 165 . In Buckley , the street travels northeast through Downtown and turns north to cross the White River and enter King County . 
 After leaving Pierce County , the highway travels northeast through rural areas into Enumclaw and passes Enumclaw High School before turning east and being renamed Roosevelt Avenue . As Roosevelt Avenue , the street intersects Griffin Avenue , also designated SR 164 , which travels northwest to SR 169 and Auburn . The roadway , now named the Chinook Scenic Byway , passes by the King County Fairgrounds and Enumclaw King County Park . Leaving Enumclaw in a southeastern direction , SR 410 begins to parallel the White River upriver into Federation Forest State Park , a 619 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 51 km2 ; 0 @.@ 967 sq mi ) state park consisting of old growth evergreen forests . The highway crosses the Greenwater River , northeast of its confluence with the White River , and re @-@ enters Pierce County . 
 The bridge ends in the community of Greenwater , named for the river , where the roadway encounters Forest Road 70 , which has been proposed to become SR 168 over Naches Pass as an alternative to the Chinook Scenic Byway . From Greenwater , the road travels south alongside the White River into Mount Baker @-@ Snoqualmie National Forest , passing Ranger Creek State Airport , a state @-@ owned airport that is open in the summer and early fall . The byway travels south into Mount Rainier National Park . SR 410 is closed at the gate to Morse Creek , about 5 miles east of the Chinook Pass Summit during the winter and early spring due to high wind , limited cell service and avalanche danger . It intersects SR 123 at Cayuse Pass . SR 410 turns east at the intersection and heads through a series of hairpin turns , passing <unk> Lake , to Chinook Pass . 
 Chinook Pass is the border between Pierce and Yakima counties and Mount Rainier National Park and the Wenatchee National Forest . The pass is also where the highway crosses the Pacific Crest Trail , a National Scenic Trail that was completed in 1993 . East of Chinook Pass , the roadway begins to parallel the American River northeast to follow the Little Naches River , which becomes the Naches River . After a junction with the other end of the proposed SR 168 , named Little Naches Road , the highway exits the Wenatchee National Forest and enters Naches . The byway ends at US 12 in Naches near the Naches Selah Canal . 
 = = History = = 
 The first portion of SR 410 that was defined under law to be built by the state of Washington was a state wagon road that extended from a county road in King County to a county road near Naches . The road ran up alongside the White River until it reached the summit of the Cascades and continued traveling down parallel to the American River before ending at the county road connecting to Naches . This road was approved and built in 1897 , making it one of the oldest state roads in Washington state . In 1905 , the road became known as State Road 1 and was incorporated into the first state highway system . By 1907 , the road was named the White River – Natches Road and was shortened to end at Cedar Springs . The rest of the road was transferred to State Road 5 , called the Cowlitz – Natches Road , which ran from Napavine to Naches . 
 In 1913 , the state highway system was adjusted again , and several new roads were added to the system , including parts of what would become US 410 . The Olympic Highway traveled around the Olympic Peninsula and a section from Aberdeen to Olympia was later used as part of US 410 . The Pacific Highway would later have a brief concurrency with US 410 from Olympia to Tacoma , and US 410 would later connect to the National Park Highway in Tacoma and follow it to Buckley , where State Road 5 , now a secondary highway maintained by the counties , began . From the end of State Road 5 in Naches , the Inland Empire Highway is concurrent with the future US 410 to Dayton , where a branch of the highway travels to Clarkston . State Road 5 became the McClellan Pass Highway in 1919 and was aligned further south to Chinook Pass . The McClellan Pass Highway was renamed the Naches Pass Highway in 1921 to reflect the realignment in 1919 . Despite the name , the road did not cross Naches Pass , as no highway ever has . 
 In 1923 , the state highway system was restructured completely , incorporating numbers instead of names . The Olympic Highway became State Road 9 , the Pacific Highway became State Road 1 , the National Park Highway absorbed the Naches Pass Highway and remained State Road 5 , and the Inland Empire Highway became State Road 3 , but its branch from Dayton to Clarkston remained a branch of the now non @-@ existent Inland Empire Highway . A system of national highways that improved on the concept of auto trails was formed in late 1925 . The final plan for the system — which became the U.S. routes — was approved on November 11 , 1926 . One of the routes included in the plan was US 410 , which extended from US 101 in Aberdeen to US 95 in Lewiston , Idaho . Parts of US 410 were concurrent with other new highways , including US 99 from Olympia to Tacoma and US 97 in Yakima . In 1937 , the state highway system changed to a primary and secondary system . US 410 remained the same , but its concurrent state highways had their designations changed by the state . State Road 9 became Primary State Highway 9 ( PSH 9 ) , State Road 1 and US 99 became PSH 1 , State Road 5 became PSH 5 , State Road 3 became PSH 3 , and the Inland Empire Highway branch from Dayton to Clarkston became a branch of PSH 3 . 
 In 1964 , Washington unveiled a new numbering system for highways . <unk> with state primary state highways would be repealed in 1970 and US 410 would be a non @-@ concurrent highway . On June 20 , 1967 , US 12 was extended west from Lewiston , Idaho , over White Pass to Aberdeen , eliminating most of the original route of the highway . The remaining sections were split amongst other routes . The segment from Elma to Olympia became State Route 8 ( SR 8 ) . Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) took the Olympia – Tacoma segment , and the Tacoma – Naches segment became SR 410 . The last reassurance markers for US 410 were taken down by December 1967 . 
 Originally , SR 410 passed through downtown Puyallup and Sumner , following several surface streets ( including Main Avenue in Puyallup and Traffic Avenue and Main Street in Sumner ) across the two cities . In the late 1960s , construction began on a limited @-@ access bypass of the two city centers . SR 410 was moved onto the new freeway by 1972 . In 1973 , SR 410 was shortened to its current length after SR 167 was extended to Tacoma . On October 11 , 2009 , a massive landslide buried about 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) of SR 410 west of Naches in the Nile Valley . The landslide also blocked off the Naches River and caused warnings of severe flooding . A detour was set up on Nile Road that was for residential use only until October 20 . SR 410 was permanently rerouted onto Nile Road sometime afterward , and the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) completed paving on the new segment of SR 410 on November 20 . After three years , SR 410 was re @-@ routed back to the east side of the Naches River along the toe of the landslide with a permanent , 55 @-@ mph route opened in August 2012 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Hotel Chevalier = 
 Hotel Chevalier is a 2007 American @-@ French short film written and directed by Wes Anderson and released in 2007 . Starring Jason Schwartzman and Natalie Portman as former lovers who reunite in a Paris hotel room , the 13 @-@ minute film acts as a prologue to Anderson 's 2007 feature The Darjeeling Limited . It was shot on location in a Parisian hotel by a small crew and self @-@ financed by Anderson , who initially intended it to be a stand @-@ alone work . Its first showing was at the Venice Film Festival première of the feature film on September 2 , 2007 , and it made its own debut later that month at Apple Stores in four American cities . The day after its première , it was made available for free from the iTunes Store for one month , during which it was downloaded more than 500 @,@ 000 times . The film garnered near @-@ universal critical acclaim from reviewers who compared it favorably with The Darjeeling Limited and praised its richness , poignancy , and careful construction . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a hotel lobby , the concierge answers a phone call from one of the guests ' rooms . A man ( Jason Schwartzman ) lies on a hotel bed in a yellow bathrobe , watching the black @-@ and @-@ white American war film Stalag 17 and reading the newspaper . After ordering room service from the concierge in broken French , he receives a call from a woman whose voice he recognizes . She tells him she is on her way from the airport and asks for his room number . Despite objecting that he did not tell her she could come , the man consents nevertheless . He then hurriedly attempts to tidy the room – pausing to play the opening bars of the song " Where Do You Go To ( My Lovely ) ? " by Peter <unk> on his stereo system – and runs a bath . 
 The man is again lying on the bed , now in a gray suit . Hearing a knock , he starts the song playing again before opening the door to a woman ( Natalie Portman ) . After staring at him for several seconds , the woman breaks the silence by asking what music is playing . Receiving no response , she steps into the room and presents the man with a bouquet of flowers . When she moves to kiss him on the mouth , he turns his head away and they embrace instead . He closes the door and asks how she found him ; she replies that it " wasn 't actually that hard " . She moves around the room browsing through his possessions , brushes her teeth with his toothbrush and declines to take the bath he had run for her . 
 Stepping back into the bedroom , the woman turns to face the man and confronts him , asking slowly " what the fuck is going on ? " He motions to her to join him on the bed and at her prompting , he reveals in the ensuing conversation that he has been living in the hotel room for " more than a month " , and that he had left to escape their relationship . They lie back on the bed looking at one another before being interrupted by the arrival of room service . Once alone again , the two kiss and the man begins to undress the woman . They have an uncomfortable exchange about not having slept with other people and when he notices bruises on her arm after undressing her further , the woman chooses not to comment on them . Lying on top of him , she tells the man that she does not want to lose his friendship , that she loves him and never meant to hurt him . He responds coldly that he " will never be [ her ] friend " , but holds her when she embraces him . " Where Do You Go To ( My Lovely ) ? " starts again and the man offers to show the woman his view of Paris . 
 The woman is perched against an <unk> , the man approaching and covering her naked body with the yellow bathrobe , and the two moving towards the window . After they step out on the balcony , the man draws a toothpick from his pocket and hands it to her with an upwards nod , which she reciprocates . After looking out for another few seconds she clasps his neck lightly and they step back inside . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 Director Wes Anderson first approached actors Schwartzman and Portman about Hotel Chevalier in 2005 . Schwartzman and Anderson had previously worked on Rushmore ( 1998 ) , Anderson 's cult second feature , and had been living together in Schwartzman 's Paris apartment in the months leading up to the shoot . Portman was approached after the director obtained her email address from Scott Rudin , producer of 2004 's Closer in which she starred . The actors appeared for free , and Anderson financed the remainder of the production himself . 
 It was filmed at the Hôtel Raphael in Paris , on Avenue Kléber , two blocks south @-@ southwest of the Arc de Triomphe . The Hôtel Raphael had previously been used as a setting for the films Love in Paris ( 1996 ) and Place Vendôme ( 1998 ) . It was shot by a crew of 15 in Panavision and used props from Anderson 's apartment . Filming took two and a half days , and editing ( done on Anderson 's computer ) another week . Despite his use of a wardrobe from prestigious fashion designer Marc Jacobs and a handmade suitcase from Louis Vuitton , the director described the production as " like making a student film " . 
 Anderson initially intended it to be a stand @-@ alone short film , but shortly before filming commenced , he realized that Schwartzman 's character bore a close resemblance to one of the protagonists of a feature film he was writing at the time . That film would begin production a year later as The Darjeeling Limited . Chevalier takes place two weeks before Schwartzman 's character ( named Jack Whitman in the feature ) joins his two older brothers on a journey in India in Darjeeling . The dialogue between the characters at the end of Chevalier is recounted by Schwartzman 's character to his brothers at the close of the feature film , in the form of an excerpt from a short story he has composed . Portman 's character has a brief cameo in the feature . Fox Searchlight Pictures , the studio that backed Darjeeling , was unaware of the short until the feature had been made and claimed to have no financial interest in it . 
 = = Release = = 
 Hotel Chevalier was screened as part of the program at the world première of The Darjeeling Limited at the 64th Annual Venice Film Festival on September 2 , 2007 . The short had its own première at Apple Stores in New York City , Chicago , San Francisco and Santa Monica , California , on September 25 . Anderson , Schwartzman and Portman appeared at the New York screening in SoHo , after which they held a questions @-@ and @-@ answers session with the audience . The short was made available the following day as a free download from Apple 's iTunes Store . On September 28 , it preceded the showing of the feature on the opening night of the 2007 New York Film Festival . A press release posted before the première described the short as " the brief coda to a doomed romance and the prologue to The Darjeeling Limited " . 
 The film was withdrawn from iTunes after having been available for download for a month . Although it had been dismissed by USA Today columnist Susan Wloszczyna before its iTunes release as an amuse @-@ bouche that was " destined to be a mere footnote " , it was downloaded nearly 500 @,@ 000 times during its run , and received wide acclaim . Following its withdrawal from iTunes , the short was distributed in theaters as the prologue to the feature @-@ length film . Although The New York Times reported in October 2007 that distributor Fox Searchlight Pictures intended to promote Chevalier as a competitor for the Best Live Action Short Film of the Academy Awards , it was not among that year 's nominations . It was included as an extra feature on the Darjeeling 2008 DVD release , and Anderson 's screenplay for the short was published in the Winter 2007 issue of the literary magazine Zoetrope : All @-@ Story . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Along with being one of the year 's most discussed short films , Hotel Chevalier attracted considerable critical praise , with reviewers comparing it favorably to The Darjeeling Limited . Entertainment Weekly 's Gary Susman described it as " an exquisite short story where we learn not much but exactly enough about these two characters " , adding that " Chevalier sees Anderson working in his customary jewel @-@ box / dollhouse mode , but the form and length really suit each other here . " In New York Press , Armand White judged the short " moving and genuinely contemporary " , citing its " lost @-@ girl poignancy " . The film drew some attention for co @-@ star Natalie Portman 's extended nude scene , and for her character 's bruised body . Portman expressed disappointment at this focus , saying " It really depressed me that half of every review ... was about the nudity " . The episode made the actress reconsider the wisdom of this aspect of her performance , and she subsequently swore off nude appearances in film . 
 While The Darjeeling Limited received generally positive reviews , with review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes showing that 68 % of critics gave the film positive reviews , many of the positive reviews for Hotel Chevalier tended to combine praise of Chevalier with subtle shots at Darjeeling . Portman 's performance was praised by TIME reviewer Richard Corliss , who declared her to be " a comic actress in fresh bloom " in the " beguiling vignette " , and expressed his wish that her role in Darjeeling had been greater . The feature , he felt , lacked " the feeling and wit of the short film " . Salon.com 's Stephanie Zacharek concurred , stating that " the untold story of Hotel Chevalier is 10 times more interesting , and infinitely richer , than the one told outright in The Darjeeling Limited " , and calling the short " very close to perfect " . The Guardian columnist Danny Leigh contrasted the lukewarm reception of the feature among bloggers and critics with the " genuine ardour " that greeted the " perfectly measured narrative " of Chevalier . He proposed that the constraints of the short @-@ film format suited Anderson , whose trademark deadpan humor , idiosyncratic set designs and choice of soundtrack inclined to exhaust the viewers ' patience in a feature @-@ length work . A. O. Scott of The New York Times hailed Chevalier as " a small gem " in comparison to the " overstuffed suitcase " of the feature , and wrote that " It is worth seeking out , not only because it fleshes out part of the story of the Whitman brothers but also because , on its own , it is an almost perfect distillation of Mr. Anderson 's vexing and intriguing talents , enigmatic , affecting and wry . " 
 = Polikarpov I @-@ 5 = 
 The Polikarpov I @-@ 5 was a single @-@ seat biplane which became the primary Soviet fighter between its introduction in 1931 through 1936 , after which it became the standard advanced trainer . Following Operation Barbarossa , which destroyed much of the Soviet Air Forces ( VVS ) , surviving I @-@ 5s were equipped with four machine guns and bomb racks and pressed into service as light ground @-@ attack aircraft and night bombers in 1941 . They were retired in early 1942 as Soviet aircraft production began to recover and modern ground @-@ attack aircraft like the Ilyushin Il @-@ 2 became available . A total of 803 built ( including 3 prototypes ) . 
 = = Development = = 
 The 1928 Five @-@ Year Plan ordered the Tupolev design bureau to develop a mixed @-@ construction ( metal and wood / fabric ) biplane fighter powered by a Bristol Jupiter VII engine with the first prototype completed by 1 September 1929 . The new fighter was designated I @-@ 5 ( Istrebitel ' — Fighter ) , but had the internal Tupolev designation of ANT @-@ 12 . Concurrently , Nikolai Nikolaevich Polikarpov 's group was tasked with creating a wood @-@ construction aircraft designated as the Polikarpov I @-@ 6 to the same specification . The I @-@ 5 design , begun by Pavel Sukhoi , under the supervision of Andrei Tupolev , lagged because the Tupolev bureau was preoccupied with large bombers . As the result the I @-@ 5 and I @-@ 6 projects were unified in 1929 under Polikarpov 's leadership , although neither project met its specified completion date . 
 Nikolai Polikarpov was arrested by the OGPU in September 1929 for the crime of industrial sabotage for these failures and sentenced to death , although this was commuted to ten years imprisonment in a labor camp . In December 1929 the OGPU gathered a number of aircraft engineers together at <unk> prison , including Polikarpov , and formed the Internal Prison Design Bureau ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> — KB VT ) under the leadership of Dmitry Pavlovich Grigorovich . The KB VT was transferred to quarters on the grounds of Factory ( Zavod ) Nr. 30 in Moscow @-@ <unk> in early 1930 . Shortly afterwards Polikarpov replaced Grigorovich as the head designer when his concept for the I @-@ 5 was approved by the OGPU . The full @-@ scale mock @-@ up was approved on 28 March 1930 and the first prototype , designated VT @-@ 11 ( <unk> <unk> — Internal Prison ) , was completed a month later . 
 It made its first flight on 30 April 1930 and was fitted with an imported supercharged 450 @-@ horsepower ( 340 kW ) Jupiter VII . It was painted in silver with a red cheat line ; a red " VT " was superimposed on the red star on the rudder . The second prototype , known as the VT @-@ 12 , had a Jupiter VI engine , and took to the air on 22 May , bearing the name " Klim Voroshilov . " The two prototypes also differed in minor details regarding the shape of the tail and the construction of the landing gear . All this meant a slight difference in weight and performance between the two prototypes was present , with the second being slightly heavier and faster , while the first had a slight range advantage and a higher service ceiling . The third prototype , designated as the VT @-@ 13 and inscribed with " A Gift for the <unk> Congress of the Party " , was powered by a 600 @-@ horsepower ( 450 kW ) Soviet @-@ built M @-@ 15 engine with a NACA cowling , but this proved to be unreliable and was not put into production . 
 The second prototype passed its State acceptance trials on 13 August 1931 and was ordered into production a month later on 13 September . One problem noted during the trials was a tendency to make an uncontrolled 180 ° turn when landing in light winds . <unk> the landing gear by 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) and moving them 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) cured the problem . The engineer who suggest the change was awarded the Order of the Red Star for his ingenuity . Ten pre @-@ production aircraft had already been ordered and they were assembled between August and October . They all had imported engines fitted , but trialled various small improvements for the production aircraft that included cooling vents for the crankcase , introduction of a pitot tube and static vent in the starboard upper wing , a faired headrest for the pilot , and a metal propeller whose pitch could be adjusted on the ground . 
 = = Design = = 
 The I @-@ 5 was a single @-@ seat biplane with staggered wings in a sesquiplane configuration with fixed landing gear and a tailskid . The aircraft was of mixed construction , with the fuselage being made of a framework of welded steel tubes covered by a fabric skin over the rear fuselage , with the front fuselage section being covered by detachable duralumin panels as far back as the rear of the cockpit . There were also detachable panels allowing easy access to the tailskid shock absorber . The fabric skin was laced for tightness and the seams were covered with calico . A fireproof bulkhead separated the 165 litres ( 36 imp gal ; 44 US gal ) fuel tank from the engine and a fire extinguisher was fitted with outlets to the fuel pump , inlet pipe and carburetor . The conventional landing gear was connected by a one @-@ piece axle and some aircraft were fitted with teardrop @-@ shaped spats covering the wheels . Initially the tailskid was fixed , but later aircraft had smaller skids that moved in concert with the rudder . Rubber rings were used as shock absorbers on the landing gear . 
 The wings were built with two spars . The upper wing was made in three parts , with the middle section being of duralumin and the outer ones being made of wood . The wooden lower wings were built in single sections , using a Göttingen @-@ 436 profile . The duralumin N @-@ type struts that separated the wings , and attached the upper wing to the fuselage , had a teardrop profile and were reinforced with steel bracing wires . Laced lacquered fabric covered the empennage and wings , except for the roots of the lower wings which were covered in plywood and the leading edges of the wings were skinned in duralumin for the first 150 cm ( 59 in ) . <unk> were fitted only to the upper wing . All movable control surfaces and the tail section were built with doped fabric over metal framing . <unk> wires above and below the tail were fitted on the prototypes , but production aircraft replaced the lower wires with a strut on each side . The horizontal tail was offset 3 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 14 in ) to port to compensate for the engine 's torque , but it could be adjusted on the ground . 
 Some early production aircraft had imported Bristol Jupiter VI engines with a metal cowling , but the bulk of the production aircraft used the M @-@ 22 license @-@ built copy , both of 480 horsepower ( 358 kW ) , with a Townend ring . Early aircraft usually had a fixed @-@ pitch wooden propeller with a diameter of 2 @.@ 9 meters ( 9 ft 6 in ) , but these were replaced by a 2 @.@ 7 meters ( 8 ft 10 in ) duralumin propeller without a spinner that could have its pitch adjusted on the ground . 
 Two synchronized 7 @.@ 62 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 300 in ) PV @-@ 1 machine guns were fitted in the fuselage with 600 rounds apiece with an OP @-@ 1 telescopic sight . It was hoped to fit another pair , but the extra weight adversely affected the aircraft 's performance during tests . Two small Der @-@ 5 underwing bomb racks were fitted that could carry one 10 @-@ kilogram ( 22 lb ) bomb apiece . Beam @-@ type bomb racks were evaluated on the I @-@ 5 that could carry a pair of 250 @-@ kilogram ( 551 lb ) bombs , but these had such adverse effects on its performance that they were rejected for service use . One of the tests with these racks had the aircraft diving down upon the target ; the first example of dive bombing in the Soviet Union . The I @-@ 5 was also used to evaluate the accuracy of the RS @-@ 82 rocket , although they are not known to have been used by the aircraft in service . 
 I @-@ 5s called up during the emergency in 1941 were converted for use as fighter @-@ bombers by adding two more machine guns , and some aircraft were fitted with the heavy bombs that had been rejected earlier . The ground @-@ attack version is sometimes referred to as the I @-@ <unk> . 
 Test pilot Mark <unk> described the flying qualities of the I @-@ 5 thus : " After flying it I was convinced that the I @-@ 5 is quite a handful , a capricious aircraft . However , if you are careful with the controls and do not offend the machine with rough actions , it will not depart controlled flight . " 
 = = Operational history = = 
 54 I @-@ 5s were delivered to the VVS by 1 October 1931 , and 66 by the end of the year . These were all aircraft from Zavod Nr. 1 at <unk> , but Zavod Nr. 21 in <unk> began deliveries the following year . It delivered ten in 1932 , 321 in 1933 and 330 in 1934 . Zavod Nr. 1 delivered 76 in 1932 before beginning production of the Heinkel HD 37 as the I @-@ 7 . The I @-@ 5 was first delivered to units in the Leningrad , Ukraine and Transbaikal Military Districts and comprised 20 % of the VVS 's fighter force by the end of 1932 . During 1933 deliveries began to units in the Far Eastern , Belorussian and Moscow Military Districts and they comprised 40 % of the fighter strength by the end of the year . By the end of 1934 most of the Polikarpov I @-@ 3s and Tupolev I @-@ 4s had been replaced and deliveries had begun to Naval Aviation . The I @-@ 5 began to be replaced by the Polikarpov I @-@ 15 in 1936 , and was completely phased out from front @-@ line use by the end of 1937 , but continued to be employed as an advanced trainer . 
 Following the German Invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941 , the heavy losses of front @-@ line aircraft endured by the VVS together with the disruption of aircraft production resulted in I @-@ 5s being removed from training units and returned to combat service as ground @-@ attack aircraft or night bombers until early 1942 . Some I @-@ 5s were used by the 605th and <unk> Fighter Regiments ( Istrebitel <unk> <unk> Polki ( IAP ) ) during the defence of Moscow as night bombers until re @-@ equipping in February 1942 . The 2nd Ground Attack Regiment ( <unk> <unk> Polki ( ShAP ) ) was raised in September 1941 in the Crimea from reservists and the Kachin Flying School . By 10 October thirty @-@ two I @-@ 5s were on hand , although attrition had reduced them to sixteen serviceable . They were down to a total of a dozen aircraft by 18 October . They served until 1 February 1942 when the regiment was withdrawn for conversion to Ilyushin Il @-@ 2s and redesignated as the 766th ShAP . The 11th ShAP was raised by the Air Force of the Black Sea Fleet on 22 September 1941 . On 18 October it mustered eighteen serviceable and fifteen unserviceable I @-@ 5s , although this was reduced to eleven serviceable and eight unserviceable aircraft by 7 November . It kept the I @-@ 5s in service until 1 February 1942 when the regiment was reorganized . 
 = = Variants = = 
 The I @-@ 5 was involved in tests of the Zveno project where a Tupolev TB @-@ 3 heavy bomber carried three I @-@ 5s as parasite fighters . One I @-@ 5 was carried was on each wing and a third over the fuselage . Ramps were used to get the wing @-@ mounted aircraft to their places , but the fuselage @-@ mounted aircraft had to be lifted by hand . This was so cumbersome that they were generally used solely as an extra powerplant for the TB @-@ 3 later in the program . The aircraft used in these trials used the longer landing gear with smaller tires originally used in the prototypes . 
 A two @-@ seat conversion trainer , designated the I @-@ <unk> ( Uchebno @-@ <unk> Istrebitel ' — Fighter Trainer ) , was built by one of the factories . Only about twenty are believed to have been built . The cockpit was moved back and a second one inserted in front of it . 
 = = Users = = 
 Soviet Union 
 VVS 
 Naval Aviation 
 = = Specifications = = 
 Data from Gordon and Dexter , Polikarpov 's Biplane Fighters , p . 22 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 
 Length : 6 @.@ 78 m ( 22 ft 3 in ) 
 Upper wingspan : 10 @.@ 24 m ( 33 ft 7 in ) 
 Lower wingspan : 7 @.@ 4 m ( 24 ft 3 in ) 
 Wing area : 21 @.@ 3 m2 ( 229 sq ft ) 
 Airfoil : Göttingen @-@ 436 
 Empty weight : 934 kg ( 2 @,@ 059 lb ) 
 Gross weight : 1 @,@ 355 kg ( 2 @,@ 987 lb ) 
 Fuel capacity : 165 
 Powerplant : 1 × Shvetsov M @-@ 22 9 @-@ cylinder , single @-@ row radial engine , 358 kW ( 480 hp ) 
 Propellers : 2 @-@ bladed duralumin , 2 @.@ 7 m ( 8 ft 10 in ) diameter 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 278 km / h ( 173 mph ; 150 kn ) at sea level 
 Range : 660 km ( 410 mi ; 356 nmi ) 
 Service ceiling : 7 @,@ 500 m ( 24 @,@ 606 ft ) 
 Time to altitude : 1 @.@ 6 minutes to 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) 
 Horizontal turn time : 10 sec 
 Armament 
 Guns : 2 × 7 @.@ 62 @-@ mm PV @-@ 1 machine guns 
 Bombs : 2 × 22 @-@ lb ( 10 @-@ kg ) 
 = A Very Gaga Holiday = 
 A Very Gaga Holiday is a live EP released by Lady Gaga , containing songs performed at the ABC Christmas special A Very Gaga Thanksgiving . It was made available for purchase in the US on November 22 , 2011 , exclusively on the iTunes Store and Amazon , and on November 26 in the rest of the world . The EP is made up of jazz covers of the songs " Orange Colored Sky " and " White Christmas " , the latter featuring an extra verse , and acoustic versions of " You and I " and " The Edge of Glory " , both songs originally from the singer 's second studio album , Born This Way ( 2011 ) . A recurring theme on the EP is Gaga stopping midway through singing to engage in conversations with the listeners . 
 Following its release , A Very Gaga Holiday received mixed reviews from music critics . Reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine , writing for Allmusic , listed " White Christmas " and " Orange Colored Sky " as highlights , while Amelia Proud , writing for the Daily Mail , found the release to be uninspiring and weaker than Gaga 's other works . A Very Gaga Holiday entered the album charts of Canada , France and the United States , while " White Christmas " entered the singles chart of Belgium , Japan and the United Kingdom . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Gaga covered " Orange Colored Sky " during a surprise appearance at The Oak Room in New York City on September 29 , 2010 , and again on January 5 , 2011 . Brian Newman served as a guest performer on trumpet for performances at the Robin Hood Gala on May 9 , 2011 , to benefit the Robin Hood Foundation , and at BBC Radio 1 's Big Weekend in Carlisle , England on May 15 , 2011 . Gaga later performed it on the ABC Christmas special A Very Gaga Thanksgiving , along with a cover version of " White Christmas " . Gaga put emphasis on the jazz side of the song . She added a second verse , describing the original song as " too short " . In the verse , Gaga describes a snowman , saying that Santa Claus is on his way to meet him . The lyrics end with Gaga saying , " Okay , so I suppose it 's not very white outside yet . " The songs on A Very Gaga Holiday were recorded during the shooting of A Very Gaga Thanksgiving at the Convent of the Sacred Heart , New York City . 
 On November 22 , 2011 , A Very Gaga Holiday was released as a digital EP . Both " Orange Colored Sky " and " White Christmas " were included in the release , along with two other tracks which were also performed : minimalist versions of Gaga 's 2011 singles " The Edge of Glory " and " You and I " , both songs which originally featured on Gaga 's second studio album , Born This Way . Interscope Records announced the release after the opening of the Holiday Wonderland Gaga Workshop at Barneys New York . It was released in the United States to the iTunes Store and Amazon and had a worldwide release to iTunes after four days . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Gaga 's cover of " White Christmas " is a " jazzy rendition " and features an extra verse about a snowman . Halfway into the cover , before beginning the new verse , Gaga says , " So as you can tell , I 'm very outgoing and a little bit shy , but I 've decided that this song is just too short . It 's such a beautiful Christmas song but it 's only one verse , so I added an extra one . " " You and I " is devoid of the musical arrangements from the version in Born This Way , and features instrumentation from a piano and a trumpet , which is played halfway through the song . From time to time , Gaga shouts the word " America " while singing the song . Her acoustic version of " The Edge of Glory " begins with a monologue , explaining her dedication of the song to her grandfather : " It 's the second Thanksgiving I 'm spending without my grandpa , and I wrote this song about him , so here it is . So Grandma , if you 're watching at home , this one 's for you . " Following the first chorus , Gaga stops playing her piano and tells a story about Italian cookies . A recurring theme for the songs is Gaga stopping midway through singing to engage in conversation with the listeners . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 In the United States , the EP debuted at number 52 on the Billboard 200 with sales of 22 @,@ 000 copies , for the week ending December 10 , 2011 . The same week , the special also had an impact on Gaga 's second studio album , Born This Way , which moved up the Billboard 200 chart from position 72 to 21 , with sales of 47 @,@ 000 ; copies ( up 416 % from previous week ) . As of April 2016 , A Very Gaga Holiday has sold 44 @,@ 000 copies in the US according to Nielsen SoundScan . Gaga 's version of " White Christmas " entered the UK Singles Chart at number 87 , for the week ending December 3 , 2011 . The same version also entered the Belgium ( Flanders ) Singles Chart at number 86 , for the week ending dated December 24 , 2011 , and the Japan Hot 100 singles at number 93 . In Canada , A Very Gaga Holiday debuted at number 74 on the Canadian Albums Chart and in France , it entered the SNEP Download Albums Chart at number 26 . 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic awarded the EP three out of five stars , saying that the release was an " attractive holiday bauble " and that although Gaga 's main persona was about authenticity , she appeared to " push her affectations " much more than required on the songs . Erlewine picked " White Christmas " and " Orange Colored Sky " as his top choices from the EP . Evigshed Magazine 's Sylvia <unk> complimented the musical arrangement of the tracks , saying that Gaga 's vocals were a highlight of the EP and adding , " ' The Edge of Glory ' featuring beautiful piano line gives me chills . It is a truly moving version . [ Gaga ] makes every song special . " Erin Strecker from Entertainment Weekly gave a glowing review of the release , explaining that Gaga 's fans might have been expecting a release like A Very Gaga Holiday which gave prominence to the singer 's vocals . She added that the songs showed " how much her voice really is well @-@ suited for the big @-@ band and jazz @-@ era stylings on these tunes " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Lady Gaga – vocals , producer , piano 
 Phil <unk> – sound editor , recording at Convent of the Sacred Heart , New York City 
 Brian Riordan – sound re @-@ recording mixer 
 Alex Smith – piano 
 Brian Newman – trumpet 
 Paul Francis – drums 
 Scott Ritchie – bass 
 Steven <unk> – saxophone 
 Credits and personnel adapted from digital booklet . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Napoleon = 
 Napoléon Bonaparte ( / <unk> , <unk> / ; French : [ <unk> ̃ <unk> ] , born Napoleone di Buonaparte ; 15 August 1769 – 5 May 1821 ) was a French military and political leader who rose to prominence during the French Revolution and led several successful campaigns during the Revolutionary Wars . As Napoleon I , he was Emperor of the French from 1804 until 1814 , and again in 1815 . Napoleon dominated European and global affairs for more than a decade while leading France against a series of coalitions in the Napoleonic Wars . He won most of these wars and the vast majority of his battles , building a large empire that ruled over continental Europe before its final collapse in 1815 . One of the greatest commanders in history , his wars and campaigns are studied at military schools worldwide . He also remains one of the most celebrated and controversial political figures in human history . 
 Napoleon had an extensive and powerful influence on the modern world , bringing liberal reforms to the numerous territories that he conquered and controlled , especially the Low Countries , Switzerland , and large parts of modern Italy and Germany . He implemented fundamental liberal policies in France and throughout Western Europe . His lasting legal achievement , the Napoleonic Code , has influenced the legal systems of more than 70 nations around the world . British historian Andrew Roberts claimed , " The ideas that underpin our modern world — meritocracy , equality before the law , property rights , religious toleration , modern secular education , sound finances , and so on — were championed , consolidated , codified and geographically extended by Napoleon . To them he added a rational and efficient local administration , an end to rural banditry , the encouragement of science and the arts , the abolition of feudalism and the greatest codification of laws since the fall of the Roman Empire . " 
 Napoleon was born in Corsica to a relatively modest family from the minor nobility . He supported the French Revolution from the outset while serving in the French army , and tried to spread its ideals to his native Corsica . He rose rapidly through the ranks during the Revolution , ending up as commander of the Army of Italy after saving the governing Directory by suppressing a revolt from royalist insurgents . At age 26 , he began his first military campaign against the Austrians and their Italian allies , scoring a series of decisive victories , conquering the Italian Peninsula in a year , and becoming a national hero . In 1798 , he led a military expedition to Egypt that served as a springboard to political power . He engineered a coup in November 1799 and became First Consul of the Republic . His rising ambition and popularity inspired him to go further , and in 1804 he became the first Emperor of the French . <unk> differences with the British meant that the French were facing a Third Coalition by 1805 . Napoleon shattered this coalition with decisive victories in the Ulm Campaign and a historic triumph at the Battle of Austerlitz , which led to the elimination of the Holy Roman Empire . In 1806 , the Fourth Coalition took up arms against him because Prussia became worried about growing French influence on the continent . Napoleon quickly knocked out Prussia at the battles of Jena and Auerstedt , then marched the Grand Army deep into Eastern Europe , annihilating the Russians in June 1807 at Friedland and forcing the defeated nations of the Fourth Coalition to accept the Treaties of Tilsit . Although Tilsit signified the high watermark of the French Empire , it did not bring a lasting peace to the continent . Two years later , the Austrians challenged the French again during the War of the Fifth Coalition , but Napoleon solidified his grip over Europe after triumphing at the Battle of Wagram in July 1809 . 
 Hoping to extend the Continental System meant to choke off British goods from the European mainland , Napoleon invaded Iberia and declared his brother Joseph the King of Spain in 1808 . The Spanish and the Portuguese revolted with British support . The Peninsular War lasted six years , featured brutal guerrilla warfare , and culminated in victory by the allied powers of Portugal , Spain , and Britain . The Continental System caused recurring diplomatic conflicts between France and its allies , especially Russia . Unwilling to bear the economic consequences of reduced trade , the Russians violated the Continental System and enticed Napoleon into war . The French launched an invasion of Russia in the summer of 1812 . The resulting campaign witnessed the catastrophic collapse of the Grand Army , the widespread destruction of Russian lands and cities , and inspired a renewed push against Napoleon by his enemies . In 1813 , Prussia and Austria joined Russian forces in a Sixth Coalition against France . A chaotic military campaign culminated in a large Allied army defeating Napoleon at the Battle of Leipzig in October 1813 . The Allies then invaded France and captured Paris in the Spring of 1814 , forcing Napoleon to abdicate in April . He was exiled to the island of Elba near Rome and the Bourbons were restored to power . However , Napoleon escaped from Elba in February 1815 and took control of France once again . The Allies responded by forming a Seventh Coalition , which ultimately defeated Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo in June . The British later exiled him to the remote island of Saint Helena in the South Atlantic , where he spent the remainder of his years . His death in 1821 at the age of 51 was received with shock and grief throughout Europe . 
 = = Origins and education = = 
 Napoleon was born on 15 August 1769 , to Carlo Maria di Buonaparte and Maria Letizia <unk> , in his family 's ancestral home Casa Buonaparte in Ajaccio , the capital of the island of Corsica . He was their fourth child and third son . This was a year after the island was transferred to France by the Republic of Genoa . He was christened Napoleone di Buonaparte , probably named after an uncle ( an older brother who did not survive infancy was the first of the sons to be called Napoleone ) . In his 20s , he adopted the more French @-@ sounding Napoléon Bonaparte . 
 The Corsican <unk> were descended from minor Italian nobility of Tuscan origin , who had come to Corsica from Liguria in the 16th century . 
 His father Nobile Carlo Buonaparte was an attorney , and was named Corsica 's representative to the court of Louis XVI in 1777 . The dominant influence of Napoleon 's childhood was his mother , Letizia <unk> , whose firm discipline restrained a rambunctious child . Napoleon 's maternal grandmother had married into the Swiss <unk> family in her second marriage , and Napoleon 's uncle , the later cardinal Joseph <unk> , would fulfill the role as protector of the Bonaparte family for some years . 
 He had an elder brother , Joseph , and younger siblings : Lucien , Elisa , Louis , Pauline , Caroline , and Jérôme . A boy and girl were born before Joseph but died in infancy . Napoleon was baptised as a Catholic . 
 Napoleon 's noble , moderately affluent background afforded him greater opportunities to study than were available to a typical Corsican of the time . In January 1779 , he was enrolled at a religious school in Autun . In May , he was admitted to a military academy at Brienne @-@ le @-@ Château . His first language was Corsican , and he always spoke French with a marked Corsican accent and never learned to spell French properly . He was teased by other students for his accent and applied himself to reading . An examiner observed that Napoleon " has always been distinguished for his application in mathematics . He is fairly well acquainted with history and geography ... This boy would make an excellent sailor . " 
 On completion of his studies at Brienne in 1784 , Napoleon was admitted to the elite École Militaire in Paris . He trained to become an artillery officer and , when his father 's death reduced his income , was forced to complete the two @-@ year course in one year . He was the first Corsican to graduate from the École Militaire . He was examined by the famed scientist Pierre @-@ Simon Laplace . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Upon graduating in September 1785 , Bonaparte was commissioned a second lieutenant in La Fère artillery regiment . He served in Valence and <unk> until after the outbreak of the Revolution in 1789 , and took nearly two years ' leave in Corsica and Paris during this period . At this time , he was a fervent Corsican nationalist , and wrote to Corsican leader Pasquale Paoli in May 1789 , " As the nation was perishing I was born . Thirty thousand Frenchmen were vomited on to our shores , drowning the throne of liberty in waves of blood . Such was the odious sight which was the first to strike me . " 
 He spent the early years of the Revolution in Corsica , fighting in a complex three @-@ way struggle among royalists , revolutionaries , and Corsican nationalists . He was a supporter of the republican Jacobin movement , organising clubs in Corsica , and was given command over a battalion of volunteers . He was promoted to captain in the regular army in July 1792 , despite exceeding his leave of absence and leading a riot against a French army in Corsica . 
 He returned to Corsica and came into conflict with Paoli , who had decided to split with France and sabotage the French assault on the Sardinian island of La Maddalena . Bonaparte and his family fled to the French mainland in June 1793 because of the split with Paoli . 
 = = = Siege of Toulon = = = 
 In July 1793 , Bonaparte published a pro @-@ republican pamphlet entitled Le souper de Beaucaire ( Supper at Beaucaire ) which gained him the support of Augustin Robespierre , younger brother of the Revolutionary leader Maximilien Robespierre . With the help of his fellow Corsican Antoine Christophe Saliceti , Bonaparte was appointed artillery commander of the republican forces at the Siege of Toulon . 
 He adopted a plan to capture a hill where republican guns could dominate the city 's harbour and force the British to evacuate . The assault on the position led to the capture of the city , but during it Bonaparte was wounded in the thigh . He was promoted to brigadier general at the age of 24 . Catching the attention of the Committee of Public Safety , he was put in charge of the artillery of France 's Army of Italy . 
 Napoleon spent time as inspector of coastal fortifications on the Mediterranean coast near Marseille while he was waiting for confirmation of the Army of Italy post . He devised plans for attacking the Kingdom of Sardinia as part of France 's campaign against the First Coalition Augustin Robespierre and Saliceti were ready to listen to the freshly promoted artillery general . 
 The French army carried out Bonaparte 's plan in the Battle of Saorgio in April 1794 , and then advanced to seize Ormea in the mountains . From Ormea , they headed west to outflank the Austro @-@ Sardinian positions around <unk> . After this campaign , Augustin Robespierre sent Bonaparte on a mission to the Republic of Genoa to determine that country 's intentions towards France . 
 = = = 13 Vendémiaire = = = 
 Some contemporaries alleged that Bonaparte was put under house arrest at Nice for his association with the <unk> following their fall in the Thermidorian Reaction in July 1794 , but Napoleon 's secretary Bourrienne disputed the allegation in his memoirs . According to Bourrienne , jealousy was responsible , between the Army of the Alps and the Army of Italy ( with whom Napoleon was seconded at the time ) . Bonaparte dispatched an impassioned defense in a letter to the commissar <unk> , and he was subsequently acquitted of any wrongdoing . 
 He was released within two weeks and , due to his technical skills , was asked to draw up plans to attack Italian positions in the context of France 's war with Austria . He also took part in an expedition to take back Corsica from the British , but the French were repulsed by the British Royal Navy . 
 By 1795 , Bonaparte had become engaged to Désirée Clary , daughter of François Clary . Désirée 's sister Julie Clary had married Bonaparte 's elder brother Joseph . In April 1795 , he was assigned to the Army of the West , which was engaged in the War in the Vendée — a civil war and royalist counter @-@ revolution in Vendée , a region in west central France on the Atlantic Ocean . As an infantry command , it was a demotion from artillery general — for which the army already had a full quota — and he pleaded poor health to avoid the posting . 
 He was moved to the Bureau of Topography of the Committee of Public Safety and sought unsuccessfully to be transferred to Constantinople in order to offer his services to the Sultan . During this period , he wrote the romantic novella Clisson et Eugénie , about a soldier and his lover , in a clear parallel to Bonaparte 's own relationship with Désirée . On 15 September , Bonaparte was removed from the list of generals in regular service for his refusal to serve in the Vendée campaign . He faced a difficult financial situation and reduced career prospects . 
 On 3 October , royalists in Paris declared a rebellion against the National Convention . Paul Barras , a leader of the Thermidorian Reaction , knew of Bonaparte 's military exploits at Toulon and gave him command of the improvised forces in defence of the Convention in the Tuileries Palace . Napoleon had seen the massacre of the King 's Swiss Guard there three years earlier and realised that artillery would be the key to its defence . 
 He ordered a young cavalry officer named Joachim Murat to seize large cannons and used them to repel the attackers on 5 October 1795 — 13 Vendémiaire An IV in the French Republican Calendar . 1 @,@ 400 royalists died and the rest fled . He had cleared the streets with " a whiff of grapeshot " , according to 19th @-@ century historian Thomas Carlyle in The French Revolution : A History . 
 The defeat of the royalist insurrection extinguished the threat to the Convention and earned Bonaparte sudden fame , wealth , and the patronage of the new government , the Directory . Murat married one of Napoleon 's sisters and became his brother @-@ in @-@ law ; he also served under Napoleon as one of his generals . Bonaparte was promoted to Commander of the Interior and given command of the Army of Italy . 
 Within weeks , he was romantically attached to Joséphine de Beauharnais , the former mistress of Barras . The couple married on 9 March 1796 in a civil ceremony . 
 = = = First Italian campaign = = = 
 Two days after the marriage , Bonaparte left Paris to take command of the Army of Italy . He immediately went on the offensive , hoping to defeat the forces of Piedmont before their Austrian allies could intervene . In a series of rapid victories during the Montenotte Campaign , he knocked Piedmont out of the war in two weeks . The French then focused on the Austrians for the remainder of the war , the highlight of which became the protracted struggle for Mantua . The Austrians launched a series of offensives against the French to break the siege , but Napoleon defeated every relief effort , scoring notable victories at the battles of Castiglione , Bassano , Arcole , and Rivoli . The decisive French triumph at Rivoli in January 1797 led to the collapse of the Austrian position in Italy . At Rivoli , the Austrians lost up to 14 @,@ 000 men while the French lost about 5 @,@ 000 . 
 The next phase of the campaign featured the French invasion of the Habsburg heartlands . French forces in Southern Germany had been defeated by the Archduke Charles in 1796 , but the Archduke withdrew his forces to protect Vienna after learning about Napoleon 's assault . In the first notable encounter between the two commanders , Napoleon pushed back his opponent and advanced deep into Austrian territory after winning at the Battle of <unk> in March 1797 . The Austrians were alarmed by the French thrust that reached all the way to Leoben , about 100 km from Vienna , and finally decided to sue for peace . The Treaty of Leoben , followed by the more comprehensive Treaty of Campo Formio , gave France control of most of northern Italy and the Low Countries , and a secret clause promised the Republic of Venice to Austria . Bonaparte marched on Venice and forced its surrender , ending 1 @,@ 100 years of independence . He also authorized the French to loot treasures such as the Horses of Saint Mark . 
 His application of conventional military ideas to real @-@ world situations enabled his military triumphs , such as creative use of artillery as a mobile force to support his infantry . He remarked later in life : " I have fought sixty battles and I have learned nothing which I did not know at the beginning . Look at Caesar ; he fought the first like the last . " 
 Bonaparte could win battles by concealment of troop deployments and concentration of his forces on the ' hinge ' of an enemy 's weakened front . If he could not use his favourite envelopment strategy , he would take up the central position and attack two co @-@ operating forces at their hinge , swing round to fight one until it fled , then turn to face the other . In this Italian campaign , Bonaparte 's army captured 150 @,@ 000 prisoners , 540 cannons , and 170 standards . The French army fought 67 actions and won 18 pitched battles through superior artillery technology and Bonaparte 's tactics . 
 During the campaign , Bonaparte became increasingly influential in French politics . He founded two newspapers : one for the troops in his army and another for circulation in France . The royalists attacked Bonaparte for looting Italy and warned that he might become a dictator . All told , Napoleon 's forces extracted an estimated $ 45 million in funds from Italy during their campaign there , another $ 12 million in precious metals and jewels ; atop that , his forces confiscated more than three @-@ hundred priceless paintings and sculptures . Bonaparte sent General Pierre Augereau to Paris to lead a coup d 'état and purge the royalists on 4 September — Coup of 18 Fructidor . This left Barras and his Republican allies in control again but dependent on Bonaparte , who proceeded to peace negotiations with Austria . These negotiations resulted in the Treaty of Campo Formio , and Bonaparte returned to Paris in December as a hero . He met Talleyrand , France 's new Foreign Minister — who later served in the same capacity for Emperor Napoleon — and they began to prepare for an invasion of Britain . 
 = = = Egyptian expedition = = = 
 After two months of planning , Bonaparte decided that France 's naval power was not yet strong enough to confront the British Royal Navy . He decided on a military expedition to seize Egypt and thereby undermine Britain 's access to its trade interests in India . Bonaparte wished to establish a French presence in the Middle East , with the ultimate dream of linking with Tipu Sultan , a Muslim enemy of the British in India . 
 Napoleon assured the Directory that " as soon as he had conquered Egypt , he will establish relations with the Indian princes and , together with them , attack the English in their possessions . " The Directory agreed in order to secure a trade route to India . 
 In May 1798 , Bonaparte was elected a member of the French Academy of Sciences . His Egyptian expedition included a group of 167 scientists , with mathematicians , naturalists , chemists , and <unk> among them . Their discoveries included the Rosetta Stone , and their work was published in the Description de l 'Égypte in 1809 . 
 En route to Egypt , Bonaparte reached Malta on 9 June 1798 , then controlled by the Knights Hospitaller . Grand Master Ferdinand von Hompesch zu Bolheim surrendered after token resistance , and Bonaparte captured an important naval base with the loss of only three men . 
 General Bonaparte and his expedition eluded pursuit by the Royal Navy and landed at Alexandria on 1 July . He fought the Battle of Shubra <unk> against the Mamluks , Egypt 's ruling military caste . This helped the French practice their defensive tactic for the Battle of the Pyramids , fought on 21 July , about 24 km ( 15 mi ) from the pyramids . General Bonaparte 's forces of 25 @,@ 000 roughly equalled those of the Mamluks ' Egyptian cavalry . Twenty @-@ nine French and approximately 2 @,@ 000 Egyptians were killed . The victory boosted the morale of the French army . 
 On 1 August , the British fleet under Horatio Nelson captured or destroyed all but two French vessels in the Battle of the Nile , defeating Bonaparte 's goal to strengthen the French position in the Mediterranean . His army had succeeded in a temporary increase of French power in Egypt , though it faced repeated uprisings . In early 1799 , he moved an army into the Ottoman province of Damascus ( Syria and Galilee ) . Bonaparte led these 13 @,@ 000 French soldiers in the conquest of the coastal towns of Arish , Gaza , Jaffa , and Haifa . The attack on Jaffa was particularly brutal . Bonaparte discovered that many of the defenders were former prisoners of war , ostensibly on parole , so he ordered the garrison and 1 @,@ 400 prisoners to be executed by bayonet or drowning to save bullets . Men , women , and children were robbed and murdered for three days . 
 Bonaparte began with an army of 13 @,@ 000 men ; 1 @,@ 500 were reported missing , 1 @,@ 200 died in combat , and thousands perished from disease — mostly bubonic plague . He failed to reduce the fortress of Acre , so he marched his army back to Egypt in May . To speed up the retreat , Bonaparte ordered plague @-@ stricken men to be poisoned with opium ; the number who died remains disputed , ranging from a low of 30 to a high of 580 . He also brought out 1 @,@ 000 wounded men . Back in Egypt on 25 July , Bonaparte defeated an Ottoman amphibious invasion at Abukir . 
 = = Ruler of France = = 
 While in Egypt , Bonaparte stayed informed of European affairs . He learned that France had suffered a series of defeats in the War of the Second Coalition . On 24 August 1799 , he took advantage of the temporary departure of British ships from French coastal ports and set sail for France , despite the fact that he had received no explicit orders from Paris . The army was left in the charge of Jean Baptiste Kléber . 
 Unknown to Bonaparte , the Directory had sent him orders to return to ward off possible invasions of French soil , but poor lines of communication prevented the delivery of these messages . By the time that he reached Paris in October , France 's situation had been improved by a series of victories . The Republic , however , was bankrupt and the ineffective Directory was unpopular with the French population . The Directory discussed Bonaparte 's " desertion " but was too weak to punish him . 
 Despite the failures in Egypt , Napoleon returned to a hero 's welcome . He drew together an alliance with director Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès , his brother Lucien , speaker of the Council of Five Hundred Roger Ducos , director Joseph <unk> , and Talleyrand , and they overthrew the Directory by a coup d 'état on 9 November 1799 ( " the 18th Brumaire " according to the revolutionary calendar ) , closing down the council of five hundred . Napoleon became " first consul " for ten years , with two consuls appointed by him who had consultative voices only . His power was confirmed by the new " Constitution of the Year VIII " , originally devised by Sieyès to give Napoleon a minor role , but rewritten by Napoleon , and accepted by direct popular vote ( 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in favor , 1 @,@ 567 opposed ) . The constitution preserved the appearance of a republic but in reality established a dictatorship . 
 = = = French Consulate = = = 
 Napoleon established a political system that historian Martyn Lyons called " dictatorship by plebiscite . " Worried by the democratic forces unleashed by the Revolution , but unwilling to ignore them entirely , Napoleon resorted to regular electoral consultations with the French people on his road to imperial power . He drafted the Constitution of the Year VIII and secured his own election as First Consul , taking up residence at the Tuileries . The constitution was approved in a rigged plebiscite held the following January , with 99 @.@ 94 percent officially listed as voting " yes . " Napoleon 's brother , Lucien , had falsified the returns to show that 3 million people had participated in the plebiscite ; the real number was 1 @.@ 5 million . Political observers at the time assumed the eligible French voting public numbered about 5 million people , so the regime artificially doubled the participation rate to indicate popular enthusiasm for the Consulate . In the first few months of the Consulate , with war in Europe still raging and internal instability still plaguing the country , Napoleon 's grip on power remained very tenuous . 
 In the spring of 1800 , Napoleon and his troops crossed the Swiss Alps into Italy , aiming to surprise the Austrian armies that had reoccupied the peninsula when Napoleon was still in Egypt . After a difficult crossing over the Alps , the French army entered the plains of Northern Italy virtually unopposed . While one French army approached from the north , the Austrians were busy with another stationed in Genoa , which was besieged by a substantial force . The fierce resistance of this French army , under André Masséna , gave the northern striking force precious time to carry out their operations with little interference . After spending several days looking for each other , the two armies finally collided at the Battle of Marengo on 14 June . General Melas had a numerical advantage , fielding about 30 @,@ 000 Austrian soldiers while Napoleon commanded 24 @,@ 000 French troops . The battle began favorably for the Austrians as their initial attack surprised the French and gradually drove them back . Melas concluded that he 'd won the battle and retired to his headquarters around 3 pm , leaving his subordinates in charge of pursuing the French . However , the French lines never broke during their tactical retreat ; Napoleon constantly rode out among the troops urging them to stand and fight . Late in the afternoon , a full division under Desaix arrived on the field and dramatically reversed the tide of the battle . A series of artillery barrages and fortunate cavalry charges managed to decimate the Austrian army , which fled chaotically over the Bormida River back to Alessandria , leaving behind 14 @,@ 000 casualties . The following day , the Austrian army agreed to abandon Northern Italy once more with the Convention of Alessandria , which granted them safe passage to friendly soil in exchange for their fortresses throughout the region . 
 Although critics have blamed Napoleon for several tactical mistakes preceding the battle , they have also praised his audacity for selecting a risky campaign strategy , choosing to invade the Italian peninsula from the north when the vast majority of French invasions came from the west , near or along the coastline . As Chandler points out , Napoleon spent almost a year getting the Austrians out of Italy in his first campaign ; in 1800 , it took him only a month to achieve the same goal . German strategist and field marshal Alfred von Schlieffen concluded that " Bonaparte did not annihilate his enemy but eliminated him and rendered him harmless " while " [ attaining ] the object of the campaign : the conquest of North Italy . " 
 Napoleon 's triumph at Marengo secured his political authority and boosted his popularity back home , but it did not lead to an immediate peace . Bonaparte 's brother , Joseph , led the complex negotiations in Lunéville and reported that Austria , emboldened by British support , would not acknowledge the new territory that France had acquired . As negotiations became increasingly fractious , Bonaparte gave orders to his general Moreau to strike Austria once more . Moreau and the French swept through Bavaria and scored an overwhelming victory at Hohenlinden in December 1800 . As a result , the Austrians capitulated and signed the Treaty of Lunéville in February 1801 . The treaty reaffirmed and expanded earlier French gains at Campo Formio . Britain now remained the only nation that was still at war with France . 
 = = = = Temporary peace in Europe = = = = 
 After a decade of constant warfare , France and Britain signed the Treaty of Amiens in March 1802 , bringing the Revolutionary Wars to an end . Amiens called for the withdrawal of British troops from recently conquered colonial territories as well as for assurances to curtail the expansionary goals of the French Republic . With Europe at peace and the economy recovering , Napoleon 's popularity soared to its highest levels under the Consulate , both domestically and abroad . In a new plebiscite during the spring of 1802 , the French public came out in huge numbers to approve a constitution that made the Consulate permanent , essentially elevating Napoleon to dictator for life . Whereas the plebiscite two years earlier had brought out 1 @.@ 5 million people to the polls , the new referendum enticed 3 @.@ 6 million to go and vote ( 72 % of all eligible voters ) . There was no secret ballot in 1802 and few people wanted to openly defy the regime ; the constitution gained approval with over 99 % of the vote . His broad powers were spelled out in the new constitution : Article 1 . The French people name , and the Senate proclaims Napoleon @-@ Bonaparte First Consul for Life . After 1802 , he was generally referred to as Napoleon rather than Bonaparte . 
 The brief peace in Europe allowed Napoleon to focus on the French colonies abroad . Saint @-@ Domingue had managed to acquire a high level of political autonomy during the Revolutionary Wars , with Toussaint Louverture installing himself as de facto dictator by 1801 . Napoleon saw his chance to recuperate the formerly wealthy colony when he signed the Treaty of Amiens . During the Revolution , the National Convention voted to abolish slavery in February 1794 . Under the terms of Amiens , however , Napoleon agreed to appease British demands by not abolishing slavery in any colonies where the 1794 decree had never been implemented . The resulting Law of 20 May never applied to colonies like Guadeloupe or <unk> , even though rogue generals and other officials used the pretext of peace as an opportunity to reinstate slavery in some of these places . The Law of 20 May officially restored the slave trade to the Caribbean colonies , not slavery itself . Napoleon sent an expedition under General Leclerc designed to reassert control over Sainte @-@ Domingue . Although the French managed to capture Toussaint Louverture , the expedition failed when high rates of disease crippled the French army . In May 1803 , the last 8000 French troops left the island and the slaves proclaimed an independent republic that they called Haïti in 1804 . Seeing the failure of his colonial efforts , Napoleon decided in 1803 to sell the Louisiana Territory to the United States , instantly doubling the size of the U.S. The selling price in the Louisiana Purchase was less than three cents per acre , a total of $ 15 million . 
 The peace with Britain proved to be uneasy and controversial . Britain did not evacuate Malta as promised and protested against Bonaparte 's annexation of Piedmont and his Act of Mediation , which established a new Swiss Confederation . Neither of these territories were covered by Amiens , but they inflamed tensions significantly . The dispute culminated in a declaration of war by Britain in May 1803 ; Napoleon responded by reassembling the invasion camp at Boulogne . 
 = = = French Empire = = = 
 During the Consulate , Napoleon faced several royalist and Jacobin assassination plots , including the <unk> des <unk> ( Dagger plot ) in October 1800 and the Plot of the Rue Saint @-@ Nicaise ( also known as the Infernal Machine ) two months later . In January 1804 , his police uncovered an assassination plot against him that involved Moreau and which was ostensibly sponsored by the Bourbon family , the former rulers of France . On the advice of Talleyrand , Napoleon ordered the kidnapping of the Duke of Enghien , violating the sovereignty of Baden . The Duke was quickly executed after a secret military trial , even though he had not been involved in the plot . Enghien 's execution infuriated royal courts throughout Europe , becoming one of the contributing political factors for the outbreak of the Napoleonic Wars . 
 To expand his power , Napoleon used these assassination plots to justify the creation of an imperial system based on the Roman model . He believed that a Bourbon restoration would be more difficult if his family 's succession was entrenched in the constitution . Launching yet another referendum , Napoleon was elected as Emperor of the French by a tally exceeding 99 % . As with the Life Consulate two years earlier , this referendum produced heavy participation , bringing out almost 3 @.@ 6 million voters to the polls . 
 Napoleon 's coronation took place on 2 December 1804 . Two separate crowns were brought for the ceremony : a golden laurel wreath recalling the Roman Empire and a replica of Charlemagne 's crown . Napoleon entered the ceremony wearing the laurel wreath and kept it on his head throughout the proceedings . For the official coronation , he raised the Charlemagne crown over his own head in a symbolic gesture , but never placed it on top because he was already wearing the golden wreath . Instead he placed the crown on Josephine 's head , the event commemorated in the officially sanctioned painting by Jacques @-@ Louis David . Napoleon was also crowned King of Italy , with the Iron Crown of Lombardy , at the Cathedral of Milan on 26 May 1805 . He created eighteen Marshals of the Empire from amongst his top generals to secure the allegiance of the army . 
 = = = = War of the Third Coalition = = = = 
 Great Britain had broken the Peace of Amiens by declaring war on France in May 1803 . In December 1804 , an Anglo @-@ Swedish agreement became the first step towards the creation of the Third Coalition . By April 1805 , Britain had also signed an alliance with Russia . Austria had been defeated by France twice in recent memory and wanted revenge , so it joined the coalition a few months later . 
 Before the formation of the Third Coalition , Napoleon had assembled an invasion force , the Armée d 'Angleterre , around six camps at Boulogne in Northern France . He intended to use this invasion force to strike at England . They never invaded , but Napoleon 's troops received careful and invaluable training for future military operations . The men at Boulogne formed the core for what Napoleon later called La Grande Armée . At the start , this French army had about 200 @,@ 000 men organized into seven corps , which were large field units that contained 36 to 40 cannons each and were capable of independent action until other corps could come to the rescue . A single corps properly situated in a strong defensive position could survive at least a day without support , giving the Grande Armée countless strategic and tactical options on every campaign . On top of these forces , Napoleon created a cavalry reserve of 22 @,@ 000 organized into two cuirassier divisions , four mounted dragoon divisions , one division of dismounted dragoons , and one of light cavalry , all supported by 24 artillery pieces . By 1805 , the Grande Armée had grown to a force of 350 @,@ 000 men , who were well equipped , well trained , and led by competent officers . 
 Napoleon knew that the French fleet could not defeat the Royal Navy in a head @-@ to @-@ head battle , so he planned to lure it away from the English Channel through diversionary tactics . The main strategic idea involved the French Navy escaping from the British blockades of Toulon and Brest and threatening to attack the West Indies . In the face of this attack , it was hoped , the British would weaken their defense of the Western Approaches by sending ships to the Caribbean , allowing a combined Franco @-@ Spanish fleet to take control of the channel long enough for French armies to cross and invade . However , the plan unraveled after the British victory at the Battle of Cape Finisterre in July 1805 . French Admiral Villeneuve then retreated to Cádiz instead of linking up with French naval forces at Brest for an attack on the English Channel . 
 By August 1805 , Napoleon had realized that the strategic situation had changed fundamentally . Facing a potential invasion from his continental enemies , he decided to strike first and turned his army 's sights from the English Channel to the Rhine . His basic objective was to destroy the isolated Austrian armies in Southern Germany before their Russian allies could arrive . On 25 September , after great secrecy and feverish marching , 200 @,@ 000 French troops began to cross the Rhine on a front of 260 km ( 160 mi ) . Austrian commander Karl Mack had gathered the greater part of the Austrian army at the fortress of Ulm in Swabia . Napoleon swung his forces to the southeast and the Grande Armée performed an elaborate wheeling movement that outflanked the Austrian positions . The Ulm Maneuver completely surprised General Mack , who belatedly understood that his army had been cut off . After some minor engagements that culminated in the Battle of Ulm , Mack finally surrendered after realizing that there was no way to break out of the French encirclement . For just 2 @,@ 000 French casualties , Napoleon had managed to capture a total of 60 @,@ 000 Austrian soldiers through his army 's rapid marching . The Ulm Campaign is generally regarded as a strategic masterpiece and was influential in the development of the Schlieffen Plan in the late 19th century . For the French , this spectacular victory on land was soured by the decisive victory that the Royal Navy attained at the Battle of Trafalgar on 21 October . After Trafalgar , Britain had total domination of the seas for the duration of the Napoleonic Wars . 
 Following the Ulm Campaign , French forces managed to capture Vienna in November . The fall of Vienna provided the French a huge bounty as they captured 100 @,@ 000 muskets , 500 cannons , and the intact bridges across the Danube . At this critical juncture , both Tsar Alexander I and Holy Roman Emperor Francis II decided to engage Napoleon in battle , despite reservations from some of their subordinates . Napoleon sent his army north in pursuit of the Allies , but then ordered his forces to retreat so that he could feign a grave weakness . Desperate to lure the Allies into battle , Napoleon gave every indication in the days preceding the engagement that the French army was in a pitiful state , even abandoning the dominant Pratzen Heights near the village of Austerlitz . At the Battle of Austerlitz , in Moravia on 2 December , he deployed the French army below the Pratzen Heights and deliberately weakened his right flank , enticing the Allies to launch a major assault there in the hopes of rolling up the whole French line . A forced march from Vienna by Marshal Davout and his III Corps plugged the gap left by Napoleon just in time . Meanwhile , the heavy Allied deployment against the French right weakened their center on the Pratzen Heights , which was viciously attacked by the IV Corps of Marshal Soult . With the Allied center demolished , the French swept through both enemy flanks and sent the Allies fleeing chaotically , capturing thousands of prisoners in the process . The battle is often seen as a tactical masterpiece because of the near @-@ perfect execution of a calibrated but dangerous plan — of the same stature as Cannae , the celebrated triumph by Hannibal some 2000 years before . 
 The Allied disaster at Austerlitz significantly shook the faith of Emperor Francis in the British @-@ led war effort . France and Austria agreed to an armistice immediately and the Treaty of Pressburg followed shortly after on 26 December . Pressburg took Austria out of both the war and the Coalition while reinforcing the earlier treaties of Campo Formio and of Lunéville between the two powers . The treaty confirmed the Austrian loss of lands to France in Italy and Bavaria , and lands in Germany to Napoleon 's German allies . It also imposed an indemnity of 40 million francs on the defeated Habsburgs and allowed the fleeing Russian troops free passage through hostile territories and back to their home soil . Napoleon went on to say , " The battle of Austerlitz is the finest of all I have fought . " Frank McLynn suggests that Napoleon was so successful at Austerlitz that he lost touch with reality , and what used to be French foreign policy became a " personal Napoleonic one " . Vincent Cronin disagrees , stating that Napoleon was not overly ambitious for himself , " he embodied the ambitions of thirty million Frenchmen " . 
 = = = = Middle @-@ Eastern alliances = = = = 
 Napoleon continued to entertain a grand scheme to establish a French presence in the Middle East in order to put pressure on Britain and Russia , and perhaps form an alliance with the Ottoman Empire . In February 1806 , Ottoman Emperor Selim III finally recognized Napoleon as Emperor . He also opted for an alliance with France , calling France " our sincere and natural ally . " That decision brought the Ottoman Empire into a losing war against Russia and Britain . A Franco @-@ Persian alliance was also formed between Napoleon and the Persian Empire of Fat ′ h @-@ Ali Shah Qajar . It collapsed in 1807 , when France and Russia themselves formed an unexpected alliance . In the end , Napoleon had made no effective alliances in the Middle East . 
 = = = = War of the Fourth Coalition and Tilsit = = = = 
 After Austerlitz , Napoleon established the Confederation of the Rhine in 1806 . A collection of German states intended to serve as a buffer zone between France and Central Europe , the creation of the Confederation spelled the end of the Holy Roman Empire and significantly alarmed the Prussians . The brazen reorganization of German territory by the French risked threatening Prussian influence in the region , if not eliminating it outright . War fever in Berlin rose steadily throughout the summer of 1806 . At the insistence of his court , especially his wife Queen Louise , Frederick William III decided to challenge the French domination of Central Europe by going to war . 
 The initial military maneuvers began in September 1806 . In a notable letter to Marshal Soult detailing the plan for the campaign , Napoleon described the essential features of Napoleonic warfare and introduced the phrase le bataillon @-@ carré ( ' square battalion ' ) . In the bataillon @-@ carré system , the various corps of the Grande Armée would march uniformly together in close supporting distance . If any single corps was attacked , the others could quickly spring into action and arrive to help . Napoleon invaded Prussia with 180 @,@ 000 troops , rapidly marching on the right bank of the River Saale . As in previous campaigns , his fundamental objective was to destroy one opponent before reinforcements from another could tip the balance of the war . Upon learning the whereabouts of the Prussian army , the French swung westwards and crossed the Saale with overwhelming force . At the twin battles of Jena and Auerstedt , fought on 14 October , the French convincingly defeated the Prussians and inflicted heavy casualties . With several major commanders dead or incapacitated , the Prussian king proved incapable of effectively commanding the army , which began to quickly disintegrate . In a vaunted pursuit that epitomized the " peak of Napoleonic warfare , " according to historian Richard Brooks , the French managed to capture 140 @,@ 000 soldiers , over 2 @,@ 000 cannons and hundreds of ammunition wagons , all in a single month . Historian David Chandler wrote of the Prussian forces : " Never has the morale of any army been more completely shattered . " Despite their overwhelming defeat , the Prussians refused to negotiate with the French until the Russians had an opportunity to enter the fight . 
 Following his triumph , Napoleon imposed the first elements of the Continental System through the Berlin Decree issued in November 1806 . The Continental System , which prohibited European nations from trading with Britain , was widely violated throughout his reign . In the next few months , Napoleon marched against the advancing Russian armies through Poland and was involved in the bloody stalemate at the Battle of Eylau in February 1807 . After a period of rest and consolidation on both sides , the war restarted in June with an initial struggle at Heilsberg that proved indecisive . On 14 June , however , Napoleon finally obtained an overwhelming victory over the Russians at the Battle of Friedland , wiping out the majority of the Russian army in a very bloody struggle . The scale of their defeat convinced the Russians to make peace with the French . On 19 June , Czar Alexander sent an envoy to seek an armistice with Napoleon . The latter assured the envoy that the Vistula River represented the natural borders between French and Russian influence in Europe . On that basis , the two emperors began peace negotiations at the town of Tilsit after meeting on an iconic raft on the River Niemen . The very first thing Alexander said to Napoleon was probably well @-@ calibrated : " I hate the English as much as you do . " 
 Alexander faced pressure from his brother , Duke Constantine , to make peace with Napoleon . Given the victory he had just achieved , the French emperor offered the Russians relatively lenient terms – demanding that Russia join the Continental System , withdraw its forces from Wallachia and Moldavia , and hand over the Ionian Islands to France . By contrast , Napoleon dictated very harsh peace terms for Prussia , despite the ceaseless exhortations of Queen Louise . <unk> out half of Prussian territories from the map , Napoleon created a new kingdom of 1 @,@ 100 square miles called Westphalia . He then appointed his young brother Jérôme as the new monarch of this kingdom . Prussia 's humiliating treatment at Tilsit caused a deep and bitter antagonism which festered as the Napoleonic era progressed . Moreover , Alexander 's pretensions at friendship with Napoleon led the latter to seriously misjudge the true intentions of his Russian counterpart , who would violate numerous provisions of the treaty in the next few years . Despite these problems , the Treaties of Tilsit at last gave Napoleon a respite from war and allowed him to return to France , which he had not seen in over 300 days . 
 = = = = Peninsular War and Erfurt = = = = 
 The settlements at Tilsit gave Napoleon time to organize his empire . One of his major objectives became enforcing the Continental System against the British . He decided to focus his attention on the Kingdom of Portugal , which consistently violated his trade prohibitions . After defeat in the War of the Oranges in 1801 , Portugal adopted a double @-@ sided policy . At first , John VI agreed to close his ports to British trade . The situation changed dramatically after the Franco @-@ Spanish defeat at Trafalgar ; John grew bolder and officially resumed diplomatic and trade relations with Britain . 
 Unhappy with this change of policy by the Portuguese government , Napoleon sent an army to invade Portugal . On 17 October 1807 , 24 @,@ 000 French troops under General Junot crossed the Pyrenees with Spanish cooperation and headed towards Portugal to enforce Napoleon 's orders . This attack was the first step in what would eventually become the Peninsular War , a six @-@ year struggle that significantly sapped French strength . Throughout the winter of 1808 , French agents became increasingly involved in Spanish internal affairs , attempting to incite discord between members of the Spanish royal family . On 16 February 1808 , secret French machinations finally materialized when Napoleon announced that he would intervene to mediate between the rival political factions in the country . Marshal Murat led 120 @,@ 000 troops into Spain and the French arrived in Madrid on 24 March , where wild riots against the occupation erupted just a few weeks later . Napoleon appointed his brother , Joseph Bonaparte , as the new King of Spain in the summer of 1808 . The appointment enraged a heavily religious and conservative Spanish population . Resistance to French aggression soon spread throughout the country . The shocking French defeat at the Battle of Bailén in July gave hope to Napoleon 's enemies and partly persuaded the French emperor to intervene in person . 
 Before going to Iberia , Napoleon decided to address several lingering issues with the Russians . At the Congress of Erfurt in October 1808 , Napoleon hoped to keep Russia on his side during the upcoming struggle in Spain and during any potential conflict against Austria . The two sides reached an agreement , the Erfurt Convention , that called upon Britain to cease its war against France , that recognized the Russian conquest of Finland from Sweden , and that affirmed Russian support for France in a possible war against Austria " to the best of its ability . " Napoleon then returned to France and prepared for war . The Grande Armée , under the Emperor 's personal command , rapidly crossed the Ebro River in November 1808 and inflicted a series of crushing defeats against the Spanish forces . After clearing the last Spanish force guarding the capital at <unk> , Napoleon entered Madrid on 4 December with 80 @,@ 000 troops . He then unleashed his soldiers against Moore and the British forces . The British were swiftly driven to the coast , and they withdrew from Spain entirely after a last stand at the Battle of Corunna in January 1809 . 
 Napoleon would end up leaving Iberia in order to deal with the Austrians in Central Europe , but the Peninsular War continued on long after his absence . He never returned to Spain after the 1808 campaign . Several months after Corunna , the British sent another army to the peninsula under the future Duke of Wellington . The war then settled into a complex and asymmetric strategic deadlock where all sides struggled to gain the upper hand . The highlight of the conflict became the brutal guerrilla warfare that engulfed much of the Spanish countryside . Both sides committed the worst atrocities of the Napoleonic Wars during this phase of the conflict . The vicious guerrilla fighting in Spain , largely absent from the French campaigns in Central Europe , severely disrupted the French lines of supply and communication . Although France maintained roughly 300 @,@ 000 troops in Iberia during the Peninsular War , the vast majority were tied down to garrison duty and to intelligence operations . The French were never able to concentrate all of their forces effectively , prolonging the war until events elsewhere in Europe finally turned the tide in favor of the Allies . After the invasion of Russia in 1812 , the number of French troops in Spain vastly declined as Napoleon needed reinforcements to conserve his strategic position in Europe . By 1814 , after scores of battles and sieges throughout Iberia , the Allies had managed to push the French out of the peninsula . 
 = = = = War of the Fifth Coalition and Marie Louise = = = = 
 After four years on the sidelines , Austria sought another war with France to avenge its recent defeats . Austria could not count on Russian support because the latter was at war with Britain , Sweden , and the Ottoman Empire in 1809 . Frederick William of Prussia initially promised to help the Austrians , but reneged before conflict began . A report from the Austrian finance minister suggested that the treasury would run out of money by the middle of 1809 if the large army that the Austrians had formed since the Third Coalition remained mobilized . Although Archduke Charles warned that the Austrians were not ready for another showdown with Napoleon , a stance that landed him in the so @-@ called " peace party , " he did not want to see the army demobilized either . On 8 February 1809 , the advocates for war finally succeeded when the Imperial Government secretly decided on another confrontation against the French . 
 In the early morning of 10 April , leading elements of the Austrian army crossed the Inn River and invaded Bavaria . The early Austrian attack surprised the French ; Napoleon himself was still in Paris when he heard about the invasion . He arrived at Donauwörth on the 17th to find the Grande Armée in a dangerous position , with its two wings separated by 75 miles ( 121 km ) and joined together by a thin cordon of Bavarian troops . Charles pressed the left wing of the French army and hurled his men towards the III Corps of Marshal Davout . In response , Napoleon came up with a plan to cut off the Austrians in the celebrated Landshut Maneuver . He realigned the axis of his army and marched his soldiers towards the town of Eckmühl . The French scored a convincing win in the resulting Battle of Eckmühl , forcing Charles to withdraw his forces over the Danube and into Bohemia . On 13 May , Vienna fell for the second time in four years , although the war continued since most of the Austrian army had survived the initial engagements in Southern Germany . 
 By 17 May , the main Austrian army under Charles had arrived on the Marchfeld . Charles kept the bulk of his troops several miles away from the river bank in hopes of concentrating them at the point where Napoleon decided to cross . On 21 May , the French made their first major effort to cross the Danube , precipitating the Battle of Aspern @-@ Essling . The Austrians enjoyed a comfortable numerical superiority over the French throughout the battle ; on the first day , Charles disposed of 110 @,@ 000 soldiers against only 31 @,@ 000 commanded by Napoleon . By the second day , reinforcements had boosted French numbers up to 70 @,@ 000 . The battle was characterized by a vicious back @-@ and @-@ forth struggle for the two villages of Aspern and Essling , the focal points of the French bridgehead . By the end of the fighting , the French had lost Aspern but still controlled Essling . A sustained Austrian artillery bombardment eventually convinced Napoleon to withdraw his forces back onto Lobau Island . Both sides inflicted about 23 @,@ 000 casualties on each other . It was the first defeat Napoleon suffered in a major set @-@ piece battle , and it caused excitement throughout many parts of Europe because it proved that he could be beaten on the battlefield . 
 After the setback at Aspern @-@ Essling , Napoleon took more than six weeks in planning and preparing for contingencies before he made another attempt at crossing the Danube . From 30 June to the early days of July , the French recrossed the Danube in strength , with more than 180 @,@ 000 troops marching across the Marchfeld towards the Austrians . Charles received the French with 150 @,@ 000 of his own men . In the ensuing Battle of Wagram , which also lasted two days , Napoleon commanded his forces in what was the largest battle of his career up until then . Neither side made much progress on 5 July , but the 6th produced a definitive outcome . Both sides launched major assaults on their flanks . Austrian attacks against the French left wing looked dangerous initially , but they were all beaten back . Meanwhile , a steady French attack against the Austrian left wing eventually compromised the entire position for Charles . Napoleon finished off the battle with a concentrated central thrust that punctured a hole in the Austrian army and forced Charles to retreat . Austrian losses were very heavy , reaching well over 40 @,@ 000 casualties . The French were too exhausted to pursue the Austrians immediately , but Napoleon eventually caught up with Charles at Znaim and the latter signed an armistice on 12 July . 
 In the Kingdom of Holland , the British launched the Walcheren Campaign to open up a second front in the war and to relieve the pressure on the Austrians . The British army only landed at Walcheren on 30 July , by which point the Austrians had already been defeated . The Walcheren Campaign was characterized by little fighting but heavy casualties thanks to the popularly dubbed " Walcheren Fever . " Over 4000 British troops were lost in a bungled campaign , and the rest withdrew in December 1809 . The main strategic result from the campaign became the delayed political settlement between the French and the Austrians . Emperor Francis wanted to wait and see how the British performed in their theater before entering into negotiations with Napoleon . Once it became apparent that the British were going nowhere , the Austrians agreed to peace talks . 
 The resulting Treaty of Schönbrunn in October 1809 was the harshest that France had imposed on Austria in recent memory . Metternich and Archduke Charles had the preservation of the Habsburg Empire as their fundamental goal , and to this end they succeeded by making Napoleon seek more modest goals in return for promises of friendship between the two powers . Nevertheless , while most of the hereditary lands remained a part of the Habsburg realm , France received Carinthia , Carniola , and the Adriatic ports , while Galicia was given to the Poles and the Salzburg area of the Tyrol went to the Bavarians . Austria lost over three million subjects , about one @-@ fifth of her total population , as a result of these territorial changes . Although fighting in Iberia continued , the War of the Fifth Coalition would be the last major conflict on the European continent for the next three years . 
 Napoleon turned his focus to domestic affairs after the war . Empress Joséphine had still not given birth to a child from Napoleon , who became worried about the future of his empire following his death . Desperate for a legitimate heir , Napoleon divorced Joséphine in January 1810 and started looking for a new wife . Hoping to cement the recent alliance with Austria through a family connection , Napoleon married the Archduchess Marie Louise , who was 18 years old at the time . On 20 March 1811 , Marie Louise gave birth to a baby boy , whom Napoleon made heir apparent and bestowed the title of King of Rome . His son never actually ruled the empire , but historians still refer to him as Napoleon II . 
 = = = = Invasion of Russia = = = = 
 In 1808 , Napoleon and Czar Alexander met at the Congress of Erfurt to preserve the Russo @-@ French alliance . The leaders had a friendly personal relationship after their first meeting at Tilsit in 1807 . By 1811 , however , tensions had increased and Alexander was under pressure from the Russian nobility to break off the alliance . A major strain on the relationship between the two nations became the regular violations of the Continental System by the Russians , which led Napoleon to threaten Alexander with serious consequences if he formed an alliance with Britain . 
 By 1812 , advisers to Alexander suggested the possibility of an invasion of the French Empire and the recapture of Poland . On receipt of intelligence reports on Russia 's war preparations , Napoleon expanded his Grande Armée to more than 450 @,@ 000 men . He ignored repeated advice against an invasion of the Russian heartland and prepared for an offensive campaign ; on 24 June 1812 the invasion commenced . 
 In an attempt to gain increased support from Polish nationalists and patriots , Napoleon termed the war the Second Polish War — the First Polish War had been the Bar Confederation uprising by Polish nobles against Russia in 1768 . Polish patriots wanted the Russian part of Poland to be joined with the Duchy of Warsaw and an independent Poland created . This was rejected by Napoleon , who stated he had promised his ally Austria this would not happen . Napoleon refused to <unk> the Russian serfs because of concerns this might provoke a reaction in his army 's rear . The serfs later committed atrocities against French soldiers during France 's retreat . 
 The Russians avoided Napoleon 's objective of a decisive engagement and instead retreated deeper into Russia . A brief attempt at resistance was made at Smolensk in August ; the Russians were defeated in a series of battles , and Napoleon resumed his advance . The Russians again avoided battle , although in a few cases this was only achieved because Napoleon uncharacteristically hesitated to attack when the opportunity arose . Owing to the Russian army 's scorched earth tactics , the French found it increasingly difficult to forage food for themselves and their horses . 
 The Russians eventually offered battle outside Moscow on 7 September : the Battle of Borodino resulted in approximately 44 @,@ 000 Russian and 35 @,@ 000 French dead , wounded or captured , and may have been the bloodiest day of battle in history up to that point in time . Although the French had won , the Russian army had accepted , and withstood , the major battle Napoleon had hoped would be decisive . Napoleon 's own account was : " The most terrible of all my battles was the one before Moscow . The French showed themselves to be worthy of victory , but the Russians showed themselves worthy of being invincible . " 
 The Russian army withdrew and retreated past Moscow . Napoleon entered the city , assuming its fall would end the war and Alexander would negotiate peace . However , on orders of the city 's governor Feodor <unk> , rather than capitulation , Moscow was burned . After five weeks , Napoleon and his army left . In early November Napoleon got concerned about loss of control back in France after the Malet coup of 1812 . His army walked through snow up to their knees and nearly 10 @,@ 000 men and horses froze to death on the night of 8 / 9 November alone . After Battle of Berezina Napoleon succeeded to escape but had to abandon much of the remaining artillery and baggage train . On 5 December , shortly before arriving in Vilnius , Napoleon left the army in a sledge . 
 The French suffered greatly in the course of a ruinous retreat , including from the harshness of the Russian Winter . The Armée had begun as over 400 @,@ 000 frontline troops , but in the end fewer than 40 @,@ 000 crossed the Berezina River in November 1812 . The Russians had lost 150 @,@ 000 in battle and hundreds of thousands of civilians . 
 = = = = War of the Sixth Coalition = = = = 
 There was a lull in fighting over the winter of 1812 – 13 while both the Russians and the French rebuilt their forces ; Napoleon was then able to field 350 @,@ 000 troops . Heartened by France 's loss in Russia , Prussia joined with Austria , Sweden , Russia , Great Britain , Spain , and Portugal in a new coalition . Napoleon assumed command in Germany and inflicted a series of defeats on the Coalition culminating in the Battle of Dresden in August 1813 . 
 Despite these successes , the numbers continued to mount against Napoleon , and the French army was pinned down by a force twice its size and lost at the Battle of Leipzig . This was by far the largest battle of the Napoleonic Wars and cost more than 90 @,@ 000 casualties in total . 
 The Allies offered peace terms in the Frankfurt proposals in November 1813 . Napoleon would remain as Emperor of France , but it would be reduced to its " natural frontiers . " That meant that France could retain control of Belgium , Savoy and the Rhineland ( the west bank of the Rhine River ) , while giving up control of all the rest , including all of Spain and the Netherlands , and most of Italy and Germany . Metternich told Napoleon these were the best terms the Allies were likely to offer ; after further victories , the terms would be harsher and harsher . Metternich 's motivation was to maintain France as a balance against Russian threats , while ending the highly destabilizing series of wars . 
 Napoleon , expecting to win the war , delayed too long and lost this opportunity ; by December the Allies had withdrawn the offer . When his back was to the wall in 1814 he tried to reopen peace negotiations on the basis of accepting the Frankfurt proposals . The Allies now had new , harsher terms that included the retreat of France to its 1791 boundaries , which meant the loss of Belgium . Napoleon would remain Emperor , however he rejected the term . The British wanted Napoleon permanently removed ; they prevailed . Napoleon adamantly refused . 
 Napoleon withdrew back into France , his army reduced to 70 @,@ 000 soldiers , and little cavalry ; he faced more than three times as many Allied troops . The French were surrounded : British armies pressed from the south , and other Coalition forces positioned to attack from the German states . Napoleon won a series of victories in the Six Days ' Campaign , though these were not significant enough to turn the tide . The leaders of Paris surrendered to the Coalition in March 1814 . 
 On 1 April , Alexander addressed the Sénat <unk> . Long docile to Napoleon , under Talleyrand 's prodding it had turned against him . Alexander told the Sénat that the Allies were fighting against Napoleon , not France , and they were prepared to offer honorable peace terms if Napoleon were removed from power . The next day , the Sénat passed the <unk> de <unk> de l 'Empereur ( " Emperor 's Demise Act " ) , which declared Napoleon deposed . Napoleon had advanced as far as Fontainebleau when he learned that Paris was lost . When Napoleon proposed the army march on the capital , his senior officers and marshals mutinied . On 4 April , led by Ney , they confronted Napoleon . Napoleon asserted the army would follow him , and Ney replied the army would follow its generals . While the ordinary soldiers and regimental officers wanted to fight on , without any senior officers or marshals any prospective invasion of Paris would have been impossible . Bowing to the inevitable , on 4 April Napoleon abdicated in favour of his son , with Marie @-@ Louise as regent . However , the Allies refused to accept this under prodding from Alexander , who feared that Napoleon might find an excuse to retake the throne . Napoleon was then forced to announce his unconditional abdication only two days later . 
 = = = = Exile to Elba = = = = 
 The Allied Powers having declared that Emperor Napoleon was the sole obstacle to the restoration of peace in Europe , Emperor Napoleon , faithful to his oath , declares that he renounces , for himself and his heirs , the thrones of France and Italy , and that there is no personal sacrifice , even that of his life , which he is not ready to do in the interests of France . 
 Done in the palace of Fontainebleau , 11 April 1814 . 
 In the Treaty of Fontainebleau , the Allies exiled him to Elba , an island of 12 @,@ 000 inhabitants in the Mediterranean , 20 km ( 12 mi ) off the Tuscan coast . They gave him sovereignty over the island and allowed him to retain the title of Emperor . Napoleon attempted suicide with a pill he had carried after nearly being captured by the Russians during the retreat from Moscow . Its potency had weakened with age , however , and he survived to be exiled while his wife and son took refuge in Austria . In the first few months on Elba he created a small navy and army , developed the iron mines , oversaw the construction of new roads , issued decrees on modern agricultural methods , and overhauled the island 's legal and educational system . 
 A few months into his exile , Napoleon learned that his ex @-@ wife Josephine had died in France . He was devastated by the news , locking himself in his room and refusing to leave for two days . 
 = = = = Hundred Days = = = = 
 Separated from his wife and son , who had returned to Austria , cut off from the allowance guaranteed to him by the Treaty of Fontainebleau , and aware of rumours he was about to be banished to a remote island in the Atlantic Ocean . Napoleon escaped from Elba , with 700 men over him , in the brig Inconstant on 26 February 1815 . Two days later , he landed on the French mainland at Golfe @-@ Juan and started heading north . 
 The 5th Regiment was sent to intercept him and made contact just south of Grenoble on 7 March 1815 . Napoleon approached the regiment alone , dismounted his horse and , when he was within gunshot range , shouted to the soldiers , " Here I am . Kill your Emperor , if you wish . " The soldiers quickly responded with , " Vive L 'Empereur ! " Ney , who had boasted to the restored Bourbon king , Louis XVIII , that he would bring Napoleon to Paris in an iron cage , affectionately kissed his former emperor and forgot his oath of allegiance to the Bourbon monarch . The two then marched together towards Paris with a growing army . The unpopular Louis XVIII fled to Belgium after realizing he had little political support . On 13 March , the powers at the Congress of Vienna declared Napoleon an outlaw . Four days later , Great Britain , Russia , Austria , and Prussia each pledged to put 150 @,@ 000 men into the field to end his rule . 
 Napoleon arrived in Paris on 20 March and governed for a period now called the Hundred Days . By the start of June the armed forces available to him had reached 200 @,@ 000 , and he decided to go on the offensive to attempt to drive a wedge between the oncoming British and Prussian armies . The French Army of the North crossed the frontier into the United Kingdom of the Netherlands , in modern @-@ day Belgium . 
 Napoleon 's forces fought the Coalition armies , commanded by the Duke of Wellington and Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher , at the Battle of Waterloo on 18 June 1815 . Wellington 's army withstood repeated attacks by the French and drove them from the field while the Prussians arrived in force and broke through Napoleon 's right flank . 
 Napoleon returned to Paris and found that both the legislature and the people had turned against him . Realizing his position was untenable , he abdicated on 22 June in favour of his son . He left Paris three days later and settled at Josephine 's former palace in Malmaison ( on the western bank of the Seine about 17 kilometres ( 11 mi ) west of Paris ) . Even as Napoleon travelled to Paris , the Coalition forces crossed the frontier swept through France ( arriving in the vicinity of Paris on 29 June ) , with the stated intent of restoring Louis XVIII to the French throne . 
 When Napoleon heard that Prussian troops had orders to capture him dead or alive , he fled to Rochefort , considering an escape to the United States . However , British ships were blocking every port . Finally , Napoleon demanded asylum from the British Captain Frederick Maitland on HMS Bellerophon on 15 July 1815 . 
 = = Exile on Saint Helena = = 
 Britain kept Napoleon on the island of Saint Helena in the Atlantic Ocean , 1 @,@ 870 km ( 1 @,@ 162 mi ) from the west coast of Africa . Napoleon was moved to Longwood House there in December 1815 ; it had fallen into disrepair , and the location was damp , windswept and unhealthy . The Times published articles insinuating the British government was trying to hasten his death , and he often complained of the living conditions in letters to the governor and his custodian , Hudson Lowe . 
 With a small cadre of followers , Napoleon dictated his memoirs and grumbled about conditions . Lowe cut Napoleon 's expenditure , ruled that no gifts were allowed if they mentioned his imperial status , and made his supporters sign a guarantee they would stay with the prisoner indefinitely . 
 There were rumors of plots and even of his escape , but in reality no serious attempts were made . For English poet Lord Byron , Napoleon was the epitome of the Romantic hero , the persecuted , lonely , and flawed genius . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 His personal physician , Barry O 'Meara , warned London that his declining state of health was mainly caused by the harsh treatment . Napoleon confined himself for months on end in his damp and wretched habitation of Longwood . 
 In February 1821 , Napoleon 's health began to deteriorate rapidly . He reconciled with the Catholic Church . He died on 5 May 1821 , after confession , Extreme Unction and Viaticum in the presence of Father Ange <unk> . His last words were , " France , l 'armée , tête d 'armée , Joséphine " ( " France , army , head of the army , Joséphine " ) . 
 Napoleon 's original death mask was created around 6 May , although it is not clear which doctor created it . In his will , he had asked to be buried on the banks of the Seine , but the British governor said he should be buried on Saint Helena , in the Valley of the Willows . 
 In 1840 , Louis Philippe I obtained permission from the British to return Napoleon 's remains to France . On 15 December 1840 , a state funeral was held . The hearse proceeded from the Arc de Triomphe down the Champs @-@ Élysées , across the Place de la Concorde to the Esplanade des Invalides and then to the cupola in St Jérôme 's Chapel , where it remained until the tomb designed by Louis Visconti was completed . In 1861 , Napoleon 's remains were entombed in a porphyry sarcophagus in the crypt under the dome at Les Invalides . 
 = = = = Cause of death = = = = 
 The cause of his death has been debated . Napoleon 's physician , François Carlo Antommarchi , led the autopsy , which found the cause of death to be stomach cancer . Antommarchi did not , however , sign the official report . Napoleon 's father had died of stomach cancer , although this was seemingly unknown at the time of the autopsy . Antommarchi found evidence of a stomach ulcer ; this was the most convenient explanation for the British , who wanted to avoid criticism over their care of Napoleon . 
 In 1955 , the diaries of Napoleon 's valet , Louis Marchand , were published . His description of Napoleon in the months before his death led Sten Forshufvud in a 1961 paper in Nature to put forward other causes for his death , including deliberate arsenic poisoning . Arsenic was used as a poison during the era because it was undetectable when administered over a long period . Forshufvud , in a 1978 book with Ben Weider , noted that Napoleon 's body was found to be remarkably well preserved when moved in 1840 . Arsenic is a strong preservative , and therefore this supported the poisoning hypothesis . Forshufvud and Weider observed that Napoleon had attempted to quench abnormal thirst by drinking large amounts of <unk> syrup that contained cyanide compounds in the almonds used for flavouring . 
 They maintained that the potassium tartrate used in his treatment prevented his stomach from expelling these compounds and that his thirst was a symptom of the poison . Their hypothesis was that the calomel given to Napoleon became an overdose , which killed him and left extensive tissue damage behind . According to a 2007 article , the type of arsenic found in Napoleon 's hair shafts was mineral , the most toxic , and according to toxicologist Patrick <unk> , this supported the conclusion that he was murdered . 
 There have been modern studies that have supported the original autopsy finding . In a 2008 study , researchers analysed samples of Napoleon 's hair from throughout his life , as well as samples from his family and other contemporaries . All samples had high levels of arsenic , approximately 100 times higher than the current average . According to these researchers , Napoleon 's body was already heavily contaminated with arsenic as a boy , and the high arsenic concentration in his hair was not caused by intentional poisoning ; people were constantly exposed to arsenic from glues and dyes throughout their lives . Studies published in 2007 and 2008 dismissed evidence of arsenic poisoning , and confirmed evidence of peptic ulcer and gastric cancer as the cause of death . 
 = = Religion = = 
 Napoleon 's baptism took place in Ajaccio on 21 July 1771 ; he was piously raised as a Catholic but he never developed much faith . As an adult , Napoleon was a deist , and showed more interest in Muhammad than in Jesus . Napoleon 's deity was an absent and distant God . However he had a keen appreciation of the power of organized religion in social and political affairs , and paid a great deal of attention to bending it to his purposes . He noted the influence of Catholicism 's rituals and splendors . Napoleon had a civil marriage with Joséphine de Beauharnais , without religious ceremony . Napoleon was crowned Emperor on 2 December 1804 at Notre Dame de Paris by Pope Pius VII . On 1 April 1810 , Napoleon married the Austrian princess Marie Louise in a Catholic ceremony . During his brother 's rule in Spain , he abolished the Spanish Inquisition in 1813 . 
 = = = Concordat = = = 
 Seeking national reconciliation between revolutionaries and Catholics , the Concordat of 1801 was signed on 15 July 1801 between Napoleon and Pope Pius VII . It solidified the Roman Catholic Church as the majority church of France and brought back most of its civil status . The hostility of devout Catholics against the state had now largely been resolved . It did not restore the vast church lands and endowments that had been seized during the revolution and sold off . As a part of the Concordat , he presented another set of laws called the Organic Articles . 
 While the Concordat restored much power to the papacy , the balance of church @-@ state relations had tilted firmly in Napoleon 's favour . He selected the bishops and supervised church finances . Napoleon and the pope both found the Concordat useful . Similar arrangements were made with the Church in territories controlled by Napoleon , especially Italy and Germany . Now , Napoleon could win favor with the Catholics while also controlling Rome in a political sense . Napoleon said in April 1801 , " Skillful conquerors have not got entangled with priests . They can both contain them and use them . " French children were issued a catechism that taught them to love and respect Napoleon . 
 = = = Religious emancipation = = = 
 Napoleon emancipated Jews , as well as Protestants in Catholic countries and Catholics in Protestant countries , from laws which restricted them to ghettos , and he expanded their rights to property , worship , and careers . Despite the anti @-@ semitic reaction to Napoleon 's policies from foreign governments and within France , he believed emancipation would benefit France by attracting Jews to the country given the restrictions they faced elsewhere . 
 He stated , " I will never accept any proposals that will obligate the Jewish people to leave France , because to me the Jews are the same as any other citizen in our country . It takes weakness to chase them out of the country , but it takes strength to assimilate them . " He was seen as so favourable to the Jews that the Russian Orthodox Church formally condemned him as " Antichrist and the Enemy of God " . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Historians agree that Napoleon 's remarkable personality was one key to his influence . They emphasize the strength of his ambition that took him from an obscure village to command of most of Europe . George F. E. Rudé stresses his " rare combination of will , intellect and physical vigour . " At 5 ft 6 in ( 168 cm ) , he was not physically imposing but in one @-@ on @-@ one situations he typically had a hypnotic effect on people and seemingly bent the strongest leaders to his will . He understood military technology , but was not an innovator in that regard . He was an innovator in using the financial , bureaucratic , and diplomatic resources of France . He could rapidly dictate a series of complex commands to his subordinates , keeping in mind where major units were expected to be at each future point , and like a chess master , " seeing " the best plays moves ahead . 
 Napoleon maintained strict , efficient work habits , prioritizing what needed to be done . He cheated at cards , but repaid the losses ; he had to win at everything he attempted . He kept relays of staff and secretaries at work . Unlike many generals , Napoleon did not examine history to ask what Hannibal or Alexander or anyone else did in a similar situation . Critics said he won many battles simply because of luck ; Napoleon responded , " Give me lucky generals , " aware that " luck " comes to leaders who recognize opportunity , and seize it . Dwyer argues that Napoleon 's victories at Austerlitz and Jena in 1805 @-@ 06 heightened his sense of self @-@ grandiosity , leaving him even more certain of his destiny and invincibility . By the Russian campaign in 1812 , however , Napoleon seems to have lost his verve . With crisis after crisis at hand , he rarely rose to the occasion . Some historians have suggested a physical deterioration , but others note that an impaired Napoleon was still a brilliant general . 
 In terms of influence on events , it was more than Napoleon 's personality that took effect . He reorganized France itself to supply the men and money needed for great wars . Above all he inspired his men — Wellington said his presence on the battlefield was worth 40 @,@ 000 soldiers , for he inspired confidence from privates to field marshals . He also unnerved the enemy . At the Battle of Auerstadt in 1806 , King Frederick William III of Prussia outnumbered the French by 63 @,@ 000 to 27 @,@ 000 ; however , when he mistakenly was told that Napoleon was in command , he ordered a hasty retreat that turned into a rout . The force of his personality neutralized material difficulties as his soldiers fought with the confidence that with Napoleon in charge they would surely win . 
 = = Image = = 
 Napoleon has become a worldwide cultural icon who symbolises military genius and political power . Martin van Creveld described him as " the most competent human being who ever lived " . Since his death , many towns , streets , ships , and even cartoon characters have been named after him . He has been portrayed in hundreds of films and discussed in hundreds of thousands of books and articles . 
 During the Napoleonic Wars he was taken seriously by the British press as a dangerous tyrant , poised to invade . He was often referred to by the British as Boney . A nursery rhyme warned children that Bonaparte ravenously ate naughty people ; the " bogeyman " . The British Tory press sometimes depicted Napoleon as much smaller than average height , and this image persists . Confusion about his height also results from the difference between the French pouce and British inch — 2 @.@ 71 cm and 2 @.@ 54 cm , respectively . The myth of the " Napoleon Complex ” — named after him to describe men who have an inferiority complex — stems primarily from the fact that he was listed , incorrectly , as 5 feet 2 inches ( in French units ) at the time of his death . In fact , he was 1 @.@ 68 metres ( 5 ft 6 in ) tall , an average height for a man in that period . 
 In 1908 Alfred Adler , a psychologist , cited Napoleon to describe an inferiority complex in which short people adopt an over @-@ aggressive behaviour to compensate for lack of height ; this inspired the term Napoleon complex . The stock character of Napoleon is a comically short " petty tyrant " and this has become a cliché in popular culture . He is often portrayed wearing a large bicorne hat with a hand @-@ in @-@ waistcoat gesture — a reference to the painting produced in 1812 by Jacques @-@ Louis David . 
 When he became First Consul and later Emperor , Napoleon eschewed his general 's uniform and habitually wore the simple green colonel uniform ( non @-@ Hussar ) of a colonel of the Chasseur à Cheval of the Imperial Guard , the regiment that often served as his personal escort , with a large bicorne . He also habitually wore ( usually on Sundays ) the blue uniform of a colonel of the Imperial Guard Foot Grenadiers ( blue with white facings and red cuffs ) . He also wore his Légion d 'honneur star , medal and ribbon , and the Order of the Iron Crown decorations , white French @-@ style culottes and white stockings . This was in contrast to the gorgeous and complex uniforms with many decorations of his marshals and those around him . 
 = = Reforms = = 
 Napoleon instituted lasting reforms , including higher education , a tax code , road and sewer systems , and established the Banque de France , the first central bank in French history . He negotiated the Concordat of 1801 with the Catholic Church , which sought to reconcile the mostly Catholic population to his regime . It was presented alongside the Organic Articles , which regulated public worship in France . His dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire paved the way to German Unification later in the 19th century . The sale of the Louisiana Territory to the United States doubled the size of the country and was a major event in American history . 
 In May 1802 , he instituted the Legion of Honour , a substitute for the old royalist decorations and orders of chivalry , to encourage civilian and military achievements ; the order is still the highest decoration in France . 
 = = = Napoleonic Code = = = 
 Napoleon 's set of civil laws , the Code Civil — now often known as the Napoleonic Code — was prepared by committees of legal experts under the supervision of Jean Jacques Régis de <unk> , the Second Consul . Napoleon participated actively in the sessions of the Council of State that revised the drafts . The development of the code was a fundamental change in the nature of the civil law legal system with its stress on clearly written and accessible law . Other codes ( " Les cinq codes " ) were commissioned by Napoleon to codify criminal and commerce law ; a Code of Criminal Instruction was published , which enacted rules of due process . 
 The Napoleonic code was adopted throughout much of Europe , though only in the lands he conquered , and remained in force after Napoleon 's defeat . Napoleon said : " My true glory is not to have won forty battles ... Waterloo will erase the memory of so many victories . ... But ... what will live forever , is my Civil Code . " The Code still has importance today in a quarter of the world 's jurisdictions including in Europe , the Americas and Africa . 
 Dieter <unk> described the code as a " revolutionary project " which spurred the development of bourgeois society in Germany by the extension of the right to own property and an acceleration towards the end of feudalism . Napoleon reorganised what had been the Holy Roman Empire , made up of more than a thousand entities , into a more streamlined forty @-@ state Confederation of the Rhine ; this provided the basis for the German Confederation and the unification of Germany in 1871 . 
 The movement toward national unification in Italy was similarly precipitated by Napoleonic rule . These changes contributed to the development of nationalism and the nation state . 
 Napoleon implemented a wide array of liberal reforms in France and across Europe , especially in Italy and Germany , as summarized by British historian Andrew Roberts : 
 The ideas that underpin our modern world – meritocracy , equality before the law , property rights , religious toleration , modern secular education , sound finances , and so on – were championed , consolidated , codified and geographically extended by Napoleon . To them he added a rational and efficient local administration , an end to rural banditry , the encouragement of science and the arts , the abolition of feudalism and the greatest codification of laws since the fall of the Roman Empire . 
 Napoleon directly overthrew feudal remains in much of western Europe . He liberalised property laws , ended seigneurial dues , abolished the guild of merchants and craftsmen to facilitate entrepreneurship , legalised divorce , closed the Jewish ghettos and made Jews equal to everyone else . The Inquisition ended as did the Holy Roman Empire . The power of church courts and religious authority was sharply reduced and equality under the law was proclaimed for all men . 
 = = = Warfare = = = 
 In the field of military organisation , Napoleon borrowed from previous theorists such as Jacques Antoine Hippolyte , Comte de Guibert , and from the reforms of preceding French governments , and then developed much of what was already in place . He continued the policy , which emerged from the Revolution , of promotion based primarily on merit . 
 Corps replaced divisions as the largest army units , mobile artillery was integrated into reserve batteries , the staff system became more fluid and cavalry returned as an important formation in French military doctrine . These methods are now referred to as essential features of Napoleonic warfare . Though he consolidated the practice of modern conscription introduced by the Directory , one of the restored monarchy 's first acts was to end it . 
 His opponents learned from Napoleon 's innovations . The increased importance of artillery after 1807 stemmed from his creation of a highly mobile artillery force , the growth in artillery numbers , and changes in artillery practices . As a result of these factors , Napoleon , rather than relying on infantry to wear away the enemy 's defenses , now could use massed artillery as a spearhead to pound a break in the enemy 's line that was then exploited by supporting infantry and cavalry . <unk> rejects the alternative theory that growing reliance on artillery by the French army beginning in 1807 was an outgrowth of the declining quality of the French infantry and , later , France 's inferiority in cavalry numbers . Weapons and other kinds of military technology remained largely static through the Revolutionary and Napoleonic eras , but 18th @-@ century operational mobility underwent significant change . 
 Napoleon 's biggest influence was in the conduct of warfare . Antoine @-@ Henri Jomini explained Napoleon 's methods in a widely used textbook that influenced all European and American armies . Napoleon was regarded by the influential military theorist Carl von Clausewitz as a genius in the operational art of war , and historians rank him as a great military commander . Wellington , when asked who was the greatest general of the day , answered : " In this age , in past ages , in any age , Napoleon . " 
 Under Napoleon , a new emphasis towards the destruction , not just outmanoeuvring , of enemy armies emerged . Invasions of enemy territory occurred over broader fronts which made wars costlier and more decisive . The political effect of war increased significantly ; defeat for a European power meant more than the loss of isolated enclaves . Near @-@ Carthaginian <unk> intertwined whole national efforts , intensifying the Revolutionary phenomenon of total war . 
 = = = Metric system = = = 
 The official introduction of the metric system in September 1799 was unpopular in large sections of French society . Napoleon 's rule greatly aided adoption of the new standard not only across France but also across the French sphere of influence . Napoleon ultimately took a retrograde step in 1812 when he passed legislation to introduce the mesures usuelles ( traditional units of measurement ) for retail trade — a system of measure that resembled the pre @-@ revolutionary units but were based on the kilogram and the metre ; for example the livre metrique ( metric pound ) was 500 g instead of 489 @.@ 5 g — the value of the livre du roi ( the king 's pound ) . Other units of measure were rounded in a similar manner . This however laid the foundations for the definitive introduction of the metric system across Europe in the middle of the 19th century . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Napoleon 's educational reforms laid the foundation of a modern system of education in France and throughout much of Europe . Napoleon synthesized the best academic elements from the Ancien Régime , The Enlightenment , and the Revolution , with the aim of establishing a stable , well @-@ educated and prosperous society . He made French the only official language . He left some primary education in the hands of religious orders , but he offered public support to secondary education . Napoleon founded a number of state secondary schools ( <unk> ) designed to produce a standardized education that was uniform across France . All students were taught the sciences along with modern and classical languages . Unlike the system during the Ancien Régime , religious topics did not dominate the curriculum , although they were present in addition to teachers from the clergy . Napoleon simply hoped to use religion to produce social stability . He gave special attention to the advanced centers , notably the École Polytechnique , that provided both military expertise and state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art research in science . Napoleon made some of the first major efforts at establishing a system of secular and public education . The system featured scholarships and strict discipline , with the result being a French educational system that outperformed its European counterparts , many of which borrowed from the French system . 
 = = Memory and evaluation = = 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 In the political realm , historians debate whether Napoleon was " an enlightened despot who laid the foundations of modern Europe or , instead , a megalomaniac who wrought greater misery than any man before the coming of Hitler . " Many historians have concluded that he had grandiose foreign policy ambitions . The Continental powers as late as 1808 were willing to give him nearly all of his remarkable gains and titles , but some scholars maintain he was overly aggressive and pushed for too much , until his empire collapsed . 
 Napoleon ended lawlessness and disorder in post @-@ Revolutionary France . He was , however , considered a tyrant and usurper by his opponents . His critics charge that he was not significantly troubled when faced with the prospect of war and death for thousands , turned his search for undisputed rule into a series of conflicts throughout Europe and ignored treaties and conventions alike . His role in the Haitian Revolution and decision to reinstate slavery in France 's oversea colonies are controversial and affect his reputation . 
 Napoleon institutionalised plunder of conquered territories : French museums contain art stolen by Napoleon 's forces from across Europe . Artefacts were brought to the Musée du Louvre for a grand central museum ; his example would later serve as inspiration for more notorious imitators . He was compared to Adolf Hitler most famously by the historian Pieter Geyl in 1947 and Claude <unk> in 2005 . David G. Chandler , a foremost historian of Napoleonic warfare , wrote in 1973 that , " Nothing could be more degrading to the former [ Napoleon ] and more flattering to the latter [ Hitler ] . The comparison is odious . On the whole Napoleon was inspired by a noble dream , wholly dissimilar from Hitler 's ... Napoleon left great and lasting testimonies to his genius — in codes of law and national identities which survive to the present day . Adolf Hitler left nothing but destruction . " 
 Critics argue Napoleon 's true legacy must reflect the loss of status for France and needless deaths brought by his rule : historian Victor Davis Hanson writes , " After all , the military record is unquestioned — 17 years of wars , perhaps six million Europeans dead , France bankrupt , her overseas colonies lost . " McLynn notes that , " He can be viewed as the man who set back European economic life for a generation by the dislocating impact of his wars . " However , Vincent Cronin replies that such criticism relies on the flawed premise that Napoleon was responsible for the wars which bear his name , when in fact France was the victim of a series of coalitions which aimed to destroy the ideals of the Revolution . 
 = = = Propaganda and memory = = = 
 Napoleon 's use of propaganda contributed to his rise to power , legitimated his régime , and established his image for posterity . Strict censorship , controlling aspects of the press , books , theater , and art , was part of his propaganda scheme , aimed at portraying him as bringing desperately wanted peace and stability to France . The propagandistic rhetoric changed in relation to events and to the atmosphere of Napoleon 's reign , focusing first on his role as a general in the army and identification as a soldier , and moving to his role as emperor and a civil leader . Specifically targeting his civilian audience , Napoleon fostered an important , though uneasy , relationship with the contemporary art community , taking an active role in commissioning and controlling different forms of art production to suit his propaganda goals . 
 Hazareesingh ( 2004 ) explores how Napoleon 's image and memory are best understood . They played a key role in collective political defiance of the Bourbon restoration monarchy in 1815 – 1830 . People from different walks of life and areas of France , particularly Napoleonic veterans , drew on the Napoleonic legacy and its connections with the ideals of the 1789 revolution . 
 Widespread rumors of Napoleon 's return from St. Helena and Napoleon as an inspiration for patriotism , individual and collective liberties , and political mobilization manifested themselves in seditious materials , displaying the tricolor and rosettes . There were also subversive activities celebrating anniversaries of Napoleon 's life and reign and disrupting royal celebrations — they demonstrated the prevailing and successful goal of the varied supporters of Napoleon to constantly destabilize the Bourbon regime . 
 Datta ( 2005 ) shows that , following the collapse of militaristic <unk> in the late 1880s , the Napoleonic legend was divorced from party politics and revived in popular culture . Concentrating on two plays and two novels from the period — Victorien Sardou 's Madame Sans @-@ <unk> ( 1893 ) , Maurice Barrès 's Les <unk> ( 1897 ) , Edmond Rostand 's L 'Aiglon ( 1900 ) , and André de Lorde and Gyp 's <unk> ( 1913 ) Datta examines how writers and critics of the Belle Époque exploited the Napoleonic legend for diverse political and cultural ends . 
 Reduced to a minor character , the new fictional Napoleon became not a world historical figure but an intimate one – fashioned by individuals ' needs and consumed as popular entertainment . In their attempts to represent the emperor as a figure of national unity , proponents and detractors of the Third Republic used the legend as a vehicle for exploring anxieties about gender and fears about the processes of democratization that accompanied this new era of mass politics and culture . 
 International Napoleonic Congresses take place regularly , with participation by members of the French and American military , French politicians and scholars from different countries . In January 2012 , the mayor of Montereau @-@ Fault @-@ Yonne , near Paris — the site of a late victory of Napoleon — proposed development of Napoleon 's Bivouac , a commemorative theme park at a projected cost of 200 million euros . 
 = = = Long @-@ term influence outside France = = = 
 Napoleon was responsible for spreading the values of the French Revolution to other countries , especially in legal reform and the abolition of serfdom . 
 After the fall of Napoleon , not only was Napoleonic Code retained by conquered countries including the Netherlands , Belgium , parts of Italy and Germany , but has been used as the basis of certain parts of law outside Europe including the Dominican Republic , the US state of Louisiana and the Canadian province of Quebec . The memory of Napoleon in Poland is favorable , for his support for independence and opposition to Russia , his legal code , the abolition of serfdom , and the introduction of modern middle class bureaucracies . 
 Napoleon could be considered one of the founders of modern Germany . After dissolving the Holy Roman Empire , he reduced the number of German states from 300 to less than 50 , paving the way to German Unification . A byproduct of the French occupation was a strong development in German nationalism . Napoleon also significantly aided the United States when he agreed to sell the territory of Louisiana for 15 million dollars during the presidency of Thomas Jefferson . That territory almost doubled the size of the United States , adding the equivalent of 13 states to the Union . 
 = = Marriages and children = = 
 Napoleon married Joséphine de Beauharnais in 1796 , when he was 26 ; she was a 32 @-@ year @-@ old widow whose first husband had been executed during the Revolution . Until she met Bonaparte , she had been known as " Rose " , a name which he disliked . He called her " Joséphine " instead , and she went by this name henceforth . Bonaparte often sent her love letters while on his campaigns . He formally adopted her son Eugène and cousin Stéphanie and arranged dynastic marriages for them . Joséphine had her daughter Hortense marry Napoleon 's brother Louis . 
 Joséphine had lovers , including lieutenant Hippolyte Charles , during Napoleon 's Italian campaign . Napoleon learnt of that affair and a letter he wrote about it was intercepted by the British and published widely , to embarrass Napoleon . Napoleon had his own affairs too : during the Egyptian campaign he took Pauline <unk> <unk> , the wife of a junior officer , as his mistress . She became known as " Cleopatra . " 
 While Napoleon 's mistresses had children by him , Joséphine did not produce an heir , possibly because of either the stresses of her imprisonment during the Reign of Terror or an abortion she may have had in her twenties . Napoleon ultimately chose divorce so he could remarry in search of an heir . Despite his divorce from Josephine , Napoleon showed his dedication to her for the rest of his life . When he heard the news of her death while on exile in Elba , he locked himself in his room and would not come out for two full days . Her name would also be his final word on his deathbed in 1821 . 
 In March 1810 , he married the 19 @-@ year old Marie Louise , Archduchess of Austria , and a great niece of Marie Antoinette by proxy ; thus he had married into a German royal and imperial family . Louise was less than happy with the arrangement , at least at first , stating " Just to see the man would be the worst form of torture . " Her great @-@ aunt had been executed in France , while Napoleon had fought numerous campaigns against Austria all throughout his military career . However , she seemed to warm up to him over time . After her wedding , she wrote to her father " He loves me very much . I respond to his love sincerely . There is something very fetching and very eager about him that is impossible to resist . " 
 Napoleon and Marie Louis remained married until his death , though she did not join him in exile on Elba and thereafter never saw her husband again . The couple had one child , Napoleon Francis Joseph Charles ( 1811 – 1832 ) , known from birth as the King of Rome . He became Napoleon II in 1814 and reigned for only two weeks . He was awarded the title of the Duke of Reichstadt in 1818 and died of tuberculosis aged 21 , with no children . 
 Napoleon acknowledged one illegitimate son : Charles Léon ( 1806 – 1881 ) by Eléonore <unk> de La <unk> . Alexandre Colonna @-@ Walewski ( 1810 – 1868 ) , the son of his mistress Maria <unk> , although acknowledged by <unk> 's husband , was also widely known to be his child , and the DNA of his direct male descendant has been used to help confirm Napoleon 's Y @-@ chromosome haplotype . He may have had further unacknowledged illegitimate offspring as well , such as Eugen <unk> von <unk> by Emilie Victoria Kraus and Hélène Napoleone Bonaparte ( 1816 – 1907 ) by <unk> de <unk> . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours , and arms = = 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = = Historiography and memory = = = 
 Dwyer , Philip ( 2008 ) . " Remembering and Forgetting in Contemporary France : Napoleon , Slavery , and the French History Wars " . French Politics , Culture & Society 26 ( 3 ) : 110 – 122 . 
 Englund , Steven . " Napoleon and Hitler " Journal of the Historical Society ( 2006 ) 6 # 1 pp 151 – 169 . 
 Geyl , Pieter ( 1982 ) [ 1947 ] . Napoleon For and Against . Penguin Books . 
 Hanson , Victor Davis ( 2003 ) . " The Claremont Institute : The Little Tyrant , A review of Napoleon : A Penguin Life " . The Claremont Institute . 
 Hazareesingh , Sudhir ( 2005 ) . The Legend of <unk> excerpt and text search 
 Hazareesingh , Sudhir . " Memory and Political Imagination : The Legend of Napoleon Revisited , " French History ( 2004 ) 18 # 4 pp 463 – 483 . 
 Hazareesingh , Sudhir ( 2005 ) . " Napoleonic Memory in Nineteenth @-@ Century France : The Making of a Liberal Legend " . <unk> 120 ( 4 ) : 747 – 773 . 
 = Lactarius fallax = 
 Lactarius fallax , commonly known as the velvety milk cap , is a species of fungus in the Russulaceae family . Found in both spruce and mixed conifer forests , it is a fairly common species in the Pacific Northwest region of North America , with a northerly range extending to Alaska . Its fruit bodies are medium @-@ sized , with velvety , brown to blackish caps up to 3 – 9 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) in diameter bearing a distinct pointed umbo . The caps are supported by velvety stems up to 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) long and 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) thick . The mushroom oozes a whitish latex when it is cut , and injured tissue eventually turns a dull reddish color . The eastern North American and European species Lactarius lignyotus is closely similar in appearance , but can be distinguished by its differing range . 
 = = Taxonomy and classification = = 
 The species was originally described by American mycologists Alexander H. Smith and Lexemuel Ray Hesler in a 1962 publication . Smith made the initial collection in late October 1944 , in Rhododendron , Oregon . The publication also described the variety Lactarius fallax var. concolor based on specimens collected in Mount Hood . According to Smith and Hesler , this variety had been to that point generally identified as Lactarius lignyotus in the Pacific Northwest . They described the variety L. lignyotus var. americanus to account for differences such as " spore ornamentation , distant gills at maturity , and the typically slightly acrid taste " . However , in their 1979 monograph of North American Lactarius species , they considered L. lignyotus var. americanus to be equivalent ( and thus synonymous ) to L. fallax var. concolor . The specific epithet fallax is derived from the Latin word " deceptive " . The mushroom is commonly known as the " velvety milk cap " . 
 Lactarius fallax is classified in the section <unk> of the subgenus <unk> of the genus Lactarius . Species in this section have brown to blackish caps , and a cap cuticle that contains a dissolved brown pigment . The cuticle of most species is of the trichoderm type — where the outermost hyphae emerge roughly parallel , like hairs , perpendicular to the cap surface . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of L. fallax is 3 – 9 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) wide , ranging in shape from convex to nearly flat with a small umbo , expanding to plane or becoming shallowly depressed , with or without the umbo . The margin ( cap edge ) is even or scalloped . The cap surface is dry and velvety , finely wrinkled over the center , <unk> ( without concentric lines ) , and dark sooty brown to blackish . The gills are attached to subdecurrent ( running shortly down the length of the stem ) , narrow , crowded , not forked , white at first , and become creamy buff with age . The edges of the gills are brown like the cap , and slowly stain vinaceous ( <unk> @-@ colored ) when bruised . There are several tiers of lamellulae ( short gills that do not reach the stem ) interspersed among the full @-@ length gills . The stem is 2 @.@ 5 – 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) long , 8 – 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) thick , nearly equal in width throughout , dry , solid , unpolished or velvety , and a paler brown than the cap . The flesh is thin , brittle , staining pale vinaceous . The odor is not distinctive , and the taste mild or faintly acrid . The latex is copious , white on exposure , unchanging , slowly staining flesh and gills vinaceous . The spore print is yellowish . The edibility of the mushroom has not been officially documented . The species is one of several brown to nearly black milkcaps that are , according to David Arora , " notable for their beauty , and therefore likely to attract the attention of even the casual collector . " 
 The variety Lactarius fallax var. concolor is nearly identical to the main species in appearance and distribution , but has gill edges that are colored like the gill face . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are spherical , and ornamented with warts and ridges that form a partial reticulum ( a net @-@ like pattern of lines ) with prominences up to 2 µm high . They are hyaline ( translucent ) , amyloid ( meaning they will absorb iodine when stained with Melzer 's reagent ) , and measure 7 @.@ 5 – 10 @.@ 0 by 7 – 9 @.@ 5 µm . The cap cuticle is a trichoderm . The basidia ( the spore @-@ bearing cells ) are 38 – 56 by 10 – 13 µm , club @-@ shaped , four @-@ spored , and hyaline when mounted in a dilute solution of potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) . There are abundant cheilocystidia ( cystidia found on the edge of gills ) , with contents ranging in color from dingy yellow to hyaline in KOH . They measure 32 – 50 by 3 @-@ 6 µm , and may be shaped somewhat like a spindle ( tapered on each end ) or a cylinder , or they may be flexuous ( winding from side to side ) . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia found on the gill face ) are filamentous , 2 @.@ 5 – 5 µm in diameter , and rare to scattered . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Lactarius <unk> and L. lignyotus are similar to L. fallax , and they are all associated with Picea and Abies ; examination of microscopic features cannot be used to distinguish between them . L. lignyotus is restricted in distribution to eastern North America and Europe . Lactarius <unk> is another milk cap with a dark brown cap , but it has a smooth ( not velvety ) and slimy cap and stem . Another brown @-@ capped eastern North American species is L. <unk> ; it has distantly spaced white gills that run down the stem . L. <unk> , which prefers to grow near hardwoods , has close gills . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies of L. fallax grow scattered to grouped together on the ground , or on very rotten conifer logs in alpine areas under standing conifers . They are fairly common , and typically found between August and October . L. fallax is distributed in the western United States and Canada , with the northern range extending to Alaska ; the eastern range is bounded on the east by the Great Plains . Field observations suggest that the fungus can form ectomycorrhizal associations with Tsuga heterophylla . Hesler and Smith noted that the variety concolor was prevalent under species of Fir . 
 = Magnificent Mile = 
 The Magnificent Mile , sometimes referred to as The Mag Mile , is an upscale section of Chicago 's Michigan Avenue , running from the Chicago River to Oak Street in the Near North Side . The district is located adjacent to downtown , and one block east of Rush Street . The Magnificent Mile serves as the main thoroughfare between Chicago 's Loop business district and its Gold Coast . It is generally the western boundary of the Streeterville neighborhood , to its east and River North to the west . 
 Real estate developer Arthur Rubloff of Rubloff Company gave the district its nickname in the 1940s . Currently Chicago 's largest shopping district , various mid @-@ range and high @-@ end shops line this section of the street ; approximately 3 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 square feet ( 290 @,@ 000 m2 ) are occupied by retail , restaurants , museums and hotels . 
 Several of the tallest buildings in the United States , such as the John Hancock Center and the Trump International Hotel and Tower , lie in the district . Landmarks along the Magnificent Mile include Wrigley Building , Tribune Tower , the Chicago Water Tower , and the Allerton Hotel . 
 = = History = = 
 After the Great Chicago Fire of 1871 , State Street ( anchored by Marshall Field 's ) in the downtown Loop , especially the Loop Retail Historic District , was the city 's retailing center . The convenience of mass transit including streetcars and elevated trains , supported a retail corridor along State Street from Lake Street to Van Buren Street . 
 By the 1920s , commuter suburbs began to have significant retail districts . Prior to the bascule bridge construction , swing bridges across the river were open for ship traffic during half the daylight hours . The Rush Street Bridge was the swing bridge for this area . The opening of the Michigan Avenue Bridge in 1920 created a new commercial district . 
 The concept for the Magnificent Mile was part of the 1909 Burnham Plan of Chicago . It was constructed during the 1920s to replace Pine Street , which had been lined with factories and warehouses near the river , and fine mansion and rowhouse residences farther north . The earliest building constructions varied in style , but challenged new heights in construction . The name the " Magnificent Mile " is a registered trademark of the Greater North Michigan Avenue Association ( <unk> ) . 
 After the Great Depression and World War II , Arthur Rubloff and William Zeckendorf bought or controlled most of the property along this stretch of the avenue and supported a plan by Holabird & Root for construction of new buildings and renovation of old ones that took advantage of new zoning laws . Soon the property values driven by the luxury shopping districts were pricing out the nearby artists of Tower Town , just southwest of the Chicago Water Tower . Rubloff and Zeckendorf successfully developed and promoted the area until it became one of the most prestigious addresses of the city . That distinction holds today , and spurred new investment along the Magnificent Mile and throughout the Near North Side . 
 After 1950 , suburban development reduced the Loop 's daily significance to many Chicagoans as downtown retail sales slipped . However , the Magnificent Mile kept a luxury shopping district close to the central business district . The opening of the 74 @-@ story Water Tower Place in 1975 marked the return of Chicago to retailing prominence . By 1979 , the State Street commercial corridor had lost its commercial vitality and was closed to street traffic for renovation including sidewalk widening until 1996 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Today , The Magnificent Mile contains a mixture of upscale department stores , restaurants , luxury retailers , residential and commercial buildings , financial services companies , and hotels , catering primarily to tourists and the affluent . The area also has a high concentration of the city 's major media firms , such as the Chicago Tribune newspaper , and advertising agencies . The Magnificent Mile includes 3 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 290 @,@ 000 m2 ) of retail space , 460 stores , 275 restaurants , 51 hotels , and a host of sightseeing and entertainment attractions to more than 22 million visitors annually . 
 The American Planning Association selected The Magnificent Mile as one of the 10 Great Streets for 2007 through its Great Places in America program . In recent years , The Magnificent Mile has added trees and flower @-@ filled medians to reflect the changing seasons . 
 = = = Retail = = = 
 Many of the world 's leading retail stores populate The Magnificent Mile , including department stores Bloomingdale 's , Neiman Marcus , Saks Fifth Avenue , Nordstrom , and Barneys New York . In addition , some of the finest luxury boutiques are located along The Magnificent Mile ( many of which have only a few North American locations ) , including Cartier , <unk> , Bottega Veneta , Marc Jacobs , Bulgari , Van Cleef & <unk> , Chanel , Georg Jensen , Gucci , Louis Vuitton , Max Mara , <unk> , Harry Winston , St. John , <unk> , Omega , Kate Spade , Stuart Weitzman , Prada , Montblanc , Hugo Boss , Anne Fontaine , and Rolex . 
 Also present are Ralph Lauren ( Ralph Lauren 's largest store in the world ) , <unk> , Barbour , Cole Haan , Charles David , Prada , <unk> , Giorgio Armani , Henri <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Dolce & Gabbana , Salvatore Ferragamo , L <unk> en Provence , Diesel , Carolina Herrera , American Girl , Moncler , Furla , Harry Winston , <unk> <unk> , Brooks Brothers , Zara , Burberry ( its U.S. flagship ) , Vera Wang , La Perla , Tumi , Agent Provocateur , Dennis Basso , lululemon <unk> , Piazza <unk> , Graff Diamonds , Tom Ford , Fratelli <unk> , Hickey Freeman , <unk> 's , Jil Sander , Henry <unk> , Topshop , Michael Kors , <unk> , <unk> , J. Crew , Arthur , <unk> , H & M , <unk> Cashmere , Marlowe , Paul Stuart , Graff Diamonds , David <unk> , <unk> , Christian Louboutin , Wolford , Saint Laurent , The Art of Shaving , <unk> , Jimmy Choo , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Tiffany & Co . , and many others . 
 The Magnificent Mile is also notable for its three urban shopping centers : Water Tower Place , The Shops at North Bridge , and 900 North Michigan Shops . Each spans multiple floors and city blocks and offers various tenants : mall mainstays and more upscale apparel shops , restaurants , and unique attractions , such as museums . 
 At present , rent on The Magnificent Mile is the third most expensive in the country , behind Fifth Avenue in New York and Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills . In 2013 alone , rent rose 46 % . 
 In its book The 10 Best of Everything : An Ultimate Guide for Travelers , the National Geographic named The Magnificent Mile along with Rodeo Drive and Fifth Avenue as one of the 10 best shopping avenues in the world . 
 = = = Hotels and dining = = = 
 Renowned and critically acclaimed restaurants such as The Signature Room at The 95th , <unk> , Tru , The Pump Room , Lawry 's , The Grand Lux , The Park Hyatt Room , The Prime Rib , and Spago provide a variety of dining options . Three 5 @-@ star hotels ( The Peninsula Chicago , Four Seasons Hotel Chicago , and Ritz @-@ Carlton Chicago ) and Illinois ' only 4 @-@ star hotel ( Park Hyatt ) are located within about five blocks along The Magnificent Mile . 
 Other hotels such as Intercontinental , Westin , Drake Hotel , and the Conrad Chicago offer convenient luxurious accommodations as well . Selected luxury @-@ class hotels are shown below : 
 = = = Banks = = = 
 The largest banks have branches along the strip including the three largest banks in the nation : Bank of America , Citibank , and JPMorgan Chase 's Chase Bank . Additionally , the largest banks in Chicago are present , such as LaSalle Bank and Harris Bank , which is technically across the street from The Magnificent Mile . American Express has a Magnificent Mile address for one of its two Chicago service offices . Fidelity Investments has an office at the foot of The Magnificent Mile . 
 = = = Chicago landmarks = = = 
 Historic and landmark presences are shown in the table below , which lists Chicago Landmarks , National Register of Historic Places locations , and National Historic Landmarks along The Magnificent Mile . At the northern edge of this district on the west , one finds the exclusive One Magnificent Mile building and Oak Street running to the west . Also , at the northern edge of the district one finds the Chicago Landmark East Lake Shore Drive District , an extremely expensive and exclusive one @-@ block area of real estate running east from N. Michigan Ave. and facing directly onto Lake Michigan . 
 At the southern edge of the district , the Michigan Avenue Bridge sits among four majestic 1920s skyscrapers , two of which are on The Magnificent Mile ( Tribune Tower and the Wrigley Building ) , and two of which are not ( 333 North Michigan and London Guarantee Building ) . These buildings are contributing properties to the Michigan – Wacker Historic District . 
 Five of the 85 tallest buildings in the world are located in The Magnificent Mile district . In fact , five of the 10 tallest buildings in Chicago , seven of the top 18 , and nine of the top 50 are located within a few blocks here . These buildings are : 
 = = = Malls = = = 
 = = Seasonal events = = 
 With each season , the ambiance of The Magnificent Mile changes . This change is signaled by several official events : 
 Median planters were constructed as part of a streetscape improvement project in 1994 . In the spring , hundreds of thousands of tulips bloom from mid April until the end of May . In 2008 , a public art installation of kinetic sculptures designed by local and international architects was placed in the garden beds . 
 During the summer , the " Gardens of The Magnificent Mile " festival event occurs . It is a self @-@ guided landscape display walking tour . In 2007 and 2008 , fashion dress forms graced the garden beds . The forms were designed by students from the Illinois Institute of Art – Chicago and the International Academy of Design and Technology , as well as prominent designers located on the Avenue . 
 In 2009 and 2010 the first ever Summer Concert Series presented by Walgreens brought top level musical talent to the Avenue for free lunchtime shows for guests , locals , and employees of the Avenue . Past artists include : Collective Soul , Better Than Ezra , Mat Kearney , Michael <unk> , Kris Allen , and Guster . 
 The tradition of lighting the trees of The Magnificent Mile to start the Christmas season extends more than forty years . More than one million lights are lit and fireworks follow the event . The Magnificent Mile Lights Festival , presented by Harris , is the annual kick @-@ off to Chicago 's Christmas season . 
 The day of the event has special activities and offers across Magnificent Mile businesses , plus interactive holiday booths in Pioneer Court , and a free concert with free concerts featuring popular artists all afternoon on the Harris Stage ( past artists have included Jason Mraz , Mitchel Musso , and KT Tunstall ) . In the evening , Mickey Mouse leads a procession down Michigan Avenue from Oak Street to Wacker Drive , stopping at each block to light the trees . He brings along a lot of friends , including Minnie Mouse , Donald Duck , other Disney friends , marching bands , celebrities and more . It is considered the first annual Christmas procession of the year . 
 = = Transportation and infrastructure = = 
 North Michigan Avenue is a six @-@ lane two @-@ way street that is serviced by Chicago Transit Authority public buses along the Magnificent Mile that connect the area to the entire Chicago metropolitan area . It is also serviced by seasonal trolley service along the street , and the foot of the Magnificent Mile is serviced by seasonal water transit services . Two blocks west along State Street , the Chicago ' L ' rapid transit services the street via its Red Line . Pedestrian traffic abounds along the broad sidewalks that are shielded by extensive , mature greenery that provides much of the friendly atmosphere . 
 In autumn 2011 , North Michigan Avenue was completely repaved from the Chicago River to Oak Street with a durable stone @-@ matrix asphalt pavement mix that incorporated high levels of recycled materials , including waste shingles , ground tire rubber , and asphalt <unk> , diverting some 800 tons of material from landfills . The $ 1 million project was completed without ever completely halting traffic on the street . In July 2012 , the City of Chicago and CDOT were honored with the Environmental Leadership Award from the National Asphalt Pavement Association . 
 = = = Intersections = = = 
 = 1989 Northeastern United States tornado outbreak = 
 The 1989 Northeastern United States tornado outbreak was a series of tornadoes which caused more than $ 130 million ( 1989 USD ) in damage across the Northeastern United States on July 10 , 1989 . The storm system affected five states with severe weather , including hail up to 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 6 @.@ 4 cm ) across , thunderstorm winds up to 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) , and 17 tornadoes . Several towns in New York and Connecticut were particularly hard @-@ hit . Several homes were leveled in Schoharie , New York and extensive damage occurred in Bantam , Connecticut . A large section of Hamden , Connecticut , including an industrial park and hundreds of homes , was destroyed ; and in some places buildings were flattened to the ground . 
 More than 150 people were injured by the tornado outbreak , and one person was killed by straight @-@ line thunderstorm winds . While tornado outbreaks in this area are unusual , this storm was especially rare in that it produced six significant tornadoes , two of which were violent <unk> , and featured many tornadoes with tracks of several miles . 
 = = List of official tornadoes = = 
 = = Storm details = = 
 Storms began causing damage early in the morning on July 10 , 1989 . A tornado briefly touched down in Ogdensburg , New York at <unk> , injuring one person . Hail up to 1 in ( 25 mm ) wide , wind gusts over 50 mph ( 60 km / h ) , and many reports of wind damage were reported in New York , Vermont , and Massachusetts before noon . Severe weather is an unusual occurrence in the morning , and the activity only increased in severity towards the middle of the afternoon . 
 = = = Schoharie County tornado = = = 
 The event which devastated areas from Montgomery to Greene County caused $ 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in damage and injured 20 people . While the Storm Prediction Center archives say that it was a single tornado , it was likely three or more tornadoes , each producing F3 to F4 damage . Only damage near Schoharie was at the F4 level , and some sources doubt it even reached that intensity at all . 
 The first tornado touched down three miles east of Ames at 1 : <unk> , moving southeast . It passed near or through the towns of Carlisle , Howe Caverns , Central Bridge , and Schoharie before lifting . Continuing southeast for 10 miles , the storm produced another tornado briefly near Rensselaerville . After another 10 miles , a third tornado touched down between Greenville and Surprise . This final section of the path is plotted as a skipping tornado , but may have been three or more separate tornadoes . 
 = = = Connecticut tornado family = = = 
 An hour after the previous event caused destruction in Upstate New York , a new tornado family began producing significant damage in the adjacent state of Connecticut . The first tornado , which may have been three separate tornadoes , started its path of destruction in Cornwall , leveling a virgin forest known as Cathedral Pines . At the nearby Mohawk Mountain Ski Area , every ski lift was destroyed , with some lift chairs found miles away . The tornado continued south @-@ southeast through Milton , leveling hundreds more trees , and destroyed the village of Bantam before dissipating . Strong downburst winds continued to cause damage and level trees after this tornado lifted : it was during this period between tornadoes that a 12 @-@ year @-@ old girl was killed by falling trees in Black Rock State Park . 
 Soon afterwards , another tornado touched down in Watertown , passing through Oakville and northern Waterbury , damaging or destroying 150 homes . 
 The Hamden tornado was by far the most destructive tornado of this family , and possibly the most damaging of the entire outbreak . It touched down at 5 : 38 pm near the Wilbur Cross Parkway . Industrial cranes and cars were tossed through the air , and rows of houses , as well as an industrial park , were flattened . The tornado lifted just a few minutes later at 5 : 45 . The damage path was only five miles long , stopping just short of the city of New Haven , but it damaged or destroyed almost 400 structures in its path . 
 The storm was so intense at this point that an 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) wind gust was measured in downtown New Haven after the tornado dissipated . About the same time , a tornado struck the area between Carmel and Brewster , New York , unroofing a condominium complex . Five people were injured . 
 = = = Long Island = = = 
 The storms continued to produce damage after crossing onto Long Island . An F2 tornado caused significant damage in the town of East <unk> . A man was thrown with his trailer across an airfield ; he escaped the destroyed trailer with only minor injuries . The tornado was accompanied by 2 @.@ 5 inch ( 6 @.@ 4 cm ) hail . Other areas further east also saw straight @-@ line wind damage and hail up to an inch across . 
 = = = Massachusetts storms = = = 
 While the destructive tornadoes were affecting Connecticut , this part of the storm produced four brief F1 tornadoes in quick succession north of Worcester , which occurred between <unk> and 4 : <unk> . These tornadoes each produced damage paths less than 150 feet ( 45 m ) wide , and less than 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) long . 
 Moving east @-@ southeast into southern Middlesex County , it continued producing severe winds ( gusting up to 90 mph ; 145 km / h ) and very heavy rain . Another tornado touched down very briefly in Norfolk County , followed by two more brief touchdowns in Plymouth County near 5 : 30PM . The storm then weakened , but still managed to produce 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) winds on Cape Cod , before finally moving out into the Atlantic and dissipating . 
 = = = New Jersey storms = = = 
 Around the same time , the last of the activity was affecting areas of northern New Jersey . Two <unk> and an F1 tracked through parts of Passaic and Bergen counties , snapping and uprooting trees , and causing $ 4 million in damage . About 150 houses were damaged in Bergen county alone . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In Waterbury , Connecticut , mayor Joseph Santopietro declared a state of emergency due to extensive damage in the city . 
 In Hamden , Connecticut , the National Guard was called in to aid in cleanup and keep order , as some looting was reported in the devastated area . President George H. W. Bush declared the area a disaster area on July 18 . The damage was so intense that much of the area was without power for a week , and trees were still being cleared a year later . 
 There was some damage to homes and other structures from this storm , but most damage was confined to wooded areas . Several major roads , including Route 9 , Route 12 , and Interstate 190 , were closed due to flooding or downed trees . The main financial impact was from damage to utilities , which totalled over $ 2 million in Princeton alone . 
 Despite the extensive and widespread damage , only one death was reported from the entire severe weather outbreak , and this was due to straight @-@ line winds , not a tornado . Many people , including Connecticut Governor William O 'Neill , commented that it was " a miracle " that more people were not seriously injured or killed . 
 = = Historic outbreak = = 
 This storm event was one of the most extensive ever seen in the Northeastern United States . In all , 17 tornadoes touched down , possibly more . There were 14 instances of measured severe winds ( several over 80 mph , 129 km / h ) , along with 46 reports of straight @-@ line wind damage . There were 10 reports of hail 1 inch ( 2 @.@ 5 cm ) across or larger , and hail 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 6 @.@ 4 cm ) wide fell from one storm , which was producing a tornado at the time . Hail this large is especially rare in this area of the world . 
 Remarkably , though hundreds of homes and other structures were leveled , no one was killed by tornadoes that day . Tornado damage caused about 140 injuries , mostly minor , and one death and 11 injuries were caused by wind damage . In just five hours , the storms produced more than 12 @,@ 500 lightning strikes . The airport in Oxford , Connecticut recorded 4 @.@ 4 inches ( 112 mm ) of rain in just 30 minutes . While the northeastern United States experiences occasional tornadoes , an event of this scale is especially rare . Typical tornadoes in this area are short @-@ lived and not particularly damaging . This outbreak featured several long @-@ lived tornadoes , produced by storms which also produced destructive non @-@ tornadic winds over a large area . Since 1950 , only six violent tornadoes have occurred in the Northeastern US , two of which were part of this outbreak . It was by far the worst tornado event in the area since May 2 , 1983 , when six significant tornadoes tore through New York , and maybe the worst since the Worcester Tornado . 
 = California State Route 244 = 
 State Route 244 ( SR 244 ) is a short unsigned freeway connection northeast of Sacramento , California , United States . It connects the junction of Interstate 80 and Interstate 80 Business ( State Route 51 ) with Auburn Boulevard ( the old Lincoln Highway - former U.S. Route 40 / U.S. Route 99E ) . SR 244 was first added to the state highway system in 1959 as Legislative Route 288 , and was renumbered as SR 244 in the 1964 renumbering . Portions of this route have been removed from the system as late as 1994 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 244 starts just east of the westernmost ramps to the Watt Avenue exit off I @-@ 80 . Just east of this , there are several connector ramps to both I @-@ 80 and Business I @-@ 80 as SR 244 passes under the terminus of Business I @-@ 80 . SR 244 terminates at Auburn Boulevard , having just entered the Sacramento city limits near <unk> Park . 
 = = History = = 
 Legislative Route 288 was defined in 1959 as a proposed route from pre @-@ 1964 Legislative Route 3 and pre @-@ 1964 Legislative Route 242 ( now I @-@ 80 and SR 51 ) northeast of Sacramento east to pre @-@ 1964 Legislative Route 249 ( unbuilt State Route 65 - approximately Sunrise Boulevard ) near Fair Oaks . In the 1964 renumbering , this was assigned the number Route 244 . 
 In 1965 , an extension was defined from SR 65 east to U.S. Route 50 . In 1972 a series of " volatile " public hearings took place where local residents protested the construction of this route among others being proposed in the Sacramento area . This extension to U.S. Route 50 was removed in 1975 , and the route 's definition was truncated to end at Fair Oaks Boulevard near San Juan Avenue . The public forums ended in mid @-@ 1976 after the Board of Supervisors abandoned plans for all three routes . It was truncated further to Auburn Boulevard , its present terminus , in 1994 . 
 The bridges along the route date from 1971 , a year after the bridges on I @-@ 80 to the west ; that part of I @-@ 80 was Interstate 880 until 1981 . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was in 1964 , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The entire route is in Sacramento County . 
 = History of Georgia Tech = 
 The history of the Georgia Institute of Technology can be traced back to Reconstruction @-@ era plans to develop the industrial base of the Southern United States . Founded on October 13 , 1885 in Atlanta , Georgia as the Georgia School of Technology , the university opened in 1888 after the construction of Tech Tower and a shop building and only offered one degree in mechanical engineering . By 1901 , degrees in electrical , civil , textile , and chemical engineering were also offered . In 1948 , the name was changed to the Georgia Institute of Technology to reflect its evolution from an engineering school to a full technical institute and research university . 
 Georgia Tech is the birthplace of two other Georgia universities : Georgia State University and the former Southern Polytechnic State University . Georgia Tech 's Evening School of Commerce , established in 1912 and moved to the University of Georgia in 1931 , was independently established as Georgia State University in 1955 . Although Georgia Tech did not officially allow women to enroll until 1952 ( and did not fully integrate the curriculum until 1968 ) , the night school enrolled female students as early as the fall of 1917 . The Southern Technical Institute ( now Southern Polytechnic College of Engineering and Engineering Technology of Kennesaw State University and formerly known as Southern Polytechnic State University ) was created as an extension of Georgia Tech in 1948 as a technical trade school for World War II veterans and became an independent university in 1981 . 
 The Great Depression saw a consistent squeeze on Georgia Tech 's budget , but World War II @-@ inspired research activity combined with post @-@ World War II enrollment more than compensated for the school 's difficulties . Georgia Tech desegregated peacefully and without a court order in 1961 , in contrast to other southern universities . Similarly , it did not experience any protests due to the Vietnam War . The growth of the graduate and research programs combined with diminishing federal support for universities in the 1980s led President John Patrick Crecine to restructure the university in 1988 amid significant controversy . The 1990s were marked by continued expansion of the undergraduate programs and the satellite campuses in Savannah , Georgia and Metz , France . In 1996 , Georgia Tech was the site of the athletes ' village and a venue for a number of athletic events for the Summer Olympics . Recently , the school has gradually improved its academic rankings and has paid significant attention to modernizing the campus , increasing historically low retention rates , and establishing degree options emphasizing research and international perspectives . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 See also : Georgia during Reconstruction and Georgia 's postwar economic growth 
 As noted by a historical marker on the large hill in Central Campus , the site occupied by the school 's first buildings once held fortifications built to protect Atlanta during the Atlanta Campaign of the American Civil War . The surrender of the city took place on the southwestern boundary of the modern Georgia Tech campus in 1864 . The next twenty years were a time of rapid industrial expansion ; during this period , Georgia 's manufacturing capital , railroad track mileage , and property values would each increase by a factor of three to four . 
 The establishment of a school of technology was proposed in 1882 during the Reconstruction period . Major John Fletcher Hanson and Nathaniel Edwin Harris , two former Confederate officers who became prominent citizens in the town of Macon , Georgia after the war , strongly believed that the South needed to improve its technology to compete with the industrial revolution that was occurring throughout the North . Many Southerners at this time agreed with this idea , known as the " New South Creed " . Its strongest proponent was Henry W. Grady , editor of The Atlanta Constitution during the 1880s . A technology school was thought necessary because the American South of that era was mostly agrarian , and few technical developments were occurring . Georgians needed technical training to advance the state 's industry . 
 With authorization from the Georgia General Assembly , Harris and a committee of prominent Georgians visited renowned technology schools in the Northeast in 1883 ; these included the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , the Worcester Polytechnic Institute , Stevens Institute of Technology , and Cooper Union . Using these examples , the committee reported that the Worcester model , which stressed a combination of " theory and practice was the embodiment of the best conception of industrial education " . The " practice " component of the Worcester model included student employment and production of consumer items to generate revenue for the school . 
 When the committee returned , they submitted their findings to the Georgia General Assembly as House Bill 732 on July 24 , 1883 . The bill , written by Harris , met significant opposition from various sources and was defeated . Reasons for opposition included the general resistance to education , specifically technical education , concerns voiced by agricultural interests , and fiscal concerns relating to the limited treasury of the Georgia government ; the state 's 1877 constitution prohibited spending beyond its means as a reactionary measure to excessive spending by " carpetbaggers and Negro leaders " . 
 In February 1883 , Harris submitted a second version , this time with the support of contemporary political leaders Joseph M. Terrell and R. B. Russel as well as the popular support of the influential State Agricultural Society and the leaders of the University of Georgia , the latter of which would be the " parent college " of any state technical school . In 1885 , House Bill 732 was submitted and passed the House 94 – 62 . The bill was passed in the Senate with two amendments , and the amended bill was defeated in the House 65 – 53 . After back @-@ room work by Harris , the bill finally passed 69 – 44 . On October 13 , 1885 , Georgia Governor Henry D. McDaniel signed the bill to create and fund the new school . The legislature then established a committee to determine the location of the new school . The school was officially established , and subsequent efforts to repeal the law were suppressed by supporter and Speaker of the House W. A. Little . 
 Section I. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of this State , and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same , That there shall be established in connection with the State University , and forming one of the departments thereof , a technological School for the education and training of students in the industrial and mechanical arts . Said school shall be located , equipped and conducted as hereinafter provided . 
 Governor McDaniel appointed a commission in January 1886 to organize and run the school . This commission elected Harris chairman , a position he would hold until his death . Other members included Samuel M. Inman , Oliver S. Porter , Judge Columbus Heard , and Edward R. Hodgson ; each was known either for political or industrial experience . Their first task was to select a location for the new school . Letters were sent to communities throughout the state , and five bids were presented by the October 1 , 1886 deadline : Athens , Atlanta , Macon , Penfield , and Milledgeville . The commission inspected the proposed sites from October 7 to October 18 . Patrick Hues Mell , the president of the University of Georgia at that time , believed that it should be located in Athens with the University 's main campus , like the Agricultural and Mechanical Schools . 
 The committee members voted exclusively for their respective home cities until the 21st ballot when Porter switched to Atlanta ; on the 24th ballot , Atlanta finally emerged victorious . Students at the University of Georgia burned Judge Heard in effigy after the final vote was announced . Atlanta 's bid included $ 50 @,@ 000 from the city , $ 20 @,@ 000 from private citizens ( including $ 5 @,@ 000 from Samuel M. Inman ) , and $ 2 @,@ 500 in guaranteed yearly support , along with a gift of 4 acres ( 16 @,@ 000 m2 ) of land from Atlanta pioneer Richard Peters instead of the initially proposed site in Atlanta 's bid , which was near land that Lemuel P. Grant was developing , including Grant Park . 
 The school 's new location was bounded on the south by North Avenue , and on the west by Cherry Street . Peters sold five adjoining acres of land to the state for $ 10 @,@ 000 . This land was situated on what was then Atlanta 's northern city limits . The act that created the school had also appropriated $ 65 @,@ 000 towards the construction of new buildings . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Includes the administration of Isaac S. Hopkins ( 1888 – 1896 ) 
 The Georgia School of Technology opened its doors in the fall of 1888 with only two buildings , under the leadership of professor and pastor Isaac S. Hopkins . One building ( now Tech Tower , the main administrative complex ) had classrooms to teach students ; the other featured a workshop with a foundry , forge , boiler room , and engine room . It was designed specifically as a " contract shop " where students would work to produce goods to sell , creating revenue for the school while the students learned vocational skills in a " hands @-@ on " manner . Such a method was seen as appropriate given the Southern United States ' need for industrial development . The two buildings were equal in size and staffing ( five professors and five shop supervisors ) to show the importance of teaching both the mind and the hands . At the time , there was some disagreement as to whether the machine shop should have been used to turn a profit . The contract shop system ended in 1896 due to its lack of profitability , after which point the items produced were used to furnish the offices and dorms on the campus . 
 The first class of students at the Georgia School of Technology was small and homogeneous , and educational options were limited . 85 students signed up on the first registration day , October 7 , 1888 , and the enrollment for the first year climbed to a total of 129 by January 7 , 1889 . The first student to register was William H. Glenn . All but one or two of the students were from Georgia . Tuition was free for Georgia residents and $ 150 ( equivalent to $ 3 @,@ 950 in 2015 ) for out @-@ of @-@ state students . The only degree offered was a Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering , and no elective courses were available . All students were required to follow exactly the same program , which was so rigorous that nearly two thirds of the first class failed to complete it . The first graduating class consisted of two students in 1890 , Henry L. Smith and George G. Crawford , who decided their graduation order on the flip of a coin . 
 John Saylor Coon was appointed the first Mechanical Engineering and Drawing Professor at the Georgia School of Technology in 1889 . He was also the first chair of the Mechanical Engineering department . Coon assumed the role of superintendent of shops in 1896 . During his tenure at Georgia Tech , he moved the curriculum away from vocational training . Coon emphasized a balance between the shop and the classroom . Coon taught his students more modern quantification methods to solve engineering problems instead of outdated and more costly trial and error methods . He also played a significant role in developing mechanical engineering into a professional degree program , with a focus on ethics , design and testing , analysis and problem solving , and mathematics . 
 Tech began its football program with several students forming a loose @-@ knit troop of footballers called the Blacksmiths . The first season saw Tech play three games and lose all three . Discouraged by these results , the Blacksmiths sought a coach to improve their record . Leonard Wood , an army officer who had played football at Harvard and was then stationed in Atlanta and taking graduate courses at the school , volunteered to serve as the team 's player @-@ coach . In 1893 , Tech played its first game against the University of Georgia ( Georgia ) . Tech defeated Georgia 28 – 6 for the school 's first @-@ ever victory . The angry Georgia fans threw stones and other debris at the Tech players during and after the game . The poor treatment of the Blacksmiths by the Georgia faithful gave birth to the rivalry now known as Clean , Old @-@ Fashioned Hate . 
 The words to Georgia Tech 's famous fight song , " Ramblin ' Wreck from Georgia Tech " , are said to have come from an early baseball game against rival Georgia . Some sources credit Billy Walthall , a member of the first four @-@ year graduating class , with the lyrics . According to a 1954 article in Sports Illustrated , " Ramblin ' Wreck " was written around 1893 by a Tech football player on his way to an Auburn game . In 1905 , Georgia Tech adopted it in roughly the current form as its official fight song , although it had apparently been the unofficial fight song for several years . It was published for the first time in the school 's first yearbook , the 1908 Blue Print , under the heading " What causes Whitlock to Blush . " Words such as " hell " and " helluva " were censored in this first printing as " certain words [ are ] too hot to print . " After Michael A. Greenblatt , the first bandmaster of the Georgia Tech Marching Band , heard the band playing the song to the tune of Charles Ives 's " A Son of a Gambolier " , he wrote a modern musical version . In 1911 , Frank Roman succeeded Greenblatt as bandmaster ; Roman embellished the song with trumpet flourishes and publicized it . Roman copyrighted the song in 1919 . 
 Tech 's first student publication was the <unk> , which ran for a short time in 1891 . The next student publication was The Georgia Tech , established in 1894 . The Georgia Tech published a " Commencement Issue " that reviewed sporting events and gave information about each class . The Technique was founded in 1911 ; its first issue was published on November 17 , 1911 by editors Albert Blohm and E.A. Turner , and the content revolved around the upcoming rivalry football game against the University of Georgia . The Technique has been published weekly ever since , with the exception of a brief period during which the paper was published twice weekly . The Georgia Tech was merged into the Technique in 1916 . 
 = = Engineering school = = 
 Includes the administration of Lyman Hall ( 1896 – 1905 ) 
 In 1888 , Captain Lyman Hall was appointed Georgia Tech 's first mathematics professor , a position he held until his appointment as the school 's second president in 1896 . Hall had a solid background in engineering due to his time at West Point and often incorporated surveying and other engineering applications into his coursework . He had an energetic personality and quickly assumed a leadership position among the faculty . As president , Hall was noted for his aggressive fundraising and improvements to the school , including his special project , the A. French Textile School . In February 1899 , Georgia Tech opened the first textile engineering school in the Southern United States , with $ 10 @,@ 000 from the Georgia General Assembly , $ 20 @,@ 000 of donated machinery , and $ 13 @,@ 500 from supporters . It named the A. French Textile School after its chief donor and supporter , Aaron S. French . The textile engineering program would move to the Harrison Hightower Textile Engineering Building in 1949 . 
 Hall 's other goals included enlarging Tech and attracting more students , so he expanded the school 's offerings beyond mechanical engineering ; new degrees introduced during Hall 's administration included electrical engineering and civil engineering in December 1896 , textile engineering in February 1899 , and engineering chemistry in January 1901 . Hall also became infamous as a disciplinarian , even suspending the entire senior class of 1901 for returning from Christmas vacation a day late . 
 Hall died on August 16 , 1905 during a vacation at a New York health resort . His death while still in office was attributed to stress from his strenuous fundraising activities ( this time , for a new chemistry building ) . Later that year , the school 's trustees named the new chemistry building the " Lyman Hall Laboratory of Chemistry " in his honor . 
 On October 20 , 1905 , U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt visited the Georgia Tech campus . On the steps of Tech Tower , Roosevelt presented a speech about the importance of technological education : 
 America can be the first nation only by the kind of training and effort which is developed and is symbolized in institutions of this kind ... Every triumph of engineering skill credited to an American is credited to America . It is incumbent upon you to do well , not only for your individual sakes , but for the sake of that collective American citizenship which dominates the American nation . 
 Roosevelt then shook hands with every student . Tech was later visited by president @-@ elect William H. Taft on January 16 , 1909 and president Franklin D. Roosevelt on November 29 , 1935 . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Includes the administration of Kenneth G. Matheson ( 1906 – 1922 ) 
 Upon his hiring in 1904 , John Heisman ( for whom the Heisman Trophy is named ) insisted that the school acquire its own football field . Previously , the team had used area parks , especially the playing fields of Piedmont Park . Georgia Tech took out a seven @-@ year lease on what is now the southern end of Grant Field , although the land was not adequate for sports , due to its <unk> , rocky nature . In 1905 , Heisman had 300 convict laborers clear rocks , remove tree stumps , and level out the field for play ; Tech students then built a grandstand on the property . The land was purchased by 1913 , and John W. Grant donated $ 15 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 359 @,@ 100 in 2015 ) towards the construction of the field 's first permanent stands . The field was named Grant Field in honor of the donor 's deceased son , Hugh Inman Grant . 
 Attempts at forming an alumni association had been made since 1896 ; a charter was applied for by J. B. McCrary and William H. Glenn on June 28 , 1906 and was approved by Fulton County on June 20 , 1908 . The Georgia Tech Alumni Association published its first annual report in 1908 , but the group was largely dormant during World War I. The organization played an important role in the 1920s Greater Georgia Tech Campaign , which consolidated all existing alumni clubs and funded a significant expansion of Georgia Tech 's campus . 
 Georgia Tech 's Evening School of Commerce began holding classes in 1912 . The school admitted its first female student in 1917 , although the state legislature did not officially authorize attendance by women until 1920 . Anna Teitelbaum Wise became the first female graduate in 1919 and went on to become Georgia Tech 's first female faculty member the following year . 
 World War I caused several changes at the school . During the conflict and for some time afterwards , Georgia Tech hosted a school for cadet aviators , supply officers , and army technicians . Tech also started a Reserve Officer Training Corps unit ; the first in the Southern United States , it became a permanent addition to the school . World War I affected the school academically as well : the United States government asked for and financed an automotive school for army officers , a rehabilitation program for disabled soldiers , and a geology department . Federal aid also helped to establish Tech 's Industrial Education Department , courtesy of the Smith @-@ Hughes Act of 1917 . The war also placed on hold extensive fundraising efforts for a new power plant , and made it difficult to find engineers willing to teach at the school ; Matheson toured Harvard , Yale , Princeton , Columbia , and MIT in 1919 but failed to secure a single hire , as none of the students wished to work for such low wages . 
 The bitter rivalry between Georgia Tech and the University of Georgia flared up in 1919 , when UGA mocked Tech 's continuation of football during the United States ' involvement in World War I. Because Tech was a military training ground , it had a complete assembly of male students . Many schools , such as UGA , lost all of their able @-@ bodied male students to the war effort , forcing them to temporarily suspend football during the war . In fact , UGA did not play a game from 1917 to 1918 . 
 When UGA renewed its program in 1919 , their student body staged a parade which mocked Tech 's continuation of football during times of war . The parade featured a tank @-@ shaped float marked " Argonne " with a sign " Georgia in France 1917 " followed by an automobile with three people in Tech sweaters and caps bearing a sign " Tech in Atlanta " . A printed program was subsequently distributed in the stands with a similar point . While the Tech faculty was able to prevent a riot , no apology was made , and this act led directly to Tech cutting athletic ties with UGA and canceling several of UGA 's home football games at Grant Field ( UGA commonly used Grant Field as its home field ) . Tech and UGA did not compete in athletics until the 1921 Southern Conference basketball tournament . Despite intense pressure on Tech to make amends , Matheson stated that he would never change his mind unless " due apologies " were offered , and if he was overruled , he would resign . Regular season competition did not renew until after Matheson 's retirement , in a 1925 agreement between the two institutions negotiated by athletic directors J. B. Crenshaw and S. V. Sanford . 
 In 1916 Georgia Tech 's football team , still coached by John Heisman , defeated Cumberland 222 @-@ 0 , the largest margin of victory in college football history . Cumberland 's total net yardage was -28 ( minus 28 ) , and it had only one play for positive yards . Cumberland beat Georgia Tech 's baseball team 22 to 0 the previous year , reportedly with the help of professional players Cumberland had hired as " ringers " , an act which infuriated Heisman . Heisman amassed 104 wins over 16 seasons and led Tech to its first national title in 1917 . After divorcing from his wife , Heisman moved to Pennsylvania in 1919 , leaving Tech 's Yellow Jackets in the hands of William Alexander . 
 In its first decades , Georgia Tech slowly grew from a trade school into a university . The state and federal governments provided little initiative for the school to grow significantly until 1919 . That year , the Georgia General Assembly passed an act entitled " Establishing State Engineering Experiment Station at the Georgia School of Technology " . This change coincided with federal debate about the establishment of Engineering Experiment Stations in a move similar to the Hatch Act of 1887 's establishment of agricultural experiment stations ; each Engineering Experiment Station would be a consultant group dedicated to assisting a region 's industrial efforts . The EES at Georgia Tech was established with the goal of the " encouragement of industries and commerce " within the state . The coinciding federal effort failed , however , and the state did not finance Georgia Tech 's EES , so the new organization existed only on paper . 
 The latter years of Matheson 's presidency were troubled by a chronic shortage of funds . In 1919 – 1920 , facilities designed for 700 students had to serve 1 @,@ 365 students , and the school received the same $ 100 @,@ 000 appropriation ( equivalent to $ 1 @,@ 364 @,@ 900 in 2015 ) that it had received since 1915 , made worse by inflation which nearly halved its value in that time . Matheson was able to acquire a $ 25 @,@ 000 increase from the General Assembly that year . In 1920 – 1921 , though , an increase of $ 125 @,@ 000 ( to $ 250 @,@ 000 ) was passed but subsequently tabled due to differences between the House and Senate version of the bill unrelated to Tech . To continue running the school , a frantic scramble for funds was undertaken , resulting in $ 40 @,@ 000 from the General Education Board , $ 30 @,@ 000 from a loan fund organized by the Georgia Rotary Club , and a grant from the Atlanta City Council . The University of Georgia , in a similar financial condition , was forced to cut its faculty 's salary . After this drama , the situation still did not improve : in 1922 – 1923 , only $ 112 @,@ 500 of the requested $ 250 @,@ 000 had been appropriated , leading Matheson to reluctantly start charging in @-@ state students for tuition . The rates were $ 100 for in @-@ state students ( equivalent to $ 1 @,@ 400 in 2015 ) and $ 175 for out @-@ of @-@ state students ( equivalent to $ 2 @,@ 500 in 2015 ) . Georgia Tech still needed a $ 125 @,@ 000 line of credit against its first professional fund @-@ raising effort , the " Greater Georgia Tech Campaign " . 
 As Matheson was leaving for the presidency of Drexel Institute in late 1921 , he wrote in The Atlanta Constitution that while Georgia Tech was " my first love " he found it a " humiliating burden " to get enough money from the state legislature to run and enlarge the school . The Board of Trustees offered him a substantial pay increase , but his issue was with the politics of the time , and not with his financial situation . 
 It was our hope and belief that by developing an efficient technological school , the legislators would amply support it . In spite of many handicaps and <unk> , we gave to the state what competent critics declare to be the second engineering college of the nation – the first [ MIT ] , by the way , having recently spent $ 28 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in its development . Notwithstanding ... [ soaring ] enrollment , donated equipment totaling many thousands of dollars in value , $ 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 in subscriptions from friends and other evidences of growth , the legislatures of the past two summers have appropriated only half of the amount actually needed for the operation of the school . In 1920 , upon the failure to appropriate the additional $ 100 @,@ 000 necessary to keep Tech 's doors open , I again became a modern Lazarus and successfully begged from Atlanta to New York the crumbs from the rich men 's tables which a rich mother had denied ... Again [ in 1921 ] we have met the emergency at a disruptive and destructive cost which cannot be continued . 
 = = Technological university = = 
 Includes the administration of Marion L. Brittain ( 1922 – 1944 ) 
 On August 1 , 1922 , Marion L. Brittain was elected as the school 's president . He noted in the 1923 annual report that " there are more students in Georgia Tech than in any other two colleges in Georgia , and we have the smallest appropriation of them all . " He was able to convince the state of Georgia to increase the school 's funding during his tenure . Additionally , a $ 300 @,@ 000 grant ( equivalent to $ 4 @,@ 249 @,@ 600 in 2015 ) from the Daniel Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion of Aeronautics allowed Brittain to establish the Daniel Guggenheim School of Aeronautics . In 1930 , Brittain 's decision to use the money for a new school of aeronautics , headed by Montgomery Knight , was controversial ; today , the Daniel Guggenheim School of Aerospace Engineering boasts the second largest faculty in the United States behind MIT . Other accomplishments during Brittain 's administration included a doubling of Georgia Tech 's enrollment , accreditation from the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools , and the creation of a new ceramic engineering department , building , and major that attracted the American Ceramics Society 's national convention to Atlanta . 
 In 1929 , some Georgia Tech faculty members belonging to Sigma Xi started a research club that met once a month at Tech . One of the monthly subjects , proposed by ceramic engineering professor W. Harry Vaughan , was a collection of issues related to Tech , such as library development , and the development of a state engineering station . Such a station would theoretically assist local businesses with engineering problems via Georgia Tech 's established faculty and resources . This group investigated the forty existing engineering experiments at universities around the country , and the report was compiled by Harold Bunger , Montgomery Knight , and Vaughan in December 1929 . 
 The Great Depression threatened the already tentative nature of Georgia Tech 's funding . In a speech on April 27 , 1930 , Brittain proposed that the university system be reorganized under a central body , rather than having each university under its own board . As a result , the Georgia General Assembly and Governor Richard Russell , Jr. passed an act in 1931 that established the University System of Georgia and the corresponding Georgia Board of Regents ; unfortunately for Brittain and Georgia Tech , the board was composed almost entirely of graduates of the University of Georgia . In its final act on January 7 , 1932 , the Tech Board of Trustees sent a letter to the chairman of the Georgia Board of Regents outlining its priorities for the school . The Depression also affected enrollment , which dropped from 3 @,@ 271 in 1931 – 1932 to a low of 2 @,@ 482 in 1933 – 1934 , and only gradually increased afterwards . It also caused a decrease in funding from the State of Georgia , which in turn caused a decrease in faculty salaries , firing of graduate student assistants , and a postponing of building renovations . 
 As a cost @-@ saving move , effective on July 1 , 1934 , the Georgia Board of Regents transferred control of the relatively large Evening School of Commerce to the University of Georgia and moved the small civil engineering program at UGA to Tech . The move was controversial , and both students and faculty protested against it , fearing that the Board of Regents would remove other programs from Georgia Tech and reduce it to an engineering department of the University of Georgia . Brittain suggested that the lack of Georgia Tech alumni on the Board of Regents contributed to their decision . Despite the pressure , the Board of Regents held its ground . The Depression also had a significant impact on the athletic program , as most athletes were in the commerce school , and resulted in the elimination of athletic scholarships , which were replaced by a loan program . Plans for an industrial management department to replace and supersede the Evening School of Commerce were first made in fall 1934 . The department was established in 1935 , and evolved into Tech 's College of Management . 
 In 1933 , S. V. Sanford , president of the University of Georgia , proposed that a " technical research activity " be established at Tech . Brittain and Dean William Vernon Skiles examined the Research Club 's 1929 report , and moved to create such an organization . W. Harry Vaughan was selected as its acting director in April 1934 , and $ 5 @,@ 000 in funds were allocated directly from the Georgia Board of Regents . These funds went to the previously established Engineering Experiment Station ( EES ) ; its initial areas of focus were textiles , ceramics , and helicopter engineering . Georgia Tech 's EES later became the Georgia Tech Research Institute ( GTRI ) . 
 The EES 's early work was conducted in the basement of the Shop Building , and Vaughan 's office was in the Aeronautical Engineering Building . By 1938 , the EES was producing useful technology , and the station needed a method to conduct contract work outside of the state budget . Consequently , the Industrial Development Council ( IDC ) was formed . It was created by the Chancellor of the University System and the president of Georgia Power Company , and the EES 's director was a member of the council . The IDC later became the Georgia Tech Research Corporation , which currently serves as the sole contract organization for all Georgia Tech faculty and departments . 
 In 1939 , EES director Vaughan became the director of the School of Ceramic Engineering . He was the director of the station until 1940 , when he accepted a higher @-@ paying job at the Tennessee Valley Authority and was replaced by Harold Bunger ( the first chairman of Georgia Tech 's chemical engineering department ) . When the ceramics department was temporarily discontinued due to World War II , the current students found wartime employment . The department would be reincarnated after the war under the guidance of Lane Mitchell . 
 The Cocking affair occurred in 1941 and 1942 when Georgia governor Eugene Talmadge exerted direct control over the state 's educational system , particularly through the firing of University of Georgia professor Walter Cocking , who had been hired to raise the relatively low academic standards at UGA 's College of Education . Talmadge justified his actions by asserting that Cocking intended to integrate a part of the University of Georgia . Cocking 's removal and the subsequent removal of members of the Georgia Board of Regents ( including the vice chancellor ) who disagreed with the decision were particularly controversial . Talmadge attempted to place Tech football star Red Barron in a new position as vice president of Georgia Tech ; the move was widely criticized by Georgia Tech alumni , who marched on the capitol , and Barron subsequently declined to accept the position . In response to the actions of Governor Talmadge , the Southern Association of Independent Schools withdrew accreditation from all Georgia state @-@ supported colleges for whites , including Georgia Tech . The controversy was instrumental in Talmadge 's loss in the 1943 gubernatorial elections to Ellis <unk> . 
 World War II resulted in a dramatic increase of sponsored research , with the 1943 – 1944 budget being the first in which industry and government contracts exceeded the EES 's other income ( most notably , its state appropriation ) . Vaughan had initially prepared the faculty for fewer incoming contracts as the state had cut the station 's appropriation by 40 percent , but increased support from industry and government eventually counteracted low state support . The electronics and communications research that Directors Gerald Rosselot and James E. Boyd attracted is still a mainstay of GTRI research . Two of the larger projects were a study on the propagation of electromagnetic waves , and United States Navy @-@ sponsored radar research . 
 Until the mid @-@ 1940s , the school required students to be able to create a simple electric motor regardless of their major . During World War II , as an engineering school with strong military ties through its ROTC program , Georgia Tech was swiftly enlisted for the war effort . In early 1942 the traditional nine @-@ month semester system was replaced by a year @-@ round trimester year , enabling students to complete their degrees a year earlier . Under the plan , students were allowed to complete their engineering degrees while on active duty . During World War II , Georgia Tech was one of 131 colleges and universities that took part in the V @-@ 12 Navy College Training Program which offered students a path to a Navy commission . The school was also one of only five U.S. colleges feeding into the United States Naval Academy . 
 = = Postwar changes and unrest = = 
 Includes the administration of Blake R. Van Leer ( 1944 – 1956 ) 
 Founded as the " Georgia School of Technology , " the school assumed its present name on July 1 , 1948 to reflect a growing focus on advanced technological and scientific research . The name change was first proposed on June 12 , 1906 , but did not gain momentum until Blake R. Van Leer 's presidency . Unlike similarly named universities such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the California Institute of Technology , the Georgia Institute of Technology is a public university . Concurrent with the name change , President Emeritus Marion L. Brittain published The Story of Georgia Tech , the first comprehensive , book @-@ length history of the school . 
 The Southern Technical Institute ( STI ) was established in 1948 in barracks on the campus of Naval Air Station Atlanta ( now DeKalb Peachtree Airport ) in <unk> , northeast of Atlanta . At that time , all colleges in Georgia were considered extensions of the state 's four research universities , and the Southern Technical Institute belonged to Georgia Tech . STI was established as an engineering technology school , to help military personnel returning from World War II gain hands @-@ on experience in technical fields . Around 1958 , the school moved to Marietta , to land donated by Dobbins Air Force Base . STI was split from Georgia Tech in 1981 , at a time when most other regional schools separated from the University of Georgia , Georgia State University , and Georgia Southern University . 
 The only women that had attended Georgia Tech did so through the School of Commerce . After it was removed in 1931 , women were not able to enroll at Tech until 1952 . In 1952 women could only enroll in programs not offered at other universities in Georgia . In 1968 the Board of Regents voted to allow women to enroll in all programs at Tech . Also in 1968 , Helen E. <unk> became Georgia Tech 's first full @-@ tenured female engineering professor . The first women 's dorm , Fulmer Hall , opened in 1969 . Women constituted 31 @.@ 1 % of the undergraduates and 25 @.@ 5 % of the graduate students enrolled in Fall 2010 . 
 Glen P. Robinson and six other Georgia Tech researchers ( including Robinson 's former professor and future EES director Jim Boyd and EES director Gerald Rosselot ) each contributed $ 100 to found Scientific Associates ( later known as Scientific Atlanta ) on October 31 , 1951 , with the initial goal of marketing antenna structures developed by the radar branch of the EES . Robinson worked as the general manager without pay for the first year ; after the fledgling company 's first contract resulted in a $ 4 @,@ 000 loss , Robinson ( upon request ) refunded five of the six other initial investors . Despite its rocky start , the company managed to succeed . In 1951 , there was a dispute over station finances and Rosselot 's hand in the foundation of Scientific Atlanta against Georgia Tech vice president Cherry Emerson . Initially , Rosselot was president and CEO of Scientific Atlanta , but later handed off responsibility to Glen P. Robinson ; at issue were potential conflicts of interest with his role at Georgia Tech and what , if any , role Georgia Tech should have in technology transfer to the marketplace . Rosselot eventually resigned his post at Georgia Tech , but his participation ensured the eventual success of Scientific Atlanta and made way for further technology transfer efforts by Georgia Tech 's VentureLab and the Advanced Technology Development Center . 
 This period also saw a significant expansion in Georgia Tech 's postgraduate education programs , driven largely by the Cold War and the launch of Sputnik ; this effort received substantial support from the EES . Despite its slow start , with the first Master of Science programs in the 1920s and the first Doctorate in 1946 , the program became firmly established . In 1952 alone , around 80 students earned graduate degrees while working at EES . Herschel H. Cudd , EES director from 1952 to 1954 , created a new promotion system for researchers that is still in use . Many EES researchers held the title of professor despite lacking a doctorate ( or a comparable qualification for promotion as determined by the Georgia Board of Regents ) , something that irritated members of the teaching faculty . The new system , approved in spring 1953 , used the Board of Regents ' qualifications for promotion and mirrored the academic tenure track . 
 = = = Sugar Bowl controversy = = = 
 After a successful ( 8 – 1 – 1 ) football season in 1955 , Tech was invited to play in the 1956 Sugar Bowl in New Orleans against the University of Pittsburgh . It would be the school 's fifth straight bowl appearance under renowned coach Bobby Dodd . Pittsburgh had a black starting player , fullback Bobby Grier , but as Tech had played a 1953 game against a desegregated Notre Dame team , and the University of Georgia had very recently played out @-@ of @-@ state games against desegregated opponents , president Van Leer and the Tech Athletic Association saw the game 's contract as acceptable . However , racial tension in the South was high following the recent Brown v. Board of Education decision . Georgia Governor Marvin Griffin had privately given Dodd his support , but he surprised the campus and the state on Friday , December 2 , 1955 by bowing to pressure from segregationists and sending a wire to the Georgia Board of Regents chairman , Robert O. Arnold , requesting not only that Tech not play the game , but that all University System of Georgia teams play only segregated games . 
 It is my request that athletic teams of units of the University System of Georgia not be permitted to engage in contests with other teams where the races are mixed on such teams or where segregation is not required among spectators at such events . The South stands at Armageddon . The battle is joined . We cannot make the slightest concession to the enemy in this dark and lamentable hour of struggle . There is no more difference in compromising integrity of race on the playing field than doing so in the classrooms . One break in the dike and the relentless seas will rush in and destroy us . We are in this fight 100 percent ; not 98 percent , nor 75 percent , not 64 percent – but a full 100 percent . An immediate called meeting of the State Board of Regents to act on my request is vitally necessary at this time . 
 Enraged , Tech students organized an impromptu protest rally on campus . At midnight , a large group of students hung the governor in effigy and ignited a bonfire . They then marched to Five Points , the Georgia State Capitol , and the Georgia Governor 's Mansion , hanging the governor in effigy at each location . The students did some minor damage to the Governor 's Mansion before the march was dispersed by state representative " Muggsy " Smith at 3 : 30 a.m. 
 At the State Capitol , the boys pulled fire hoses from their racks , adorned the sculpt head of Civil War Hero John Gordon with an <unk> . A dozen effigies of Governor Marvin Griffin were hanged and burned during the students ' march , which culminated in a 2 a.m. riot in front of the governor 's mansion . 
 Van Leer 's only comment to the media came on Saturday , December 3 , 1955 : " I am 60 years old and I have never broken a contract . I do not intend to start now " . At a tense meeting of the Board of Regents on Monday , it was decided that Georgia Tech would be allowed to play in the Sugar Bowl . The new policy was that " all laws , customs and traditions of host states would be respected but all games played in Georgia would be segregated " , a policy that would remain until 1963 . The regents , with the exception of Tech alum David Rice , condemned the " riotous " behavior of Tech students . Rice instead criticized Marvin Griffin , and was lauded by The Technique as the " only man with the moral conviction to stand up against Griffin , ... and co " . Ironically , Tech defeated Pittsburgh 7 – 0 because of a pass interference call on the black player . Van Leer died six weeks after this incident , on January 23 , 1956 ; the stress of the controversy was believed to have shortened his life . 
 = = Integration and expansion = = 
 Includes the administrations of Paul Weber ( interim , February 1956 – August 1957 ) and Edwin D. Harrison ( 1957 – 1969 ) 
 After Van Leer 's death , Paul Weber served as acting president from January 1956 to August 1957 , while still holding the title of Dean of Faculties ; it was difficult to find a permanent replacement due to discriminatory state laws and the looming issue of integration , along with a salary gap between Georgia Tech and comparable institutions . Weber 's short tenure as acting president saw significantly increased enrollment standards , efforts by the Georgia Tech Foundation to increase faculty salaries , and further campus expansion including the Alexander Memorial Coliseum , which was completed and dedicated on October 27 , 1956 . Weber left larger organizational changes and integration for his eventual successor . After the selection of a replacement in the University of Toledo 's Dean of Engineering , Edwin D. Harrison , Weber remained a Georgia Tech administrator and was named Vice President for Planning in 1966 . 
 Around 1960 , state law mandated " an immediate cut @-@ off of state funds to any white institution that admitted a black student " . At a meeting in the Old Gym on January 17 , 1961 , an overwhelming majority of the 2 @,@ 741 students present voted to endorse integration of qualified applicants , regardless of race . Three years after the meeting , and one year after the University of Georgia 's violent integration , Georgia Tech became the first university in the Deep South to desegregate without a court order , with Ford Greene , Ralph A. Long , Jr . , and Lawrence Michael Williams becoming Georgia Tech 's first three African American students ; they registered for class on September 18 , 1963 and started class on September 20 . Members of the press were barred from the campus to discourage disruptive behavior , and plainclothes police officers were placed on the campus . The ANAK Society claims to have met with their families and discreetly kept an eye on the students once they enrolled to ensure peaceful integration . 
 There was little reaction to this by Tech students who , like the city of Atlanta described by former mayor William Hartsfield , were " too busy to hate " . On the first day , the Ku Klux Klan came to Georgia Tech , marched up North Avenue , and picketed Harrison 's house , staying just long enough to have their pictures taken . Lester Maddox chose to close his restaurant ( near Georgia Tech 's modern @-@ day Burger Bowl ) rather than desegregate , after losing a year @-@ long legal battle in which he challenged the constitutionality of the public accommodations section ( Title II ) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . In 1965 , John Gill became The Technique 's first black editor , and Tech 's first black professor , William Peace , joined the faculty of the Department of Social Sciences in 1968 . 
 The Ramblin ' Wreck , the iconic 1930 Ford Model A Sport coupe that serves as the official mascot of the student body , was acquired in this era . The Wreck is present at all major sporting events and student body functions , and leads the football team into Bobby Dodd Stadium at Historic Grant Field , a duty it has performed since 1961 . Dean of Student Affairs Jim Dull recognized a need for an official Ramblin ' Wreck when he observed the student body 's fascination with classic cars . Fraternities , in particular , would parade around their House Wrecks as displays of school spirit and enthusiasm . It was considered a rite of passage to own a broken @-@ down vehicle . In 1960 , Dull began a search for a new official symbol to represent the Institute . He specifically wanted a classic pre @-@ war Ford . Dull 's search employed newspaper ads , radio commercials , and other means to locate this vehicle . The search took him throughout the state and country , but no suitable vehicle was found until the autumn of 1960 when Dull spotted a polished 1930 Ford Model A outside of his apartment located in Towers Dormitory . The owner was Captain Ted J. Johnson , Atlanta 's chief Delta Air Lines pilot . When Johnson returned to his car , he found a note from Dull attached to his windshield . Dull 's note offered to purchase the car to serve as Georgia Tech 's official mascot . Johnson , after great deliberation , agreed to take $ 1 @,@ 000 ; he eventually returned the money in 1984 so that the car would be remembered as an official donation to Georgia Tech and the Alexander @-@ Tharpe Fund . The Ramblin ' Wreck was officially transferred to the Athletic Association on May 26 , 1961 . 
 James E. Boyd , Assistant Director of Research at the Engineering Experiment Station since 1954 , was appointed Director of the station from July 1 , 1957 , a post in which he served until 1961 . While at Tech , Boyd wrote an influential article about the role of research centers at institutes of technology , which argued that research should be integrated with education ; he correspondingly involved undergraduates in his research . Under Boyd 's purview , the EES gained many electronics @-@ related contracts , to the extent that an Electronics Division was created in 1959 ; it would focus on radar and communications . The establishment of research facilities was also championed by Boyd . In 1955 , Van Leer had appointed Boyd to Georgia Tech 's Nuclear Science Committee , which recommended the creation of a Radioisotopes Laboratory Facility and a large research reactor . The $ 4 @.@ 5 million ( $ 34 @.@ 8 million in 2015 ) Frank H. Neely Research Reactor would be completed in 1963 and would operate until 1996 . 
 Harrison 's administration also addressed the disparity between salaries at Georgia Tech and competing institutions . This was solved via the " Joint Tech @-@ Georgia Development Fund " developed by the Georgia Tech Alumni Association in 1967 , which supplemented salaries of faculty at both Georgia Tech and UGA and worked to attract high @-@ quality faculty members to both schools . 
 Students across the nation protested the Vietnam War , including at similar institutions such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , where students picketed and blocked access to the Draper Laboratory that was producing guidance systems for the Poseidon missile . While The Technique did publish editorials against the United States ' involvement , the Student Council easily defeated a bill endorsing the Vietnam Moratorium in the fall of 1969 . There were significant protests at other institutions that conducted military research , but there were no protests against the military electronics research at the Georgia Tech Research Institute . 
 There was similar nationwide concern over the United States ' involvement in the Cambodian Civil War , resulting in the Kent State shootings , which in turn caused about 450 colleges to suspend classes . In Georgia , the student response was largely restrained . Several hundred students at the University of Georgia marched on the home of president Frederick Corbet Davison demanding that the school be closed ; consequently , all schools in the University System of Georgia were closed on May 8 and 9 . While there were no protests at Tech , the students were still concerned over the events at Kent State ; on May 8 , four hundred students and faculty filled Bertha Square for a student @-@ organized memorial , after which the students left quietly . 
 A 1965 plan signaled the beginning of Tech 's expansion to include what is now West Campus . The area west of Hemphill Avenue , for decades the campus ' western border , was then a working @-@ class multiracial neighborhood , and Hemphill itself was a major city thoroughfare connecting Buckhead , the Atlantic Steel Mill , Techwood Homes and Downtown . In July 1968 , Harrison resigned to the surprise of many in the Georgia Tech community ; it was leaked to the press prior to his official announcement , and he subsequently released a public statement , saying that " ten years was long enough to be president of one university " . The true reasons stemmed from his reorganization of the campus administration , and difficulties between Harrison and the Georgia Board of Regents and its chancellor over long @-@ term goals and procedures . 
 = = Rapid turnover = = 
 Includes the administrations of Vernon D. Crawford ( interim , March 1969 @-@ August 1969 ) , Arthur G. Hansen ( 1969 – 1971 ) , and James E. Boyd ( interim , 1971 – 1972 ) 
 On July 1 , 1968 , Vernon D. Crawford became dean of the institute 's General College . In March 1969 , Harrison announced that he would take a leave of absence until his resignation was effective ; Chancellor George L. Simpson subsequently announced that Crawford would be the interim president . One notable development during Crawford 's term was the advancement of the School of Industrial Management to a college . In 1966 , Arthur G. Hansen , then a chairman of the University of Michigan 's mechanical engineering department , was named Georgia Tech 's Dean of Engineering . On August 1 , 1969 , Hansen became the institute 's next president , a post he held until his resignation on July 1 , 1971 , to become president of his alma mater , Purdue University . 
 James E. Boyd , who had assumed the vice chancellorship of the University System of Georgia the previous month , was appointed Acting President of Georgia Tech by Chancellor George L. Simpson in May 1971 . Simpson 's selection of Boyd as interim president was influenced by Boyd 's previous experience as an academic administrator , his experience as director of the Engineering Experiment Station , and his ongoing position on the station 's board of directors . The chancellor hoped this combination would help resolve a brewing controversy over whether the EES should be integrated into Georgia Tech 's academic units to improve both entities ' competitiveness for federal money . 
 The EES had sizable and growing support from the state of Georgia and its Industrial Development Council , which developed products and methods and provided technical assistance for Georgia industry . However , due in part to efforts made by Boyd and previous station director Gerald Rosselot , the station increasingly relied on electronics research funding from the federal government . In 1971 , funding to both Georgia Tech 's academic units and the EES began to suffer due to a sharp decline in state funds combined with cuts to federal science , research , and education funding after the end of the Space Race funding boom . Similar institutions , such as the Battelle Memorial Institute , Stanford Research Institute , and the Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute had weathered this storm by becoming exceedingly good at obtaining research contracts . 
 Boyd 's predecessor Arthur G. Hansen 's " bold and controversial " solution to both entities ' problems was to completely integrate the station into Georgia Tech 's academic units . On paper , this would dramatically increase Georgia Tech 's stated research funding ( as all of it would be performed through the academic units ) , and it would increase options and financial aid for graduate students . Another , less publicized , reason was that Georgia Tech would gain access to the contract organization 's reserve fund , which was said to be over $ 1 million ( $ 6 @.@ 1 million in 2015 ) . Thomas E. Stelson , Dean of the College of Engineering at Georgia Tech , was named to " reorganize " the station . Publicly , Stelson 's task was simply to recommend a plan for reorganization , but the administration clearly intended for Georgia Tech and the EES to be closely integrated . Maurice W. Long , who was director of the station at the time , viewed the move as a violation of the EES 's charter as legislatively established by the Georgia General Assembly in 1919 , and asserted that Georgia Tech did not have the authority to merge the two institutions . EES employees and business executives involved with the station appealed to the Georgia Board of Regents and to Governor of Georgia Jimmy Carter ( himself a Georgia Tech alumnus ) ; the controversy received coverage in both The Technique and The Atlanta Constitution . 
 This was the climate into which Boyd entered as interim institute president after Hansen had announced , on April 27 , 1971 , that he would be departing Georgia Tech to become president of Purdue University on July 1 of that year . Boyd stopped the plan for absolute absorption of the station , but did allow plans for closer control and more aggressive contract solicitation to proceed . Among these measures were increased resource @-@ sharing , including increased sharing of physical assets and research staff . The latter was evidenced by the increase in joint faculty appointments between the EES and Georgia Tech . The move paid off , and the fiscal year 1970 – 1971 saw EES win new contracts and grants , totaling a record $ 5 @.@ 2 million ( $ 30 @.@ 4 million 2015 ) . 
 Boyd had to deal with intense public pressure to fire Yellow Jackets football coach Bud Carson . Georgia Tech alumni – accustomed to success under football legends John Heisman ( whose career wins – losses – draws statistics were 185 – 70 – 17 ) , William A. Alexander ( 134 – 95 – 15 ) and Bobby Dodd ( 165 – 64 – 8 ) – made repeated calls for Carson 's dismissal . The complaints were based on a long list of infractions , including " mistreating and humiliating students " and " unsportsmanlike conduct " , but the most important issue was his 27 – 27 record . The last straw was his 6 – 6 season in 1971 , which included both a loss to Georgia Tech 's longtime rival , the Georgia Bulldogs , and to the 1971 Ole Miss Rebels football team in the 1971 Peach Bowl . As institute president , Boyd chaired the Board of Directors of the Georgia Tech Athletic Association , which had been suffering both in win percentage and in finances . 
 Traditional sources of Athletic Association income , primarily ticket sales , had declined as a result of both the Yellow Jackets ' poor record and the relatively recent establishment of professional football in Atlanta , namely the Atlanta Falcons . Bobby Dodd , then athletic director , had warned for years that Georgia Tech 's rising academic standards and its limited curriculum would affect the athletic program . At a meeting on January 8 , 1972 , the Athletic Association board , led by Boyd , ignored a 42 @-@ page list of " charges " drafted by an alumnus , but nevertheless voted to not renew Carson 's contract , making him the first Georgia Tech coach to be fired . The board also voted to not accept Bobby Dodd 's resignation , which had been offered at the meeting . Carson went on to have a successful career , particularly with the Pittsburgh Steelers . On January 21 , 1972 , Boyd announced that Bill Fulcher had been selected as the new football head coach . This would not change the Georgia Tech Athletic Association 's fortunes , however ; after Carson 's departure , the on @-@ field and financial problems remained . 
 Georgia Tech 's mascot Buzz got his start in the 1970s . The original Georgia Tech Yellow Jacket mascot was Judi McNair who donned a homemade yellowjacket costume in 1972 and performed at home football games . She rode on the Ramblin ' Wreck and appears in the 1972 Georgia Tech Blueprint yearbook . McNair 's mascot was considered a great idea , as it was a big hit with the fans . In 1979 , McNair 's idea for a Yellow Jacket was reintroduced by another Georgia Tech student , Richie Bland . Bland , who was apparently unaware of McNair 's prior initiative , paid $ 1 @,@ 400 to have a local theme park costume designer make a yellowjacket costume that he first wore at a pep rally prior to the Tennessee football game . Rather than obtain permission from Georgia Tech as Judi had done in 1972 , this student simply sneaked onto the field in costume during a football game and ran across the field . The fans believed that this costumed character was acting as an official member of the cheerleading squad and responded accordingly . By 1980 , this new incarnation of the yellow jacket mascot was given the name Buzz Bee and was adopted as an official mascot by Georgia Tech . This new Buzz character would be the model for a new Georgia Tech emblem , designed in 1985 by Mike Lester . 
 = = Research expansion = = 
