 Includes the administrations of Joseph M. Pettit ( 1972 – 1986 ) and Henry C. Bourne , Jr . ( interim , 1986 – 1987 ) 
 Joseph M. Pettit became president of the Georgia Institute of Technology in 1972 . During his 14 @-@ year tenure as president , Pettit was credited with turning Georgia Tech into a top @-@ flight research institution . Pettit has also received credit for shifting Georgia Tech back to its roots with regards to providing assistance with economic development within the state of Georgia . In the decades known for the Vietnam War and the launch of Sputnik , research at Georgia Tech and the Georgia Tech Research Institute had become so tied with NASA and the Department of Defense that local industrial development had been largely forgotten . 
 During Pettit 's tenure , the Institute progressed into the top tier of technological education institutions . Under his leadership , Tech 's research budget surpassed the $ 100 million mark for the first time in its history . Thomas E. Stelson was Georgia Tech 's Vice President for Research from 1974 to 1988 . Faced with a longstanding cultural war over the relative merits of basic research versus applied research , Stelson emphasized the importance of both . An increased focus on research activities allowed more funding for academics , which allowed the school 's ranking to start a long and continuing rise from that of the 20s . Stelson simultaneously served as the interim director of the Georgia Tech Research Institute from 1975 to 1976 , during which time he reorganized the station into eight semi @-@ autonomous laboratories in order to allow each to develop a specialization and clientele — a model that GTRI retains ( with slight modifications ) to this day . 
 In the aftermath of the launch of Scientific Atlanta and the subsequent disputes , Georgia Tech 's culture encouraged hard work , but did not encourage start @-@ ups . This changed during Pettit 's administration ; Pettit was at Stanford during the development of the Silicon Valley and worked to change the culture to inspire something similar in Atlanta . " That was when Tech began actively encouraging faculty , staff and students to be entrepreneurial ... In some ways it was a shift back to our roots , with Tech beginning to reconnect with the state through the Advanced Technology Development Center , the Economic Development Institute and the Georgia Research Alliance " , according to Bob <unk> . 
 Pettit also oversaw Georgia Tech 's application and admittance into the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) , an athletic league founded in 1953 which included seven charter members . Georgia Tech had withdrawn from the Southeastern Conference in January 1964 and had operated as an Independent until 1975 when Georgia Tech joined the Metro Conference . Georgia Tech was admitted to the ACC on April 3 , 1978 . The ACC has expanded from 8 to 12 members since that time . 
 The Institute celebrated its centennial in 1985 . Pettit and J. Erskine Love , Jr. spearheaded Tech 's $ 100 million Centennial Campaign . A total of $ 202 @.@ 7 million was raised during the Centennial Campaign , which was Georgia Tech 's largest single fundraising effort to that date . Among other centennial observances , a time capsule was placed in the Student Center , and a team of historians wrote a comprehensive guide to Georgia Tech 's history , Engineering the New South : Georgia Tech 1885 – 1985 . In 1986 , Pettit died of cancer , and Henry C. Bourne , Jr. served as interim president . 
 = = Restructuring controversy = = 
 Includes the administration of John Patrick Crecine ( 1987 – 1994 ) and Michael E. Thomas ( interim , 1994 ) 
 President John Patrick Crecine proposed a controversial restructuring in 1988 . The Institute at that point had three colleges : the College of Engineering , the College of Management , and the catch @-@ all <unk> , the College of Sciences and Liberal arts . Crecine reorganized the latter two into the College of Computing , the College of Sciences , and the Ivan Allen College of Management , Policy , and International Affairs . Crecine announced the changes without asking for input , and consequently many faculty members disliked him for his top @-@ down management style . The administration sent out ballots in 1989 , and the proposed changes passed with very slim margins . The restructuring took effect in January 1990 . While Crecine was seen in a poor light at the time , the changes he made are considered visionary . In January 1994 , Crecine resigned . 
 In October 1990 , Tech opened its first overseas campus , Georgia Tech Lorraine ( GTL ) . A non @-@ profit corporation operating under French law , GTL primarily focuses on graduate education , sponsored research , and an undergraduate summer program . In 1997 GTL was sued on the grounds that the course descriptions on its internet site did not comply with the <unk> Law , which requires that advertisements must be provided in French . The case was dismissed on a technicality ; the GTL site subsequently offers course descriptions in English , French and German . 
 Crecine was instrumental in securing the 1996 Summer Olympics for Atlanta . In September 1989 he imagined a grand multimedia presentation for the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) . The resulting 3 @-@ D presentation , developed by the institute 's Multimedia Laboratory , provided a " 1996 " view of Atlanta , complete with digitized graphic models of non @-@ existent facilities overlaid on their proposed sites . More than 40 Georgia Tech computer scientists were recruited to assemble the virtual reality , three @-@ dimensional tour through Olympic venues that had not yet even been designed . The term " virtual reality " was almost unknown in 1989 when Tech 's seven @-@ foot tall , three @-@ screen , 3 @-@ D interactive video and laser disc projection system debuted during a meeting of the IOC at San Juan , Puerto Rico . Members of the committee used a trackball and a touch screen to view a dazzling montage of animation , computer graphics , aerial photography , video , and satellite topographical photographs created to depict Atlanta during the Centennial Olympic Games . Many believe the presentation showed the IOC that Atlanta was a major player in its Olympics bid and served to create the foundation for the city 's high @-@ tech theme for the Centennial Games . 
 After Atlanta won the Olympics bid , a dramatic amount of construction occurred , creating most of what is now considered " West Campus " in order for Tech to serve as the Olympic Village . The Undergraduate Living Center , Fourth Street Apartments , Sixth Street Apartments , Eighth Street Apartments , Hemphill Apartments , and Center Street Apartments housed athletes and journalists . The Georgia Tech Aquatic Center was built for swimming events , and the Alexander Memorial Coliseum was renovated . 
 = = Modern history = = 
 Includes the administrations of G. Wayne Clough ( 1994 – 2008 ) , Gary Schuster ( interim , 2008 – 2009 ) , and George P. " Bud " Peterson ( 2009 – present ) 
 In 1994 , G. Wayne Clough became the first Tech alumnus to serve as the President of the Institute . The 1996 Summer Olympics took place in Atlanta early in Clough 's tenure . In 1998 , he split the Ivan Allen College of Management , Policy , and International Affairs , creating the Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts and returning the College of Management to " College " status . During his tenure , research expenditures increased from $ 212 million to $ 425 million , enrollment increased from 13 @,@ 000 to 18 @,@ 000 , Tech received the <unk> Award , and Tech 's U.S. News & World Report rankings steadily improved . 
 Clough 's tenure especially focused on a dramatic expansion and modernization of the institute . Coinciding with the rise of personal computers , computer ownership became mandatory for all students in 1997 . In 1998 , Georgia Tech was the first university in the Southeastern United States to provide its fraternity and sorority houses with internet access . A campus wireless network , the Local Area Wireless / <unk> Network ( LAWN ) , was established in 1999 ; it now covers most of the campus . 
 In 1999 , Georgia Tech began offering local degree programs to engineering students in Southeast Georgia . In 2003 Tech established a physical campus in Savannah , Georgia , called Georgia Tech Savannah . Clough 's administration also focused on improved undergraduate research opportunities and the creation of an " International Plan " degree option that requires students to spend two terms abroad and take internationally focused courses . In addition , Clough spearheaded the creation of a fund to make Georgia Tech more affordable for low @-@ income students ( the G. Wayne Clough Georgia Tech Promise Program ) . 
 The master plan for the school 's physical growth and development — created in 1912 and significantly revised in 1952 , 1965 , and 1991 — saw two further revisions under Clough 's guidance in 1997 and 2002 . While Clough was in office , around $ 1 billion was spent on expanding and improving the campus . These projects include the construction of the Manufacturing Related Disciplines Complex , 10th and Home , Tech Square , The Biomedical Complex , the completion and subsequent renovations of several west campus dorms , the Student Center renovation , the expanded 5th Street Bridge , the Georgia Tech Aquatic Center 's renovation into the CRC , the new Health Center , the Klaus Advanced Computing Building , the Molecular Science and Engineering Building , and the Nanotechnology Research Center . 
 The school has also taken care to maintain its Historic District , with several projects dedicated to the preservation or improvement of Tech Tower , the school 's first and oldest building and its primary administrative center . As part of Phase I of the Georgia Tech Master Plan of 1997 , the area was made more pedestrian @-@ friendly by the removal of access roads and the addition of landscaping improvements , benches , and other facilities . The National Register of Historic Places has listed the Georgia Tech Historic District since 1978 . In the 2007 " Best of Tech " issue of The Technique , students voted " construction " as Georgia Tech 's worst tradition . 
 On March 15 , 2008 , Clough was appointed to lead the Smithsonian Institution , effective July 1 , 2008 . Dr. Gary Schuster , Tech 's Provost and Executive Vice President for Academic Affairs , was named Interim President , effective July 1 , 2008 . On February 9 , 2009 , George P. " Bud " Peterson , chancellor of the University of Colorado at Boulder , was named the finalist in the presidential search ; he took office on September 3 , 2009 . On April 20 , 2010 , Georgia Tech was invited to join the Association of American Universities , as the first new member institution in nine years . 
 In 2011 , Georgia Tech opened the G. Wayne Clough Undergraduate Learning Commons building named in honor of his commitment to undergraduate students ; it was dedicated on his birthday , September 24 , 2011 . In 2012 , Ernest Scheller Jr. gave a $ 50 million gift that led to the renaming of the Georgia Tech College of Management to the Scheller College of Business . 
 = Genelia D 'Souza = 
 Genelia D 'Souza ( born 5 August 1987 ) is an Indian film actress and model . She has appeared in South Indian cinema and Bollywood films . After gaining wide attention in a Parker Pen commercial with Amitabh Bachchan , Genelia began her acting career with the box @-@ office hit Tujhe Meri Kasam in 2003 . She was recognized for her role in Boys the same year , and later established herself in Telugu cinema by acting in several Telugu films during 2003 – 2005 . 
 Genelia received her first Filmfare Award in 2006 for her performance in the Telugu romantic film , Bommarillu , which earned her critical acclaim . In 2008 , she gave critically acclaimed performances in Santosh Subramaniam , a Tamil remake of Bommarillu , and the Bollywood movie Jaane Tu ... Ya Jaane Na . Having acted in several commercially successful movies in Telugu and Tamil , Genelia has established herself as one of the leading actresses of the South Indian film industry . In addition to mainstream acting , Genelia has hosted the television show Big Switch , and is the brand ambassador of Fanta , Virgin Mobile India , Fastrack , LG Mobiles , Garnier Light , Margo , and Perk in India . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Mumbai into a Mangalorean Catholic family , Genelia was raised as a Roman Catholic in the Bandra suburb of Mumbai . Her mother tongue is Konkani . Her mother Jeanette D 'Souza was formerly a managing director of the Pharma Multinational corporation ( MNC ) , who left her job in 2004 to help Genelia with her career . Her father Neil D 'Souza , is a senior official with Tata Consultancy Services ( TCS ) . She also has a younger brother , Nigel D 'Souza , who works with the Bombay Stock Exchange . According to Genelia , her name means " rare " or " unique " , and is a portmanteau of Jeanette and Neil , her mother and father 's names . She is also often informally referred to as <unk> , her nickname . Genelia studied at the Apostolic Carmel High School in Bandra and later joined St. Andrew 's College in Bandra to pursue her bachelor 's degree of Management Studies . She completed her degree while shooting for her first film , Tujhe Meri Kasam in 2003 and initially thought that an MNC job would suit her . She liked sports and studies in college , and was a state level athlete , sprinter , and a national level football player . 
 Genelia did her first modeling assignment at the age of 15 , the result of being spotted as the bridesmaid at a wedding . She was selected for the Parker Pen commercial with Amitabh Bachchan , just two days before her exams , and had to shoot the next day . Initially she refused , because of her exam the next day , but the director persuaded Genelia to shoot for the commercial . She gained wide attention from the Parker Pen commercial with Amitabh Bachchan , who said " she was good , and her expressions were spontaneous " . She further did a Fair and Lovely 2003 Cricket World Cup advertisement with cricketer Krishnamachari Srikkanth . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Debut and recognition ( 2003 – 05 ) = = = 
 When Genelia was offered a role in Tujhe Meri Kasam , initially she turned it down , as she was not keen to pursue a career in acting . But the crew insisted and kept contacting her for two months , and she agreed when she saw the Telugu version of the movie . Tamil director , S. Shankar , was impressed with her performance in the Parker Pen commercial and decided to cast her in a leading role in his 2003 Tamil film Boys . Genelia was selected among 300 girls , who had auditioned for the movie . She signed three movies simultaneously in three different languages , Tujhe Meri Kasam ( Hindi ) , Boys ( Tamil ) , and Satyam ( Telugu ) . 
 Genelia 's professional movie career began , with her Bollywood debut Tujhe Meri Kasam in 2003 . Film critic Taran Adarsh noted , " Genelia is a wonderful performer . She catches you unaware with a performance that 's natural to the core . " The film was a box @-@ office success . However , it could not do much to propel her career in Bollywood . Later , she decided to act in South Indian films . The same year , she made her Tamil debut as the teenage girl Harini in Boys , a story about five teenagers having stereotypical teen @-@ boy fantasies . The movie , though noted for its vulgar sexual content , was a box @-@ office success , and subsequently she started receiving Telugu film offers . She left Tamil cinema for a while to concentrate on the Telugu film industry . She made her Telugu debut in 2003 as a medical student in Satyam . Sify noted in their review that , " Genelia is excellent as her body language is her major asset . " The movie was well received , and it raised her profile in the Telugu film industry . 
 In 2004 , Genelia appeared in her second Bollywood movie , Masti . The comedy focuses on three close friends who reunite after three years , but are now married and are being harassed by their wives . Genelia portrayed the character of one of the wives . Taran Adarsh was complimentary of Genelia 's role , saying , " Amongst the wives , Genelia is the best , [ ... ] Genelia looks the stern and demanding wife and is sure to be noticed . " The film was a box @-@ office success . The same year , she appeared in two Telugu movies Samba , and <unk> , both succeeding at the box @-@ office . 
 After appearing in her first Telugu movie in 2005 , Naa <unk> , she starred in the Tamil romantic entertainer Sachein . A review in The Hindu noted , " Genelia , who hardly made an impression in Boys , makes much impact in Sachein . " The movie evoked mixed response from audiences , but was well received with the younger generation . She later appeared in the Telugu patriotic movie Subhash Chandra Bose . 
 = = = Turning point in South Indian films ( 2006 – 08 ) = = = 
 The year 2006 marked a significant turning point in Genelia 's career . She completed two Telugu movies in early 2006 , one was the romantic comedy Happy , and the other was Raam . She then portrayed the role of <unk> , a vibrant , effervescent and a happy @-@ go @-@ lucky young girl , in the 2006 Telugu romantic film Bommarillu . The movie , a blockbuster at the box @-@ office , grossed ₹ 250 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 7 million ) in India , and also won the 2006 Golden Nandi award . Her character was well received , and garnered her the Telugu Filmfare Award for Best Actress , besides Nandi Special Jury Award and Santosham Award for Best Actress . Sify concluded about her acting in their review that , " The scene stealer is Genelia with her innocent looks and cute mannerisms . She does not overact and we just fall in love with her character . Genelia looks like a dream in chic skirts and is the life of the party and raises the bar of the film . " 
 Following the success of Bommarillu , Genelia played the role of the daughter of a local don , in the Tamil gangster film Chennai Kadhal alongside Boys co @-@ star Bharath . Rediff.com criticized her commenting , " Genelia stands up yet again to prove the point that if you are pretty and well dressed , you can get away with anything , without acting . " Shortly afterwards in 2007 , Genelia played the role of sister of a notorious gangster in the blockbuster Telugu movie <unk> , set against a gang war backdrop . 
 The following year , Genelia appeared in the 2008 Telugu romantic thriller Mr. <unk> , in which she portrayed the role of a student from Canada . The movie was successful , with Rediff.com complimenting her performance saying , " Genelia is her effervescent self – full of joie @-@ de @-@ vivre and lights up the screen . " She made her Kannada debut in Satya in Love the same year . Later , she was cast in a leading role in Santhosh Subramaniam , a Tamil remake of Bommarillu . The film also turned out to be rather successful as its predecessor . Sify described Genelia 's portrayal as " the soul of the film " and the film 's " biggest strength " , however Rediff.com described her character as " appears a little too good to be true . " 
 = = = Return to Bollywood and recent work ( June 2008 – present ) = = = 
 In June 2008 , following a nearly five @-@ year hiatus in Bollywood , she appeared in Mere <unk> Pehle Aap , which failed to make profit at the box @-@ office . A Rediff review noted , " besides her apparent cuteness , brings in tons of freshness and traits to the youthful characters she chooses to play " , while a Sify review criticized her stating , " Genelia is sprightly but has a standard two @-@ three expressions bank in this film . " She later appeared in the Telugu love story Ready alongside Ram , which was well received . Her breakthrough performance in 2008 was through the portrayal of the role of Aditi Mahant in the blockbuster Jaane Tu ... Ya Jaane Na , which was an economic success across India and overseas , grossing ₹ 564 million ( US $ 8 @.@ 4 million ) . Her role was widely admired for her sweetness and freshness , and new style of acting , with Rediff describing her acting as a " spark that has been missing in Hindi cinema for well over a decade now " . In that same year , Genelia acted in the Telugu romantic comedy Sasirekha Parinayam . The movie received favorable reviews , and Sify noted in their review that , " The life of the film is definitely Genelia and she has shown the varied emotions from innocence , sadness , romance and anger in equal proportions without a hitch . " 
 In 2009 , Genelia was cast in the Hindi film Life Partner , in which she was criticized for her performance . Indian film critic Rajeev Masand commented , " The adorable little imp from Jaane Tu … Ya Jaane Na has turned into a nagging harridan in this film , and how you wish she 'd immediately enroll for acting lessons . " Her next appearance in 2009 was in the Telugu thriller Katha , which was well received , and for which she won the 2009 Nandi Special Jury Award . In 2010 , Genelia appeared in Chance Pe Dance and Orange , both receiving poor reviews from critics , but her Uthama Puthiran was a moderate success in Tamil . 
 D 'Souza had a major role in 2011 , starring as the Muslim warrior princess <unk> Ayesha , in her debut Malayalam film <unk> . The film is about a fictional story happening in Calicut , Kerala during the 15th century , about a boy who plots to assassinate the Portuguese explorer Vasco Da Gama . She learned horse riding , and spent two weeks of training to use the sword , the short stick , and movements of the Dravidian martial art <unk> . The movie portrayed her image makeover from typically girl @-@ next @-@ door roles to more serious roles . Her next appearance was in the Bollywood action thriller Force , which received mixed reception from critics , with Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama noting that D 'Souza is strikingly sweet and subdued . She played the role of a journalist alongside leading actor Vijay in <unk> , which was also commercially successful . She appeared in Tere Naal Love Ho Gaya and Naa Ishtam in 2012 and in cameo appearances in Jai Ho and Lai <unk> in 2014 . 
 Future films of D 'Souza include Hook Ya Crook and It 's My Life ( a remake of Bommarillu in Hindi ) . 
 = = Other work and events = = 
 D 'Souza was a part of Tamil director Mani Ratnam 's stage show , Netru , Indru , Naalai , an event which seeks to raise funds for The Banyan , a voluntary organisation which rehabilitates homeless women with mental illness in Chennai . She was one of the judges at the grand finale of <unk> Mega Model and Manhunt 2009 contest on 28 March 2009 . She also walked the ramp alongside Tushar Kapoor for fashion designer Manish Malhotra at the Lakme Fashion Week 2009 on 28 March 2009 . On 5 April 2009 , D 'Souza was among several Bollywood celebrities to perform at the Pantaloons Femina Miss India 2009 finale in Mumbai . In October 2009 , she appeared as a showstopper for jewellery designer Farah Khan Ali on the second season of Housing Development and Infrastructure Limited ( <unk> ) India Couture Week , a platform created to celebrate India 's fashion heritage by showcasing the country 's leading couture designers . On 24 October 2009 , D 'Souza began hosting Big Switch , a television show based on slum kids on UTV <unk> channel to reach a bigger audience . 
 She has unveiled Spinz Black Magic deodorant on 7 October 2009 in Mumbai , and the Ceres Store retail outlet . At the Chennai International Fashion Week ( <unk> ) in December 2009 , she appeared as a showstopper for designer Ishita Singh 's spring @-@ summer indigenous collection of 2010 , showcasing the best of Indian and Western dresses . She also holds a Limca world record of delivering four different super hit films in four different languages , Ready ( Telugu ) , Satya in Love ( Kannada ) , Santosh Subramaniam ( Tamil ) , and Jaane Tu ... Ya Jaane Na ( Hindi ) in a span of one calendar year . 
 She was a part of online market portal eBay 's 2010 " Dream House " challenge , where she transformed an empty three @-@ room apartment in Bandra into an attractive home with online shopping . She had been provided a budget of ₹ 450 @,@ 000 ( US $ 6 @,@ 700 ) and two weeks to create a look she wants with items on sale on the website . On the occasion of Children 's Day ( 14 November ) , D 'Souza auctioned a few items from the apartment . All proceeds received from the auction was given to <unk> , a Non @-@ governmental organization ( NGO ) , which aims to provide education to underprivileged children . 
 = = Reception = = 
 D 'Souza has been often tagged in the media as the " bubbly girl " , after portraying the role of a young energetic girl in several movies , especially Jaane Tu ... Ya Jaane Na ( 2008 ) . She appeared alongside Shahid Kapoor on the fourth episode of Tere Mere Beach Mein , a celebrity chat show , hosted by Farah Khan . The theme of the show was " Second Innings " , since both D 'Souza and Kapoor had the same history of failures initially and success later in their acting careers . In June 2010 , D 'Souza was crowned as the " Brand Ambassador of the Year " at the CNBC Awaaz consumer awards , for endorsing nine brands . She is now the brand ambassador of the soft drink Fanta ( replacing Rani Mukherjee ) , the chocolate Perk ( replacing Preity Zinta ) , Virgin Mobile India ( along with Ranbir Kapoor ) , Fastrack watches and accessories , LG mobiles ( along with John Abraham and Abhay Deol ) , Garnier Light fairness cream , Dabur Vatika hair oil , Margo soap , and Spinz deodorant . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 In June 2010 , she was the subject of a controversy , when a Tamil daily reported that she had attended the controversial 2010 IIFA Awards in Colombo . Several Bollywood actors and the South Indian film industry had boycotted the event , over the alleged killing of Tamilian civilians at the height of the conflict between the Sri Lanka Army and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam ( LTTE ) in 2009 . The rumours of her visit to Colombo started after her friend Ritesh Deshmukh was seen at the festival in Colombo . Immediately , various Tamil groups and Kollywood associations demanded her films to be banned . 
 In 2011 , a controversy broke out for her film Force , in a wedding sequence scene of herself and John Abraham . Sources claim that the wedding ceremony and rituals conducted were so authentic that they would have actually been husband and wife in real life . Instead of a junior artiste , a real priest was called for the scene . Again , following the reports of Ritesh Deshmukh and D 'Souza 's marriage plans , the priest landed up at producer Vipul Amrutlal Shah 's office to register a complaint . He insisted that the couple couldn 't get married , as D 'Souza has been already married to John Abraham , as all marriage rituals were observed , from wearing a <unk> ( a sacred thread worn by Indian women as a symbol of their marriage ) , to exchanging garlands , and taking the seven steps around the holy fire . Shah dismissed the claims as a publicity stunt . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 D 'Souza is deeply religious and says that , she regularly attends Sunday Mass at St. Anne 's Parish ( Bandra ) , and whenever the family is home , a part of their evening is reserved for saying the rosary together . In an interview with The Times of India , she comments , " I keep a <unk> every Wednesday at St. Michael 's Church in Mahim . " In an interview with Daily News and Analysis , she said that " My communication with God is conversational , [ ... ] I 'm God 's favourite child ; I believe that God has always been kind to me . " Her mother tongue is Konkani . Tabloids repeatedly linked D 'Souza romantically with Ritesh Deshmukh , ever since they starred together in their debut film Tujhe Meri Kasam in 2003 . They were reportedly ready to get engaged , but Ritesh 's father , the then @-@ Maharashtra Chief Minister , Vilasrao Deshmukh did not agree . D 'Souza later denied any rumors of a relationship with Deshmukh , and responds that she had just friendly relations with him . However , the couple eventually got married on 3 February 2012 , according to Marathi marriage traditions in a Hindu wedding ceremony . She got married in a Roman Catholic ceremony in Bandra , the following day . The couple 's first child , a son named <unk> , was born on 25 November 2014 . Their second son was born on 1 June 2016 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = U.S. Route 9 in Delaware = 
 U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) is a U.S. highway in the northeast United States , running from Laurel , Delaware north to Champlain , New York . In Delaware , the route runs an east – west path through Sussex County . Even though US 9 is signed north – south for the remainder of its route , the segment in Delaware is signed east – west . The highway runs from its western terminus at US 13 in Laurel to the Cape May @-@ Lewes Ferry across the Delaware Bay in Lewes , which carries the route to Cape May , New Jersey . US 9 passes through rural areas and serves the communities of Laurel , Georgetown and Lewes . US 9 intersects Delaware Route 20 ( DE 20 ) in Hardscrabble , US 113 and DE 18 / DE 404 in Georgetown , DE 30 in Gravel Hill , DE 5 in Harbeson , and DE 1 in Five Points . Between Georgetown and Five Points , US 9 runs concurrent with DE 404 . 
 What is now US 9 in Delaware was originally built as a state highway during the 1920s and designated by 1936 as DE 28 between Laurel and Georgetown and a part of DE 18 between Georgetown and Lewes . US 9 was extended to Delaware from New Jersey by way of the Cape May @-@ Lewes Ferry in 1974 , replacing all of DE 28 and the portion of DE 18 between Georgetown and Five Points , with the route aligned to bypass Lewes . DE 404 was designated along the portion of US 9 between Georgetown and Five Points by 1987 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 9 starts out at an intersection with US 13 in the commercial northern part of Laurel , heading to the northeast on two @-@ lane undivided County Seat Highway . The road leaves Laurel and runs through a mix of farmland and woodland with some homes . The route intersects DE 20 in Hardscrabble , at which point it briefly becomes a divided highway . Past this intersection , US 9 becomes undivided again and continues through rural land , passing to the southeast of the University of Delaware Agricultural Experiment Station and Sussex Technical High School . Farther northeast , the road reaches Georgetown and intersects US 113 / DE 404 Truck in a commercial area . At this point , US 9 Truck heads south along US 113 / DE 404 Truck to bypass Georgetown to the south . Following US 113 , the route continues northeast on West Market Street through residential areas . US 9 enters downtown Georgetown and intersects DE 18 / DE 404 at The Circle , where the Sussex County Courthouse is located . 
 At this point , US 9 continues northeast concurrent with DE 404 on East Market Street through the downtown area . The road crosses Norfolk Southern 's Indian River Secondary railroad line and runs through residential areas with a few businesses . US 9 / DE 404 heads east @-@ northeast out of Georgetown and becomes Lewes Georgetown Highway , passing through farmland and woodland with some development . The two routes intersect the eastern terminus of US 9 Truck / DE 404 Truck a short distance east of Georgetown . In Gravel Hill , the road intersects DE 30 . Following this intersection , US 9 / DE 404 passes through more rural land , reaching a junction with DE 5 in Harbeson . Past here , the two routes cross a Delaware Coast Line Railroad line . Farther east , residential development near the road begins to increase . Upon reaching the area of the Five Points intersection in Nassau , US 9 / DE 404 runs past homes and businesses , widening into a divided highway and coming to an intersection with DE 1D / DE 23 . DE 23 joins US 9 / DE 404 for a concurrency on a four @-@ lane divided highway before the road comes to a junction with DE 1 . Here , DE 23 / DE 404 ends , US 9 Bus. continues northeast , and US 9 heads east for a concurrency with DE 1 . 
 Past the Five Points intersection , US 9 follows DE 1 on the six @-@ lane divided Coastal Highway , running through commercial areas . The road curves southeast into wooded areas . In Carpenters Corner , US 9 splits from DE 1 by turning northeast onto Dartmouth Drive , a three @-@ lane undivided road with two westbound lanes and one eastbound lane . A short distance later , the route turns north @-@ northeast onto two @-@ lane undivided Kings Highway , passing through farmland with some residential subdivisions and heading to the east of Cape Henlopen High School . US 9 splits from Kings Highway and continues northeast on Theodore C. Freeman Memorial Highway , bypassing Lewes to the southeast . The route runs through rural areas , crossing the Lewes and Rehoboth Canal on a high @-@ level bridge . The road bends north and crosses the Delaware Coast Line Railroad . After the railroad tracks , US 9 intersects US 9 Bus. again and turns east onto Cape Henlopen Drive , passing between residential development along the Delaware Bay to the north and the railroad tracks to the south . US 9 comes to the terminal of the Cape May @-@ Lewes Ferry , which carries the route across the Delaware Bay to Cape May , New Jersey . Cape Henlopen Drive continues east toward Cape Henlopen State Park . 
 The portion of the route between Gills Neck Road and the Cape May @-@ Lewes Ferry terminal in Lewes is designated as part of the Lewes , Gateway to the Nation Byway , a Delaware Byway . US 9 in Delaware has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 53 @,@ 789 vehicles along the DE 1 concurrency to a low of 895 vehicles at the Cape May @-@ Lewes Ferry terminal . The portion of US 9 in Delaware east of DE 18 / DE 404 in Georgetown is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 What is currently US 9 in Delaware existed as a state highway between <unk> Corners and Georgetown by 1920 , with the remainder as an unimproved county road . At the time , the road was a state aid highway between Laurel and <unk> Corners and under contract as a state aid highway between Georgetown and Harbeson . By 1924 , the state highway along the present alignment of US 9 was completed , running from Laurel through Georgetown to Lewes . A year later , what is now US 9 along the DE 1 concurrency was built as a state highway . The Kings Highway portion of the current route was paved by 1931 . When Delaware assigned numbers to its state highways by 1936 , DE 28 was designated to run from US 13 ( Central Avenue ) in Laurel to DE 18 in Georgetown while the road between Georgetown and Lewes became a part of DE 18 . By 1954 , US 13 was moved to a new alignment to the east of Laurel , and the western terminus of DE 28 was truncated from Central Avenue to the new location of US 13 . The Cape May @-@ Lewes Ferry was started in 1964 ; at this time , the ferry did not carry a route number . By this time , the Theodore C. Freeman Highway portion of US 9 had been built . 
 In 1974 , US 9 was extended across the ferry from New Jersey to Delaware , replacing DE 28 between Laurel and Georgetown and DE 18 between Georgetown and Five Points . Between Five Points and the terminal of the Cape May @-@ Lewes Ferry , US 9 followed DE 14 ( now DE 1 ) , Kings Highway , and Theodore C. Freeman Highway before coming to Cape Henlopen Drive . At the same time , US 9 Business was designated onto the former alignment of DE 18 between Five Points and Lewes as well as a portion of Cape Henlopen Drive connecting to US 9 . US 9 Truck was created as a truck bypass of the portion of US 9 through Georgetown in 1983 . DE 404 was extended to follow US 9 between Georgetown and Five Points by 1987 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Conversation poems = 
 The conversation poems are a group of eight poems composed by Samuel Taylor Coleridge ( 1772 – 1834 ) between 1795 and 1807 . Each details a particular life experience which led to the poet 's examination of nature and the role of poetry . They describe virtuous conduct and man 's obligation to God , nature and society , and ask as if there is a place for simple appreciation of nature without having to actively dedicate one 's life to altruism . 
 The Conversation poems were grouped in the 20th @-@ century by literary critics who found similarity in focus , style and content . The series title was devised to describe verse where Coleridge incorporates conversational language while examining higher ideas of nature and morality . The works are held together by common themes , in particular they share meditations on nature and man 's place in the universe . In each , Coleridge explores his idea of " One Life " , a belief that people are spiritually connected through a universal relationship with God that joins all natural beings . 
 Critics have disagreed on which poem in the group is strongest . Frost at Midnight is usually held in high esteem , while Fears in Solitude is generally less well regarded . 
 = = Grouping = = 
 20th @-@ century literary critics often categorise eight of Coleridge 's poems ( The Eolian Harp , Reflections on having left a Place of Retirement , This Lime @-@ Tree Bower my Prison , Frost at Midnight , Fears in Solitude , The Nightingale : A Conversation Poem , Dejection : An Ode , To William Wordsworth ) as a group , usually as his " conversation poems " . The term was coined in 1928 by George McLean Harper , who used the subtitle of The Nightingale : A Conversation Poem ( 1798 ) to describe all eight . Harper considered these poems as a form of blank verse that is " ... more fluent and easy than Milton 's , or any that had been written since Milton " . In 2006 , Robert <unk> wrote about another aspect of this apparent " easiness " , noting that " The Eolian Harp and The Nightingale maintain a middle register of speech , employing an idiomatic language that is capable of being construed as un @-@ symbolic and un @-@ musical : language that lets itself be taken as ' merely talk ' rather than rapturous ' song ' . " 
 M. H. Abrams wrote a broad description of the works in 1965 . He observed that in each , the speaker " begins with a description of the landscape ; an aspect or change of aspect in the landscape evokes a varied by integral process of memory , thought , anticipation , and feeling which remains closely <unk> with the outer scene . In the course of this meditation the lyric speaker achieves an insight , faces up to a tragic loss , comes to a moral decision , or resolves an emotional problem . Often the poem rounds itself to end where it began , at the outer scene , but with an altered mood and deepened understanding which is the result of the intervening meditation . " In fact , Abrams was describing both the conversation poems and later works influenced by them . Abrams ' essay has been describes as a " touchstone of literary criticism " . As Paul Magnuson wrote in 2002 , " Abrams credited Coleridge with originating what Abrams called the ' greater Romantic lyric ' , a genre that began with Coleridge 's ' Conversation ' poems , and included William Wordsworth 's Tintern Abbey , Percy Bysshe Shelley 's Stanzas Written in Dejection and John Keats 's Ode to a Nightingale , and was a major influence on more modern lyrics by Matthew Arnold , Walt Whitman , Wallace Stevens , and W. H. Auden . " 
 In 1966 , George Watson devoted a chapter to the poems in his literary analysis Coleridge the Poet . Although stressing that the form was the only type of poetry Coleridge created , he admitted that " the name is both convenient and misleading . A conversation is an exchange ; and these poems , a dozen or fewer , stretching from ' The Eolian Harp ' [ ... ] to ' To William Wordsworth ] [ ... ] and perhaps further , are plainly monologues . Those who met Coleridge in his later life , it is true , were inclined to find his conversation arrestingly one @-@ sided , but this will hardly serve as an explanation of what is happening here . " 
 = = Poems = = 
 = = = The Eolian Harp = = = 
 Coleridge began work on The Eolian Harp in August 1795 during his engagement to Sara Fricker . It details their future union and was inspired by his visit to the house in Clevedon that would serve as their home after their wedding . The poem is infused by the fact that Coleridge took an idealised view of his life with Fricker . 
 The Eolian Harp was published in the 1796 edition of Coleridge 's poems and in all subsequent collections . Coleridge did not stop working on the poem after it was published . He expanded and reworked up until 1817 . It deals with themes of love , sex and marriage , but is not formed in the usual manner of a love poem . In contrast to the second poem in the series , Reflections , which hints at problems with the relationship , The Eolian Harp focuses on innocence and the poet 's anticipation of his conjugal union . 
 The poem creates a series of oppositional themes with aspects of nature representing each : seduction and innocence , order and chaos . These oppositions establish tension before the poem asks as to how they can be reconciled . These images and their being reconciled are described as analogous to the effects of an Aeolian harp and Coleridge 's pantheistic feelings towards nature . In terms of religion , The Eolian Harp describes the mind 's desire to seek after the divine . His approach is similar to Ralph Cudworth 's in The True Intellectual System of the Universe . However , Coleridge 's pantheistic feelings on nature are said to receive reproof from Fricker , and Coleridge returns to a more traditional view of God that deals more with faith than finding the divine within nature . 
 = = = Reflections on Having Left a Place of Retirement = = = 
 Soon after his autumn 1795 marriage to Sarah Fricker , Coleridge left their home in Clevedon , North Somerset . However , he felt guilt at his absence from his wife , and eventually went to live with her family at Redcliffe Hill , Bristol . As he completed The Eolian Harp — composed to commemorate his return to Clevedon — Coleridge composed Reflections on Having Left a Place of Retirement on his absence from Clevedon and later return to be with his wife at Bristol . The poem was published in the October 1796 Monthly Magazine , under the title Reflections on Entering into Active Life . A poem Which Affects Not to be Poetry . Reflections was included in Coleridge 's 28 October 1797 collection of poems and the anthologies that followed . 
 The themes of Reflections are similar to those of The Eolian Harp . They are set in the same location , and both describe Coleridge 's relationship with his wife and sexual desire . The reflection on his life within the poem represent an unwillingness to accept his current idyllic life and a rejection of the conclusion drawn in The Eolian Harp . Although the land of Clevedon can bring one closer to God in Coleridge 's view , he reflects on how one cannot simply exist in such an area but must actively seek out truth in order to fulfill God 's will . The poem details how men feel a need to seek truth like a philosopher while also desiring to simply live in an idyllic natural state . The poem reconciles these desires by claiming that the pursuer of truth can still reflect back on his time when he was simply enjoying nature and God 's presence . 
 Reflections further differs from The Eolian Harp by looking at problems within Coleridge 's marriage , especially when the union distracts him from the world outside of his home . The poem expresses desire for solitude and confinement and emphasises the difference between the worlds within and outside of the cottage . Overall , there is focus on the relationship of the private to the public spheres . When engaged with the outside world the narrator is separate from mankind , yet his focus is devoted to helping mankind , which contains religious and political components . The image of " One Life " compels him to abandon the sensual pleasures of the cottage , to pursue a path of altruism . 
 = = = This Lime @-@ Tree Bower My Prison = = = 
 During summer 1797 , Coleridge spent time with many of his friends , including John Thelwall , William and Dorothy Wordsworth , Charles Lamb , Thomas Poole , and his wife Sara Fricker . During this time , he suffered an accident in which his foot was burned . As a result , he was left alone at Poole 's property underneath a lime tree , while Lamb , the Wordsworths and his wife went on a journey across the Quantocks . 
 The first version of the poem was sent in a letter to Southey and was only 56 lines . The first published edition , in 1800 , was 76 lines long . The poem was revised and published under another name in Southey 's Annual Anthology . A later revised edition was included in Sibylline Leaves , Coleridge 's 1817 collection of poems . 
 Within the verse , Coleridge seeks to discover the environment that his friends are exploring because he is unable to join them . The poem links the lime @-@ tree bower to the Quantocks where the Wordsworths , Lamb and Fricker were out walking . Although he is separated from them , the poet connects to his distant friends and they are able to share in a common view on life . The poem describes Coleridge 's loneliness and solitude throughout , yet he is glad that his friends are able to experience nature . Because of this , he is able to tolerate his prison , which he views as merely physical rather than intellectual . 
 = = = Frost at Midnight = = = 
 Frost at Midnight was written in February 1798 . It is based on Coleridge 's childhood as well as his friendship with Wordsworth , who first exposed Coleridge to the wild beauty of the Lake District . The poem was published in a small work containing his France : An Ode and Fears in Solitude . It was rewritten many times ; seven versions have been printed . Of these , the 1798 edition contains six concluding lines that were removed from later editions . 
 The narrator comes to an understanding of nature while isolated with his thoughts . Nature becomes a comfort , however , the poet remembers the loneliness of childhood when he felt isolated from nature and other people , as if living in a world of strangers . His hope is that his own child , David Hartley , will experience an easier and more harmonious life . 
 Although Wordsworth places a similar emphasis on living in harmony with nature in his poetry , Coleridge 's view is different from that of Wordsworth 's in that he believed that nature represents a physical presence of God 's word ; this is combined with a Neoplatonic understanding of God that emphasises the need to understand the divine in order to embrace it . 
 = = = Fears in Solitude = = = 
 Fears in Solitude was written after rumors of a French invasion spread across England . Although Coleridge was opposed to Prime Minister William Pitt 's control over the British government , he sided with his homeland . He began work on the poem during April 1798 and it was first published in a small pamphlet along with Frost at Midnight and France : An Ode . It was eventually printed seven times with a later printing removing any anti @-@ Pitt sentiment . 
 The poem is critical of the corruption Coleridge sees within his own government , but it still displays his loyalty and devotion to England . The poem operates in a circular pattern with its beginning and ending at the Stowey dell . By introducing the historically real possibility of an invasion of England , the narrator announces his determination to protect his family and the dell , along with his fellow Britons . Throughout the poem , there is also an emphasis on the simple life and the narrator desires to return to his previous idyllic lifestyle . 
 = = = The Nightingale : A Conversation Poem = = = 
 The Nightingale was written in April 1798 , during the same time Coleridge wrote Fears in Solitude . The poem was included in the Lyrical Ballads , a joint publication with Wordsworth . The nightingale is part of a discussion directed to Wordsworths in which Coleridge refutes the traditional association between nightingales and melancholic feelings because of the bird 's appearance in the myth of Philomela . 
 In a break from tradition , the nightingales in Coleridge 's poem represented an experience he had with the Wordsworths . The narrative is interrupted by a mysterious female character . In this case , the female is not Coleridge 's wife , Sara , a fact which separates The Nightingale from the other poems in the series . The work mentions Hartley , the child they had together , as well as a resonant night in which Coleridge viewed and contemplated the moon . John Keats would later follow Coleridge 's depiction and use of nightingale in " Ode to a Nightingale " . 
 = = = Dejection : An Ode = = = 
 Coleridge was living apart from his family in 1802 During this period he intended to write a poem for Sara Hutchinson , with whom he had fallen in love . He sent her the verse on 4 April 1802 . The original draft was titled " Letter to Sara Hutchinson " , but renamed as Dejection when published . There are many differences between the versions . The original consisted of 340 lines ; when published , 139 lines were cut to emphasise two moments in Coleridge 's emotional struggle , while many personal elements were removed . The poem was published in The Morning Post on 4 October 1802 . The date corresponds with Wordsworth 's marriage to Mary Hutchinson . 
 Dejection was a response to Wordsworth 's Immortality Ode . It conveys feelings of dejection , expressed through an inability to write or appreciate nature . Wordsworth is introduced in the poem as a counterbalance to Coleridge ; Wordsworth is able to turn his darkness to benefit and accept comfort . However , Coleridge cannot find any positive aspect to his despair , and is paralyzed by his emotions . The poem captures many of the feelings expressed in his earlier works , including his exploration of a problematic childhood and thoughts on his religious beliefs . 
 = = = To William Wordsworth = = = 
 To William Wordsworth commemorates the time when Coleridge stayed with the Wordsworths during the winter of 1806 – 1807 , and recalls when William Wordsworth read his newly completed The Prelude . Coleridge wrote his poem in response during January 1807 , to capture his feelings about his friend 's poem . Portions of the verse were printed in the 1809 Friend , however Wordsworth did not wish it to be made public due to the private nature of Coleridge 's thoughts . Eventually , it was published in Coleridge 's 1817 collection Sibylline Leaves . 
 The poem begins by summarising the themes of The Prelude , and develops into a discussion of Wordsworth 's understanding of his beliefs and their relationship with nature . In the poem , Coleridge is self @-@ critical in a near masochistic manner , holding his poetry and thoughts as inferior to Wordsworth . This is partly because Coleridge believed that Wordsworth was able to find bliss from solitude while he was unable to find anything but pain . Coleridge discusses his youthful hopes to become a great poet and how his ability to write has diminished over time . The poem 's admiration of Wordsworth 's ability is rendered without jealousy , though he is scornful of his own . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The Eolian Harp examines Coleridge 's understanding of nature within the concept of his " One Life " , an idea that came from reflection on his experiences at Clevedon . The conversation poems as a whole are connected to the ideas within The Eolian Harp that deal with the nature and mans ' understanding of the universe . In particular , The Eolian Harp express an unease with David Hartley 's ideas about necessity . Within Reflections , the idea of " One Life " compels the narrator to abandon the sensual pleasures of the cottage and of nature in order to pursue a path of helping mankind . This Lime @-@ Tree Bower continues the conversation poems theme of " One Life " by linking Coleridge 's surroundings with the walk his friends went on . Although they are all separated , Coleridge connects to his distant friends by their mutual experience and appreciation of nature . 
 Frost at Midnight uses the idea of " One Life " as the poem describes the idea life that Coleridge 's child will experience in the countryside . Coleridge hoped that the boy would become a " child of nature " and raised free of the constraints that come from a disconnection from nature . Fears in <unk> the unity of mankind and nature , which manifests in the form of fearing for his fellow countrymen in times of invasion . This idea of " One Life " , according to Abrams , " best epitomize the Romantic constellation of joy , love , and the shared life " . 
 Both The Eolian Harp and Reflections deal with similar understandings of nature but differ in approach . By Reflections , Coleridge questions his right to simply enjoy nature . The image of nature and other themes reappears in Fear in Solitude , and the later poem even recreates the " Valley of Seclusion " image . Similarly , the compulsion to enter into the world and help mankind is included , but it is altered from being motivated by guilt to a warning message against a possible invasion from outside forces . As such , Fear in Solitude does not seek to leave the location to help mankind , but to stay as a protector over his family . 
 This Lime @-@ Tree Bower and Frost at Midnight also deal with a similar understanding of nature , and the ideas within This Lime @-@ Tree Bower form the basis for a natural education . Coleridge hoped that his son Hartley would be able to learn through nature in an innocent way . Unlike Wordsworth 's nature , Coleridge 's has a strong Christian presence and nature is a physical presence of God 's word . There is also a connection between Dejection and Frost at Midnight with its emphasis on Coleridge 's private life . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The poems are considered by many critics to be among Coleridge 's finest . The final ten lines of Frost at Midnight were chosen by Harper in 1928 as the " best example of the peculiar kind of blank verse Coleridge had evolved , as natural @-@ seeming as prose , but as exquisitely artistic as the most complicated sonnet . " In 1966 , Virginia Radley argued , " Although no conversation poem can rightly be said to stand equally with the poems of high imagination [ ... ] certainly " Frost at Midnight " and " This Lime @-@ tree Bower ... " both have within them that quality of heart so essential to these latter poems . Because of this quality , and because of the striking effectiveness of their imagery , these poems can be said to be the true harbingers of Coleridge 's greatest poems " . 
 Others agree on the strength of Frost at Midnight . Richard Holmes wrote in 1989 that the poem " is one of the most intricately structured of all the Conversation Poems " . Rosemary Ashton argued in 1997 that the poem is " one of [ Coleridge 's ] most delightful conversation poems " . Agreeing with this view in 2006 , Adam <unk> believes that Frost at Midnight is " perhaps the most beautiful of Coleridge 's ' conversation poems ' " . Other poems in the series received praise , with George Watson , in 1966 , claiming that To William Wordsworth " is the last pure example that Coleridge 's poetry affords of the conversation poem [ ... ] the poem is extravagant in its very being . " Also , Holmes describes The Eolian Harp as a " beautiful Conversation Poem " . 
 Not all of the poems have been well received . Watson believes that Fears in Solitude " shows how precarious Coleridge 's new achievement was . It is a shameless return to the older , effusive manner , evidently written in a white heat of patriotic indignation against the degradation of English public opinion during the French wars , and it is only by stretching charity that it can be considered a conversation poem at all . " Holmes simply claims Fears in Solitude as " one of the most difficult of [ Coleridge 's ] Conversation Poems " . In discussing The Nightingale , Ashton writes that , " <unk> though this is , and , however , beautiful the final lines about Hartley are , ' The Nightingale ' is as a whole a less successful poem than the other conversation poems . It has rather a blank at the centre , just where the others pivot on a significant controlling idea . " 
 = Michael Hordern = 
 Sir Michael Murray Hordern , CBE ( 3 October 1911 – 2 May 1995 ) was an English stage and film actor whose career spanned nearly 60 years . He is best known for his Shakespearean roles , especially that of King Lear , which he played to much acclaim on stage in Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon in 1969 and London in 1970 . He then successfully assumed the role on television five years later . He often appeared in film , rising from a bit part actor in the late 1930s to a member of the main cast ; by the time of his death he had appeared in nearly 140 cinema roles . His later work was predominantly in television and radio . 
 Born in Hertfordshire into a family with no theatrical connections , Hordern was educated at Windlesham House School where he became interested in drama . He went on to Brighton College where his interest in the theatre developed . After leaving the college he joined an amateur dramatics company , and came to the notice of several influential Shakespearean directors who cast him in minor roles in Othello and Macbeth . During the Second World War he served on HMS Illustrious where he reached the rank of lieutenant commander . Upon his demobilisation he resumed his acting career and made his television debut , becoming a reliable bit @-@ part actor in many films , particularly in the war film genre . 
 Hordern came to prominence in the early 1950s when he took part in a theatrical competition at the Arts Theatre in London . There , he impressed Glen Byam Shaw who secured the actor a season @-@ long contract at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre where he played major parts , including Caliban in The Tempest , Jaques in As You Like It , and Sir Politick Would @-@ Be in Ben Jonson 's comedy Volpone . The following season Hordern joined Michael Benthall 's company at the Old Vic where , among other parts , he played Polonius in Hamlet , and the title role in King John . In 1958 he won a best actor award at that year 's British Academy Television Awards for his role as the barrister in John Mortimer 's courtroom drama The Dock Brief . Along with his theatrical responsibilities Hordern had regular minor roles in various films including Cleopatra ( 1963 ) , and A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum ( 1966 ) . 
 In the late 1960s Hordern met the British theatre director Jonathan Miller , who cast him in Whistle and I 'll Come to You , which was recorded for television and received wide praise . Hordern 's next major play was Jumpers which appeared at the Royal National Theatre at the start of 1972 . His performance was praised by critics and he reprised the role four years later . His television commitments increased towards the end of his life . His credits include Paradise Postponed , the BAFTA award @-@ winning Memento Mori , and the BBC adaptation of Middlemarch . He was appointed a CBE in 1972 and was knighted eleven years later . Hordern suffered from kidney disease during the 1990s and died from it in 1995 at the age of 83 . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Family background = = = 
 Hordern 's mother , Margaret Murray , was descended from James Murray , an Irish physician whose research into digestion led to his discovery of the stomach aid milk of magnesia in 1829 . The invention earned him a knighthood and brought the family great wealth . Margaret grew up in England , and attended St Audries School for Girls in Somerset . 
 Hordern 's father , Edward , was the son of a Lancastrian priest who was the rector at the Holy Trinity Church in Bury . As a young man Edward joined the Royal Indian Marines and gained the rank of lieutenant . During a short break on home @-@ leave he fell in love with Margaret , after they were introduced by one of his brothers . The courtship was brief and the young couple married in Burma on 28 November 1903 . They had their first child , a son , Geoffrey , in 1905 , followed by another , Peter , in 1907 . 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Four years after the birth of Peter , a pregnant Margaret returned to England where Michael Hordern , her third son , was born on 3 October 1911 in Berkhamsted , Hertfordshire . Still stationed abroad , Edward was promoted to the rank of captain for which he received a good salary . The family lived in comfort and Margaret employed a scullery maid , nanny , groundsman , and full @-@ time cook . Margaret left for India to visit her husband in 1916 . The trip , although only planned as a short term stay , lasted two years because of the ferocity of the First World War . In her absence , Hordern was sent to Windlesham House School in Sussex at the age of five . His young age exempted him from full @-@ time studies but he was allowed to partake in extracurricular activities , including swimming , football , rugby and fishing . After a few years , and along with a fellow enthusiast , he set up the " A Acting Association " ( AAA ) , a small theatrical committee , which organised productions on behalf of the school . As well as the organisation of plays , Hordern arranged a regular group of players , himself included , to perform various plays which they wrote , directed , and choreographed themselves . He stayed at Windlesham House for nine years , later describing his time there as " enormous fun " . 
 Hordern was 14 when he left Windlesham House to continue his schooling as a member of Chichester House at Brighton College . By the time he joined the college , his interest in acting had matured . In his 1993 autobiography , A World Elsewhere , he admitted : " I didn 't excel in any area apart from singing ; I couldn 't read music but I sang quite well . " There he helped organise amateur performances of various Gilbert and Sullivan operas . The first of these was The Gondoliers , in which he played the role of the Duchess . The tutors called his performance a great success , and he was given a position within the men 's chorus in the next piece , Iolanthe . Over the next few years , he took part in The Mikado as a member of the chorus , and then appeared as the Major @-@ General in The Pirates of Penzance . It was a period which he later acknowledged as being the start of his career . When the war ended in 1918 , Edward , who was by now a port officer in Calcutta , arranged for Margaret to return to England . With her , she brought home an orphaned baby girl named Jocelyn , whom she adopted . The following year , Edward retired from active service and returned to England where he relocated his family to Haywards Heath in Sussex . There , Michael developed a love for fishing , a hobby about which he remained passionate for the rest of his life . 
 In his autobiography Hordern admitted that his family showed no interest in the theatre and that he had not seen his first professional play , Ever Green , until he was 19 . It was at around this time that he met Christopher Hassall , a fellow student at Brighton College . Hassall , who also went on to have a successful stage career , was , as Hordern noted , instrumental in his decision to become an actor . In 1925 Hordern moved to Dartmoor with his family where they converted a disused barn into a farm house . For Hordern the move was ideal ; his love of fishing had become stronger and he was able to explore the remote landscape and its isolated rivers . 
 = = = Early acting career ( 1930 – 39 ) = = = 
 = = = = Theatrical beginnings = = = = 
 Hordern left Brighton College in the early 1930s and secured a job as a teaching assistant in a prep school in Beaconsfield . He joined an amateur dramatics company and in his spare time , rehearsed for the company 's only play , <unk> 's Boots , which was entered into a British Drama League competition , with Hordern in the title role . The play did well but conceded the prize , a professional production at a leading London theatre , to Not This Man , a drama written by Sydney Box . So envious was he of the rival show 's success that Hordern supplied a scathing review to The Welwyn Times calling Box 's show a " blasphemous bunk and cheap theatrical claptrap " . The comment infuriated Box , who issued the actor with a writ to attend court on a count of slander . Hordern won the case and left Box liable for the proceeding 's expenses . Years later the two men met on a film set where Box , much to Hordern 's surprise , thanked him for helping to kick @-@ start his career in film making , as he had received a lot of publicity as a result of the court case . 
 With the death of his mother in January 1933 , Hordern decided to pursue a professional acting career . He briefly took a job at a prep school but fell ill with poliomyelitis and had to leave . Upon his recuperation , he was offered a job as a travelling salesman for the British Educational Suppliers Association , a family @-@ run business belonging to a former school friend at Windlesham House . As part of his job he spent some time in Stevenage where he joined an amateur dramatics company and appeared in two plays ; Journey 's End , in which he played Raleigh , and Diplomacy , a piece which the actor disliked as he considered it to be " too old @-@ fashioned " . Both productions provided him with the chance to work with a cue @-@ script , something which he found to be helpful for the rest of his career . That summer he joined a Shakespearian theatre company which toured stately homes throughout the United Kingdom . His first performance was Orlando in As You Like It , followed by Love 's Labour 's Lost , in which he co @-@ starred with Osmond Daltry . Hordern admired Daltry 's acting ability and later admitted to him being a constant influence on his Shakespearean career . 
 In addition to his Shakespearean commitments , Hordern joined the St Pancras People 's Theatre , a London @-@ based company partly funded by the theatrical manager Lilian Baylis . Hordern enjoyed his time there , despite the tiresome commute between Sussex and London , and stayed with the company for five years . By the end of 1936 he had left his sales job in Beaconsfield to pursue a full @-@ time acting career . He moved into a small flat at Marble Arch and became one of the many jobbing actors eager to make a name for themselves on the London stage . 
 = = = = London debut = = = = 
 Hordern 's London debut came in January 1937 , as an understudy to Bernard Lee in the play Night Sky at the Savoy Theatre . On nights when he was not required , Hordern would be called upon to undertake the duties of assistant stage manager , for which he was paid £ <unk> a week . In March , Daltry , who had since formed his own company , Westminster Productions , cast Hordern as Ludovico in Othello . The part became Hordern 's first paid role as an actor for a theatre company . The play was an instant hit and ran at the People 's Theatre in Mile End for two weeks . It also starred the English actor Stephen Murray in the title role , but he became contractually obliged elsewhere towards the end of the run . This allowed Hordern to take his place for which Daltry paid Hordern an extra £ 1 a week . 
 After Othello 's closure , Daltry undertook a tour of Scandinavia and the Baltic with two plays , Outward Bound , and Arms and the Man . He employed Hordern in both with the first being the more successful . It was a time that the actor recognised as being a turning point in his professional acting career . On his return to London , and after spending a few weeks in unemployment , he was offered a part in the ill @-@ fated Ninety Sail . The play , about Sir Christopher Wren 's time in the Royal Navy , was cancelled on the day Hordern was due to start work , with " unforeseen problems " cited as the reason by its producers . 
 = = = = Bristol repertory theatre = = = = 
 In mid @-@ 1937 the theatre proprietor Ronald Russell offered Hordern a part in his repertory company , the Rapier Players , who were then based at Colston Hall in Bristol . Hordern 's first acting role within the company was as Uncle Harry in the play Someone at the Door . Because of the play 's success , Russell employed him in the same type of role , the monotony of which frustrated the actor who longed to play the leading man . It was whilst with the Rapier Players that Hordern fell in love with Eve Mortimer , a juvenile actress who appeared in minor roles in many of Russell 's productions . Hordern considered his experience with the Rapier Players to be invaluable ; it taught him how a professional theatre company worked under a strict time frame and how it operated with an even stricter budget . He was allowed two minutes to study each page of the script , but because of the frequent mistakes and many stalled lines , rehearsals became long and laborious . Hordern described the company 's props as being made to a very high standard , despite being bought on a shoe @-@ string budget . 
 After a brief holiday with Eve in Scotland in 1938 , Hordern returned to London where he appeared in <unk> , a radio play broadcast by the BBC in June of that year . The main part went to Henry Ainley whom Hordern described as " a great actor , who , sadly , was past his best " . Hordern then made a return to Bristol to prepare for the following season with the Rapier Players . One production singled out in the Western Daily Press as particularly good was Love in Idleness , in which Hordern played the lead character . A reporter for the paper thought that the play " had been noticed " among theatrical critics and that the players " filled their respective roles excellently " . 
 By the end of 1938 Hordern 's father had sold the family home and had bought a cottage in Holt , near Bath , Somerset . The arrangement was convenient for the young actor , who used the premises as a base while he appeared in shows with the Rapier Players . One such piece was an adaption of Stella Gibbons 's Cold Comfort Farm , which starred Mabel <unk> , who had adapted the book with Gibbons ' permission . Hordern was cast in the supporting role of Seth , a part he described as being fun to perform . The modernised script was " adored " by the cast , according to Hordern , but loathed by the audience who expected it to be exactly like the book . 
 = = = Second World War and film debut = = = 
 Hordern and Eve left Bristol in 1939 for Harrogate , where Eve joined a small repertory company called the White Rose Players . After a brief spell of unemployment , and with the outbreak of war , Hordern volunteered for a post within the Air Raid Precautions ( ARP ) . He was accepted but soon grew frustrated at not being able to conduct any rescues because of the lack of enemy action . He decided that it was " not a very good way to fight the war " and enlisted instead as a gunner with the Royal Navy . While he waiting to be accepted he and Eve responded to an advertisement in The Stage for actors in a repertory company in Bath . They were appointed as the company 's leading man and lady . Their first and only engagement was in a play entitled Bats in the Belfry which opened at the city 's Assembly Rooms on 16 October . Hordern 's elation at finally becoming a leading man was short @-@ lived when he received his call @-@ up that December . In the interest of helping to boost public morale , Hordern sought permission from the navy to allow him to complete his theatrical commitment in Bath and to appear in his first film , a thriller called Girl in the News , directed by Carol Reed ; his request was accepted , and he was told to report for duty at Plymouth Barracks in the early months of 1940 when the show had finished and he was free from filming responsibilities . 
 In 1940 , after a minor role in Without the Prince at the Whitehall Theatre , Hordern played the small , uncredited part of a BBC official alongside James Hayter in Arthur Askey 's comedy film Band Waggon . Soon after , he began his naval gunnery training on board City of Florence , a defensively equipped merchant ship ( <unk> ) which delivered ammunition to the city of Alexandria on behalf of the British fleet . He found that although his middle class upbringing hindered his ability to make friends on board the ship , it helped in his appeal to his commanding officers . 
 By 1941 radar was slowly being introduced within the Navy and Hordern was appointed as one of the first operatives who communicated enemy movements to the RAF . He later said that the post was owed to his clear diction and deep vocal range . His commentary impressed his superior officers so much that by early 1942 he had been given the job as a Fighter Direction Officer , and then first lieutenant on board HMS Illustrious . Shortly after the departure of his immediate superior , he was promoted to lieutenant commander , a post which he occupied for two years . Alongside his naval responsibilities , he was also appointed as the ship 's entertainment officer , and was responsible for organising shows featuring various members of Illustrious 's crew as the show 's cast . 
 = = = Marriage and post @-@ war years = = = 
 During a short visit to Liverpool in 1943 , Hordern proposed to Eve ; they married on 27 April of that year with the actor Cyril Luckham as best man . After the honeymoon , Hordern resumed his duties on Illustrious while Eve returned to repertory theatre in Southport . In the months after the end of the war in 1945 , he was transferred to the Admiralty where he worked briefly as a ship dispatcher . The Horderns rented a flat in <unk> Place in Kensington , London , and he began to seek work as an actor . After a short while , he was approached by André Obey who cast him in his first television role , Noah , in a play adapted from the book of the same name . Hordern was apprehensive about performing in the new medium and found the rehearsal and live performance to be exhausting ; but he was generously paid , earning £ 45 for the entire engagement . 
 Hordern 's first role in 1946 came as <unk> <unk> in A Doll 's House at the Intimate Theatre in Palmers Green . This was followed by the part of Richard Fenton , a murder victim , in Dear Murderer which premiered at the Aldwych Theatre on 31 July . The play was a success and ran for 85 performances until its closure on 12 October . Dear Murderer thrilled the critics and Hordern was singled out by one reporter for the Hull Daily Mail who thought that the actor brought " sincerity to a difficult role " . The following month Eve gave birth to the couple 's only child , a daughter , Joanna , who was born at Queen Charlotte 's Hospital in Chelsea . That Christmas he took the role of Nick Bottom in a festive reworking of Henry Purcell 's The Fairy @-@ Queen . The play was the first performance by the Covent Garden Opera Company , who latter became known as The Royal Opera . 
 Towards the end of April 1947 , Hordern accepted the small part of Captain Hoyle in Richard Llewellyn 's comic drama film Noose . Two other roles occurred that year : as Maxim de Winter in a television adaption of Daphne du Maurier 's novel Rebecca , followed by the part of a detective in Good @-@ Time Girl , alongside Dennis Price and Jean Kent . The following year he took part in three plays : Peter Ustinov 's The Indifferent Shepherd , which appeared at the newly opened Q Theatre in Brentford , West London ; Ibsen 's Ghosts ; and an adaptation of The Wind in the Willows at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre in Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon in which he portrayed the part of the blustery , eccentric Mr Toad . 
 In early 1949 Hordern appeared as Pascal in the Michael Redgrave @-@ directed comedy A Woman in Love , but disliked the experience because of the hostile relationship between Redgrave and the show 's star , Margaret Rawlings . Next , he was engaged in the minor role of Bashford in the critically acclaimed Ealing comedy Passport to Pimlico , a performance which he described as " tense and hyperactive " . 
 = = = 1950 – 70 = = = 
 = = = = Ivanov and Saint 's Day = = = = 
 By the 1950s Hordern had come to the notice of many influential directors . In his autobiography , the actor recognised the decade as being an important era of his career . It started with a major role in Anton Chekhov 's Ivanov in 1950 . The production took place at the Arts Theatre in Cambridge and excited audiences because of its 25 @-@ year absence from the English stage . The writer T. C. Worsley was impressed by Hordern 's performance and wrote : " Perhaps an actor with star quality might have imposed on us more successfully than Mr Michael Hordern , and won our sympathy for Ivanov by his own personality . But such a performance would have raised the level of expectation all round . As it is , Mr Hordern is rich in intelligence , sensitivity and grasp , and with very few expectations , the company give his impressive playing the right kind of support . " The title character in Macbeth , directed by Alec Clunes , was Hordern 's next engagement . Critics wrote of their dislike of Clunes 's version , but the theatre reviewer Audrey Williamson singled out Hordern 's performance as being " deeply moving " . 
 The dramatist John Whiting , trying to make a name for himself in the theatre after the war , was called by Clunes to take part in a theatrical competition at the Arts Theatre in London in 1951 , for which he entered his play Saints Day . Several other amateur directors also competed for the prize , which was to have their play funded and professionally displayed at the Arts . Having seen him perform the previous year , Whiting hired Hordern for the lead role of Paul <unk> , a cantankerous old poet who fights off three rebellious army deserters who threaten the tranquillity of his sleepy country village . The play proved popular with audiences , but not so with theatrical commentators . Hordern liked the piece , calling it " bitter and interesting " , but the press , who extensively reported on the competition throughout each stage , thought differently and condemned it for winning . This infuriated the actors Laurence Olivier and John Gielgud , who wrote letters of complaint to the press . 
 = = = = Shakespeare Memorial Theatre = = = = 
 Hordern cited Saint 's Day 's negative publicity as having done his career " the power of good " as it brought him to the attention of the director Glen Byam Shaw , who cast him in a series of plays at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre in 1951 . Among the roles were Caliban in The Tempest , Jaques in As You Like It , and Sir Politick Would @-@ Be in Ben Jonson 's comedy Volpone . Hordern claimed to know very little about the bard 's works and sought advice from friends about how best to prepare for the roles . The same year , he travelled down to <unk> Studios , Walton @-@ on @-@ Thames , to film Scrooge , an adaptation of Charles Dickens 's A Christmas Carol , in which he played Marley 's ghost . Reviews were mixed with The New York Times giving it a favourable write @-@ up , while Time magazine remained ambivalent . The Aberdeen Evening Express echoed the comments made by an American reviewer by calling Scrooge a " trenchant and inspiring Christmas show " . The author Fred Guida , writing in his book Christmas Carol and Its Adaptations : A Critical Examination in 2000 , thought that Marley 's ghost , though a " small but pivotal role " , was " brilliantly played " by Hordern . 
 With the first play of the season imminent , the Horderns moved to Stratford and took temporary accommodation at <unk> House , a large country property situated on the River Avon . The first of his two plays , The Tempest , caused Hordern to doubt his own acting ability when he compared his interpretation of Caliban to that of Alec Guinness , who had played the same role four years earlier . Reassured by Byam Shaw , Hordern remained in the role for the entire run . A few days later , the actor was thrilled to receive a letter of appreciation from Michael Redgrave , who thought Hordern 's Caliban was " immensely fine , with all the pity and pathos ... but with real terror and humour as well " . More praise was received as the season continued ; an anonymous theatre reviewer , quoted in Hordern 's autobiography , called the actor 's portrayal of <unk> <unk> " a dryly acute study of the ' humorous patrician ' and one moreover that can move our compassion in the <unk> cameo " , before going on to say " we had felt that it would be long before Alec Guinness 's <unk> could be matched . The fact that Michael Hordern 's different reading can now stand beside the other does credit to a player who will be a Stratford prize . " 
 = = = = The Old Vic = = = = 
 Hordern 's contract at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre lasted until mid @-@ 1952 , and on its expiration , he secured a position within Michael Benthall 's theatrical company at the Old Vic in London . The company 's first play , Hamlet , starred Richard Burton , Claire Bloom , and Fay Compton , and opened on 14 September 1953 . Hordern called it " the perfect play with which to open the season " as it featured " fine strong parts for everyone and [ was ] a good showpiece for an actor 's latent vanity " . Shortly after opening , it was transferred to Edinburgh , where it took part at the Fringe before returning to London . For his role of Polonius , Hordern received mixed reviews , with one critic saying : " He was at his best in his early scenes with Ophelia ... but towards the end of the performance he began to obscure less matter with more art " . After Edinburgh , Benthall took Hamlet on a provincial tour and the play had a successful run of 101 performances . 
 In mid @-@ 1953 the Danish government invited Benthall and his company to Helsingør ( Elsinore ) to perform Hamlet for the Norwegian Royal Family . The play was well received by the royals . On the whole , the actor enjoyed his time in Hamlet but behind the scenes , relations between him and Burton were strained . Hordern noted his colleague 's " likeability , charm and charisma " but thought that Burton had a tendency to get easily " <unk> " with him in social situations . Hordern described their working relationship as " love @-@ hate " and admitted that they were envious of each other 's success ; Burton of Hordern because of the latter 's good reviews , and Hordern of Burton who received more attention from fans . When Burton left for Hollywood years later , he recommended Hordern to various casting directors ; Hordern was subsequently engaged in six of Burton 's films . 
 King John was next for Benthall 's company and opened on 26 October 1953 . The lead character initially went to an unknown and inexperienced young actor , but the part was re @-@ cast with Hordern in the role . Hordern described King John as being " a difficult play in the sense that it has no common purpose or apparent theme " . Simultaneously to this , he was commuting back to Pinewood Studios where he was filming Forbidden Cargo . The hectic schedule brought on a bout of exhaustion for which he received medical advice to reduce his workload . 
 = = = = Theatre Royal , Brighton = = = = 
 In early 1955 Hordern was asked by the British theatre manager and producer Binkie Beaumont to take the lead in André Roussin 's comedy Nina , directed by Rex Harrison . The play , which starred Edith Evans , Lockwood West , and James Hayter , transferred from Oxford to the Theatre Royal in Brighton . Beaumont 's request came at short notice because Hordern 's predecessor had proved inadequate . The play was cursed with bad luck : Evans fell ill and was replaced midway by an understudy who neglected to learn her lines ; Harrison frequently upset the cast , which resulted in reduced morale . When Evans did return , she walked off stage and left after seeing empty seats in the front row . 
 Hordern regretted his decision to take part in Roussin 's Nina , but admitted that the allure of appearing alongside Evans had got the better of him . Harrison held auditions to replace his leading lady and settled on the Australian @-@ American actress Coral Browne . Hordern and Browne grew close , aided by their mutual dislike of their disciplinarian director . They fell in love and they had an affair which lasted for the duration of the run . Years later Hordern confessed : " I kept falling in love . It is a common complaint among actors . You cannot be at such close quarters , mind and body , without being sorely tempted . " 
 Hordern and Harrison 's dislike for one another was evident to the rest of the cast . One night , after a performance of Nina in Eastbourne , and having felt that he had " acted [ his ] socks off " , Hordern , along with the rest of the cast , were berated by Harrison who accused them of producing a piece " not fit for the end of a pier " . Nina transferred to the Haymarket Theatre , London , not long after the incident but it was unsuccessful and closed after five weeks . " The play was fine " , opined Hordern , " it was a disaster because of Rex Harrison . " Hordern and Browne 's relationship ended shortly after the play closed and Hordern set about rebuilding his marriage with Eve , who had long known of the affair . 
 = = = = Films and 1950s theatre = = = = 
 Hordern viewed the 1950s as a good decade to appear in film , although he did not then particularly care for the medium . Writing in 1993 he said : " With cinema one has to leap into battle fully armed . From the start of the film the character has to be pinned down like a butterfly on a board . One does not always get this right , of course , sometimes starting at the beginning of shooting a film on a comedic level that cannot be sustained . " He disliked his physical appearance , which he found to be " repulsive " , and as a result loathed watching back his performances . He preferred radio because the audience only heard his voice , which he then considered his best attribute . Another reason was his recognition of the differences between his sense of personal achievement within a theatre compared to that on a film set : " You get a certain sort of satisfaction in delivering what the director wants of you , but the chances of being emotionally involved are slim . " He acknowledged his good ability at learning lines , something which he found to be especially helpful for learning film scripts which frequently changed . He enjoyed the challenge of earning as much value as possible out of a scene and revelled in being able to hit " the right mark for the camera " . With the experience of Nina still fresh in his mind , Hordern took a break from the stage and decided to concentrate on his film career . 
 Hordern was appearing in three to four films a year by 1953 , a count that increased as the decade progressed . In 1956 he took a leading part in The Spanish Gardener for which he spent many months filming in southern Spain alongside Dirk Bogarde , Cyril Cusack , and Bernard Lee . The New York Times called Hordern 's role of the strict and pompous Harrington Brande " an unsympathetic assignment " , but thought the actor did " quite well " in his portrayal . By the mid @-@ 1950s Hordern 's name was becoming one of reliability and good value ; as a result , he was offered a clutch of roles . In 1956 he appeared as Demosthenes in Alexander the Great , and Commander Lindsay in The Night My Number Came Up . He appeared in two other films the following year ; the medical drama No Time for Tears , and the thriller Windom 's Way . The Second World War was a popular genre for filmmakers during the 1950s . Hordern said the conflict took up a large part of people 's lives ; " whether it be one of love , loss , nostalgia or tragedy " , everybody , according to the actor , had a story to tell and could relate to the situations that were being depicted before them on screen . He found his earlier naval experience to be an asset when cast in many war films , including The Man Who Never Was , Pacific Destiny , The Baby and the Battleship , all in 1956 , and I Was Monty 's Double two years later . 
 Hordern was cast in John Mortimer 's 1957 play The Dock Brief in which Hordern played the barrister . The story centres on a failed lawyer who is hired at the last minute to defend a man on a charge of murder . Hordern played the barrister opposite David <unk> 's murder suspect . After some positive comments from the theatrical press , the play transferred to television in May the same year and earned Hordern a Best Actor Award at the 1958 British Academy Television Awards . The Horderns moved to Donnington , Berkshire in 1958 where they renovated three cottages into one ; the property became the family home and is where Hordern and Eve remained until their deaths . 
 The year 1959 was professionally disastrous for Hordern . He made a return to stage at the Old Vic in Arthur Wing Pinero 's The Magistrate in which he played Mr. <unk> . The play was not particularly successful and received mixed reviews : According to the author and theatre critic J. P. Wearing , Hordern was miscast , while a reporter for The Stage , thought he gave a " convincing portrayal " . Wearing believed that overall the play was not " played briskly enough " , while a critic for The Times thought that it had " durable theatrical quality " . The role was followed with a part of Pastor Manders in Ghosts opposite Flora Robson . The Sunday Times published an unenthusiastic notice , and thought Hordern 's character had " an anxious air " about him . He received equally critical notices when he took to the stage to play the title character in Macbeth , opposite Beatrix Lehmann . The press wrote of Hordern 's " unintended comic interpretation " when characterising the evil king : " Half his time on stage he cringed like an American carpet seller in an ankle @-@ length black dressing gown of fuzzy <unk> " thought one reviewer , who went on to say " he would make a sinister Shylock , a frightening Fagin . But this Thane of Cawdor would be unnerved by Banquo 's valet , never mind Banquo 's ghost . " 
 On 9 October 1959 , Hordern made his debut on Broadway at the Cort Theatre in Marcel Aymé 's comedy <unk> , alongside the comedian Wally Cox . The play was a disaster and closed after only two nights and three performances . Little was offered in the way of praise , although critics singled out Hordern 's performance in particular as being good . He was unsure why the play failed , and attributed it to clashes of personality between cast and management . 
 = = = = Cleopatra and the 1960s = = = = 
 In 1960 Hordern played Admiral Sir John Tovey in the British war film Sink the Bismarck ! , based on the book Last Nine Days of the Bismarck by C. S. Forester and with a plot reminiscent of his naval days . With a few smaller roles in between , Hordern started work on the American epic historical drama film Cleopatra . It was made in 1962 and according to the actor , was " the most extraordinary piece of film @-@ making in which I had the pleasure to take part " . He played the Roman orator Cicero and was hired on an eight @-@ week contract which due to various setbacks , including cast sickness and adverse weather conditions , was extended to nine months . Much to Hordern 's annoyance , the film would require him to once again work with Rex Harrison , who was cast as Caesar . Despite the animosity between them , they agreed to endure each other 's company for the sake of the film . The agreement was short @-@ lived ; Harrison made a drunken quip at a cast dinner about Nina which prompted Hordern to assault him . The incident almost resulted in Hordern 's dismissal , but the matter was quickly resolved by producers and the two were kept separate in between filming . In 1993 Hordern claimed the incident had " cleared the air " between them and they eventually became friends . After Cleopatra 's release , Hordern made a return to films , appearing in The Spy Who Came in from the Cold ( 1965 ) , How I Won the War ( 1967 ) , and Where Eagles Dare in 1968 . He also featured in the Roman farce A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum in 1966 . 
 Hordern first met the British theatre director Jonathan Miller in 1968 . Miller , who had long been an admirer of Hordern , offered him the part of the agonistic Professor Parkin in his forthcoming television drama Whistle and I 'll Come to You . Hordern , who had heard positive things of Miller from theatrical friends , likewise thought highly of the director , and was quick to take up location filming in Norfolk that year . He came to like Miller 's way of working , such as having the freedom to improvise instead of adhering to the strict rules of a script ; the actor wrote in his autobiography that he had never experienced that degree of professional freedom . The programme was released towards the end of 1968 and was a hit with audiences and critics . Mark Duguid of the British Film Institute called it " a masterpiece of economical horror that remains every bit as chilling as the day it was first broadcast " , while a journalist for The Telegraph , writing in 2010 about that year 's remake starring John Hurt , reminded readers of the " brilliant Sixties production by Jonathan Miller [ in which ] Michael Hordern made a fine , crusty Parkin " . The year ended with a role in Peter Hall 's production of Edward Albee 's A Delicate Balance at the Aldwych Theatre . The piece received lukewarm reviews , with Hilary Spurling of The Spectator thinking Hordern was " ill @-@ served " as the principal character , Tobias . 
 = = = Later career : 1970 – 90 = = = 
 = = = = King Lear = = = = 
 Miller and Hordern 's collaboration continued into 1969 with King Lear at the Nottingham Playhouse . Hordern immediately accepted the title role but later said that it was a character he never much cared to play . Writing about Miller in his autobiography , Hordern stated : " It was one of the most exhilarating and funny experiences I have had in the theatre . " Miller recruited Frank <unk> to play the fool , but contrary to tradition , Miller made the character an intimate of Lear 's as opposed to a servant , something which Shakespearean purists found difficult to accept . Miller decided to further defy convention by concentrating on the relationships between the characters rather than adding detail to scenery and costume ; he was eager not to use lavish sets and lighting for the fear of detracting from the characterisations and the sentimentality of the storyline . As such , the sets were bleak and the costumes more so ; it was a style that was also used when the play was televised by the BBC later that decade . 
 When King Lear played at the Old Vic in 1970 , reviews were mixed ; J.W. Lambert thought that the " grey sets " and Hordern 's " grizzled " costume were how Shakespeare would have intended them to be , while Eric Shorter thought otherwise , stating " I still do not understand those costumes . " Of the performance , the dramatist and critic Martin <unk> called Hordern 's portrayal " a magnificent creation " before going on to say : " Hordern 's timing of the silences from which snatches of demented wisdom emerge is masterly and illuminates the subterranean processes of his derangement . " Writing for The Times later that year , the theatre critic Irving Wardle described Hordern 's Lear as a " sharp , peremptory pedant ; more a law @-@ giver than a soldier , and ( as justice is an old man 's profession ) still in the prime of his life " . Hordern played Lear once more that decade , in 1975 , which was televised by the BBC for their series Play of the Month . 
 = = = = Jumpers = = = = 
 The playwright Tom Stoppard approached Hordern in 1971 with a view to him playing a leading part in the playwright 's new play Jumpers , a comic satire based around the field of academic philosophy . Hordern was to play George Moore , a bumbling old philosophy professor , who is employed at a modern university and who , throughout the play , is in constant debate with himself over his moral values . Hordern , though thinking the play was brilliant , disliked the script on the initial read @-@ through as he did not understand its complex situations and strange dialogue . His co @-@ star would be Diana Rigg , who played Moore 's wife Dotty , and the entire piece was to be directed by Peter Wood . 
 Jumpers was scheduled to appear at the National Theatre at the start of 1972 , but encountered problems when the theatre 's director , Laurence Olivier , called the play " unintelligible " before walking out during the first read @-@ through in disgust . Despite this , rehearsals went ahead , which the cast found difficult ; the play featured many scenes , a complicated script , and relied heavily on the opening scene , a sceptical speech about the existence of God which lasted 13 minutes . In his autobiography , Hordern commented : " Each day my fists would sink into my cardigan pockets as I tried to make sense of it all . " In a meeting shortly before the opening night , Olivier complained to Stoppard that the play was overlong and , in some parts , laborious . Stoppard agreed to reduce the epilogue by half . The decision angered Hordern as it meant the extra stress of learning a new script at short notice . He vented his frustrations on Wood who agreed to leave his character alone and instead to cut many of the other scenes . The final dress rehearsal also experienced disruption when the revolving stage broke down and had to be fixed half @-@ way through . The problems had ceased by the opening performance the following evening ; it was a night which Hordern called " unbelievable , one of the highlights of my career " . The actress Maureen Lipman , who was in the audience on the opening night , said that her husband , the playwright Jack Rosenthal , had " laughed so hard he thought he was going to be seriously ill " . 
 The critic Michael Billington , writing in The Guardian , gave a mixed review : " Once or twice one of Stoppard 's brightly coloured balls falls to the ground , partly because Michael Hordern 's moral philosopher substitutes academic mannerism for apprehension of the argument . But this is not to deny that Hordern 's simian habit of scratching his left earlobe with right hand or leaning over his desk as if he is doing intellectual press @-@ ups is very funny to watch or that he is brilliant at displaying cuckolded curiosity . " Harold Hobson , the drama critic , thought that failing to enjoy the play was " not actually a criminal offence but it is a sad evidence of illiteracy " . Jumpers won the Evening Standard ' s Best Play Award which , much to Hordern 's amusement , was presented by the philosopher A. J. Ayer . 
 = = = = Stripwell , and voice work = = = = 
 In June 1973 Hordern appeared on radio for the BBC as Jeeves in an adaption of P.G. Wodehouse 's " Jeeves " stories . The following year , Hordern narrated several other , one @-@ off programmes for the broadcaster , including The Honest Broker , The Last Tsar , and Tell the King the Sky Is Falling . In 1975 Hordern played the judge in Howard Barker 's play Stripwell at the Royal Court Theatre . Hordern described the character as " a man wracked by guilt , full of self @-@ doubt and pessimism " . It was a role which the actor found to be too close to his own personality for comfort . His time in the play was marred by personal problems ; he and Eve had briefly separated and the actor was forced to rent a small flat in Sloane Square from the actor Michael Wilding after being banished from the family home . Hordern and Eve soon reconciled , but it was a time which he was keen to forget , including the play . Critics were complimentary of his performance , with one writing : " Stripwell 's ambiguities are therefore viewed half affectionately and half contemptuously and this comes over well in Michael Hordern 's portrayal of bumbling , sometimes endearing ineffectiveness , as skilful and accomplished a performance as one would expect from this actor . " 
 Later , in 1975 , Hordern narrated Barry Lyndon , Stanley Kubrick 's filmed adaptation of William Makepeace Thackeray 's novel The Luck of Barry Lyndon . The critic John Riley , writing for the British Film Institute , thought that the actor provided " a witty and ironic foil to the characters ' helplessness " . The same year Hordern was asked to narrate 30 episodes of the children 's animation series Paddington , which was based on the Paddington Bear book series by Michael Bond . In his 1993 autobiography , Hordern wrote of his enjoyment at working on Paddington and that he could not differentiate between his enjoyment in comedy and drama : " it 's a bit like difference between roast beef and meringue , both delicious in their way , but there is nothing more satisfying than a thousand people sharing their laughter with you " . 
 = = = = Return to Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon and Jumpers revival = = = = 
 In 1976 Hordern joined the RSC in Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon , where he appeared as Prospero for Trevor Nunn in The Tempest , an engagement which the actor found to be unpleasant because of his poor relationship with the show 's director , Clifford Williams . After that came a short run of Love 's Labour 's Lost in which he played Don Adriano de Armado opposite Alan Rickman and Zoë Wanamaker . Hordern was the oldest member of the company and found it difficult to adjust to the behaviour and attitudes of some of the younger and less experienced actors . He found it different from the 1950s : non @-@ intimate , characterless , and lacking in morale because management preferred discipline rather than offering guidance and assistance to their young actors . Writing in his 1993 biography , Hordern wrote : " Being at Stratford again after all these years was rather like being on a battleship or an aircraft carrier that doesn 't often come into harbour . You are at sea for long periods and away from the rest of your service and if the captain of your ship is a good one then the ship is happy ; if not , then the commission you serve is very unhappy because you are a long way from land . At Stratford that season I was a long way from land . " Later , in 1976 , Hordern portrayed the kingly father of the Prince ( played by Richard Chamberlain ) in the musical film adaptation of Cinderella , The Slipper and the Rose , and returned to the role of George in Stoppard 's Jumpers at the Lyttelton Theatre . The theatre critic Kenneth <unk> " enjoyed it immoderately " and thought the revival revealed a " <unk> play than it look [ ed ] " . Hordern compared it to the 1972 version by saying : " It is unquestionably a busy little number , and my first impression of the piece , back in 1972 , was that it had more decoration than substance , and that the decoration was more chaotic than coherent . " 
 = = = = Television and radio : 1980 – 83 = = = = 
 In 1981 Hordern played the role of Gandalf in the BBC radio adaptation of Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings . The BBC 's budget was generous , and attracted well @-@ known actors from stage and television . The series ran for 26 episodes and was a hit with audiences and critics . The author Ernest Mathijs singled out Hordern in particular as being one of the more powerful characters of the series and his personal favourite , while co @-@ star Ian Holm , writing years later in his autobiography Acting My Life , said he thought Hordern interpreted the role " in a grand , rather old fashioned way " . Writing in his autobiography in 1993 , Hordern said he found the part of Gandalf to be " a bit of a slog " . 
 Hordern and Jonathan Miller reprised their collaboration in 1982 with a final performance of King Lear , again televised by the BBC . The actor considered this version to be his best and attributed its success to the fact he was getting older and therefore able to better understand the character . The author Joseph Pearce , writing in 2008 , claimed that Hordern played the king " straight up with no gloss " and made a " reliable and workmanlike Lear " who is " forceful when he should be forceful , compassionate when he should be compassionate , [ and ] sorrowful when he should be sorrowful " . Despite the praise , Pearce thought that Hordern 's performance in Act 3 " lack [ ed ] the required fierceness and miss [ ed ] the mythic quality when compared to some of the bigger names " . 
 In January 1983 Hordern was knighted , an honour which the actor called " a great thrill and [ a ] surprise to us all " . That year he became popular among children as the voice of Badger in the ITV film The Wind in the Willows . He then spent the rest of 1983 appearing as Sir Anthony Absolute in The Rivals for Peter Wood at the Royal National Theatre and received excellent notices . He was nominated for an award at that year 's Olivier Awards for best comedy performance of the year , but lost out to Griff Rhys Jones . His success on the stage was tinged with private turmoil ; Eve was taken ill after she suffered a brain haemorrhage , a condition from which she never fully recuperated . She required constant care but recovered enough to become partially self @-@ sufficient . However , in 1986 she had a fatal heart attack at the couple 's London flat . Hordern was devastated and became consumed in self @-@ pity , in part because of his guilt at the extramarital affairs he had had with many of his leading ladies during the marriage . 
 = = = = Paradise Postponed and You Never Can Tell = = = = 
 In 1986 , John Mortimer , a writer whom Hordern respected greatly , engaged the actor in Paradise Postponed , an eleven @-@ part drama which took a year to make and cost in excess of £ 6 million . Set in rural England , the saga depicts the struggles within British middle @-@ class society during the post @-@ war years . In his biography , Hordern described himself as " a man of prejudice rather than principle " and as such , had very little in common with his character , the left @-@ wing , Marxist @-@ loving vicar , Simeon Simcox . Despite the political differences , Hordern felt great empathy towards his character , and admired his " plain , straightforward attitude to life , his <unk> , and the way he hung to his faith in a wicked world with a saintliness verging on the simple " . 
 Hordern made a return to the London stage in 1987 after a four @-@ year absence . The play in which he starred , You Never Can Tell , transferred to the Haymarket Theatre that December having made its debut at the Theatr Clwyd in Wales earlier that year . It was the second time the actor had appeared in the play , the first being back in Bristol fifty years previously when he starred as the youthful lead , Valentine . This time he was cast as William , the elderly waiter , a part which he considered to be " a real hell to play " , partly because of the many meals he had to serve up on stage , whilst at the same time trying to remember the complex script . He enjoyed the play immensely and was thrilled at its successful run . His engagement also gave him a chance to reunite with some old friends , including Irene Worth , Michael Denison and Frank <unk> , all of whom were in the cast . Hordern admitted that , on the whole , the experience made him feel " a little happier " about life . 
 = = = Final years and death = = = 
 By the early 1990s Hordern was concentrating more on television . His roles were mostly those of ageing teachers , bank managers , politicians and clergymen . In 1989 he appeared alongside John Mills in an adaption of Kingsley Amis 's Ending Up , a tale about a group of pensioners growing old together in a residential home . After that he took the part of Godfrey Colston in Memento Mori , a television film about a group of elderly friends succumbing to old age , which was adapted for television from the Muriel Spark novel of the same name . The film received excellent notices and Hordern 's performance was described as outstanding by the critic Neil Sinyard . All that was required of Hordern in his next role , the wealthy but terminally ill landowner Peter Featherstone in the BBC adaptation Middlemarch , was for him simply to lie in bed and pretend to die . It was the kind of role which he found to be most fitting for someone of his advanced years and confirmed to him that as the older he got , the more he became typecast . It was a situation that did not altogether bother him as he felt grateful at still being employable at the age of 81 . 
 In January 1995 Hordern was invited back to his old college in Brighton , where a room was named in his honour . Inside , the college had commissioned the sculptor Peter Webster to create a bronze bust of the actor which is displayed with a plaque . Hordern 's last physical acting role came shortly afterwards as Lord Langland in the comedy film A Very Open Prison . This was followed by two narration performances , firstly in Spode A History of Excellence , and then in the five @-@ part film Dinosaurs and Their Living Relatives . 
 Hordern died of kidney disease at the Churchill Hospital , Oxford , on 2 May 1995 , at the age of 83 . Medical staff confirmed that he had been suffering from " a long illness and had been receiving dialysis treatment " . 
 = = Approach to acting = = 
 Hordern was a self @-@ confessed " lazy bugger " when it came to role preparation . He did not regret his lack of formal acting training , and attributed his abilities to watching and learning from other actors and directors . He said : " I am bored of the intellectual view of the theatre . Actually , it scares the shit out of me , my view being that an actor should learn the lines without too much cerebral interference . " In 1951 , he asked Byam Shaw how best to rehearse unfamiliar roles . The director advised him to " never read up on them " before going on to say " read the plays as much as [ you like ] but never read the commentators or critics " . It was advice which Hordern adopted for the role of King Lear , and for the rest of his career . The critic Brian McFarlane , writing for the British Film Institute , said that Hordern , despite his relaxed attitude , " had one of the most productive careers of any 20th century British actor " . 
 After all the great parts I have played in my career , Prospero , Lear , Sir Anthony Absolute , George in Jumpers , after all the accolades , the CBE , knighthood , honorary degrees , mixing with the great and the good , I was brought down to earth recently by a small boy whom I had noticed having an intense argument with two other small boys outside my phone box . I seemed to be the centre of discussion . When I stepped out of the box , one of the boys came up to me , looked up earnestly , and very politely asked , ' Excuse me , aren 't you Paddington ? ' I felt gratified . 
 Throughout his 1993 autobiography A World Elsewhere , Hordern exhibited his pride on being able to play a wide range of parts , something which made him a frequent subject among theatrical critics . The author Martin Banham thought that many of Hordern 's characters shared a general identity of " an absent @-@ minded , good @-@ hearted English eccentric " . The American journalist Mel Gussow , writing in Hordern 's obituary in The New York Times in 1995 , described the actor as being " a classical actor with the soul of a clown " , while the actors John Hurt and Michael Bryant described Hordern as being " the Austin Princess among British actors " , which implied to the author Sheridan Morley that Hordern possessed an element of " reliability but [ with ] a faint lack of charisma " . Morley , who wrote Hordern 's biography for the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , went on to describe the actor as being " one of the great eccentrics of his profession , perched perilously somewhere half way between Alistair Sim and Alec Guinness " . 
 = = Stage roles and filmography = = 
 = New Jersey Route 45 = 
 Route 45 is a state highway in the southern part of New Jersey , United States . It runs 28 @.@ 51 mi ( 45 @.@ 88 km ) from Route 49 in Salem , Salem County , northeast to U.S. Route 130 ( US 130 ) in Westville , Gloucester County . Much of the southern part of the route runs through rural areas of Salem and Gloucester counties , passing through the communities of Woodstown and Mullica Hill . North of Mullica Hill , Route 45 runs through suburban areas , with the portion of the route between the northern border of Mantua Township and the southern border of Woodbury a four @-@ lane divided highway . The route intersects many highways , including US 40 in Woodstown , Route 77 and US 322 in Mullica Hill , and Interstate 295 ( I @-@ 295 ) in West Deptford Township . 
 The current route was originally a segment of pre @-@ 1927 Route 6 that was created in 1917 , running from Salem to Camden . Route 45 was designated in 1927 to replace the Salem @-@ Camden branch of pre @-@ 1927 Route 6 and was eventually realigned to follow US 130 ( Crescent Boulevard ) to the Airport Circle in Pennsauken Township . The northern terminus of Route 45 was moved to its current location in 1953 in order to avoid the concurrency with US 130 . A freeway for Route 45 between I @-@ 295 in Woodbury and US 322 in Mullica Hill was recommended by the Delaware Valley Regional Planning Commission in the 1960s . It was never built , and the New Jersey Department of Transportation proposed widening all of Route 45 into a four @-@ lane divided highway ; only a small portion in northern Gloucester County was widened . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Salem County = = = 
 Route 45 begins at an intersection with Route 49 in Salem , Salem County , heading to the north on Market Street , a two @-@ lane undivided road . It passes downtown businesses and both the Salem County Courthouse and the Old Salem County Courthouse , the second oldest active courthouse in the United States , which currently serves as the Salem City Court . Upon crossing County Route 657 ( CR 657 ) , the road heads into residential areas before crossing a Southern Railroad of New Jersey railroad line and the Fenwick Creek . At the crossing of the latter , Route 45 enters Mannington Township and becomes an unnamed road that passes marshland with some development . The route passes by the Memorial Hospital of Salem County just prior to an intersection with CR 540 in Pointers . 
 Here , Route 45 turns to the east and forms a concurrency with CR 540 , passing through farmland with some woods and homes . CR 540 splits from Route 45 by heading southeast on <unk> Road and Route 45 continues , intersecting CR 653 before crossing the Mannington Creek . It intersects CR 669 and CR 631 within a short distance of each other before crossing Majors Run into Pilesgrove Township . 
 Here , the route intersects CR 679 near the Salem County Veterans Cemetery before heading through more agricultural areas . The route reaches an intersection with US 40 ( Harding Highway ) and CR 616 in a business area , where US 40 forms a concurrency with Route 45 . The two routes head northeast into Woodstown as the Harding Highway into residential areas . 
 At the intersection with Main Street in downtown , Route 45 splits from US 40 by heading north on Main Street while CR 672 heads south on Main Street and US 40 continues to the east on East Avenue . Route 45 continues north , intersecting CR 636 before turning northeast again and meeting CR 602 . The road passes over a Southern Railroad of New Jersey line before coming to an intersection with CR 668 / CR 617 . A short distance later , the route enters Pilesgrove Township again and heads back into farmland with some residences and forested areas as an unnamed road , crossing CR 660 . 
 = = = Gloucester County = = = 
 Route 45 crosses Oldmans Creek into South Harrison Township , Gloucester County within woodland and continues through rural areas with some residential developments as Woodstown @-@ Mullica Hill Road . The route crosses CR 668 before crossing CR 694 and CR 607 within a close distance of each other . Past this intersection , it continues to CR 617 , where the name changes to Woodstown Road , before crossing CR 538 . A short distance later , the route enters Harrison Township and continues north . It enters the community of Mullica Hill , where it intersects the northern terminus of Route 77 . Here , Route 45 turns north and becomes Main Street , passing homes and some businesses and turning into a county @-@ maintained road . The route intersects Mullica Road , at which point it becomes concurrent with unsigned US 322 Bus . / CR 536 . 
 In Mullica Hill , the road crosses US 322 and CR <unk> , where US 322 Bus. ends and CR 536 turns west along US 322 , and Route 45 continues northeast along Main Street , passing residential and commercial development as a state @-@ maintained road . The route intersects CR 664 , CR 603 , CR 667 , and CR 624 before crossing into Mantua Township , where it becomes Bridgeton Pike . The road heads through a mix of woods and farms with occasional homes , intersecting CR 626 . The route passes more rural land before heading into suburban development . 
 Here , Route 45 intersects CR 627 and CR 678 as it passes a mix of homes and businesses . The route intersects CR 632 , where the name changes to Mantua Pike , and CR 553 Alt. before widening into a four @-@ lane divided highway and crossing the Mantua Creek . At this point , Route 45 turns to the north and forms the border between Deptford Township to the east and West Deptford Township to the west , intersecting CR 648 and CR 656 . At the intersection with College Boulevard , the route forms the border between Woodbury Heights to the east and West Deptford Township to the west , crossing over the New Jersey Turnpike without an interchange . From here , Route 45 continues north , intersecting CR 652 and CR 650 . 
 After the intersection with the latter , the route becomes a four @-@ lane undivided road , entering Woodbury and immediately crossing a Conrail Shared Assets Operations railroad line . The road crosses another railroad line before coming to an intersection with CR 551 . Here , Route 45 forms a concurrency with CR 551 and heads north @-@ northeast on Broad Street through the downtown of Woodbury , where it intersects CR 663 . Route 45 and CR 551 cross the Woodbury Creek out of the downtown area and intersect CR 644 near <unk> Medical Center Woodbury . From here , the route continues past a mix of residences and businesses as a two @-@ lane undivided road . CR 551 splits from Route 45 by heading east on Park Avenue then north on Broadway . 
 Meanwhile , Route 45 continues north along the border between Deptford Township to the east and Woodbury to the west , with a Conrail Shared Assets Operations railroad line closely paralleling the route on its east side . At the intersection with CR 642 , the road forms the border between Deptford Township and West Deptford Township again . The route widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway as it comes to a partial interchange with I @-@ 295 , with some of the movements provided by nearby CR 551 to the east . Past this interchange , Route 45 becomes a four @-@ lane undivided highway and enters Westville . Here , it continues parallel to the railroad line to the east with businesses lining the west side of the road . Route 45 passes residential areas before it comes to its northern terminus at a directional Y @-@ intersection with US 130 . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now Route 45 was originally designated as a segment of pre @-@ 1927 Route 6 in 1917 . This route was to head south from Camden and follow Route 45 to Mullica Hill , where it split into two branches , with one going to Salem on current Route 45 and another going to Bridgeton on current Route 77 . In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , pre @-@ 1927 Route 6 between Camden and Salem became Route 45 . A bypass around Camden was created as the southern half of Crescent Boulevard , a part of US 130 , and Route 45 was rerouted to use the bypass up to the Airport Circle in Pennsauken Township . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , the northern terminus of Route 45 was cut back to its current location in Westville to avoid the concurrency with US 130 . 
 In the late 1960s , the Delaware Valley Regional Planning Commission ( <unk> ) proposed construction of a 10 @-@ mile ( 16 km ) long , $ 20 million freeway along the Route 45 corridor in Gloucester County which would have extended from Exit 24 of I @-@ 295 in Woodbury to a planned US 322 freeway in Mullica Hill . The New Jersey Department of Transportation never followed through on this proposal . A portion of Route 45 was widened to four lanes from the border of Woodbury to the border of Mantua Township by the 1980s . In 2012 , the Mullica Hill Bypass was completed , and US 322 was removed from its concurrency with Route 45 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Future = = 
 The New Jersey Department of Transportation is planning on rebuilding Route 45 in Woodbury to make it more friendly to pedestrians and bicyclists . The project calls for reducing the road from four lanes to three lanes while adding bike lanes , curb extensions to improve safety for pedestrians , and improvements to curb ramps and crosswalks . It is currently in the design stage . 
 = Fallout 3 = 
 Fallout 3 is an action role @-@ playing open world video game developed by Bethesda Game Studios , and is the third major installment in the Fallout series . It was released worldwide in October 2008 for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 . 
 Fallout 3 takes place in the year 2277 , 116 years after the setting of Fallout , 36 years after the setting of Fallout 2 and 200 years after the nuclear apocalypse that devastated the game 's world , in a future where international conflicts between the United States and China culminated in a Sino @-@ American war in 2077 , due to the scarcity of petroleum reserves that ran the economies of both countries . The player character is an inhabitant of Vault 101 , a survival shelter designed to protect up to 1 @,@ 000 humans from the nuclear fallout . When the player character 's father disappears under mysterious circumstances , the player is forced to escape from the Vault and journey into the ruins of Washington , D.C. , now known as the " Capital Wasteland " , to track their father down . Along the way the player is assisted by a number of human survivors and settlements , and must battle a myriad of enemies that inhabit the area . 
 Fallout 3 was critically acclaimed and received a number of Game of the Year awards , praising the game 's open @-@ ended gameplay and flexible character @-@ leveling system , and is considered one of the greatest video games of all time . The NPD Group estimated that Fallout 3 sold over 610 @,@ 000 units during its initial month of release in October 2008 , performing better than Bethesda 's previous game , The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion , which sold nearly 500 @,@ 000 units in its first month . The game received post @-@ launch support with Bethesda releasing five downloadable add @-@ ons . The game also received controversy upon release . In Australia , for the use of and the ability to be addicted to alcohol and drugs , in India , for cultural and religious sentiments over the cattle in the game being called " Brahmin " , and in Japan , due to having a weapon called the " Fat Man " , which releases mini nuclear bombs . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 = = = Attributes = = = 
 The game starts with the main character as a newborn , whereupon the player determines the race , gender , and the general appearance of their character . As a one @-@ year @-@ old baby , the infant reads a child 's book titled You 're SPECIAL , where the player can set the character 's starting <unk> primary attributes : Strength , Perception , Endurance , Charisma , Intelligence , Agility , and Luck . The character gains a set of Skills with base levels determined by these attributes . At age 10 , the character obtains a Pip @-@ Boy , a computerized wristwatch which allows the player to access a menu with statistics , maps , data , radio , and other items . The character also obtains their first weapon , a BB gun , which he or she then uses to kill a <unk> , a type of irradiated giant cockroach . At age 16 , the character takes the Generalized Occupational Aptitude Test ( <unk> ) to determine the three Skills they wish the character to focus on . 
 As the character progresses through the game , experience points are earned that are used to achieve levels of accomplishment . Upon achieving a new level , the player receives a set of skill points that can be assigned to improve any of the Skill percentages . For instance , increasing the lock pick skill grants the player the ability to pick harder locks to unlock doors and supply crates . A Perk is granted at each level , which offers advantages of varying quality and form . Many Perks have a set of prerequisites that must be satisfied , and new Perks are unlocked every two levels . 
 An important statistic tracked in the game is karma . Each character has an aggregate amount of karma that can be affected by the decisions and actions made in the game . Positive karmic actions include freeing captives and helping others . Negative karmic actions include killing good characters and stealing . Beyond acting as flavor for the game 's events , karma can have tangible effects to the player , primarily affecting the game 's ending . Other effects include altered dialogue with non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) , or unique reactions from other characters . Actions vary in the level of karma change they cause ; thus , pickpocketing produces less negative karma than the killing of a good character . However , the player 's relationships with the game 's factions are distinct , so any two groups or settlements may view the player in contrasting ways , depending on the player 's conduct . Some Perks require specific karma levels . 
 = = = Health and weapons = = = 
 Health is separated into two types : general and limb . General health is the primary damage bar , and the player will die if it is depleted . Limb health is specific to each portion of the body , namely the arms , legs , head , and torso . Non @-@ human enemies will sometimes have additional appendages . When a limb 's health bar is depleted , that limb is rendered " crippled " and induces a negative status effect , such as blurred vision from a crippled head or reduced movement speed from a crippled leg . Health is diminished when damage is taken from being attacked , falling from great distances , or accidental self injury . General health can be replenished by sleeping , using medical equipment ( <unk> ) , eating food , or drinking water . Limbs can be healed directly by injecting them with <unk> , by sleeping , or by being healed by a doctor . Along with the health , there are 20 bobbleheads that can be found throughout the game that will give the player bonuses to attributes and skills . Each bobblehead is an iconic Vault Boy figurine in a different pose . Three of them have to be found in different time periods in the gameplay ; otherwise they will be lost . 
 There are secondary health factors that can affect performance . Chief among these is radiation poisoning : most food is irradiated to a small degree , and parts of the world have varying levels of background radiation . As the player is exposed to radiation , it builds up , causing negative effects and eventually death if left untreated . Radiation sickness must be healed by special medicine named Rad Away or by visiting one of the Wasteland 's doctors . Radiation can be prevented by the use of Rad @-@ X which increases radiation resistance . The player can become addicted to drugs and alcohol , and then go through withdrawal symptoms if denied those substances . Both afflictions can blur the player 's vision for a few seconds and have a negative effect on SPECIAL attributes until the problem is corrected . 
 Items can become degraded and become less effective . Firearms do less damage and may jam during reloading , and apparel becomes gradually less protective . This will eventually result in the item breaking altogether . Items can be repaired for a price from special vendors , or , when the player has two of the same item ( or a comparable item ) , one can be repaired using salvage parts from the other . Players have the option to create their own weaponry using various scavenged items found in the wasteland . These items can only be created at <unk> , and only if the player possesses the necessary schematics or Perk . These weapons usually possess significant advantages over other weapons of their type . Each schematic has three copies that can be found . Each copy improves the condition ( or number ) of items produced at the workbench . A higher repair skill will result in a better starting condition for the related weapon . Weapon schematics can be found lying in certain locations , bought from vendors , or received as quest rewards . 
 = = = V.A.T.S. = = = 
 The Vault @-@ Tec Assisted Targeting System , or V.A.T.S. , plays an important part in combat . While using V.A.T.S. , real @-@ time combat is paused , and action is played out from varying camera angles in a computer graphics version of " bullet time " , creating a combat system that the Bethesda developers have described as a hybrid between <unk> @-@ based and real @-@ time combat . Various actions cost action points , limiting the actions of each combatant during a turn , and the player can target specific body areas for attacks to inflict specific injuries ; head shots can be used for quick kills or blinding , legs can be targeted to slow enemies ' movements , opponents can be disarmed by shooting at their weapons , and players can drive certain enemies into a berserker rage by shooting out things like antennae on various overgrown insects and combat inhibitors on armored robots . However , the use of V.A.T.S. also eliminates most of the first @-@ person shooter elements of the game ; aiming is taken over by the computer , and the player is unable to move as a means of avoiding attacks . Each body part has a percentage of hit chance , and generally the closer the player character is to an enemy the higher that percentage . The higher level the character using <unk> is , the more likely that character will hit their enemy . 
 = = = Companions = = = 
 The player can have a maximum party of three consisting of the player 's character , a dog named Dogmeat , and a single non @-@ player character ( NPC ) . Dogmeat can be killed during the game if the player misuses him or places him in a severely dangerous <unk> ; it is possible to not encounter Dogmeat at all depending on how the game is played . One other NPC can travel with the player at any time , and in order to get another NPC to travel , the first one must be dismissed ( either voluntarily by the player or as a consequence of other events ) or die in <unk> In the " Broken Steel " DLC , the level 22 perk " Puppies ! " allows the player to gain a puppy if Dogmeat dies . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Fallout 3 takes place in the year 2277 , 200 years after a war over resources that ended in nuclear holocaust in 2077 . The setting is a post @-@ apocalyptic retro @-@ future , covering a region that includes Washington , D.C. , Northern Virginia and parts of Maryland . The game 's landscape includes war @-@ ravaged variants of numerous real @-@ life landmarks such as the White House , the Jefferson and Lincoln Memorials , Arlington National Cemetery and the Washington Monument . The area that the game is set in , known in @-@ game as the Capital Wasteland , holds a number of small settlements of the descendants of survivors from the Great War . Many inhabitants were killed during the nuclear holocaust and the Wasteland is now little more than a barren land nearly devoid of healthy water , food , plant and animal life due to the extreme radiation levels . However , there is a small settlement in the north part of the Capital Wasteland where plant life is abundant . 
 The player ( known as the Lone Wanderer ) begins the game inside Vault 101 , where they were raised , before escaping out into the Capital Wasteland and facing its many dangers . The Capital Wasteland is home to a number of mutated species of creatures such as two @-@ headed cattle called Brahmin , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Many of these creatures are generally hostile to the player and will attack on sight . The Wasteland and the city proper is home to several hostile groups , including super mutants , feral ghouls , raiders , slavers , mercenaries , and robots . Of note are the various Vaults — underground structures designed as shelters to protect inhabitants from the dangers of nuclear war ( and also for more sinister purposes ) . In the Washington , D.C. area , many of the roads are blocked off with giant piles of rubble . The player can navigate around the city using a system of underground metro tunnels that connect with other locations ( loosely based on the real @-@ life Washington Metro ) . 
 The game takes place in an alternate version of history that sees the 1940s ' and 1950s ' aesthetics , design and technology advance in the directions imagined at the time . The resulting universe is thus a retro @-@ futuristic one , where the technology has evolved enough to produce laser weapons , manipulate genes and create nearly @-@ autonomous artificial intelligence , but all within the confines of 1950s ' solutions like the widespread use of atomic power and vacuum tubes , as well as having the integrated circuitry of the digital age . The architecture , advertisements and general living styles are also depicted to be largely unchanged since the 1950s , while including contemporary products , such as a robotic rocking horse for children in one advertisement , or posters for the underground vaults that play a central role in the storyline of the game . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The introductory sequence introduces the player to their character 's father , James , a doctor and scientist in Vault 101 . James frequently makes comments about the player character 's deceased mother Catherine , and her favorite Bible passage , Revelation 21 : 6 , which speaks of " the waters of life " . 
 The main quest begins 19 years later , after the player is forced to flee Vault 101 when James leaves the vault , throwing it into anarchy and causing the paranoid Overseer , the leader of the Vault , to send his security force after the player . The search for James takes the character on a journey through the Wasteland , first to the nearby town of Megaton , named for the undetonated atomic bomb at the center of town , then the Galaxy News Radio station , whose enthusiastic DJ Three Dog gives the player the moniker of " The Lone Wanderer " . The Wanderer travels to Rivet City , a derelict aircraft carrier now serving as a fortified human settlement . Here the Lone Wanderer meets Doctor Li , a scientist who worked alongside the player 's father . Doctor Li informs the Wanderer of Project Purity , a plan conceived by Catherine and James to purify all the water in the Tidal Basin and eventually the entire Potomac River with a giant water purifier built in the Jefferson Memorial . However , continued delays and Catherine 's death during childbirth put an end to the project , and James took the Lone Wanderer as a newborn to raise them in the safety of Vault 101 . 
 After investigating the Jefferson Memorial , the Lone Wanderer tracks James to Vault 112 , and frees him from a virtual reality program being run by the Vault 's sadistic Overseer , Dr. Braun . James and the Wanderer return to Rivet City , and James reveals he sought out Braun for information on the Garden of Eden Creation Kit ( G.E.C.K. ) , a device that contains the components needed to finally activate Project Purity . James and Doctor Li lead a team of Rivet City scientists to the memorial with intent to restart the project , but the memorial is invaded by the Enclave , a powerful military organization formed from the remnants of the pre @-@ War United States government . James floods the project 's control room with radiation to stop the Enclave military leader , Colonel Augustus Autumn , from taking control of it , killing himself ( but Autumn survives ) , his last words urging his child to run . The Lone Wanderer and Dr. Li flee to the ruins of the Pentagon , now a base for the Brotherhood of Steel and now known as the Citadel . With Project Purity still <unk> even with the Enclave occupying the site , the player travels to Vault 87 to find a G.E.C.K. and finish James 's work . The Wanderer finds the Vault to be a testing site for the <unk> ( Forced Evolutionary Virus ) , and the source of the Super Mutants in the Capital Wasteland . After the player acquires the G.E.C.K. , the Wanderer is ambushed by the Enclave and captured . 
 At the Enclave base at Raven Rock , the Lone Wanderer is freed from their cell by the Enclave leader , President John Henry Eden , who requests a private audience with them . En route to his office however , Colonel Autumn defies Eden 's orders and takes command of the Enclave military , ordering them to kill the Wanderer . Fighting their way to Eden 's office , the Lone Wanderer discovers that Eden is actually a sentient <unk> series supercomputer who took control of the Enclave after their defeat in Fallout 2 on the West Coast thirty years previously . Eden wishes to repeat the plan of then @-@ President Dick Richardson using Project Purity , infecting the water with a modified strain of <unk> that will make it toxic to any mutated life . This plan will kill most life in the wasteland including humans , but the Enclave , due to their genetic " purity " as a result of their isolation , will be immune and free to take control of the area . The Wanderer , provided with a sample of the new <unk> , is given a choice to either leave peacefully or convince Eden to self @-@ destruct the entire base . The Lone Wanderer escapes Raven Rock and returns to the Citadel . 
 With the knowledge they possess , the G.E.C.K. and the means to activate Project Purity , the Brotherhood assault the Jefferson Memorial , spearheaded by a giant robot named Liberty Prime . In the control room of Project Purity , the Lone Wanderer confronts Colonel Autumn , and has the choice to persuade him to give up or kill him . Dr. Li informs the Wanderer that the purifier is ready to be activated , but the activation code must be input manually , and also that the control room is flooded with lethal amounts of radiation . To make matters worse , the purifier has been damaged and will self @-@ destruct if not activated . The Lone Wanderer is forced to choose between sending Sarah Lyons of the Brotherhood inside the extremely irradiated purifier or entering themselves . Whoever enters into the chamber inputs the code hinted at throughout the game , 21 : 6 , and dies from a radiation spike . The Lone Wanderer can also choose to simply do nothing and allow the purifier to explode , destroying the Jefferson Memorial and killing everyone inside in the process . 
 If the " Broken Steel " DLC is installed , the Lone Wanderer survives if they activate it themselves , but they also have the option of sending one of their radiation @-@ immune companions to enter the code and start the purifier with no casualties . The player also has the possibility to enter the <unk> sample into the water prior to activation , having adverse post @-@ ending effects on the game 's side quests . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Interplay Entertainment = = = 
 Fallout 3 was initially under development by Black Isle Studios , a studio owned by Interplay Entertainment , under the working title Van Buren . Black Isle Studios was the developer of the original Fallout and Fallout 2 . When Interplay Entertainment went bankrupt and closed down Black Isle Studios before the game could be completed , the license to develop Fallout 3 was sold for a $ 1 @,@ 175 @,@ 000 minimum guaranteed advance against royalties to Bethesda Softworks , a studio primarily known as the developer of The Elder Scrolls series . Bethesda 's Fallout 3 , however , was developed from scratch , using neither Van Buren code nor any other materials created by Black Isle Studios . In May 2007 , a playable technology demo of the canceled project was released to the public . 
 Leonard Boyarsky , art director of the original Fallout , when asked about Interplay Entertainment 's sale of the rights to Bethesda Softworks , said " To be perfectly honest , I was extremely disappointed that we did not get the chance to make the next Fallout game . This has nothing to do with Bethesda , it 's just that we 've always felt that Fallout was ours and it was just a technicality that Interplay happened to own it . It sort of felt as if our child had been sold to the highest bidder , and we had to just sit by and watch . Since I have absolutely no idea what their plans are , I can 't comment on whether I think they 're going in the right direction with it or not . " . 
 = = = Bethesda Softworks = = = 
 Bethesda Softworks started working on Fallout 3 in July 2004 , but principal development did not begin until after The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion and its related extras and plug ins were completed . Bethesda Softworks decided to make Fallout 3 similar to the previous two games , focusing upon non @-@ linear gameplay , story , and black comedy . Bethesda also chose to pursue an ESRB rating of M ( for mature ) by including the adult themes , violence , and depravity characteristic of the Fallout series . They also decided to shy away from the self @-@ referential gags of the game 's predecessors that broke the illusion that the world of Fallout is real . Fallout 3 uses a version of the same Gamebryo engine as Oblivion , and was developed by the team responsible for that game . Liam Neeson was cast as the voice of the player 's father . 
 In February 2007 , Bethesda stated that the game was " a fairly good ways away " from release but that detailed information and previews would be available later in the year . Following a statement made by Pete Hines that the team wanted to make the game a " multiple platform title " , the game was announced by Game Informer to be in development for Windows , Xbox 360 , and PlayStation 3 . 
 During a March 21 , 2008 , Official Xbox Magazine podcast interview , Todd Howard revealed that the game had expanded to nearly the same scope as Oblivion . There were originally at least 12 versions of the final cutscene , but , with further development , this expanded to over 200 possible permutations in the final release , all of which are determined by the actions taken by the player . Bethesda Softworks attended E3 2008 to showcase Fallout 3 . The first live demo of the Xbox 360 version of the game was shown and demonstrated by Todd Howard , taking place in downtown Washington , D.C. The demo showcased various weapons such as the Fat Man nuclear catapult , the V.A.T.S. system and the functions of the Pip @-@ Boy 3000 as well as combat with several enemies . The demo concluded as the player neared the Brotherhood of Steel @-@ controlled Pentagon and was attacked by an Enclave patrol . 
 = = = = Audio = = = = 
 Several actors of film and video games lent their voices to Fallout 3 , including Liam Neeson as James , Ron Perlman as the game 's narrator , Malcolm McDowell as President John Henry Eden , Craig Sechler as Butch <unk> , Erik Todd Dellums as Three Dog , and Odette <unk> as Amata <unk> . Veteran voice actors Dee Bradley Baker , Wes Johnson , Paul Eiding , and Stephen Russell also provided voice overs for the game . The Fallout 3 soundtrack continued the series ' convention of featuring sentimental 1940s big band American popular music , the main theme , and few other side songs recorded by The Ink Spots and The Andrews Sisters ; in addition to a score written by composer Inon Zur . The soundtrack of the game included artists such as Roy Brown , Billie Holiday , Billy Munn , Cole Porter , and Bob Crosby . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 = = = Trailers = = = 
 A teaser site for the game appeared on May 2 , 2007 , and featured music from the game and concept art , along with a timer that counted down to June 5 , 2007 . The artists and developers involved later confirmed that the concept art , commissioned before Oblivion had been released , did not reveal anything from the actual game . When the countdown finished , the site hosted the first teaser trailer for the game , and unveiled a release date of " Fall 2008 " . 
 On June 5 , 2007 , Bethesda released the Fallout 3 teaser trailer . The press kit released with the trailer indicated that Ron Perlman would be on board with the project , and cited a release date of Fall 2008 . The trailer featured The Ink Spots song " I Don 't Want to Set the World on Fire " , which the previous Fallout developer Black Isle Studios originally intended to license for use in the first Fallout game . The trailer , which was completely done with in @-@ engine assets , closed with Ron Perlman saying his trademark line which he also spoke in the original Fallout : " War . War never changes " . The trailer showed a devastated Washington , D.C. , evidenced by the partially damaged Washington Monument in the background as well as the crumbling buildings that surrounded a rubble @-@ choked city thoroughfare . 
 A second trailer was first shown during a GameTrailers TV E3 special on July 12 , 2008 . The trailer zoomed out from a ruined house in the Washington , D.C. suburbs , and provided a wider view of the capital 's skyline including the Capitol Building and Washington Monument in the distance . On July 14 , 2008 , an extended version of this trailer was made available , which besides the original content , included a Vault @-@ Tec advertisement and actual gameplay . Both versions of the trailer featured the song " Dear Hearts and Gentle People " as recorded by Bob Crosby and the Bobcats . 
 = = = Film festival = = = 
 On July 11 , 2008 , as a part of promoting Fallout 3 , Bethesda Softworks partnered with American Cinematheque and Geek Monthly to sponsor " A Post @-@ Apocalyptic Film Festival Presented by Fallout 3 " . The festival took place on August 22 – 23 at Santa Monica 's Aero Theater . Six post @-@ apocalyptic movies were shown which depict life and events that could occur after a world @-@ changing disaster , including Wizards , Damnation Alley , A Boy and His Dog , The Last Man on Earth , The Omega Man , and Twelve Monkeys . 
 = = = Retail versions = = = 
 Fallout 3 was released in five separate versions , only three of which were made available worldwide : 
 The Standard Edition includes the game disc and instruction manual with no extras . 
 The Collector 's Edition includes the game disc , manual , a bonus " making of " disc , a concept artbook , and a 5 " Vault Boy Bobblehead , all of which is contained in a Vault @-@ Tec lunchbox . In Australia , the Collector 's Edition is exclusive to <unk> and EB Games . 
 The Limited Edition includes the game disc and manual , as well as a Brotherhood of Steel Power Armor figurine . This edition is available only in the UK through the retailer Game . 
 The Survival Edition includes everything from the Collector 's Edition , as well as a model of the PIP @-@ Boy 3000 from the game which functions as a digital clock . The Survival Edition is available exclusively from Amazon.com to U.S. customers only . 
 The Game of the Year Edition , which includes the original Fallout 3 game as well as all 5 of the downloadable content packs , was released on October 13 , 2009 in North America and October 16 , 2009 in Europe . It was released in Australia on October 22 , 2009 , and in Japan on December 3 , 2009 . It was made available on Steam on December 17 , 2009 . 
 An Xbox 360 version of Fallout 3 and Oblivion double pack was announced for release in North America on April 3 . 
 = = Downloadable content = = 
 Bethesda 's Todd Howard first confirmed during E3 2008 that downloadable content ( DLC ) would be prepared for the Xbox 360 and Windows versions of Fallout 3 . There are five DLCs : Operation : Anchorage , The Pitt , Broken Steel , Point Lookout , and Mothership Zeta , released in that order . Of the five , Broken Steel has the largest effect on the game , altering the ending and allowing the player to continue playing past the end of the main quest line . 
 Originally , there was no downloadable content announced for the PlayStation 3 version of the game . Although Bethesda had not offered an official explanation as to why the content was not released for PlayStation 3 , Lazard Capital Markets analyst Colin Sebastian speculated that it may have been the result of a money deal with Bethesda by Sony 's competitor , Microsoft . When asked if the PlayStation 3 version would receive an update that would enable gameplay beyond the main quest 's completion , Todd Howard responded , " Not at this time , no . " However , in May 2009 , Bethesda announced that the existing DLC packs ( Operation : Anchorage , The Pitt and Broken Steel ) would be made available for the PlayStation 3 ; the later two ( Point Lookout and Mothership Zeta ) were released for all platforms . 
 On October 1 , 2009 , a New Xbox Experience premium theme for the game was released for the Xbox 360 . Consumers could pay 240 Microsoft Points , or by having downloaded all other downloadable content . The PlayStation 3 received a free theme , featuring a Brotherhood of Steel Knight in the background , and includes symbols from the game as icons on the PS3 home menu . In December 2008 the official editor , known as the G.E.C.K. ( Garden of Eden Creation Kit ) was made available for the Windows version of the game as a free download from the Fallout 3 website . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Fallout 3 received " universal acclaim " , according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . 1UP.com 's Demian Linn praised its open @-@ ended gameplay and flexible character @-@ leveling system . While the V.A.T.S. system was called " fun " , enemy encounters were said to suffer from a lack of precision in real @-@ time combat and little variety in enemy types . The review concluded , Fallout 3 is a " hugely ambitious game that doesn 't come around very often " . IGN editor Erik Brudvig praised the game 's " minimalist " sound design , observing , " you might find yourself with nothing but the sound of wind rustling through decaying trees and blowing dust across the barren plains ... Fallout 3 proves that less can be more " . The review noted that the " unusual amount of realism " combined with the " endless conversation permutations " produces " one of the most truly interactive experiences of the generation " . In a review of the game for Kotaku , Mike Fahey commented that " While Inon Zur 's score is filled with epic goodness , the real stars of Fallout 3 's music are the vintage songs from the 1940s " . Will Tuttle of GameSpy commended the game for its " engaging storyline , impeccable presentation , and hundreds of hours of addictive gameplay " . Although Edge awarded the game 7 out of 10 , in a later anniversary issue it placed the game 37th in a " 100 best games to play today " list , saying " Fallout 3 empowers , engages and rewards to extents that few games have ever achieved " . 
 Some criticisms were the bugs in regards to the physics and crashes — some of which broke quests and even prevented progression . The AI and stiff character animations are another common point of criticism , as is the ending . Edge stated that " the game is cumbersome in design and frequently incompetent in the details of execution " , taking particular issue with the nakedness of the HUD , the clarity of the menu interface , and that the smaller problems are carried over from Oblivion . Edge liked the central story but said " the writing isn 't quite as consistent as the ideas that underpin " and that the " voice @-@ acting is even less reliable " . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 From its release in October to the end of 2008 , Fallout 3 shipped over 4 @.@ 7 million units . According to NPD Group , as of January 2009 , the Xbox 360 version had sold 1 @.@ 14 million units , and the PlayStation 3 version had sold 552 @,@ 000 units . The Xbox 360 version was the 14th best @-@ selling game of December 2008 in the United States , while the PlayStation 3 version was the 8th best @-@ selling PlayStation 3 game in that region and month . Electronic Entertainment Design and Research , a market research firm , estimated that the game had sold 12 @.@ 4 million copies worldwide . 
 Fallout 3 was one of the most played titles in Xbox Live in 2009 and Games for Windows – Live in 2009 , 2011 , and 2012 . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Fallout 3 won several awards following its showcasing at E3 2007 . IGN gave it the " Game of E3 2007 " award , and GameSpot gave it the " Best Role @-@ Playing Game of E3 2007 " award . Following the game 's demonstration at E3 2008 , IGN also gave it " Best Overall RPG " , " Best Overall Console Game " , and " Overall Game of the Show " for E3 2008 . Game Critics Awards gave the game " Best Role @-@ Playing Game " and " Best of Show " for E3 2008 . 
 After its release , Fallout 3 won numerous awards from gaming journalists and websites . At the 2009 Game Developer 's Choice Awards , it won overall " Game of the Year " along with " Best Writing . " It was also awarded " Game of the Year " by IGN , GamesRadar , GameSpy , UGO Networks , Gamasutra and the Golden Joystick Awards . The game also won " Xbox 360 Game of the Year " from Official Xbox Magazine , GameSpy and IGN , while winning " PC Game of the Year " from GamePro , GameSpy , GameTrailers and GameSpot , with the latter two also awarding it " Best RPG . " 
 At the end of 2009 , Fallout 3 was featured in IGN 's " Best Video and Computer Games of the Decade " ( 2000 – 2009 ) , with the game being placed top game of 2008 and seventh overall game of the decade . In 2012 , Fallout 3 was also exhibited at the Smithsonian American Art Museum . Fallout 3 was voted for and won the " Adventure " section for the platform " Modern Windows . " That same year , G4tv ranked it as the 75th top video game of all time . 
 = = = Technical issues = = = 
 Shortly before the game 's release , IGN posted a review of the game , citing numerous bugs and crashes in the PlayStation 3 release . The game also contained a bug , causing the game to freeze and the screen to blur when friends signed out of and into the PlayStation Network . The IGN review was edited shortly thereafter , removing all references to the PS3 version 's bugs , causing controversy in the PlayStation communities . Reviewing PlayStation 3 Game of the Year edition , Digital <unk> and Spawn Kill confirmed that most bugs remained , citing occasional freezes , several animation , and scripting issues along with other bugs , requiring a restart of the game . Even IGN retroactively cited bugs with the original release as well as the Game of the Year edition , calling it " a fantastic game " , but warned players to " be aware that you might have to deal with some crashes and bugs " . 
 = = = Controversy and fandom = = = 
 Not all fans are happy with the direction the Fallout series has taken since its acquisition by Bethesda Softworks . Notorious for their support of the series ' first two games , Fallout and Fallout 2 , members centered around one of the oldest Fallout fansites , No Mutants Allowed , have criticized departures from the original games ' stories , gameplay mechanics and setting . Criticisms include the prevalence of unspoiled food after 200 years , the survival of wood @-@ framed dwellings following a nuclear blast , and the ubiquity of Super Mutants at early levels in the game . Also criticized are the quality of the game 's writing , its level of verisimilitude , the switch to a first @-@ person action game format , and the level of <unk> of the surrounding game world to player actions . In response , Jim Sterling of Destructoid has called fan groups like No Mutants Allowed " selfish " and " arrogant " ; stating that a new audience deserves a chance to play a Fallout game ; and that if the series had stayed the way it was back in 1997 , new titles would never have been made and brought to market . Luke Winkie of Kotaku tempers these sentiments , saying that it is a matter of ownership ; and that in the case of Fallout 3 , hardcore fans of the original series witnessed their favorite games become transformed into something else . 
 = = Regional variations = = 
 = = = Drug references = = = 
 On July 4 , 2008 , Fallout 3 was refused classification by the ACB in Australia , thus making it illegal to distribute or purchase the game in the country . In order for the game to be reclassified , the offending content in the Australian version of the game would have had to be removed by Bethesda Softworks and the game resubmitted to the ACB . According to the ACB board report , the game was refused classification due to the " realistic visual representations of drugs and their delivery method [ bringing ] the ' science @-@ fiction ' drugs in line with ' real @-@ world ' drugs " . 
 A revised version of the game was resubmitted to the ACB and reclassified as MA 15 + on August 7 , 2008 , or not suitable for people under the age of 15 unless accompanied by a parent or adult guardian ; this new rating ensured that the game could retail legally in Australia . According to the ACB board report , the drug content was not removed entirely from the revised version of the game , but the animation showing the actual usage of the drugs was removed ; the minority view on the decision stated that the drug content was still enough to warrant a refused classification rating . 
 In a later interview with UK gaming magazine Edge , Bethesda Softworks revealed that there would be only one version of Fallout 3 released worldwide , and that this version would have all real @-@ world drug references removed . It was later clarified that the only change made would be that morphine , a real @-@ world drug that would have appeared in the game , would instead be renamed to the more generic " Med @-@ X " . 
 = = = Release in India = = = 
 On October 22 , 2008 , Microsoft announced that the game would not be released in India on the Xbox 360 platform . Religious and cultural sentiments were cited as the reason . Microsoft stated , " Microsoft constantly endeavors to bring the best games to Indian consumers in sync with their international release . However , in light of cultural sensitivities in India , we have made the business decision to not bring Fallout 3 into the country . " Although the specific reason was not revealed in public , it is possible that it is because the game contains two @-@ headed mutated cows called Brahmin , or that Brahmin is also the name of an ancient , powerful hereditary caste of Hindu priests and religious scholars in India , or its similarity to the spelling of brahman , a type of cow that originated in India . Brahman , a breed of Zebu , are revered by Hindus . 
 = = = Sensitivity in Japan = = = 
 Bethesda Softworks changed the side quest " The Power of the Atom " in the Japanese version of Fallout 3 to relieve concerns about depictions of atomic detonation in inhabited areas , as the memory of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki remain strong in the country . In non @-@ Japanese versions , players are given the option of either defusing , ignoring , or detonating the dormant atomic bomb in the town of Megaton ; in the Japanese version , the character of Mr. Burke is absent , making it impossible to choose the detonation option . Also in the Japanese release , the " Fat Man " nuclear catapult weapon was renamed " Nuka Launcher " , as the original name was a reference to the bomb used on Nagasaki . According to Tetsu Takahashi , responsible for localizing Fallout 3 to Japan under his company <unk> Asia , the available actions prior to localizing " The Power of the Atom " and the ability to kill civilians almost got the game banned by CERO before it received an Adult Only Rating . 
 = Jamaal Westerman = 
 Jamaal Akeem Westerman ( born February 21 , 1985 ) is an American football defensive lineman for the Winnipeg Blue Bombers of the Canadian Football League ( CFL ) . He was signed by the New York Jets as an undrafted free agent in 2009 . He played college football at Rutgers and was named to the Second – team All – Big East team two times . Westerman played high school football in Fort Lauderdale , Florida , at St. Thomas Aquinas High School before moving to Brampton , Ontario and attending Notre Dame Secondary School . 
 He has also been a member of the Miami Dolphins , Arizona Cardinals , Indianapolis Colts , Buffalo Bills , Pittsburgh Steelers and Cleveland Browns . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Westerman was born in Brooklyn , New York , on February 21 , 1985 . He and his family moved to Fort Lauderdale , Florida , where Westerman began his high school career at St. Thomas Aquinas High School . Following his freshman season , he moved , this time to Brampton , Ontario , and enrolled at Notre Dame Secondary School . Westerman started every year he was there and led both the team and league in tackles and sacks . After graduating from Notre Dame in 2004 he was considered a two @-@ star prospect by Rivals.com. Rutgers , Boise State and Central Michigan all recruited him and all offered him scholarships . He eventually accepted Rutgers ' scholarship offer . 
 = = College career = = 
 Westerman received three scholarship offers from National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) colleges before accepting one from Rutgers . 
 After redshirting in 2004 , Westerman made a quick impression on the Rutgers coaching staff after recording six tackles in two games to begin 2005 . In the Cincinnati game , Westerman recorded a sack on quarterback Dustin Grutza which forced a fumble . 
 Before the 2006 season , Westerman was involved in a car accident with teammates Willie Foster and Corey Hyman . Westerman and Foster were uninjured while Hyman required two stitches in his forehead . On September 29 , against South Florida , Westerman sacked quarterback Matt <unk> for a five yard loss . After the month of September , Westerman had eight tackles and two and a half sacks . Through eight games , Westerman was the team leader in sacks with six . Against Connecticut , Westerman blocked a punt and recovered a fumble by Connecticut quarterback D. J. Hernandez . Both the punt and fumble recovery were returned for a touchdown . Westerman also recorded two and a half sacks in the game . By the final game in the season , Westerman and defensive end William Blackford had a combined 59 tackles , 16 tackles for a loss with 10 sacks . In the Texas Bowl against the Kansas State Wildcats , Westerman sacked quarterback Josh Freeman twice and recovered a Freeman fumble . Westerman was named second – team All – Big East following the season along with teammates Brian Leonard , Cameron Stephenson , Pedro Sosa , Jeremy Ito , Ramel <unk> , <unk> Thompson , Ron <unk> and Courtney Greene . 
 During spring practice , Westerman and two other starter defensive linemen missed the annual intersquad scrimmage due to injuries . In Rutgers ' 59 – 0 win over Norfolk State , Westerman recorded one sack on quarterback Casey Hansen . Against Syracuse and South Florida , Westerman recorded two sacks which gave him six for the season . Following the season , Westerman and Rutgers earned a bid to play in the International Bowl against Ball State . The game was played in his hometown of Toronto . According to Westerman he received numerous questions from teammates about Toronto , including " What 's the weather like ? " 
 Beginning in March 2008 , Rutgers attempted to convert Westerman to defensive tackle , so he could replace the departed Eric Foster . However , Westerman ended up playing defensive end during the season . Against Morgan State , Westerman blocked a punt and recovered the loose ball . Westerman suffered a torn biceps against Louisville and was forced to sit out the rest of the season which included a bowl game . Despite his injury , he led Rutgers with six sacks on the season . 
 Westerman ended his collegiate career with 26 sacks , 141 tackles and 45 tackles for a loss . His career sack total ranked him third highest in Rutgers school history . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = New York Jets = = = 
 Westerman was signed by the New York Jets as an undrafted free agent on April 27 , 2009 . On June 9 , 2009 , Jets head coach Rex Ryan said that he expected Westerman to make the team 's final roster . He ended up making the final roster as an outside linebacker and recorded two tackles and a sack in his debut against the Houston Texans on September 13 . On October 9 , 2011 , Westerman recorded 5 tackles along with 2 sacks against the New England Patriots but in a losing effort while the Jets lost 30 – 21 . 
 = = = Miami Dolphins = = = 
 Westerman signed with the Miami Dolphins on March 15 , 2012 . He was waived during the final cuts before ever playing a regular season game for the Miami Dolphins . 
 = = = Arizona Cardinals = = = 
 On September 1 , Westerman was claimed off waivers by the Arizona Cardinals . After making just one tackle in five games for the team , he was waived on November 20 . 
 = = = Indianapolis Colts = = = 
 On December 4 , Westerman signed with the Indianapolis Colts . 
 = = = Buffalo Bills = = = 
 On August 14 , 2013 , Westerman was signed by the Buffalo Bills . After appearing in 12 games with the Bills in 2013 , Westerman was waived on December 10 , 2013 . 
 = = = Pittsburgh Steelers = = = 
 Westerman signed with the Pittsburgh Steelers on December 17 , 2013 , after a season @-@ ending injury to linebacker LaMarr Woodley . He appeared in one game for the Steelers during the 2013 NFL season . 
 = = = Cleveland Browns = = = 
 On July 24 , 2014 Westerman signed with the Browns . He was released by the Browns on August 30 , 2014 , as they trimmed their roster down to 53 players . 
 = = = Winnipeg Blue Bombers = = = 
 On May 7 , 2015 the Westerman signed with the Winnipeg Blue Bombers of the Canadian Football League . He appeared in 17 games in 2015 , registering 17 sacks and receiving the Western nomination for Most Outstanding Canadian . Unfortunately for Westerman , Ottawa receiver Brad <unk> would end up winning the award for Most Outstanding Canadian . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Westerman 's brother , <unk> , walked onto the Rutgers football team as a wide receiver after Westerman encouraged him to do so . His other brother , Jabar Westerman , was a first round draft pick of the BC Lions in the 2012 Canadian Football League college draft and is currently a starter at defensive end for the team . 
 = M @-@ 38 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 38 is an east – west state trunkline highway in the Upper Peninsula ( UP ) of the U.S. state of Michigan . Its west end starts in Ontonagon and runs east to Baraga , some 42 @.@ 225 miles ( 67 @.@ 955 km ) apart . The highway crosses streams and rivers in forest lands and provides access to a casino . The east end is located by the Keweenaw Bay of Lake Superior in the Keweenaw Bay Indian Community . 
 There have been two highways in the state to carry the designation . The first was located in the southeastern Lower Peninsula . The current version of M @-@ 38 was created from a section of M @-@ 35 in the 1960s . This section was orphaned from the rest of M @-@ 35 when the highway was cancelled through the Huron Mountains . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 38 begins at a four @-@ way intersection in Ontonagon . US Highway 45 ( US 45 ) runs north – south through this intersection while M @-@ 64 runs west and M @-@ 38 runs east on Steel Street . This intersection is both the eastern terminus of M @-@ 64 and the western terminus of M @-@ 38 . From here , M @-@ 38 forms a segment of the Lake Superior Circle Tour along Ontonagon – Greenland Road to a junction with M @-@ 26 near Greenland . The roadway runs through forest land and crosses several small streams while traveling southeasterly . Outside of Greenland , M @-@ 38 curves to the north around town after intersecting Plank Road . On the east side of town , M @-@ 26 and M @-@ 38 meet and join in a concurrency after Ontonagon – Greenland Road meets Plank Road a second time . The two highways run together for just over a mile to the unincorporated community of Lake Mine . There , M @-@ 38 turns south through the community while M @-@ 26 turns off to the northeast . 
 The highway crosses a set of railroad tracks before turning east . At Post Office Road , M @-@ 38 meets a road named Old M @-@ 35 Road , a vestige of a highway straightening project during the time the highway was M @-@ 35 . M @-@ 38 crosses the West Branch of the <unk> River in hilly terrain through this area . The highway continues east and provides access to the Courtney Lake National Forest Campground west of the Houghton County line . East of Federal Forest Highway 16 ( FFH @-@ 16 ) near Nisula , M @-@ 38 crosses the West Branch of the Otter River . It is along this section of roadway in Houghton County that the lowest annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) counts were measured by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) in 2007 . An average of 680 vehicles traveled on the roadway , according to MDOT surveys . Of those vehicles , only 40 trucks on average were included in the traffic counts . East of Nisula , the roadway runs parallel to Mill Creek . Mill Creek flows into the West Branch of the Sturgeon River near the Baraga County line . 
 East of the county line is the crossing over the Sturgeon River south of <unk> , home of the Baraga County Fairgrounds . The trunkline crosses more hilly terrain while veering to the northeast . Continuing to the east , M @-@ 38 had its highest traffic usage in 2007 . The AADT for the Baraga County segment of the highway was measured at 3 @,@ 000 vehicles a day . The roadway continues east through Baraga County and runs downhill approaching Baraga and the Keweenaw Bay Indian Community , home of the first Native American casino in the United States . After passing through downtown Baraga on Michigan Avenue , M @-@ 38 ends at an intersection with US 41 ; on the western shore of Keweenaw Bay . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous designation = = = 
 The first version of M @-@ 38 was designated in 1919 in the Lower Peninsula . It was located on Junction Road from M @-@ 10 ( later US 10 / US 23 ) southeast of Bridgeport to Frankenmuth , and then ran east to M @-@ 19 in the Peck area in 1919 . The highway was transferred to county jurisdiction in late 1961 when the I @-@ 75 / US 10 / US 23 freeway was completed in the area . 
 = = = Current designation = = = 
 In 1968 , the Michigan Department of Transportation redesignated the western section of M @-@ 35 as M @-@ 38 . M @-@ 35 was originally planned to start in Menominee and run north to Big Bay , turn west through the Huron Mountains in northern Marquette County and run west from Baraga to Ontonagon . The Huron Mountains portion of M @-@ 35 was never built due to opposition from Henry Ford and the Huron Mountain Club . This left M @-@ 35 discontinuous . It was later routed along US 41 from Negaunee to Baraga , connecting the two sections until the western section was given the M @-@ 38 designation . 
 The original routing of M @-@ 38 in the Upper Peninsula ran from M @-@ 26 at Greenland to Baraga . US 45 was rerouted in 1971 along M @-@ 26 from Rockland to Greenland and Ontonagon – Greenland Road between those two towns . M @-@ 26 was shortened to end at the new US 45 in Greenland . This change to US 45 was reversed in 1973 . M @-@ 26 was reextended to Rockland , and M @-@ 38 was extended along M @-@ 26 to Ontonagon – Greenland Road to meet US 45 in Ontonagon . 
 On October 11 , 2006 , the western terminus of M @-@ 38 was relocated about .25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) south to end at a junction with US 45 and the newly realigned M @-@ 64 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Mark Tonelli = 
 Mark Lyndon Tonelli ( born 13 April 1957 ) , whose birth name was Mark Lyndon <unk> , is an Australian former backstroke , butterfly , and freestyle swimmer of the 1970s and 1980s , who won a gold in the 4 × 100 @-@ metre medley relay at the 1980 Moscow Olympics as a makeshift butterfly swimmer in the self @-@ named Quietly Confident Quartet . Tonelli unofficially led the relay team and was an athletes ' spokesperson who fought for the right of Australian Olympians to compete in the face of a government call for a boycott to protest against the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan . 
 Tonelli took up swimming due to his asthma , and quickly came to prominence . Selected to represent Australia at the 1973 World Championships , he came sixth in the 200 m backstroke at the age of 16 . He won his first Australian titles in 1974 in the 100 m backstroke and 200 m butterfly and went on to the 1974 Commonwealth Games in Christchurch , where he won his first major international race , the 100 m backstroke , and took silver in the 200 m backstroke . In 1975 , Tonelli won his only individual medal at global level , a silver in the 200 m backstroke at the World Championships in Cali , Colombia . In 1975 , Tonelli enrolled at the University of Alabama in the United States , studying and competing in the collegiate sport system . He was selected in both backstroke events for the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal , but struggled and missed the medals in both events . During his stay in America , Tonelli set times that would have placed him among the world 's leading swimmers , but he was expelled from the 1978 Commonwealth Games team for breaches of discipline . 
 After finishing his American university career , Tonelli returned to Australia and gained selection for his second Olympics . Having cleared the political obstacles , Tonelli was given a heavy schedule of six events : both backstroke races , the 100 m freestyle and butterfly , and two relays . He made little impact in the individual events , only reaching one final . Australia lacked butterfly swimmers and Tonelli was versatile , so he swum the stroke in the medley relay . He performed above his previous record , posting a time fast enough to win silver in the corresponding individual event and helping Australia to an unexpected win . Upon returning to Australia , Tonelli retired with eleven individual Australian championships in three different strokes . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Tonelli was born Mark Lyndon <unk> into a working @-@ class family in Ipswich , a city 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) southwest of Brisbane , the capital of Queensland . His father Lyndon was a blue @-@ collar worker of Dutch origin and his Irish mother Muriel worked in the Queensland Department of Industrial Relations . Muriel was pregnant with twins , but miscarried one of the babies and gave birth only to Mark . The family moved to the northern outback mining town of Mount Isa , where Lyndon worked as a miner . There , Muriel left her husband and married Renato " Ray " Tonelli , an Italian immigrant labourer . Still a toddler , Tonelli and his stepfather left the town and returned to Brisbane . He adopted his stepfather 's surname , but did not officially change his name until he was 18 . 
 Tonelli was effectively an only child ; his half @-@ sister was not born until he was 14 . A decade later , he discovered two half @-@ sisters from his biological father 's remarriage . His family moved around frequently due to his stepfather 's work , before settling permanently in Brisbane . Tonelli 's family had no history of athletic success , and had little knowledge of swimming , but his mother encouraged him to take up the sport to ease his asthma . In his first year , Tonelli came third in his age group at Western Districts Club , prompting his mother to send him at age nine to John Keating — a swimming coach who had guided several swimmers to national selection – at the Centenary Pool in the hope that he could improve to Olympic standards . Tonelli said the reality was that he could hardly swim at all . By the age of 10 , Tonelli was regularly winning at school carnivals and at 11 , came seventh in the 100 m freestyle in his division at the Queensland Championships , before winning the event the following year . Tonelli rates his win over Stephen Holland , the future 1500 m freestyle world champion and world record holder , in a 200 m freestyle race at a schoolboys ' carnival as his favourite race . Holland was to break his first world record just a few months later . 
 Keating motivated Tonelli by showing him the best times recorded by American boys of the same age , as documented in Swimming World Magazine . Unaware that the Americans were swimming in 50 yd pools , roughly 10 % shorter than those in Australia , Tonelli could not understand his inability to match and better their times . He said that his greatest motivation was the desire to impress his parents . 
 = = National and international debut = = 
 In 1973 , at the age of 15 , Tonelli competed in his first Australian Age Championships in Hobart , winning the 100 m and 200 m freestyle , and the 200 m backstroke . These results allowed him to swim at the preliminary qualifying trials for the 1973 World Aquatics Championships , where he managed four fourth placings . However , the selectors held another set of trials just before the World Championships , which offered swimmers a final chance to gain selection . Tonelli said " Everyone , except me , knew it was a ploy simply to keep the team on its toes " . 
 Upon returning to Brisbane after the first round of trials , Tonelli tore rib cartilage while participating in judo at high school . The pain of the injury restricted him to swimming backstroke for four months , and his times steadily improved during this period under the guidance of John Rigby at the Valley Pool . At the final selection event , he came second in both the 100 m and 200 m backstroke behind Olympic gold medallist Brad Cooper to earn his international debut . At the World Championships in Belgrade , Yugoslavia , he came sixth in the 200 m backstroke behind East Germany 's Roland Matthes , who set a world record . Tonelli self @-@ deprecatingly noted that " I didn 't get to see him [ Matthes ] swim in the final , because I was in the same race five sets of <unk> behind " . 
 Tonelli won his first Australian titles in 1974 , claiming both the 100 m backstroke and 200 m butterfly ; it was his first race in the latter stroke at senior national level . He completed the victories in times of 59 @.@ 55 s and 2 m 7 @.@ 30 s respectively . Tonelli also claimed victory as part of the Queensland teams in the 4 × 200 m freestyle and the 4 × 100 m medley relays — it was the first time that Queensland had won the former race . In total , Tonelli had claimed gold medals in three different strokes at his first Australian Championships . 
 = = Commonwealth gold = = 
 Tonelli was selected for the 1974 Commonwealth Games in Christchurch , New Zealand , where he had his first medal success at international level . He won gold in the 100 m backstroke , where he won his heat comfortably before setting a Games record of 59 @.@ 65 s in the final . Tonelli was second behind Cooper in the 200 m backstroke , finishing in a time of 2 m 9 @.@ 47 s , more than three seconds in arrears . He claimed a silver in the 4 × 100 m medley relay as Australia were thwarted by Canada despite setting a national record , and was eliminated in the heats of the 200 m butterfly . 
 In 1975 , Tonelli won the 100 m backstroke , 200 m backstroke and 200 m butterfly events at the Australian Championships . Although he won more individual titles than in the previous year , his times were slower ; he completed the distances in 59 @.@ 70 s , 2 m 10 @.@ 50 s and 2 m 10 @.@ 00 s respectively . Tonelli was also part of the Queensland team that successfully defended their medley relay title . Tonelli was thus selected for the 1975 World Championships in Cali , Colombia . He qualified fastest for the 200 m backstroke final and had planned to pursue an aggressive strategy to attack from the start . However , he was advised to swim conservatively in the first half of the race by Australian coach Terry Gathercole so that his main rivals Matthes and John Naber would not be able to draft behind him in the early stages . The tactic backfired and Tonelli ended with the silver medal . He had swum faster in the second half of the race — something exceedingly rare in top @-@ level swimming and an indication of strategic error — and felt that he had too much unused energy left at the end of the race . Tonelli vowed that from then on , he would always back his judgment and race strategy . 
 = = 1976 Olympics and move to US college system = = 
 After the World Championships , Tonelli accepted a swimming scholarship from the University of Alabama to train under John <unk> , having rejected offers from Stanford and Harvard . Tonelli was almost killed before ever swimming for the university , suffering a mid @-@ air parachute malfunction during an activity with the campus skydiving club . Tonelli eventually completed a BA in Communications and Film . 
 After enrolling at Alabama , Tonelli 's parents paid for him to return home for the 1976 Australian Championships , which were the selection trials for the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal , Canada . Tonelli won the 100 m backstroke in a time of 58 @.@ 35 s but was relegated to silver in the 200 m event by Mark Kerry . Along with Kerry , Tonelli was selected for both backstroke events and the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay . 
 In Montreal , Tonelli came eighth fastest in every round of the 100 m backstroke . He came second in his heat in a time of 58 @.@ 53 s , making him the eighth of sixteen qualifiers for the semifinals . He then scraped into the 100 m final as the slowest qualifier — 0 @.@ 01 s ahead of fellow Australian Glenn Patching — after finishing fourth in his semifinal in a time of 58 @.@ 14 s . He came eighth in the final in a time of 58 @.@ 42 s and did not threaten the medals ; Naber of the United States won in a time of 55 @.@ 49 s . As Kerry outpaced Tonelli to finish seventh in the event , he was selected ahead of Tonelli for the backstroke leg in the 4 × 100 m medley relay . 
 In the 200 m event , Tonelli came second in his heat to qualify sixth fastest for the final . There he came fourth and missed the medals — which were swept by the Americans — by 1 @.@ 82 s . He was 3 @.@ 98 s behind Naber , who broke the world record and became the first person to break two minutes for the event . Australia struggled in the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay , eliminated in the preliminary round after finishing third in their heat , and ninth overall . Tonelli swam the second leg in a time of 1 m 55 @.@ 94 s . 
 Tonelli returned to Alabama after the Olympics and intensified his training regimen , He recalled that " The coach really supplied me with the environment to improve . I got used to pressure . You had to stand up and race in dual meets almost every other weekend , no matter how you felt . In Australia you are lucky if you get two top meets a year . " In 1977 , he won the 100 m backstroke at the US Open Championships at Mission Viejo , becoming one of the few Australians to win a US title . 
 = = Expelled from Australian team = = 
 Tonelli continued in the United States in 1978 , recollecting " I really hit my straps " , reporting that he had swum world records in time trials at training . Because he was in the United States , he was allowed to qualify for the 1978 Commonwealth Games in Edmonton , Canada by swimming fast times in events in North America . Tonelli raced in five events at the Canada Cup held in Edmonton , winning four . During a drunken party after the competition , Tonelli and some fellow swimmers decided to steal three giant flags from poles in the city centre : those of Canada , the City of Edmonton , and Alberta . In the process , Tonelli fell off the staff and was hospitalised , his arm put in plaster . 
 He returned to Mission Viejo and continued his build @-@ up despite his arm injury , before flying to the Australian training camp in Hawaii , where he was made team captain . However , his international career appeared to be in disarray when along with teammates Kerry and Joe Dixon , he was expelled from the team for breaking a curfew on the American Independence Day holiday . Tonelli also admitted to the officials that he had smoked marijuana and been drinking on the night . In the aftermath of the incident , Tonelli appeared on Australian television , strongly denying rumours that he had been involved in a drug @-@ fuelled orgy with teammates . He admitted to smoking marijuana , but defended his actions as being legal under Hawaii law . Supporters in Australia — including future Prime Minister Bob Hawke — launched a petition for the reinstatement of the trio . They gathered thousands of signatures to no avail . 
 Tonelli returned to the United States , while his compatriots competed for Australia . In the meantime , Tonelli again won the 100 m backstroke title at the US Nationals in a time two seconds faster than Patching 's Commonwealth gold @-@ winning effort . He said that his career was " never the same again " after his expulsion by a " kangaroo court " , feeling that the punishment had weakened his will . Tonelli predicted that he could have won eight Commonwealth Games gold medals and possibly set a world record in the 200 m backstroke if he had not been expelled . 
 = = 1980 Summer Olympics = = 
 In 1979 Tonelli failed to defend his US title in the 100 m backstroke , but managed third in the event at the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) Championships in his final year of university . In his four years at Alabama , he was an eight @-@ time All @-@ American in the 100 m and 200 m backstroke . His triumph at the NCAA Championships came amid the backdrop of a teammate 's death in a waterskiing accident during a social event with a group of fellow swimmers . Tonelli was driving the powerboat when he did a U @-@ turn that resulted in his teammate being thrown off his skis and into the water . The boat 's propellor then struck the man , who died due to severe cuts and blood loss . 
 Tonelli graduated , returned to Australia , and won the 100 m freestyle , butterfly and backstroke events at the 1979 Australian Championships . The following year , he repeated the freestyle and butterfly victories in times of 51 @.@ 80 s and 56 @.@ 64 s to gain selection for the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow ; he was also chosen for the 100 m and 200 m backstroke after finishing second to Kerry . However , another obstacle arose with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan , which resulted in a boycott of the Games by a large part of the Western world , led by the United States . The Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser was also the patron of the Australian Olympic Committee , and significant political pressure came to bear on the athletes to boycott the Games . Tonelli however , knew that only the sportspeople would suffer from a boycott and that trade relations would continue unabated . He took a leadership role among the Australian athletes to fight for their right to compete . According to women 's captain Lisa Forrest , Tonelli adopted populist tactics in championing the athletes ' cause . He said that Fraser was sending " wheat to feed the Russian army , wool to clothe the army and Australian metal to make Russian guns " , saying that this contradicted the proposed boycott in protest against Soviet military policy . Tonelli 's anti @-@ authoritarian and individualistic style manifested itself during media appearances , including a news interview in which he debated with Reverend Lance Shilton , who had referred to the athletes as traitors . Shilton expressed sympathy to the athletes , which Tonelli interpreted as condescension . Unaware that the camera was broadcasting images of him , Tonelli responded by rolling his eyes and twirling his finger , a gaffe that was shown on national television . Forrest said that " the damage was done — one of our most prominent anti @-@ boycott lobbyists ... looked like a smart alec " . 
 Tonelli arrived in Moscow facing a heavy schedule : he was nominated in the 100 m freestyle , backstroke and butterfly , the 200 m backstroke and the 4 × 100 m medley and the 4 × 200 m freestyle relays . Tonelli came third in his heat of the 100 m freestyle to qualify fourth with a time of 52 @.@ 04 s . However , he swam slower in coming fifth in his semifinal in a time of 52 @.@ 17 s to miss the final by 0 @.@ 26 s . Overall , he was ranked 10th , but if he repeated his Australian record of 51 @.@ 80 set at the selection trials , he would have come sixth . 
 Tonelli had another let @-@ down in the 100 m backstroke . He won his heat — which was relatively slow — in a time of 58 @.@ 66 s , and scraped into the semifinals as the second slowest of 16 qualifiers . He then came second in his semifinal in a time of 57 @.@ 89 s to qualify third fastest , before again swimming slower in the final and finishing seventh in a time of 57 @.@ 98 s . However , the event was closely contested ; only 0 @.@ 18 s separated third and ninth places in the semifinal and there was only 0 @.@ 35 s between bronze and seventh in the final . 
 Tonelli rued his individual performances in Moscow : " I fell apart . I had swum only one big race in the past twelve months and lacked the competitive edge . " He came third in his heat of the 200 m backstroke in a time of 2 m 7 @.@ 04 s , four seconds slower than his effort in the previous Olympics . This placed him in fifteenth position , more than two seconds from qualification for the final . Tonelli then withdrew from the 100 m butterfly to concentrate on the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay . He combined with Kerry , Graeme Brewer and Ron McKeon as Australia qualified fourth before coming seventh . Tonelli swam the second leg in the final after leading off in the heats . The Australians were third after the first leg , which was swum by Brewer , the bronze medallist in the corresponding individual event . However , Tonelli split 1 m 53 @.@ 47 s , the fifth slowest time among the 32 swimmers , resulting in Australia falling back to seventh place by the end of his leg . Kerry and McKeon could not overtake any swimmers in the last two legs and Australia ended the race in seventh place , 1 @.@ 52 s outside the medals . Tonelli was disappointed with the relay result , feeling that the Australians — who came into the race ranked second in the world in the event — were too casual before the race , incorrectly believing that four fast legs from four fast swimmers would yield the desired result . 
 = = = Relay gold = = = 
 The 4 × 100 m medley relay was the focal point of Tonelli 's Moscow campaign . The event had always been won by the United States since its inception at the Olympics at the 1960 Games , and their boycott had opened up the field . Australia 's best result had come in the inaugural race , when it out @-@ touched Japan to claim silver . The only other time that it had won a medal was in 1964 , taking bronze , and the previous outing in 1976 had seen Australia eliminated in the heats . Australia was regarded as a chance of a medal , but were not seen as the main threats , with Sweden , Great Britain and the Soviet Union the most heavily fancied teams . The hosts ' team included the silver medallists in the 100 m backstroke and breaststroke , and their butterflyer had come fifth ; their freestyler would come fourth in his event . The British boasted Duncan Goodhew , the breaststroke gold medallist , while Sweden 's butterflyer and backstroker had won their respective events and their freestyle swimmer would come second in the 100 m . On paper , Australia 's team paled in comparison . Neil Brooks , the freestyler , would come fourteenth in the corresponding individual event after having an asthma attack , while Peter Evans was the only individual medallist in the distance , claiming bronze in the 100 m breaststroke . Kerry had been eliminated in the backstroke semifinals , while Tonelli was swimming as a makeshift butterflyer . Adding to the pressure was the fact that Australia won no gold medals at the 1976 Olympics in any sport , so the public were still awaiting their first victory since the 1972 Games in Munich . Coming into the Olympics , Australia were ranked seventh out of the thirteen competing countries . 
 Australia 's prospects improved after Sweden was disqualified in the morning heats . Tonelli , the eldest swimmer in the quartet at the age of 23 , convened the team as its de facto leader . He asked his teammates to commit to swimming their legs in a certain time ; Kerry vowed to complete the backstroke in 57 s , Evans the breaststroke in 63 s flat , Tonelli the butterfly in 54 s and Brooks promised to anchor the team in 49 @.@ 8 s , even though he had never gone faster than 51 s . Tonelli named the foursome the Quietly Confident Quartet , and they exhibited a calm self @-@ belief as they lined up for the race . 
 Kerry led off in a faster time than he had clocked in the individual event , but it was still two seconds slower than his personal best time of 57 @.@ 87 s . This left Australia in fourth place at the end of the first leg . Evans then swam a personal best of 63 @.@ 01 s , leaving Australia almost level with the host nation at the halfway mark . Tonelli then swam the butterfly leg in 54 @.@ 94 s , almost two seconds faster his previous best over the distance . He did so with an uneven arm technique due to the unequal strength in his arms . Tonelli 's butterfly leg would have been good enough for a silver medal if he had replicated it in the individual event . He began to lose ground in the last 50 m and was a bodylength behind until a late surge brought him to within a metre of his Soviet opponent by the end of his leg . Brooks then executed a powerful , well @-@ timed dive and surfaced almost even with his Soviet counterpart . By the 50 m mark , he had drawn level and made a superior turn to take the lead . The Soviet freestyler pulled level at the 25 m mark before Brooks sprinted away again to seal an Australian victory by 0 @.@ 22 s . He had finished his leg in 49 @.@ 86 s as he had vowed to his teammates . The time of 3 m 45 @.@ 70 s sealed Australia 's first ever win in a medley relay at the Olympics , for men or women . After the win , Tonelli said " I was totally stunned . After all the hassle , and my being the athletes ' mouthpiece , we 'd come through and done it . " In 2000 , Tonelli and the other members of the quartet were each awarded the Australian Sports Medal for their victory in Moscow . 
 Relations between the Olympians and the Australian Government remained tense after months of political struggle regarding the boycott . The quartet did not receive the customary congratulations from Fraser , who initially resisted complaints the next day from the media and government members at his failure to applaud the Australian victory . In a radio interview , he said " I hope that circumstances do not arise over the next few years which will cause them to have very great regrets about the fact that they 've gone " . Fraser relented and late in the night , his office sent a telegram indirectly , through the Australian Embassy in Moscow . Fraser had ordered the Australian diplomatic mission to shun the Olympians , so the embassy staff had to pass the envelopes containing the message through the Olympic Village fence . Fraser 's telegram said : " You know I did not and do not approve of Australia being represented at these Olympic Games . I do want to say however that your performance in the relay was a truly great sporting achievement . My personal congratulations . " The swimmers tore up the message . 
 Tonelli retired after the Games . His aquatic success was not derived from any physical advantage , as he was relatively small for a swimmer . He was only 185 cm tall and weighed 70 kg , with relatively small hands and feet . Tonelli felt that his success was based around his ability to make fast starts from the blocks , and attributed his success to his mental approach and his ability to convert his energy into a fast swim in under one minute . He had a deliberate strategy of making himself nervous before the race , feeling that he thrived on pressure . 
 = = After the 1980 Olympics = = 
 After retiring from competition , Tonelli did television commentary for the 1984 and 1988 Olympics in Los Angeles and Seoul respectively . Since 2004 , he has been a swimming commentator on Sky News Australia . Outside swimming , he worked at a spastic centre for children in Brisbane in the 1980s before opening his own swimming school . He also completed a series for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation on their Lifestyle TV program and produced movies on swimming and child development . Tonelli later set up his own computing business , which he ran for three years . He also served as a sports administrator , completing a term on the Australian Sports Commission in its early years in the 1980s . One policy that he proposed was the creation of an athletes ' appeal tribunal similar to the Court of Arbitration for Sport so that " officials are now held accountable for their actions " . He cited his expulsion from the Australian team as his motivation for having an appeals mechanism . As of 2007 , Tonelli was working as a real estate agent and corporate speaker . He married his wife Lee in the late 1990s . 
 = The Secret Service = 
 The Secret Service is a British children 's espionage television series , filmed by Century 21 for ITC Entertainment and broadcast on Associated Television , Granada Television and Southern Television in 1969 . Created by Gerry and Sylvia Anderson , and produced by David Lane and Reg Hill , it was the eighth and last Century 21 production to feature – in a manner similar to Thunderbirds and other earlier series – marionette puppet characters as part of a filming technique known as " Supermarionation " . Under the direction of Gerry Anderson , who wanted to increase the realism of the Supermarionation format , The Secret Service incorporates footage of live actors for long @-@ distance shots . Following The Secret Service , Anderson would not work with puppets again until the 1980s , when he produced Terrahawks in " Supermacromation " . 
 The series follows the adventures of Father Stanley Unwin , a character both voiced by and resembling the real @-@ life comedian of the same name . Outwardly the parish priest of a rural English village , Unwin is in fact a secret agent for BISHOP , a covert branch of British Intelligence that counters criminal and terrorist threats from abroad . Aided by junior operative Matthew Harding , the Father answers to his London @-@ based superior , " The Bishop " . Whenever they must gather intelligence in a hostile situation , Unwin and Matthew deploy the " Minimiser " – a gadget capable of shrinking people and objects to a fraction of their normal size – to carry out secret reconnaissance . A form of gobbledegook of Unwin 's devising is used to confuse and distract enemies when required . 
 Filming commenced at Century 21 Studios in Slough and on location in August 1968 . Production was cancelled in December when Lew Grade , the Andersons ' financial backer , responded poorly to a test screening of the pilot episode , fearing that successful distribution in the United States would be impossible with the inclusion of the nonsensical " Unwinese " dialogue . Filming concluded in January 1969 with the completion of the thirteenth episode . Critical reception to The Secret Service remains mixed : when compared to the Andersons ' previous series , verdicts range from " the forgotten gem " to " the one flop " . Commentators have questioned the wisdom of hiring Unwin as a voice actor , suggesting that the potential for comedy provided by his Unwinese is too weak to sustain interest ; however , the writing of the supporting characters has been praised . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Secret Service follows the adventures of Father Stanley Unwin , the parish priest of a rural English village . Affecting the appearance of an eccentric middle @-@ aged vicar , Unwin moonlights as a secret agent for BISHOP ( an acronym of " British Intelligence Service Headquarters , Operation Priest " ) , a top @-@ secret division of British Intelligence based in Whitehall . Answering to his superior , " The Bishop " , Unwin is stationed at his vicarage with Matthew Harding – another agent who , when not assisting the Father on missions , adopts the manner of a simple gardener . Supporting characters include Blake , a junior BISHOP operative , and Mrs Appleby , the Father 's ageing housekeeper , who is unaware of Unwin and Harding 's involvement with British Intelligence . 
 Prior to the events of the series , the pioneering scientist Professor Humbert invented the Minimiser , a device capable of shrinking people or objects to one third of their original size . After Humbert 's death , it was passed down to Father Unwin , who conceals his deceased parishioner 's parting gift inside a copy of Milner 's Gallery of Nature . The regular focus of the Minimiser is Harding , whom Unwin reduces to a height of two feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) to enable him to infiltrate situations to which no ordinary @-@ sized person could make a discreet entry . In this manner , the Harding puppet interacts with life @-@ sized sets and live actors whose faces are excluded from shots . The Minimiser is also used to shrink enemy agents , literally bringing them down to Harding 's size . 
 While miniaturised , Harding is transported in Unwin 's specially @-@ adapted briefcase , which is fitted with equipment such as a periscope , stores other gadgets as and when required , and can open from the inside . Unwin 's hearing aid is in fact a transceiver that enables him to communicate covertly with Harding , who wears a corresponding unit . The Father 's preferred means of transport is Gabriel , a repainted and revamped 1917 @-@ issue Ford Model T that can travel at speeds in excess of 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) . When enemies , police or other authorities challenge Unwin , the Father spouts a form of nonsensical gobbledegook as a smokescreen to confuse the opposition and cover for Matthew . 
 The Secret Service represents a departure from most earlier Supermarionation television series on account of its contemporary , late @-@ 1960s setting . The events of the episodes " Errand of Mercy " and " The Deadly Whisper " are set on 3 February and 24 May 1969 , respectively . The earlier series Supercar is set between 1960 and 1962 . However , Simon Archer and Marcus Hearn , writers of The Complete Gerry Anderson : the Authorised Episode Guide , argue that the setting is ambiguous : although they suggest it to be " sometime in the near future " , they also observe that " Morris Minors negotiate leafy country roads while space @-@ age <unk> patrol the skies " and conclude that the series is so fantastic that it " isn 't set in the real world at all . " 
 = = = Episodes = = = 
 = = Production = = 
 With the completion of Joe 90 , which commenced transmission on ATV in September 1968 , Gerry Anderson decided to produce another espionage television series . This would incorporate the plot device of a rural English village as the base of operations for the star secret agent , the local parish priest . Anderson selected Stanley Unwin to voice the lead character , which would be named after him , after encountering the comedian at Pinewood Studios as he completed dubbing work for the 1968 film Chitty Chitty Bang Bang . 
 In the 1940s and 50s , Unwin had developed " Unwinese " , a nonsense language that distorted words and phrases into a form of gibberish that sounded unintelligible but which in fact retained some fragments of meaning . Recalling Unwin 's radio and television performances , Anderson thought that the self @-@ made language would suit the character of an eccentric undercover operative , and could produce humour if demonstrated to have a confusing effect on enemies . He elaborated , " As far as I was concerned , Stanley came first and then the idea had to accommodate him . It wasn 't that the story called for someone who could speak gobbledegook , it was a question of how we could fit him into the storyline . " 
 Due to the strange nature of the language , the Century 21 writers would brief Unwin on episode plots and then leave space in their scripts for the actor to draft all the Unwinese dialogue himself . Shane Rimmer , who scripted the episode " Hole in One " , remarked that " A lot of [ the Unwinese ] you had to leave to [ Unwin ] . You gave him a line of patter that 's going to work with what he does . Because he was such a bizarre character , you felt you could really go all the way with him : you could practically do anything . " 
 The premise of The Secret Service drew part of its inspiration from the Joe 90 episode " The Unorthodox Shepherd " , which features the character of an aged , deaf vicar who covers up a money counterfeiting operation on his church grounds . Archer and Hearn comment on the wider influence of Joe 90 on its successor series , stating that The Secret Service " continues the espionage theme of Joe 90 in a range of adventures that depict a Britain under siege from despicable foreign agents intent on stealing its secrets . " 
 = = = Puppets = = = 
 Following Joe 90 , Anderson had originally intended to discontinue the use of Supermarionation puppets altogether . However , due to the higher prospective production costs of filming a new series completely in live action , he decided to compromise between the advantages of both options and mix the two formats . On the nature of the puppets , which had incorporated natural human anatomical proportions since Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons , Anderson stated that a progression in sculpting techniques had resulted in " imitations of human beings " that rendered his series " like live @-@ action shows but with unconvincing actors " . 
 Recording live actors for long shots solved a problem that all previous Supermarionation productions had entailed : that of inducing realistic movement from puppet characters . Century 21 had experimented with filming special effects in live settings for its 1968 film , Thunderbird 6 . " The Unorthodox Shepherd " had incorporated similar filming techniques : a church at Harefield in Buckinghamshire had doubled as the principal setting , the villain represented on location footage by a full @-@ size mannequin based on a Supermarionation puppet . La Rivière notes the contrast between the mixing of formats for The Secret Service and the procedure adopted for earlier Supermarionation series , which had only used live @-@ action shots for situations such as the operation of machines ( for which a brief shot of a living hand would often be inserted ) . 
 New puppets created for The Secret Service were limited to the characters of Father Unwin ( which sculptor Mary Turner based on the likeness of Stanley Unwin ) , his ageing housekeeper Mrs Appleby ( which Christine Glanville based on the appearance of her mother ) and The Bishop . Other characters were portrayed by " revamp puppets " that appeared in the earlier Anderson series Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons and Joe 90 . For example , the Harding puppet made its first appearance in the Captain Scarlet episode " Treble Cross " , while the Captain Scarlet marionette itself starred as Blake . La Rivière refers to the Unwin puppet in particular as " one of the most impressive artistic feats " produced at the Century 21 puppet workshop , describing the accuracy of the likeness as " uncanny " . 
 = = = Voice cast = = = 
 With the exception of Unwin , all voice actors cast for The Secret Service had contributed to earlier Supermarionation series . The Secret Service featured the voices of : 
 Stanley Unwin as Father Stanley Unwin ( aged 57 ) , a parish priest based in rural England who carries out top @-@ secret missions for BISHOP ( British Intelligence Service Headquarters , Operation Priest ) . Due to the realism of the costume that he wore for live @-@ action location filming , members of the public would often confuse Unwin for a real vicar during production on The Secret Service . While driving home from one shooting session in costume , he once found himself " held up because the driver in front had stalled his caravan . Seeing my clerical garb he said : ' So sorry , Father . I 'm in trouble . ' " 
 Gary Files as Matthew Harding ( aged 28 ) , a BISHOP agent paired with Unwin , who serves as his accomplice on assignment and as gardener of the vicarage in public life . Files retained fond memories of his time on The Secret Service , stating that he enjoyed voicing the character of Harding more than the character of Captain Magenta on Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons . He made significant contributions to Harding 's characterisation , conceiving the rural accent of Unwin 's assistant himself : " It just seemed so right for the character . Then once I had the voice , the rest of Matthew followed . " 
 Sylvia Anderson as Mrs Appleby ( aged 55 ) , the housekeeper of Unwin 's vicarage , who remains ignorant of Unwin and Harding 's secret double life . 
 Jeremy Wilkin as The Bishop ( aged 52 ) , a high @-@ ranking figure in British Intelligence , director of BISHOP and superior to Unwin , based in Whitehall . 
 Keith Alexander as Agent Blake , a cautious junior agent of BISHOP , who has speaking roles in three episodes ( " A Question of Miracles " , " Last Train to Bufflers Halt " and " The Cure " ) . 
 Supporting character voices were provided by all the regular cast ( with the exception of Unwin ) in addition to David Healy and ( for the final two episodes , " May @-@ Day , May @-@ Day ! " and " More Haste Less Speed " ) David Graham . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming commenced on 20 August 1968 after a summer of pre @-@ production . Director Ken Turner , who headed the location unit , recalled that The Secret Service became a complex series to shoot because it incorporated three design elements ( studio puppet filming , studio special effects filming and live @-@ action location filming ) . In a reversal to the practice used on earlier Supermarionation productions , location filming needed to be completed first before work could start at the Century 21 Studios . Turner elaborated , " We felt that somebody had to take the location stuff by the balls , get it shot and then hand it over to the director to fit his puppet stuff in . I suppose that seemed a bit back to front but with that programme it was what worked out best . " 
 On the complications that emerged from filming , producer David Lane remembered his experience on the series as " an absolute nightmare " due to the various scales used : " You can imagine the problems . You 're shrinking [ the Matthew Harding puppet ] to puppet size on a puppet set and then you 're having to build it in live @-@ action size for the puppet because he 's supposed to be a small man in a full @-@ sized environment . And then you 're using the ' shrunken ' puppet in a full set . " 
 Locations used in filming included a manor house at Burnham in Buckinghamshire , which doubled as Unwin 's residence . Centre Point , a tower building located on Oxford Street in London , appeared as British Intelligence Headquarters , while Horse Guards Parade in Whitehall represented the base of BISHOP . The hospital at which Unwin visits Brother Gregory in the episode " School for Spies " was in fact <unk> Park Hospital in Slough . The exterior of Century 21 Studios themselves , located on the Slough Trading Estate , appeared as the Healey Automation plant in the pilot episode , " A Case for the Bishop " . 
 Due to the 1960s setting of The Secret Service , Derek Meddings and the technicians of the special effects department received few commissions for scale models of vehicles that appeared futuristic . This left Unwin 's vintage Ford Model T , Gabriel , as their main project , in addition to rendering vehicles and settings common to the decade in miniature and producing the optical enlargement and miniaturisation effects for the character of Harding . Wag Evans manufactured a full @-@ size and two miniature versions ( the last of differing scales ) of Gabriel , fitting the larger car with belt @-@ driven electric motors , a folding roof , upholstered interior , and a remote control mechanism . 
 Evans remembered that the location filming involving Gabriel , conducted in and around Burnham Beeches in Buckinghamshire in the autumn of 1968 , proved to be arduous due to the low levels of light . On occasion , just two minutes of new footage would be recorded at each session . On the subject of the remote @-@ control steering , he stated , " I remember standing out of shot and having to ' drive ' [ Gabriel ] down the road while it was out of view . Often I didn 't know where it was , or where and when it had stopped . " A location unit member would be on hand to stop the car with a large cushion if it went out of control . 
 Shooting locations included Horse Guards Parade and Centre Point in London ( left and centre ) and at Burnham Beeches in Buckinghamshire ( right ) . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Composer Barry Gray 's opening theme music , his first Supermarionation contribution since Stingray to include vocal cues , is a chant incorporating church organ and percussion accompaniment . Imitating the nuances of Bach , Gray developed his initial concept into a three @-@ part fugue . He initially approached the Swingle Singers to provide the chant , but the fee demanded would have placed considerable strain on the music budget . Seeking out an alternative , Gray hired the Mike Sammes Singers , who had provided vocals for the Supercar theme and produced an impression of the Swingle Singers ' tones under his direction . Archer and Hearn cite the opening and closing theme music , recorded in a four @-@ hour studio session on 16 October 1968 , as " a glorious piece of choral lunacy " . 
 Both the opening and ending credits sequences incorporate shots of St Michael and All Angels Church in Hughenden Valley , Buckinghamshire , which doubles as the parish church of Father Unwin . In the opening sequence , a zoom shot establishes a backdrop of fields while the series title slowly fills the screen in a motion that draws inspiration from traditional images of angels descending from Heaven . 
 Further to the titles , Gray recorded incidental music for individual episodes in three additional four @-@ hour sessions . < <unk> name = " <unk> " / > For the first , held at the Olympic Studios in London on 12 November 1968 , an orchestra of 29 musicians played tracks to feature in the pilot episode , " A Case for the Bishop " . Recording for " A Question of Miracles " ran on 11 December , at Gray 's private studios and with eight musicians . The only other episodes to have original scores are " The Feathered Spies " and " Last Train To Bufflers Halt , " with the remaining episodes tracked with the four original scores and previously recorded music for other Anderson series , particularly Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons and Joe 90 ( " A Question of Miracles , " although having an original score , also used cues recorded for " A Case for the Bishop " and " The Feathered Spies " ) . The final session wrapped up the soundtrack on 10 January 1969 . 
 Due to the series ' cancellation , the soundtrack has received no commercial releases , although since 2007 it has been available on CD exclusively for members of Fanderson , the official Gerry Anderson appreciation society . 
 = = = Cancellation = = = 
 Lew Grade , the ITC Entertainment financier , ordered Anderson to cancel production on The Secret Service during a test screening of the pilot episode , " A Case for the Bishop " , in December 1968 . Objecting to the concept on the grounds that audiences in the United States would be confused by the Unwinese , Grade capped the production at the thirteen episodes that either had been completed or were in production at the time of the screening . Anderson countered that a nonsense language such as Unwinese is inherently incomprehensible , and questioned Grade 's reasoning for the cancellation , responding that " I chose Stanley Unwin because you are not supposed to understand Stanley Unwin , even if you 're British . I thought if the Americans don 't understand him either , what 's the difference ? " 
 However , Anderson conceded that Grade " was not a man you could argue with . If he said " No " , you had to accept that he wouldn 't change his mind . " Of Grade 's decision , La Rivière conjectures , " No one knows what was running through [ his ] mind ... but given the ease with which the ' Unwinese ' element could have been removed the series , it seems probable that he simply didn 't like a lot of what he was seeing . " In a move that would lead to the discontinuation of the Supermarionation format , Anderson and Grade coordinated to transfer most of the production staff from the Century 21 base at the Slough Trading Estate in Berkshire to Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire for the commencement of filming on UFO , the Andersons ' first full live @-@ action series . 
 Having wanted to abandon puppet work and move into live @-@ action , Anderson greeted the cancellation of The Secret Service with optimism , remarking of live actors , " I started to think : ' It 's amazing ! They speak ! Their mouths are in synch with their words ! And they can walk ! And they can pick up things ! ' " After the Century 21 Studios closed down on 24 January 1969 on completion of the final episode of The Secret Service , " More Haste Less Speed " , the special effects department expanded its workshops into the disused rooms in anticipation of new projects for UFO . 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 In the UK , The Secret Service aired only in the ATV , Granada and Southern broadcasting regions on its original run , appearing on Sunday afternoons on ATV at the regular time of 5 @.@ 30 pm . In most other ITV regions , The <unk> Boys was broadcast in this time slot . Although repeats ran until 1972 on ATV and Southern , and until 1975 on Granada , the series has not been transmitted since and remains unsold to new broadcasters , although ATN Channel 7 purchased and broadcast the series in Australia on Saturday mornings in 1972 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception of The Secret Service has been mostly negative . Gerry Anderson , however , has said that it is his favourite of all the series that he has produced . Leo Eaton , who directed four episodes , has referred to The Secret Service as " just a bit weird " and questioned the effectiveness of Unwin 's humour . Production manager Desmond Saunders ' verdict was " strange . I suppose it was the gobbledegook and the mixture of live action with puppets . It never seemed to me to be a very good idea . " Simon Wickes , in discussing the production of the series on the website <unk> , judges the premise " very strange " and suggests that The Secret Service was made first and foremost to bridge the Andersons ' Supermarionation series and their subsequent efforts in live action . Kif Bowden @-@ Smith of the <unk> website concurs with this latter point , describing the mix of puppetry and live action as " an experimental format for the following live @-@ action series " . 
 Simon Archer and Marcus Hearn , authors of What Made Thunderbirds Go ! The Authorised Biography of Gerry Anderson ( 2002 ) register a divergence from earlier Supermarionation productions stemming from The Secret Service being less " American @-@ orientated " and comprising fewer action sequences . They consider it the " most eccentric " of all the Supermarionation series up to 1969 , and the fusion of puppets and live actors the " natural conclusion " to the filming technique . The writers bestow particular praise on the characterisation of Mrs Appleby , whose ignorance of Unwin and Harding 's involvement with British Intelligence adds to the comedy : for example , when Father Unwin speaks into his communications device that is disguised as a hearing aid , the housekeeper thinks that the apparently senile vicar is muttering to himself . The episodes " A Question of Miracles " , in which the miniaturised Matthew is dwarfed by articles of food and drink from a picnic basket , and " Last Train to Bufflers Halt " , whose plot concerns an unstoppable runaway train , are also well received . Stephen La Rivière , author of Filmed in Supermarionation : A History of the Future , favours " More Haste Less Speed " : describing the series finale as " wonderfully quirky " and " glorious " , he sees the counterfeiting plot as being reminiscent of the " gentler , earlier days of Supercar " , also praising Keith Alexander for his voice acting of the part of the elderly Lady <unk> . 
 However , in his evaluation of The Secret Service as a whole , La Rivière argues that the premise of a secret agent masquerading as a priest while driving an antiquated car could not have appealed much to children , and that older viewers would have been disappointed with the series ' unoriginal " traditional espionage format " . Ian Fryer concurs , writing in FAB magazine that " very little about The Secret Service has obvious appeal to the traditionally young Supermarionation audience . " Discussing the opening theme music , he remarks that " the younger me would have run a mile from any series which sounded like that . " He also notes that the opening credits " broke with the tradition of having a thrilling or suspenseful promise of what was to come , and made the series look suspiciously like it might be about the life and work of an elderly vicar . " For La Rivière , the blending of puppetry and live action " simply doesn 't work . It requires more than the audience can give in terms of acceptance . " In the case of " More Haste Less Speed " , he points out that the character of Lady <unk> is portrayed in live @-@ action distance shots by a stunt actor dressed in drag – an " unintentionally hilarious moment that illustrates beautifully why the live @-@ action inserts didn 't work . " He further argues that the contrasting light levels of shots that alternate between one format and the other shatter the illusion of " artificiality " that previous series had been able to sustain in the absence of live action . 
 La Rivière also cites external influences that , in his view , did not work in favour of The Secret Service . He expounds the continuing popularity of earlier Supermarionation productions as far back as The Adventures of <unk> ( 1959 ) and the frequent repeat runs that they had on ATV throughout the 1960s : " ... as with anything that is phenomenally popular , the time must come when the audience is satiated and drifts away to something else . " Fryer suggests that the espionage theme may not have been attractive to potential foreign buyers , noting that the American spy series The Man from U.N.C.L.E. had been cancelled in 1968 and that the last episode of The Avengers had aired in the UK the following year . Fryer considers the " making a spy series just when the fad for the genre was waning " the biggest problem that faced The Secret Service in finding an audience . On the other hand , it is argued that , in light of the release of Century 21 's Doppelgänger ( 1969 ) , a live @-@ action film that preceded UFO , the Supermarionation format had become outdated . Archer and Hearn express similar concerns about expectations for a new Supermarionation series in 1969 , writing that Anderson and his colleagues had become " a bit too successful " in producing a winning format . 
 Science @-@ fiction author John Peel , in his episode guide to the Supermarionation productions , labels The Secret Service " dismal " , describing the combination of puppetry and live action as " completely pointless " and Unwin 's recruitment not only " bizarre in the extreme " but also ill @-@ considered , in his opinion that Unwinese " was hardly funny to most people ( let alone children ) . " Addressing Lew Grade 's concerns that American audiences would have been left baffled by Unwin 's mannerisms , he argues that the character was equally incomprehensible to UK viewers . As with La Rivière , Peel considers the central premise uninspired , writing that the Minimiser was the " single gimmick " of the series , which as a whole " marked the death knell of Supermarionation . " It is his opinion that every Supermarionation series after Thunderbirds " had made one mistake after another " , such that " From the heights of Thunderbirds , the Anderson team had slipped to the depths with The Secret Service . 
 Writers Chris Drake and Graeme Bassett put it that " On paper , at least , the premise seemed irresistible " , yet view the blending of puppetry and live action as " uneasy " . Prior to his death in 2002 , Unwin himself praised the off @-@ beat nature of The Secret Service , defending the inclusion of elements such as Unwinese dialogue as " an attempt to add a new dimension to the puppet field ... It was a bit bizarre , but then aren 't many new ideas a little odd at first ? " On the subject of the cancellation , he commented that the series was possibly " a little bit before its time " . Contrary to Peel and La Rivière , John Walsh of The Guardian challenges the idea that the gobbledegook devalued the series , arguing that " British audiences quite like not understanding things . " 
 In an episode review published in the Andersonic fanzine , Paul O 'Brien writes that the <unk> plot of " Recall to Service " is " an obvious allegory about the hazards of complete automation " , suggesting that the depiction of a military super @-@ weapon gone rogue imitates episodes of previous Supermarionation series in its subtext , which warns of the dangers of over @-@ reliance on technology . The vital plot development of the episode occurs , according to O 'Brien , when the character of Matthew returns the <unk> to manual control : " in other words , the machinery is now subordinate to its creator once again , as it should stay . " O 'Brien is critical of the limitations of the puppet cast , arguing that the recurring absence of female characters makes Unwin and Harding members of an " all @-@ male club " and that the one regular character of the opposite sex , Mrs Appleby , " contributes precisely nil to the plot . " 
 Exploring cultural influences , historian Nicholas J. Cull describes The Secret Service as an " idiosyncratically British product " and , in reference to BISHOP , writes that the series honours " the 1960s vogue for stories set in secret organisations with extravagant acronyms . " He points out inferences to the Cold War , noting that the spy <unk> in " The Cure " is Russian and concluding that The Secret Service is one of several Century 21 series that " unashamedly capitalised on the Cold War cult of the secret agent whose skills defend the home from enemies unknown . " He labels The Secret Service overall as the Andersons ' " one flop " . 
 = = Other media = = 
 In 1969 , author John William Jennison wrote two original novels based on the series – The Destroyer and The VIP – under the pseudonym " John Theydon " . 
 A & E Home Video released the series as a two @-@ disc Region 1 DVD box set on 30 December 2003 with digitally remastered picture and sound quality . Special features include an audio commentary by producer David Lane for the pilot episode , " A Case for the Bishop " . 
 Network DVD followed with a Region 2 release on 20 June 2005 . Bonus material includes audio commentaries from creator Gerry Anderson and PDF transfers of original script documents . The AllMovie website awards a feature rating of three and a half stars out of five . 
 = Superb fairywren = 
 The superb fairy @-@ wren ( Malurus cyaneus ) , also known as the superb blue @-@ wren or colloquially as the blue wren , is a passerine bird of the family Maluridae , common and familiar across southeastern Australia . The species is sedentary and territorial , also exhibiting a high degree of sexual dimorphism ; the male in breeding plumage has a striking bright blue forehead , ear coverts , mantle , and tail , with a black mask and black or dark blue throat . Non @-@ breeding males , females and juveniles are predominantly grey @-@ brown in colour ; this gave the early impression that males were polygamous , as all dull @-@ coloured birds were taken for females . Six subspecies groups are recognized : three larger and darker forms from Tasmania , Flinders and King Island respectively , and three smaller and paler forms from mainland Australia and Kangaroo Island . 
 Like other fairy @-@ wrens , the superb fairy @-@ wren is notable for several peculiar behavioural characteristics ; the birds are socially monogamous and sexually promiscuous , meaning that although they form pairs between one male and one female , each partner will mate with other individuals and even assist in raising the young from such pairings . Male wrens pluck yellow petals and display them to females as part of a courtship display . 
 The superb fairy @-@ wren can be found in almost any area that has at least a little dense undergrowth for shelter , including grasslands with scattered shrubs , moderately thick forest , woodland , heaths , and domestic gardens . It has adapted well to the urban environment and is common in suburban Sydney , Canberra and Melbourne . The superb fairy @-@ wren eats mostly insects and supplements its diet with seeds . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The superb fairy @-@ wren is one of 12 species of the genus Malurus , commonly known as fairy @-@ wrens , found in Australia and lowland New Guinea . Within the genus , the superb fairy @-@ wren 's closest relative is the splendid fairywren ; these two " blue wrens " are also related to the purple @-@ crowned fairywren of northwestern Australia . 
 William Anderson , surgeon and naturalist on Captain James Cook 's third voyage , collected the first superb fairywren specimen in 1777 while traveling off the coast of eastern Tasmania , in Bruny Island 's Adventure Bay . He named it Motacilla cyanea because its tail reminded him of the European wagtails of the genus Motacilla . Anderson did not live to publish his findings , although his assistant William Ellis described the bird in 1782 . The genus Malurus was later described by Louis Jean Pierre Vieillot in 1816 , giving the bird its current scientific name . 
 Shortly after the First Fleet 's arrival at Port Jackson , Sydney , the bird gained the common name superb warbler . In the 1920s came common names wren and wren @-@ warbler — both from its similarity to the European wren — and fairywren . The bird has also been called Mormon wren , a reference to observations of one blue @-@ plumaged bird accompanied by many brown @-@ plumaged birds , which were incorrectly assumed to be all female . The <unk> people of the Murray River and Coorong regions called it <unk> <unk> , meaning " little one of the <unk> ( lignum ) bush " , and the Gunai called it <unk> , meaning " little bird with long tail " . Both it and the variegated fairywren were known as <unk> to the local Eora and Darug inhabitants of the Sydney basin . 
 Like other fairywrens , the superb fairywren is unrelated to the true wren . It was previously classified as a member of the Old World flycatcher family Muscicapidae and later as a member of the warbler family Sylviidae before being placed in the newly recognised Maluridae in 1975 . More recently , DNA analysis has shown the Maluridae family to be related to the Meliphagidae ( honeyeaters ) , and the Pardalotidae ( pardalotes , scrubwrens , thornbills , gerygones and allies ) in the large superfamily Meliphagoidea . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Ornithologist Richard Schodde has reported that the subspecific classification of the superb fairy @-@ wren requires further review . In 1982 , he lumped all forms into two subspecies , the smaller and paler @-@ plumaged M. c. cyanochlamys of the mainland and larger and <unk> M. c. cyaneus of Tasmania and adjoining islands . However , zones of abrupt change led him to split these into more subspecies , and to note that the differences between New South Wales and Queensland populations needed investigation . Six subspecies are recognized : 
 M. c. cyaneus , the nominate subspecies described in 1782 , is found throughout Tasmania . Birds are larger and darker than the mainland subspecies , with males having a deeper azure blue coloration . Schodde in his 1982 review reclassified elizabethae and samueli under cyaneus . 
 M. c. elizabethae , endemic to King Island was described as a separate species elizabethae by Archibald James Campbell in 1901 . Males have a deeper blue colour than Tasmanian birds . King Island birds also have longer tarsi ( lower legs ) . 
 M. c. samueli , endemic to Flinders Island , has males that are of intermediate colour between the King Island and Tasmanian subspecies . 
 M. c. cyanochlamys , described by Richard Sharpe in 1881 , is found on mainland Australia ; in general , birds are smaller and paler than those of Tasmania , with Queensland male birds bearing a pale silvery blue crown , ear tufts and mantle . 
 M. c. <unk> , described by Gregory Mathews in 1912 , is found in eastern South Australia . Males in breeding plumage differ from those of subspecies cyanochlamys by having blue tinges on their belly below the chest band and on their wing remiges . 
 M. c. ashbyi , described by Mathews in 1912 , is found on Kangaroo Island , and has been separated from the mainland subspecies for around 9000 years . Birds of this subspecies are larger , have narrower bills and darker plumage than birds on nearby mainland South Australia . Females from Kangaroo Island are more uniformly grey in plumage than mainland birds . 
 = = = Evolutionary history = = = 
 In his 1982 monograph , Schodde proposed a southern origin for the common ancestor of the superb and splendid fairywrens . At some time in the past it was split into southwestern ( splendid ) and southeastern ( superb ) enclaves . As the southwest was dryer than the southeast , once conditions were more favourable , the splendid forms were more able to spread into inland areas . In the east , the superb fairywren spread into Tasmania during a glacial period when the sea level was low and the island was connected with the rest of the continent via a land bridge . What gave rise to subspecies cyaneus became isolated as the sea levels rose . The Bass Strait forms were isolated from Tasmania but more recently and so their subspecific status was not maintained . Further molecular studies may result in this hypothesis being modified . 
 = = Description = = 
 The superb fairywren is 14 cm ( 5 1 ⁄ 2 in ) long and weighs 8 – 13 g ( 0 @.@ 28 – 0 @.@ 46 oz ) , with males on average slightly larger than females . The average tail length is 5 @.@ 9 cm ( 2 1 ⁄ 3 in ) , among the shortest in the genus . Averaging 9 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) in subspecies cyaneus and 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 in ) in subspecies cyanochlamys , the bill is relatively long , narrow and pointed and wider at the base . Wider than it is deep , the bill is similar in shape to those of other birds that feed by probing for or picking insects off their environs . 
 Like other fairywrens , the superb fairywren is notable for its marked sexual dimorphism , males adopting a highly visible breeding plumage of brilliant iridescent blue contrasting with black and grey @-@ brown . The brightly coloured crown and ear tufts are prominently featured in breeding displays . The breeding male has a bright @-@ blue forehead , ear coverts , mantle and tail , brown wings , and black throat , eye band , breast and bill . Females , immatures , and non @-@ breeding males are a plain fawn colour with a lighter underbelly and a fawn ( females and immatures ) or dull greyish blue ( males ) tail . The bill is brown in females and juveniles and black in males after their first winter . Immature males moult into breeding plumage the first breeding season after hatching , though incomplete moulting sometimes leaves residual brownish plumage that takes another year or two to perfect . Both sexes moult in autumn after breeding , with males assuming an eclipse non @-@ breeding plumage . They moult again into nuptial plumage in winter or spring . Breeding males ' blue plumage , particularly the ear @-@ coverts , is highly iridescent because of the flattened and twisted surface of the barbules . The blue plumage also reflects ultraviolet light strongly , and so may be even more prominent to other fairywrens , whose colour vision extends into this part of the spectrum . 
 Vocal communication among superb fairywrens is used primarily for communication between birds in a social group and for advertising and mobbing , or defending a territory . The basic , or Type I , song is a 1 – 4 second high @-@ pitched reel consisting of 10 – 20 short elements per second ; it is sung by both males and females . Males also possess a peculiar song @-@ like Type II vocalization , which is given in response to the calls of predatory birds , commonly grey butcherbirds ( Cracticus torquatus ) . The purpose of this behaviour , which does not elicit a response from other nearby wrens , remains unknown . It is not a warning call , but in fact gives away the location of the vocalizing male to the predator . It may serve to announce male fitness , but this is far from certain . Superb fairywrens ' alarm call is a series of brief sharp chits , universally given and understood by small birds in response to predators . Females also emit a purr while incubating . Strangely , the bird appears to also use song as a password for its chicks to give it a chance to avoid cuckoo parasites . 
 = = Various views and plumages = = 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The superb fairywren is common throughout most of the relatively wet and fertile south @-@ eastern corner of the continent , from the south @-@ east of South Australia ( including Kangaroo Island and Adelaide ) and the tip of the Eyre Peninsula , through all of Victoria , Tasmania , coastal and sub @-@ coastal New South Wales and Queensland , through the Brisbane area and extending inland – north to the Dawson River and west to Blackall ; it is a common bird in the suburbs of Sydney , Melbourne and Canberra . It is found in wooded areas , generally with plenty of undergrowth , and has also adapted to urban existence and can be found in gardens and urban parks as long as there is an undergrowth of native plants nearby . Lantana ( Lantana camara ) , a prolific weed in Australia , has also been beneficial in providing shelter in disturbed areas , as has the introduced and invasive blackberry ( Rubus spp . ) Unlike other fairywrens , it appears to benefit from the urban environment and has out @-@ competed the introduced house sparrow ( Passer domesticus ) in one study on the grounds of the Australian National University in Canberra . Colonies of wrens can be found in Hyde Park and the Royal Botanic Gardens in Sydney 's urbanized centre . It is not found in dense forest nor in alpine environments . Forestry plantations of pine ( Pinus spp . ) and eucalypts are also unsuitable as they lack undergrowth . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Like all fairywrens , the superb fairywren is an active and restless feeder , particularly on open ground near shelter , but also through the lower foliage . Movement is a series of jaunty hops and bounces , with its balance assisted by a proportionally large tail , which is usually held upright , and rarely still . The short , rounded wings provide good initial lift and are useful for short flights , though not for extended jaunts . During spring and summer , birds are active in bursts through the day and accompany their foraging with song . Insects are numerous and easy to catch , which allows the birds to rest between forays . The group often shelters and rests together during the heat of the day . Food is harder to find during winter and they are required to spend the day foraging continuously . 
 The superb fairywren is a cooperative breeding species , with pairs or groups of 3 – 5 birds maintaining and defending small territories year @-@ round . The group consists of a social pair with one or more male or female helper birds that were hatched in the territory , though they may not necessarily be the offspring of the main pair . These birds assist in defending the territory and feeding and rearing the young . Birds in a group roost side @-@ by @-@ side in dense cover as well as engaging in mutual preening . 
 Major nest predators include Australian magpies ( Gymnorhina tibicen ) , butcherbirds ( Cracticus spp . ) , laughing kookaburra ( Dacelo novaeguineae ) , currawongs ( Strepera spp . ) , crows and ravens ( Corvus spp . ) , shrike @-@ thrushes ( Colluricincla spp . ) as well as introduced mammals such as the red fox ( Vulpes vulpes ) , cat and black rat ( Rattus rattus ) . Superb fairywrens may utilise a ' rodent @-@ run display to distract predators from nests with young birds . The head , neck and tail are lowered , wings held out and feathers fluffed as the bird runs rapidly and voices a continuous alarm call . A field study in Canberra found that superb fairywrens that lived in areas frequented by noisy miners ( Manorina melanocephala ) recognised miner alarm calls and took flight , and had learnt to ignore their non @-@ alarm calls , while those that live in areas not frequented by noisy miners did not respond to miner alarm calls . This suggests the species has adapted and learned to discriminate and respond to another species ' vocalisations . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Superb fairywrens are predominantly insectivorous . They eat a wide range of small creatures ( mostly insects such as ants , grasshoppers , shield bugs , flies , weevils and various larvae ) as well as small quantities of seeds , flowers , and fruit . Their foraging , termed ' hop @-@ searching ' , occurs on the ground or in shrubs that are less than two metres high . Because this foraging practice renders them vulnerable to predators , birds tend to stick fairly close to cover and forage in groups . During winter , when food may be scarce , ants are an important ' last resort ' food , constituting a much higher proportion of the diet . Nestlings , in contrast to adult birds , are fed a diet of larger items such as caterpillars and grasshoppers . 
 = = = Courtship = = = 
 Several courtship displays by superb fairywren males have been recorded . The ' sea horse flight ' , named for its seahorse @-@ like undulations , is one such display . During this exaggerated flight , the male — with his neck extended and his head feathers erect — tilts his body from horizontal to vertical , and descends slowly and springs upwards by rapidly beating his wings after alighting on the ground . The ' face fan ' display may be seen as a part of aggressive or sexual display behaviours ; it involves the flaring of the blue ear tufts by erecting the feathers . 
 During the reproductive season , males of this and other fairywren species pluck yellow petals , which contrast with their plumage , and show them to female fairywrens . The petals often form part of a courtship display and are presented to a female in the male fairywren 's own or another territory . Males sometimes show petals to females in other territories even outside the breeding season , presumably to promote themselves . <unk> are socially monogamous and sexually promiscuous : pairs will bond for life , though both males and females will regularly mate with other individuals ; a proportion of young will have been fathered by males from outside the group . Young are often raised not by the pair alone , but with other males who also mated with the pair 's female assisting . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Breeding occurs from spring through to late summer ; the nest is a round or domed structure made of loosely woven grasses and spider webs , with an entrance in one side generally close to the ground , under 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) , and in thick vegetation . Two or more broods may be laid in an extended breeding season . A clutch of three or four matte white eggs with reddish @-@ brown splotches and spots , measuring 12 mm × 16 mm ( 0 @.@ 47 in × 0 @.@ 63 in ) . The eggs are incubated for 14 days , after which they hatch within 24 hours . Newborn chicks are blind , red and featherless , though quickly darken as feathers grow . Their eyes open by day five or six and are fully feathered by day 10 . All group members feed and remove fecal sacs for 10 – 14 days . Fledglings are able to feed themselves by day 40 but remain in the family group as helpers for a year or more before moving to another group or assuming a dominant position in the original group . In this role they feed and care for subsequent broods and repel cuckoos or predators . Superb fairywrens also commonly play host to the brood parasite Horsfield 's bronze cuckoo ( Chrysococcyx basalis ) and , less commonly , the shining bronze cuckoo ( C. lucidus ) and fan @-@ tailed cuckoo ( Cacomantis flabelliformis ) . 
 = = Cultural depictions = = 
 The superb fairy @-@ wren breeding male is used as an emblem by the Bird Observation & Conservation Australia . On 12 August 1999 , a superb fairywren was mistakenly illustrated for an Australia Post 45c pre @-@ stamped envelope meant to depict a splendid fairywren . Called the blue wren as it was then known , it had previously featured on a <unk> stamp , released in 1964 , which was discontinued with the advent of decimal currency . 
 = This England ( album ) = 
 This England is a classical music album by the Oregon Symphony under the artistic direction of Carlos Kalmar , released by Dutch record label PentaTone Classics in November 2012 . The album was recorded at the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall in Portland , Oregon at five performances in February and May 2012 . It contains works by three English 20th @-@ century composers : Edward Elgar 's Cockaigne ( In London Town ) , Ralph Vaughan Williams ' Symphony No. 5 , and " Four Sea Interludes " and " Passacaglia " from Benjamin Britten 's opera Peter Grimes . The recording was the orchestra 's second under Kalmar 's leadership , following the highly successful Music for a Time of War ( 2011 ) , which also included works by Britten and Vaughan Williams and received Grammy Award nominations for Best Orchestral Performance and Best Engineered Album , Classical . This England received positive critical reception but failed to chart . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 This England , released by the Dutch record label PentaTone Classics on November 13 , 2012 , contains compositions by three English 20th @-@ century composers : Cockaigne ( In London Town ) by Edward Elgar , Symphony No. 5 by Ralph Vaughan Williams , and " Four Sea Interludes " and " Passacaglia " from the opera Peter Grimes ( 1945 ) by Benjamin Britten . The album contains ten tracks , with works divided into separate tracks for each movement and interlude . The works were recorded live at the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall in Portland , Oregon , at five performances in February and May 2012 . Symphony No. 5 and Cockaigne were performed February 18 and 19 as part of the program " Kahane Plays Mozart " ; the works by Britten were performed May 12 – 14 as part of the program " Arnaldo Cohen Plays Tchaikovsky " . In his review of the February 18th live performance , The Oregonian 's James <unk> noted disturbances from the audience , including coughing and the ringing of one attendant 's cell phone . <unk> suggested the disturbances could be removed from the audio by engineers if the February 19th recording was not preferable . 
 The album was the second recorded during Kalmar 's tenure , following the highly successful Music for a Time of War ( 2011 ) , which also included works by Britten and Vaughan Williams and which received Grammy Award nominations for Best Orchestral Performance and Best Engineered Album , Classical . The recording is the second of four albums expected to be produced by the Symphony and PentaTone before the end of the 2014 – 2015 season , all under Kalmar 's artistic leadership . Like Music for a Time of War , This England was recorded in hybrid multichannel ( surround sound ) Super Audio CD format . Blanton Alspaugh served as producer . Alspaugh and John Newton were the recording engineers , and mixing and mastering was conducted by Mark Donahue . In addition to recording the performances , the Boston @-@ based company Soundmirror edited , mixed and mastered the audio . Program notes for the recording were written by Steven Kruger . The album 's cover art was designed by David McLaughlin , art director for the Symphony . 
 The Symphony celebrated the recording by hosting a CD release party in late October . 
 = = = Works = = = 
 Elgar conducted the world premiere of Cockaigne ( In London Town ) at a Royal Philharmonic Society concert at Queen 's Hall in London in June 1901 . The work has been described as an " unashamedly populist portrait of ' old London town ' " and a musical description of the city at the turn of the century , with references to whistling boys , strolling lovers and marching bands . The Oregon Symphony last performed the overture in January 1990 , under Norman Leyden . The work , which is approximately 15 minutes in length , employs two flutes , piccolo , two oboes , two clarinets , two bassoons , one contrabassoon , four horns , two trumpets , two cornets , three trombones , tuba , timpani , five percussionists , strings . 
 Symphony No. 5 was composed during the period 1936 – 1943 and premiered in June 1943 , with Vaughan Williams conducting the London Philharmonic Orchestra at Royal Albert Hall in London . The widely performed work evokes serenity and pastoral settings ; despite being completed during World War II , Vaughan Williams originally intended the work to be an opera when he began writing it before the war . The symphony , which is approximately 41 minutes in length , contains four movements ( " Preludio " , " Scherzo " , " <unk> " and " Passacaglia " ) and includes two flutes ( second doubling piccolo ) , oboe , English horn , two clarinets , two bassoons , two horns , two trumpets , three trombones , timpani and strings . The Oregon Symphony 's February 2012 performances were its first performances of Symphony No. 5 . 
 The recording continues with Britten 's " Four Sea Interludes " and " Passacaglia " . The four interludes ( " Dawn " , " Sunday morning " , " Moonlight " and " Storm " ) have been published separately as Opus <unk> ; " Passacaglia " has also been published separately as Opus 33b . Peter Grimes premiered on June 7 , 1945 , at the Sadler 's Wells Theatre in London , conducted by Reginald Goodall . On June 13 , Britten conducted the four interludes with the London Philharmonic in Cheltenham ; Adrian Boult conducted " Passacaglia " with the BBC Symphony Orchestra on August 29 . Prior to 2012 , the Oregon Symphony 's most recent performance of " Four Sea Interludes " had been in 1993 under James DePreist ; the orchestra had never presented " Passacaglia " . The interludes and " Passacaglia " are approximately 16 minutes and 7 minutes , respectively , and include two flutes ( both doubling piccolo ) , two oboes , two clarinets , two bassoons , contrabassoon , four horns , three trumpets , three trombones , tuba , timpani , bass drum , bells , cymbals , gong , snare drum , tam tam , tambourine , tenor drum , xylophone , celeste , harp and strings . The percussion section added a 14 @-@ foot chime to produce bell sounds , which had to be stationed horizontally on stage . 
 = = Reception = = 
 This England received positive critical reception . David Patrick Stearns of Philadelphia Daily News awarded the album 3 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars and , also referring to the success of Music for a Time of War , wrote that the repertoire has " perfectly wide appeal , especially in vital , muscular performances such as these " . Stearns , who appreciated Kalmar 's balance of technicality and the music 's " exterior atmosphere " , called the performances " thoughtful " and " incisive " . He also noted the originality of the interludes and " Passacaglia " from Peter Grimes , claiming they " won 't be mistaken for anybody else 's . " In his review for The Huffington Post , Brian Horay wrote that the orchestra delivered " knockout " and " beefy @-@ yet @-@ restrained " performances of the Peter Grimes compositions . Referring to This England and its preceding album , which featured Sinfonia da Requiem , Horay said the recordings " showcase Kalmar and his band as supreme interpreters of Benjamin Britten 's amazingly colorful brand of orchestral anxiety , inviting the listener to delve ever deeper into painful , yet rewarding , symphonic ambivalence . " Classical CD Review 's Robert Benson called the Elgar performance " brilliant " and appreciated that " Passacaglia " was programmed before " The Storm " . Benson complimented Kalmar ( calling him a " conductor to watch " ) as well as the sound of the recording , describing it as " well @-@ balanced orchestral sound , with a wide dynamic range " . He noted the lack of audience interference with the sound and assured audiophiles that they would appreciate the quality . Steven Ritter of Audiophile Audition wrote that the Symphony performed " with a brilliance and verve equal to any on record " and were " entirely attuned to the ' English ' idiom " . Ritter complimented Kalmar and the orchestra for the performances , saying " Who knew Oregon could sound like this ? PentaTone should hold on to this bunch as long as they can , and explore as much repertory as they can handle . Great sound , performances , and production ! " 
 Several Oregon publications included This England on their lists highlighting local products . Portland Monthly included the album on their list of " November 's Best PDX Stuff " , which showcases Portland 's " coolest products and ideas " . The Oregonian included the album on their list of " 25 local gifts under $ 25 " . Oregon <unk> contributor Brett Campbell recommended the album on his list of Oregon classical music " stocking <unk> " . Campbell wrote that , despite the acoustic limitations of the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall , the live recordings " achieve admirable depth and clarity that bring out unexpected elements in both major 20th century English compositions " . He also complimented Kalmar and the orchestra for their " tightly wound expressiveness " and " sharp " performances , and said their recording of Cockaigne can " proudly stand alongside other top versions by the likes of the London Symphony Orchestra " . 
 The Portland Mercury invited local music industry professionals to list " Portland 's Top Five Records of 2012 " ; the reviewer known as " Angry Symphony Guy " ( Brian Horay ) included This England at the top of his list . The CBC Radio 2 program " In Concert " designated the album as the Disc of the Week for the week of January 7 , 2013 . In her review , the CBC 's Denise Ball said of the recording , " the sound is vivid and fresh , and the orchestra plays with remarkable depth of colour and rhythmic drive . " 
 Portland classical music radio station KQAC offered the album as a thank you gift to donors during a 2012 fundraising campaign . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Cockaigne ( In London Town ) , Opus 40 " ( Edward Elgar ) – 15 : 02 
 Symphony No. 5 in D major ( Ralph Vaughan Williams ) 
 " Preludio : Moderato " – 11 : 57 
 " Scherzo : Presto misterioso " – 5 : 12 
 " <unk> : Lento " – 10 : 56 
 " Passacaglia : Moderato " – 10 : 15 
 " Four Sea Interludes " and " Passacaglia " from Peter Grimes , Opus <unk> and b ( Benjamin Britten ) 
 " Dawn : Lento e tranquillo " – 3 : 50 
 " Sunday morning : Allegro <unk> " – 3 : 53 
 " Moonlight : Andante <unk> e rubato " – 4 : 54 
 " Passacaglia " – 6 : 53 
 " Storm : Presto con fuoco " – 4 : 30 
 Track listing adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from AllMusic and the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = Orchestra roster = = = 
 Orchestra roster adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 " * " designates acting orchestra members ; " * * " designates musicians on a leave of absence ; " * * * " designates guest musicians . 
 = Ghosttown ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Ghosttown " is a song recorded by American singer Madonna for her thirteenth studio album , Rebel Heart ( 2015 ) . It was released to radio stations on March 13 , 2015 , as the album 's second single . The song was written by Madonna , Jason Evigan , Evan Bogart , and Sean Douglas , and produced by Madonna , Billboard and Evigan . Madonna had listened to Douglas 's previous works and had requested studio time with him . Together with the other songwriters , they wrote " Ghosttown " in three days . A pop ballad , the song was inspired by the imagery of a destructed city after armageddon , and how the survivors carry on with their lives , with love being the only thing they can hold onto . Composed as an uplifting track , " Ghosttown " features instrumentation from organ and drums , with minor vocoder effects on Madonna 's vocals . 
 " Ghosttown " was released to iTunes Store as part of the album 's pre @-@ order in December 2014 , in response to hackers leaking songs from Rebel Heart . The song received positive response from critics , who commended Madonna 's vocal delivery , the lyrics , Billboard 's production work , as well as compared it to the singer 's early ballads . In the United States , the song became Madonna 's 36th entry on the Adult Contemporary chart , as well as her 45th number @-@ one song on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart , surpassing country singer George Strait as the artist with most number @-@ one songs on an active Billboard chart . Internationally , " Ghosttown " reached the top twenty position in Hungary and Italy , and the digital charts of Finland and Sweden , and was certified platinum by the Federazione Industria Musicale Italiana ( FIMI ) . 
 Madonna performed the song during her promotional schedules across Europe — Le Grand Journal in France , Che tempo che fa in Italy and The Jonathan Ross Show in the United Kingdom . She also performed it at the 2nd iHeartRadio Music Awards , where she was joined by singer Taylor Swift who played guitar . An accompanying music video for " Ghosttown " was directed by Jonas Åkerlund , and starred actor Terrence Howard . The main theme behind the video was " an apocalyptic situation mimicking the end of the world " , showing the singer and Howard as sole survivors in a destroyed city . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Ghosttown " was written by Madonna , Jason Evigan , Evan Bogart , and Sean Douglas . The song was composed in three days , after Madonna had personally requested some studio time with them . Madonna liked Jason Derulo 's 2014 single " Talk Dirty " which was co @-@ written by Evigan and Douglas , and hence she decided to collaborate with them . Douglas recalled that they ended up having a " great session " , saying " I was incredibly nervous for obvious reasons , but she showed up , was super personable and was ready to work . I basically checked it off my life bucket list . " Of their writing session , Madonna explained : 
 We all get into a room together . They start playing their chords and then we just start thinking about ... When I write with people , we always try to come up with a theme . What do we want to write about ? So this one is about the city after armageddon . The burnt out city , the crumbling buildings , the smoke that 's still lingering after the fire . You know what I mean ? There 's only a few people left . How do we pick up the pieces and go on from here ? Kind of dramatic . But not entirely impossible at this stage of the game ... And we 'll all be in our version of a ' Ghosttown ' or in a version of a ' Ghosttown ' , and at the end of the day , all we 're going to have left is each other . So that 's really what that song is about . 
 While discussing the song 's theme with French radio Europe 1 , Madonna spoke about the intolerance going around the world , especially in France whom she believed to have lost its ability to accept people of all race and color . Adding that the level of intolerance and antisemitism was increasing all @-@ throughout Europe , Madonna said that " Ghosttown " ' s apocalyptic theme was a foreshadow of the destruction of humanity , should the intolerance continue . " The way we behave , to treat one another the way we 're treating one another , to maintain this level of intolerance and discriminatory prejudice ... hateful behavior towards other human beings who are different than you are , " Madonna concluded . 
 On December 17 , 2014 , a total of 13 songs from the recording sessions were leaked . An aggravated Madonna took to Instagram and clarified that the songs were demo versions from earlier recordings . Madonna told Billboard that after the leak , she and her team tried to trace it back to the source . Ultimately they decided to release the finished songs . On December 20 , 2014 , the album became available for pre @-@ order on iTunes Store . When ordered , six tracks were automatically downloaded , including " Ghosttown " . Madonna added that she " would prefer [ her ] fans to hear completed versions of some of the songs instead of the incomplete tracks that are circulating . " During Madonna 's appearance on Italian television show Che tempo che fa , " Ghosttown " was confirmed as the second single from Rebel Heart and was sent to Italian radio on March 13 , 2015 . A week later it was added to Australian radio , while in the United Kingdom , it would be released on April 20 , 2015 . 
 = = Composition and remixes = = 
 Thematically , introspection was also listed as one of the foundational themes prevalent in Rebel Heart , with genuine statements of careerist and personal reflections of Madonna and her " obsessive self @-@ regard " . " Ghosttown " was one of the songs carrying on the subtle messages while talking about unity and religious consciousness . Madonna reverses the concept of " loss of love " with her romantic idealization , according to Matthew Harden from Samesame.com.au , as the lyrics go " When it all falls down , when it all falls down . We 'll be two souls in a ' Ghosttown ' . " Jim Farber from New York Daily News said that the song brings out " the warmest elements of [ Madonna 's ] voice " and " at times , her alto [ range ] sounds like Karen Carpenter 's , while the melody has the enveloping calm of hits like ' Live to Tell ' " . 
 The song 's composition is " uplifting and euphoric " in nature , far @-@ reaching with a number of melodic effects generated by electronic music . A cinematic visualization with the track is accomplished by different chord progressions , making the whole song sound compact . " Ghosttown " begins with sounds of single organ chords and a dusty drum beat . Instead of being a straight @-@ up pop ballad , the composition sounds a little " edgy " , due to the usage of synth percussion and vocoder effects . Chris Rosa from VH1 stated that the song " features tight production and an ear @-@ crashing chorus that is pure pop bliss " , while Elysa Gardner from USA Today described the song as a mixture of " disarmingly earnest sweetness with a stark , chilly arrangement " . The chorus appears after 40 seconds in the song , with a distortion filled pause , a thumping beat and a repetitive chord progression . " Ghosttown " is set in the time signature of common time with a moderate tempo of 79 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of D minor , with Madonna 's vocals spanning from F3 to B ♭ 4 . The song has a basic sequence of Dm – F – C – Gm during the verses and B ♭ – F – C – Dm during the chorus as its chord progression . Demacio " Demo " Castellon engineered and mixed the track , while Ron Taylor did additional Pro Tools editing of Madonna 's vocals and <unk> provided background vocals on the song . 
 On March 31 , 2015 , Billboard premiered a remix of the song by Dutch DJ Don Diablo , who changed the ballad into an EDM track . Another set of remixes were released later as a Remix EP . Two of the remixes were released on Madonna 's Tidal streaming account , including one by DJ RedTop as well as Armand Van Helden , Offer Nissim and Roger Sanchez . According to Idolator , " RedTop completely deconstructs ' Ghosttown ' and turns it into something you might hear in a post @-@ apocalyptic piano bar . It 's sad and depressing yet defiantly groovy . " Another remix , by Paul Andrews , gave emphasis on Madonna 's vocals while adding piano and orchestra in the production . Andrews explained that the music video of " Ghosttown " was how he had imagined it , " two people in a dark place with destruction all around them , but they have each other " . Hence he wanted the verse to represent the reality of the situation and the chorus would represent their view of the world because of their love . The non @-@ dance remix was approved by Madonna and was another exclusive release to her Tidal account . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Hugh McIntyre from Forbes considered " Ghosttown " as a favorite from the album . Dean Piper from The Daily Telegraph considered the song as Madonna 's best chance at achieving a radio hit from the album , comparing the composition to the singer 's previous studio album , Ray of Light ( 1998 ) . This view was shared by Gregory Ellwood of HitFix who considered it to be Madonna 's " most commercially friendly ballad " of the 2010s , while Jon Lisi from PopMatters called it " arguably the most haunting love song of [ Madonna 's ] career . The Dallas Morning News ' Hunter Hauk complimented Madonna 's " natural " vocal delivery in spite of the vocal effects added , also considering it to be a probable radio hit for Madonna . Daryl Deino from The Inquisitr also praised Madonna 's vocals in " Ghosttown " , along with " Devil Pray " and " Living for Love " . Bernard Zuel from The Sydney Morning Herald found Madonna to be reliving her older ballads like " Live to Tell " , and found the electronic arrangements to be complimenting her vocals . Amy Pettifer from The Quietus observed that the chorus could have been sung by any other singer , but Madonna , " despite being a weaker singer , licks it in the emotional truth stakes , particularly on this more melancholy end of the spectrum . Singing with a tremulous tonality , her voice hangs in uncluttered space , the lyrics positioning her as the dark @-@ glowing , guiding light . A brilliant , desperate and rousing anthem . " Along with comparing Madonna 's vocals in Ghosttown to that of Karen Carpenter , Farber also observed that it was her most " rich sounding " voice since her Evita soundtrack , comparable to " Live to Tell " and also " Crazy for You " . Digital Spy 's Lewis Corner rated it four out of five stars , noting that Madonna sounded " significantly more subdued and reflective compared to her handbag bangers of recent years , but by doing so it makes the biggest possible impact . " 
 Bradley Stern from MuuMuse felt that since " Ghosttown " was a previous unheard track not present among the leaks , it was the most surprising . With the ample presence of melodies , Stern reminisced that one of the major complaints about Madonna 's past few studio albums was a lack of memorable lyrics , which was dissipated with " Ghosttown " . Quoting a part of the lyrics — " When the world gets cold I 'll be your cover / Let 's just hold onto each other . " — Stern added that the song " is a gorgeously earnest , us @-@ against @-@ the @-@ world anthem tailored for two souls wandering alone in this mad , mad world . " Giving the song a rating of two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars , Hardeep Phull from New York Post described it as musically and emotionally " hectic " , but found it to be tender and simple while being a " big synth @-@ ballad of solidarity " . Writing for i @-@ D , Nick Levine felt that " Ghosttown " was enhanced as a song by the " glorious stealth bomb of a chorus " . Jed Gottlieb from Boston Herald commended Billboard 's production techniques , and the blend of EDM and lyrical introspection , while focusing on the " catchy " chorus . Jon Pareles from The New York Times found the song to be a mixture of " affection and post @-@ apocalyptic gloom " , adding that " it begs for a dystopian @-@ romance video " . Michael Jose Gonzalez from Danish music magazine , Gaffa , praised Madonna 's decision to give emphasis on her singing , with " trouble embossed and melodic " tracks like " Ghosttown " . 
 For a writer from Q , " Ghosttown " displayed a " wonderful finality " , while striking a tentative note . Zel McCarthy from Vice relegated the song to being an " album filler " but believed that it displayed Madonna 's " vocal chops and rarely @-@ deployed emotional sincerity " . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine had initially considered it as the least memorable song among the six tracks released for pre @-@ order , however in another review for the album he explained , " A decade of disco @-@ Madonna makes it easy to forget that she 's a skilled balladeer , and the post @-@ apocalyptic ' Ghosttown ' takes a generic , contemporary @-@ pop template ( think ' Halo ' ) and stamps it with her singular style a la 1994 's Babyface @-@ penned ' Take a Bow ' . " Saeed Saeed of The National described the song as a " streamlined power ballad " , and complimented Madonna 's pop music instincts . Rolling Stone ranked " Ghosttown " at number 16 on its year @-@ end list to find the 50 best songs of 2015 . It was also number one on their list of 10 Best Songs of 2015 through the reader 's poll . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Following the release of the song as a pre @-@ order , " Ghosttown " charted in a number of nations . In France , the song debuted at number 70 on the French SNEP Singles Chart , but fell down to number 105 the next week . Following the album 's release , the song again entered the chart at number 60 . After the release of the physical CD single , " Ghosttown " reached a new peak of number 34 , while topping the SNEP Physical Singles Chart . It debuted and peaked at number 41 in Spain , staying there for two weeks . The song debuted within the top @-@ forty in Switzerland at number 39 , but was present on the chart for one week . " Ghosttown " charted outside the top @-@ 100 on the UK Singles Chart at number 117 , and debuted at number 86 on the Scottish Singles Chart . In Italy , " Ghosttown " reached a peak of number 20 on the Italian FIMI Singles Chart spending 19 weeks in the top 100 , while reaching a peak of number 34 on the German Media Control Charts . 
 In the United States , " Ghosttown " was promoted to the adult contemporary radio formats by regular radio plays on iHeartMedia owned stations . It debuted at number 21 on the Billboard Adult Contemporary chart making it her 36th entry , starting from her 1984 single " Borderline " . Madonna ranks fourth on the list of artists with the most entries on the chart , preceded by Elton John ( 43 ) , Celine Dion ( 41 ) and Rod Stewart ( 40 ) . " Ghosttown " was Madonna 's first entry on the chart since her 2006 single , " Jump " . According to Billboard , the song also bubbled under the main Adult Pop Songs chart , aided by iHeart radio play . For the week ending April 25 , 2015 , " Ghosttown " debuted at number 41 on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart . The following four weeks it was the greatest gainer in position , reaching to a peak of number one . 
 On the week ending May 30 , 2015 , " Ghosttown " reached the top of the chart , becoming Madonna 's 45th number @-@ one there . She became the artist with the most number @-@ one singles ever on a Billboard chart , breaking her tie with country singer George Strait who earned 44 number @-@ ones on the Hot Country Singles chart . She pulled further ahead of runners @-@ ups Beyonce and Rihanna , who had 22 number @-@ one songs each at that time . Along with the Dance Club Songs record , " Ghosttown " debuted at number 38 on the Adult Pop Songs chart , becoming the singer 's 19th entry on the list . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Madonna confirmed on The Howard Stern Show that she would be filming a music video for the song in Los Angeles . Directed by Jonas Åkerlund , who had previously helmed Madonna 's music videos for " Ray of Light " , " Music " , " American Life " , " Jump " and " Celebration " , the music video also starred actor Terrence Howard . The main theme behind the video was " an apocalyptic situation mimicking the end of the world " , as described by Kim Peiffer from InStyle . The director came up with the concept of a dystopian future and shot it at an old steel mill . Madonna 's look in the video was styled by B. Åkerlund , wife of Jonas , who blended contemporary fashion trends like military @-@ bandleader @-@ Victorian and gave it her signature characteristics . She created a leather greatcoat with a billowing cape , from designer label Chrome Hearts , considering the rock @-@ n @-@ roll silhouette of the video . 
 Laurie Lynn Stark , co @-@ owner of Chrome Hearts spoke about working with Madonna on the video , with whom they had previously collaborated on photoshoots . Chrome Hearts were given a week 's notice to work with Åkerlund and after a few telephone exchanges , the group met Åkerlund at their factory . The latter told them about her inspiration and concepts for the designs , and Stark 's team put together the leather pieces and jacket structures , and finalized on buttons and cross patches . The task was easy for them , since both Åkerlund and Chrome Hearts had the same vision of the design in their mind , " so the challenge was how to bring it to life in the most dramatic and beautiful way . " The whole costume took about a week and a total of 30 people to finish it , to achieve the " Apocalyptic meets Rock & Roll with a bit of a ship wrecked mood " vibe that Åkerlund had wanted . 
 Rest of the ensemble included leather , metallic combinations , green silk vest from A.F. <unk> , and cotton clothing from Greg Lauren . The lace shorts Madonna wore was vintage , and Åkerlund burnt up the singer 's Agent Provocateur bra and applied dirt on it for giving special effects . The whole inspiration for Åkerlund behind the look was Jonas , as well as the couple 's interest in rock @-@ n @-@ roll . Madonna approved the design , saying that " It was magical ... It perfectly represented the vibe that we wanted to bring to the video . " She also asked for a golf club and pocket knife to make the look more edgy . With Swedish broadcasting channel Sveriges Television , Åkerlund explained that for the opening shot , where Madonna is shown laying on the bed , she wanted boots which looked like leg braces . She contacted a designer in New York who said that he developed such pieces for fetish fashion . Åkerlund wanted him to provide the designs for arms also . 
 = = = Release and synopsis = = = 
 Following the completion of the shooting , Madonna posted blurry images from the video set , and on April 3 , 2015 , she announced that the video would be released the next week . She then uploaded a 16 @-@ second preview of the video on her Tidal streaming account . The clip showed Madonna in a black , leather outfit , running through a bleak , destroyed area , the scene interspersed with religious symbols like an immaculate heart as well as animal carcasses . The release date was initially confirmed as April 7 , 2015 , on live video broadcasting app , Meerkat , at 10 am PST , but was rescheduled to the next day . Stuart Dredge from The Guardian felt that since " [ Madonna ] is now one of the 16 co @-@ owners of streaming music service Tidal , which is planning to use similarly @-@ exclusive video premieres to promote itself , " the release of the " Ghosttown " music video on Meerkat was perplexing . 
 The video starts with an announcement on television that nuclear activities has destroyed cities like London , Paris , New York City , and Los Angeles . It then cuts to a room where Madonna lies in her bed watching the news about the nuclear explosion . As the song starts , a visibly distressed Madonna walks to her dressing table . She sits down and kisses a framed photograph of her mother , while looking at herself . She drapes a cape around her , picks up a rod and a hat , and goes out of her house as the chorus of " Ghosttown " starts . Madonna is seen in what appears to be a post @-@ apocalyptic destroyed city , where there are no signs of life and posters of the Rebel Heart album are shown burning . She looks around and walks carefully among the destruction , while twirling around the cape . 
 Outside , Madonna rummages debris , tries to make a phone @-@ call from a payphone , gets frustrated , and starts smashing objects in front of her with the rod . Her actions catches the attention of a man , played by Howard . He picks up his sniper rifle to shoot at the object of disturbance , but seeing Madonna through the lens , runs after her . They meet each other at a destroyed building where both of them notice each other and circle around with weapons in their hand . They come close and instead of attacking they throw away the weapons , embrace each other and engage in a dance @-@ routine . After they complete their dance , and the song ends , the couple notice a little boy watching them from the destroyed building . The video ends with the couple leaving the city with the little boy hand @-@ in @-@ hand together with a large dog , and a panorama of the destruction . 
 = = = Reception and analysis = = = 
 Jason Lipshutz from Billboard described the video as a " fitting soundtrack " to the choreographed dance between Madonna and Howard , and complimented the last scene . Eliana Dockterman from Time believed that since Howard had been acting and dancing on Empire , he was signed for the video . Brett <unk> from E ! shared this view but added that the duos " dancing skills aren 't half bad " . Louis Virtel from HitFix made 10 observations about the video , but concluded that there should have been more dance sequences to liven up the visuals , and hence could not live up to other " all @-@ time great " Madonna releases . Kory Grow from Rolling Stone complimented the visual , saying that the " better part of the video is a mostly harrowing scene for the pop star " and compared it to the TV series , The Last Man on Earth . James Elliot from Complex found the video to be " captivating " and keeping one " surprised " in spite of feeling it to be long . 
 The video was reviewed by four critics from Idolator website . Robbie Daw from the website gave it 9 out of 10 saying that " this is actually Madge ’ s best music video since ' Hung Up ' , not to mention her greatest single choice since that time period . " They complimented her onscreen Stevie Nicks like look , and described her as " a gorgeous vampire pirate witchy @-@ wench " . However , Mike Wass from Idolator negative critiqued the video , calling it a " ham @-@ fisted embarrassment complete with lame special effects , an unnecessary celebrity appearance and the most awkward dance scene of all time . " Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine called the video " campy " , while describing it as a " <unk> tale " comparable with the singer 's cancelled video for 2003 single , " American Life " . He criticized the overall execution of the clip , saying that " In another director 's hands ( like , say , M 's friend and frequent collaborator Steven Klein ) , ' Ghosttown ' might have been more than just ridiculous , glorified ruin porn , but at least there are no zombies . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On February 26 , 2015 , Madonna appeared on The Jonathan Ross Show in England , which aired on March 14 . She performed an edited version of " Living for Love " , as well as " <unk> " for the first time . She a wore a black Marc Jacobs dress and boots while performing the songs . On March 1 , Madonna was a guest on Italian TV show , Che tempo che fa ( aired on March 8 ) . While talking with host Fabio Fazio , she performed " Devil Pray " and " Ghosttown " . A writer for Yahoo ! noticed that both performances were warmly received by the audience , while Lionel Nicaise from MCM appreciated that Madonna put more emphasis on the melodies and her vocals during the performance , rather than costumes and stage props . A day later , Madonna appeared on France 's Le Grand Journal show . She performed an edited version of " Living for Love " and " Ghosttown " . Nicaise described the performance as " an intimate interpretation of the already known ballad " . Writing for Idolator , Bradley Stern described it as a " deeply emotional performance " , where Madonna stood against a piano and sang the song . He added that " While [ Madonna ] is at her best man @-@ handling Minotaurs , flipping mid @-@ air and dry @-@ humping boomboxes , it 's refreshing to see <unk> [ ballad Madonna ] in action for a change . And for a first performance of the song , she sounded great , especially once it took off with that final glorious chorus . " In the giant screens located on either side of the platform , burning cities of images were broadcast , as well as those of the World Trade Center collapses during the attack of September 11 , 2001 . The next performance happened at The Ellen DeGeneres Show in the United States , where Madonna sang " Ghosttown " wearing a black leather dress . She knelt down at one point during the song , and arose to sing the final chorus . Stern gave a positive feedback in MuuMuse , saying that " Madonna delivered yet another stirring performance of the post @-@ apocalyptic tune . In fact , it was likely her best to date , from the outfit choice to the raw , emotional vocal delivery . " 
 Madonna performed an acoustic version of " Ghosttown " at the 2nd iHeartRadio Music Awards on March 29 , 2015 . She was accompanied by singer Taylor Swift onstage , who played guitar . Elizabeth <unk> from New York Daily News noted that it was a " subdued " performance for Madonna , who only walked towards the front of the stage near the end of the song . Mikael Wood from Los Angeles Times called it an " appealingly breezy version of the song " , while Cathy <unk> Olson from Billboard declared it as the " award show 's best performance " , describing the duo as " kindred spirits " . Matthew Jacobs from The Huffington Post called it " an intimate , light @-@ some @-@ candles @-@ and @-@ sway ballad [ that ] turned into an electrifying meeting of the souls " . For Daniel D 'Addario from Time , the performance was " the very best sort of collaboration " , adding that Swift seemed excited to be on stage with Madonna . Ellen DeGeneres uploaded a parody video of the performance on her website . The video showed DeGeneres added by computer graphics beside Madonna and Swift , playing violin . She accidentally rips out Madonna 's hair with her violin , and at the end Madonna smashes the instrument by taking it from DeGeneres , and moves away with Swift . 
 " Ghosttown " had been initially absent from the 2015 – 16 Rebel Heart Tour . However , on the September 19 , 2015 , stop at New York City 's Barclays Center , Madonna announced that she would perform the song , but it was unrehearsed . " That is the truth . So , if I make mistakes , will you forgive me ? " the singer added . She then sang an acoustic version of the song . According to Robbie Daw from Idolator , " Madonna 's fans went nuts over the performance of the ballad , and the singer was so touched that she began reaching into the crowd " . Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani was complimentary of the performance , calling it a " stirring , if pitchy , rendition of [ the ] shoulda @-@ been @-@ a @-@ sleeper @-@ hit ... which brought seemingly genuine tears to [ Madonna 's ] eyes , a development that seemed to surprise even her " . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Webo Girl Publishing , Inc . ( ASCAP ) / BMG Platinum Songs o / b / o itself and Bad Robot ( BMI ) 
 Warner @-@ Tamerlane Publishing Corp. and East Pond Publishing ( BMI ) / Seven Summits Music o / b / o itself and Casbah Kid ( BMI ) 
 Personnel 
 Madonna – vocals , songwriter , producer 
 Billboard – producer 
 Evan Bogart – songwriter 
 Sean Douglas – songwriter 
 Jason Evigan – songwriter , producer , background vocals 
 Demacio " Demo " Castellon – engineer , mixer 
 Ron Taylor – additional Pro Tools editing 
 Personnel adapted from Madonna official website . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = It Is the Law = 
 It Is the Law is a 1924 American silent mystery film directed by J. Gordon Edwards and starring Arthur Hohl , Herbert Hayes , and Mona Palma . It is a film adaptation of the eponymous 1922 Broadway play by Elmer Rice , itself based on a novel by Hayden Talbot . The film depicts the story of Ruth Allen ( Palma ) , who marries Justin Victor ( Heyes ) over competing suitor Albert Woodruff ( Hohl ) . Seeking revenge for this slight , Woodruff fakes his death by killing a drifter who resembles him , and frames Victor for the murder . When Woodruff returns to court Allen under a new identity , she sees through his disguise . Once Victor is freed from prison , he kills Woodruff , and goes free because a conviction would constitute double jeopardy . 
 This was the final film for director Edwards , who died the following year , and was one of the last produced at Fox Film 's New York studio . Contemporary reviews were generally positive . Like many of Fox 's early works , it was likely lost in the 1937 Fox vault fire . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Albert Woodruff and Justin Victor are friends who are both in love with the same woman , Ruth Allen . Allen chooses to wed Victor , and Woodruff storms off in a jealous rage . Woodruff locates his look @-@ alike , " Sniffer " Evans , a drifter and drug addict . On the evening following Allen and Victor 's wedding , Woodruff calls Allen and threatens to blackmail her . He also convinces Evans to come to his apartment . 
 Victor also travels to Woodruff 's apartment , intending to confront his former friend about the threatening phone call . When Woodruff sees Victor outside the apartment building , he feigns a cry for help and shoots Evans to death . Victor is blamed for the murder of the man presumed to be Woodruff , and is sentenced to life imprisonment . 
 Five years later , Woodruff disguises himself with a beard and monocle and assumes a new identity in an attempt to court Allen . She is able to recognize him as Woodruff because of his fear of fire tongs . Because she is friends with the governor , she is able to arrange her husband 's release from prison . Victor locates Woodruff in a casino and kills him . At trial , he declares that the prohibition against double jeopardy prevents his prosecution for the murder ; he is set free to live happily with his wife . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Arthur Hohl as Albert Woodruff and " Sniffer " Evans 
 Herbert Heyes as Justin Victor 
 Mona Palma as Ruth Allen ( credited as Mimi Palmeri ) 
 Arthur Hohl reprised the role of Woodruff from Broadway ; in addition to Woodruff and Evans , he played a third role as the casino 's proprietor . The cast also includes Dorothy Kingdon , Helena D <unk> , Patricia O 'Connor , and Nancy Newman as casino regulars . This was Herbert Heyes final silent film ; he returned to acting in the 1940s . 
 = = Production = = 
 In 1922 , theatrical agent Walter Jordan encouraged Elmer Rice to dramatize an unpublished novel by Hayden Talbot . At the time , Rice was best known for his 1914 Broadway play On Trial , which featured the first use of flashback , a narrative technique he adapted from film , in a Broadway production . Rice 's adaptation of Talbot 's work , It Is the Law , again featured a story told in flashback . It ran for 125 performances at the Ritz Theatre , and was a modest success . 
 Curtis Benson wrote the film adaptation for It Is the Law ; unlike the theatrical version , his screenplay presents the story entirely in chronological order . J. Gordon Edwards directed , the only time he did so in 1924 , as he was primarily serving as Fox Film 's director @-@ general at the time . It was also his last time to direct ; he retired from Fox after the film 's completion , and although he expressed an interest to returning to the role , he died of pneumonia the following year . Filming took place at Fox 's New York studio , although most production had by then moved to Hollywood . It Is the Law was one of only four films Fox made at its East Coast facility in 1924 . Except for four Allan Dwan films in 1926 , they were the last Fox produced in New York . The Film Daily reported that a trailer was produced to advertise the film . 
 The copyright registration for It Is the Law stated its length as eight reels , but the released version was a shorter , seven @-@ reel film . When Twentieth Century @-@ Fox Film renewed the copyright in 1951 , they again referred to the longer run time ; the title was also restyled with an exclamation point , as It Is the Law ! 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 It Is the Law received generally positive reviews . George T. Pardy , writing for Exhibitors Trade Review , noted that the audience was aware of the nature of the mystery while the characters were not , a welcome departure from the conventions of most melodramas . Motion Picture Magazine called the film " tense , <unk> , ... and new in its idea . " The Film Daily 's reviewer believed it would appeal to fans of the genre despite " some hokum and implausible twists " . Edwards 's direction was praised , including his pacing of the story , although the reviewer for Variety felt the film was unnecessarily long . Hohl , in his dual role performance , was considered the strongest of the cast , despite some exaggerated expressions . 
 It Is the Law is believed to be lost . The 1937 Fox vault fire destroyed most of Fox 's silent films , and the Library of Congress is not aware of any extant copies . Because little of Edwards 's work survives , few of his films have drawn attention from modern authors , but film historian Larry Langman included It Is the Law as an example of the evolution of avenging @-@ spouse films to " emphasize the inner strengths of their women " in the 1920s . 
 = Oryzomys gorgasi = 
 Oryzomys gorgasi , also known as Gorgas 's oryzomys or Gorgas 's rice rat , is a rodent in the genus Oryzomys of family Cricetidae . First collected as a living animal in 1967 , it is known from only a few localities , including a freshwater swamp in the lowlands of northwestern Colombia and a mangrove islet in northwestern Venezuela . It formerly occurred on the island of Curaçao off northwestern Venezuela ; this extinct population has been described as a separate species , Oryzomys curasoae , but does not differ morphologically from mainland populations . 
 Oryzomys gorgasi is a medium @-@ sized , brownish species with large , semiaquatically specialized feet . It differs from other Oryzomys species in several features of its skull . Its diet includes crustaceans , insects , and plant material , and parasitic nematodes infect it . The species is listed as " Endangered " by the International Union for Conservation of Nature due to destruction of its habitat and competition with the introduced black rat ( Rattus rattus ) . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Oryzomys gorgasi was first found in Antioquia Department of northwestern Colombia in 1967 during an expedition by the U.S. Army Medical Department and the Gorgas Memorial Laboratory . In 1971 , Field Museum zoologist Philip Hershkovitz described a new species , Oryzomys gorgasi , on the basis of the single known specimen , an old male . He named the animal after physician William Crawford Gorgas , the namesake of the Gorgas Memorial Laboratory . Hershkovitz considered the new species most closely related to Oryzomys palustris , which at the time included North and Central American populations now divided into several species , including the marsh rice rat ( O. palustris ) and O. couesi . The species was not recorded again until 2001 , when Venezuelan zoologist J. Sánchez H. and coworkers reported on 11 specimens collected in coastal northwestern Venezuela in 1992 , 700 km ( 430 mi ) from the Colombian locality . They confirmed that O. gorgasi is a distinct species related to the O. palustris group . 
 In 2001 , Donald McFarlane and Adolphe <unk> described a new Oryzomys species from the Dutch island of Curaçao off northwestern Venezuela . For their description , they used subfossil material from owl pellets , including two partial skulls and several <unk> . They referred the species to Oecomys , a group of arboreal ( tree @-@ living ) , mainly South American rodents related to Oryzomys . O. curasoae has also been known as the " Curaçao Rice Rat " and the " Curaçao Oryzomys " . 
 Marcelo Weksler and colleagues removed most of the species then placed in Oryzomys from the genus in 2006 , retaining only the marsh rice rat and related species , including O. gorgasi . They also kept O. curasoae in the genus and suggested that it may not be distinct from O. gorgasi . In a 2009 paper , R.S. Voss and Weksler examined the two and concluded that they represented the same species on the basis of direct comparisons and a phylogenetic analysis . The resultant tree placed O. curasoae and O. gorgasi sister to each other and closer to O. couesi than to the marsh rice rat . Accordingly , they placed O. curasoae as a junior synonym of the earlier described O. gorgasi . 
 Oryzomys gorgasi is the <unk> representative of the genus Oryzomys , which extends north into the eastern United States ( marsh rice rat , O. palustris ) . O. gorgasi is further part of the O. couesi section , which is centered on the widespread Central American O. couesi and also includes six other species with more limited and peripheral distributions . Many aspects of the systematics of the O. couesi section remain unclear and it is likely that the current classification underestimates the true diversity of the group . Oryzomys is classified in the tribe Oryzomyini , a diverse assemblage of American rodents of over a hundred species , and on higher taxonomic levels in the subfamily Sigmodontinae of family Cricetidae , along with hundreds of other species of mainly small rodents . 
 = = Description = = 
 Oryzomys gorgasi is a medium @-@ sized oryzomyine with small ears and large feet , and is similar to the marsh rice rat in general appearance . The long and coarse fur is brownish above and ochraceous below . At the base of the tail , the upper and lower sides differ in color and at the end is a short tuft of hairs . The scales on the tail are well @-@ developed . As in other Oryzomys , the hindfeet exhibit specializations for life in the water . The plantar ( lower ) surface of the metatarsus is naked . Two of the pads are very small . Ungual tufts , tufts of hair at the bases of the claws , are poorly developed . Interdigital webbing is present , but extends along less than half of the first phalanges . 
 In specimens from El Caimito , total length is 220 to 290 mm ( 8 @.@ 7 to 11 @.@ 4 in ) , averaging 259 mm ( 10 @.@ 2 in ) ( measured in 6 specimens ) ; tail length is 116 to 138 mm ( 4 @.@ 6 to 5 @.@ 4 in ) , averaging 130 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) ( measured in 8 specimens ) ; hindfoot length is 30 to 32 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 3 in ) , averaging 31 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) ( measured in 10 specimens ) ; ear length is 15 to 17 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 to 0 @.@ 67 in ) , averaging 16 mm ( 0 @.@ 63 in ) ( measured in 7 specimens ) ; and <unk> @-@ incisive length ( a measure of total skull size ) is 26 @.@ 9 to 31 @.@ 4 mm ( 1 @.@ 06 to 1 @.@ 24 in ) , averaging 29 @.@ 6 mm ( 1 @.@ 17 in ) ( measured in 5 specimens ) . In the holotype from Colombia , an old male , total length is 240 mm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) ; tail length is 125 mm ( 4 @.@ 9 in ) ; ear length is 19 mm ( 0 @.@ 75 in ) ; and <unk> @-@ incisive length is 32 @.@ 1 mm ( 1 @.@ 26 in ) . The collector recorded the holotype 's hindfoot as being 34 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) long , but Sánchez and colleagues <unk> it as 33 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) . 
 The rostrum ( front part of the skull ) is short . The broad zygomatic plate develops a prominent notch , but not a spine , on its front end , and its back margin is in front of the first molars . The interorbital region , located between the eyes , is narrowest towards the front and is flanked by <unk> along its margins . The interparietal bone is relatively long . The incisive foramina , perforations of the palate between the incisors and the molars , are narrow and long and taper towards the end . The palate itself is also long , extending beyond the molars , and includes prominent posterolateral palatal pits near the third molars , which are excavated into deep fossae . The roof of the mesopterygoid fossa , the opening behind the palate , is not perforated by sphenopalatine vacuities . O. gorgasi lacks an alisphenoid strut ; in some other oryzomyines , this extension of the alisphenoid bone separates two openings in the skull , the masticatory – buccinator foramen and the foramen ovale accessorium . The squamosal bone lacks a suspensory process that contacts the tegmen tympani , the roof of the tympanic cavity , a defining character of oryzomyines . The subsquamosal fenestra , an opening at the back of the skull determined by the shape of the squamosal , is almost absent . 
 In the mandible ( lower jaw ) , the upper and lower masseteric ridges come close together below the first molars , but do not fuse . The back end of the lower incisor root is in a capsular process , a raising of the mandibular bone behind the molars . The upper incisors have yellowish enamel and are opisthodont , with the cutting edge inclined backwards . The molars are relatively small and are brachydont ( low @-@ crowned ) and bunodont ( with the cusps higher than the connecting crests ) . They are similar to those of the marsh rice rat in structural details . The upper and lower first molars have small accessory roots , as in many other oryzomyines , and the second and third lower molar each have two roots only . 
 Oryzomys gorgasi is distinguished from other Oryzomys species by its short rostrum , the form of its incisive foramina , the absence of sphenopalatine vacuities , and the near absence of a subsquamosal fenestra . Within the species , the Colombian specimen differs from the Venezuelan animals in being larger in some measurements , but having smaller teeth , and in having oddly shaped wear facets of the incisors . The Colombian animal was probably kept in captivity for some time after it was caught , which would explain its large size and odd wear facets . There are no substantial differences between mainland O. gorgasi and material from Curaçao . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 As far as known , Oryzomys gorgasi has a disjunct distribution in northwestern South America , including Colombia , Venezuela , and Curaçao . In a 2009 paper , Carleton and Arroyo @-@ Cabrales speculated that its distribution may extend into Central America . The Colombian population is known from the holotype only , caught at Loma <unk> ( 7 ° <unk> , 77 ° W ) in Antioquia Department , northwestern Colombia , near the Río Atrato , at about 1 m above sea level . The location is apparently a freshwater swamp , and Hershkovitz suggested that O. gorgasi probably occurred throughout the swamp forests in the Río Atrato basin . On Curaçao , it is known from cave faunas at <unk> Santa Barbara , <unk> , Ser 'i Kura , and Hermanus . At <unk> Santa Barbara , it was found in association with introduced black rats ( Rattus rattus ) , indicating that the population persisted at least until the first European contact in 1499 . 
 In Venezuela , it was found on El Caimito , a small ( 57 ha , 140 acres ) islet just east of the outlet of Lake Maracaibo in the state of Zulia , where the only other native non @-@ flying mammal is the opossum Marmosa <unk> . El Caimito is separated from the mainland by a narrow , brackish channel and contains sand banks with xerophytic vegetation surrounded by marshy lagoons with <unk> mangle mangroves . Oryzomys gorgasi was caught in all habitats on the islet , but has not been found in other similar sites in northwestern Venezuela , where the introduced black rat is the only rodent collected . Analysis of stomach contents of El Caimito specimens indicates that the species is an omnivore , with a diet including crustaceans , insects , plant seeds , and other plant material . The crustaceans may include fiddler crabs ( Uca ) and a mangrove tree crab of the genus Aratus ; the insects include flies ( Diptera ) ; and the plants include grass seeds . Two parasitic nematodes , <unk> <unk> ( family <unk> ) and an undetermined species of <unk> ( family <unk> ) , are known to infect O. gorgasi . The 2009 IUCN Red List tersely indicates that the species has been found in second Venezuelan locality . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 On the 2009 IUCN Red List , O. gorgasi is currently listed as " endangered " and O. curasoae as " data deficient " . The species may be threatened by competition with introduced black rats and destruction of its habitat , but does occur in at least one protected area . Displacement by the black rat has caused the species to become locally extinct in parts of its Venezuelan range . Suitable habitats for O. gorgasi exist in inland Venezuela , and further study is needed to determine whether it is present there . The extinction of the Curaçao population may also have been caused by competition with the black rat , which has been found together with Oryzomys in subfossil deposits . 
 = Japanese battleship Mutsu = 
 Mutsu ( <unk> ) , named after the eponymous province , was the second and last Nagato @-@ class dreadnought battleship built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) at the end of World War I. In 1923 , a year after commissioning , she carried supplies for the survivors of the Great Kantō earthquake . The ship was modernized in 1934 – 36 with improvements to her armor and machinery , and a rebuilt superstructure in the pagoda mast style . 
 Other than participating in the Battle of Midway and the Battle of the Eastern Solomons in 1942 , where she did not see any significant combat , Mutsu spent most of the first year of the Pacific War in training . She returned to Japan in early 1943 . That June , one of her aft magazines detonated while she was at anchor , sinking the ship with the loss of 1 @,@ 121 crew and visitors . The IJN conducted a perfunctory investigation into the cause of her loss and concluded that it was the work of a disgruntled crewmember . The navy dispersed the survivors in an attempt to conceal the sinking in the interest of morale in Japan . Much of the wreck was salvaged after the war and many artifacts and relics are on display in Japan . 
 = = Description = = 
 Mutsu had a length of 201 @.@ 17 meters ( 660 ft 0 in ) between perpendiculars and 215 @.@ 8 meters ( 708 ft 0 in ) overall . She had a beam of 28 @.@ 96 meters ( 95 ft 0 in ) and a draft of 9 meters ( 29 ft 6 in ) . The ship displaced 32 @,@ 720 metric tons ( 32 @,@ 200 long tons ) at standard load and 39 @,@ 116 metric tons ( 38 @,@ 498 long tons ) at full load . Her crew consisted of 1 @,@ 333 officers and enlisted men as built and 1 @,@ 368 in 1935 . The crew totaled around 1 @,@ 475 men in 1942 . 
 In 1927 , Mutsu 's bow was remodeled to reduce the amount of spray produced when steaming into a head sea . This increased her overall length by 1 @.@ 59 meters ( 5 ft 3 in ) to 217 @.@ 39 meters ( 713 ft 3 in ) . During her 1934 – 36 reconstruction , the ship 's stern was lengthened by 7 @.@ 55 meters ( 24 ft 9 in ) to improve her speed , and her forward superstructure was rebuilt into a pagoda mast . She was given torpedo bulges to improve her underwater protection and to compensate for the weight of the additional armor and equipment . These changes increased her overall length to 224 @.@ 94 m ( 738 ft 0 in ) , her beam to 34 @.@ 6 m ( 113 ft 6 in ) and her draft to 9 @.@ 49 meters ( 31 ft 2 in ) . Her displacement increased over 7 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 6 @,@ 900 long tons ) to 46 @,@ 690 metric tons ( 45 @,@ 950 long tons ) at deep load . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Mutsu was equipped with four Gihon geared steam turbines , each of which drove one propeller shaft . The turbines were designed to produce a total of 80 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 60 @,@ 000 kW ) , using steam provided by 21 Kampon water @-@ tube boilers ; 15 of these were oil @-@ fired while the remaining half @-@ dozen consumed a mixture of coal and oil . The ship had a stowage capacity of 1 @,@ 600 t ( 1 @,@ 600 long tons ) of coal and 3 @,@ 400 t ( 3 @,@ 300 long tons ) of fuel oil , giving her a range of 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at a speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . The ship exceeded her designed speed of 26 @.@ 5 knots ( 49 @.@ 1 km / h ; 30 @.@ 5 mph ) during her sea trials , reaching 26 @.@ 7 knots ( 49 @.@ 4 km / h ; 30 @.@ 7 mph ) at 85 @,@ 500 shp ( 63 @,@ 800 kW ) . 
 During a refit in 1924 the fore funnel was rebuilt in a serpentine shape in an unsuccessful effort to prevent smoke interference with the bridge and fire @-@ control systems . That funnel was eliminated during the ship 's 1930s reconstruction when all of her existing boilers were replaced by ten lighter and more powerful oil @-@ fired Kampon boilers , which had a working pressure of 22 kg / cm2 ( 2 @,@ 157 kPa ; 313 psi ) and temperature of 300 ° C ( 572 ° F ) . In addition her turbines were replaced by lighter , more modern , units . When Mutsu conducted her post @-@ reconstruction trials , she reached a speed of 24 @.@ 98 knots ( 46 @.@ 26 km / h ; 28 @.@ 75 mph ) with 82 @,@ 300 shp ( 61 @,@ 400 kW ) . Additional fuel oil was stored in the bottoms of the newly added torpedo bulges , which increased her capacity to 5 @,@ 560 t ( 5 @,@ 470 long tons ) and thus her range to 8 @,@ 560 nmi ( 15 @,@ 850 km ; 9 @,@ 850 mi ) at 16 knots . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
