 Rates of OFC increase alongside cases of unchecked primary hyperparathyroidism . In developing countries , such as India , rates of disease as well as case reports often mirror those published in past decades in the developed world . 
 The other 10 % of cases are primarily caused by primary hyperplasia , or an increase of the number of cells . Parathyroid carcinoma accounts for less than 1 % of all cases , occurring most frequently in individuals around 50 years of age ( in stark contrast to OFC as a result of primary hyperparathyroidism ) and showing no gender preference . Approximately 95 % of <unk> caused by genetic factors is attributed to MEN type 1 . This mutation also tends to affect younger individuals . 
 = = History = = 
 The condition was first described by Gerhard Engel in 1864 and Friedrich Daniel von Recklinghausen in 1890 , though William Hunter , who died in 1783 , is credited with finding the first example of the disease . " von Recklinghausen 's disease " ( without the qualification " of bone " ) is a completely unrelated disorder , nowadays termed neurofibromatosis . In 1884 , Davies Colley delivered a presentation to the Pathological Society of London that detailed the manifestation of hyperparathyroidism into a brown tumor of the mandible , as well as the histological makeup of the tumor . 
 The discovery and subsequent description of the parathyroid glands is credited to Ivar Sandstrom , though his publication , On a New Gland in Man and Several Mammals @-@ <unk> <unk> , received little attention . Gustaf Retzius and Eugene <unk> compounded his research , the latter credited with the discovery of the function of the parathyroid glands . This research cumulated in the first surgical removal of a parathyroid tumor by Felix Mandel in 1925 . A 2 @.@ 5 × 1 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 64 × 38 mm ) tumor was removed from the thyroid artery of a man suffering from advanced OFC . The patient 's symptoms disappeared , only to return in approximately six years as a result of renal stones that were diagnosed only after the patient had died . In 1932 , blood tests on a female patient suffering from renal stone @-@ based OFC revealed extremely high blood calcium levels . Fuller Albright diagnosed and treated the woman , who suffered from a large tumor of the neck as well as renal stones . 
 The first published literature to describe a brown tumor ( which was linked to OFC ) was published in 1953 , though clinical reports from before 1953 do draw a correlation between the disease and tumors previous to the publication . 
 The advent of the multichannel <unk> in the 1960s and 70s led to an increase in early diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism . This increase led to a sharp decline in the prolonged manifestation of the disease , leading to a drop in the number of cases of OFC due to the early detection of hyperparathyroidism . Before this invention , the diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism was generally prolonged until the emergence of severe manifestations , such as OFC . 
 = The Dying Swan = 
 The Dying Swan ( originally The Swan ) is a solo choreographed by Mikhail Fokine in 1905 to Camille Saint @-@ Saëns 's Le Cygne from Le Carnaval des animaux as a pièce d <unk> for the ballerina Anna Pavlova , who performed it about 4 @,@ 000 times . The short ballet ( 4 minutes ) follows the last moments in the life of a swan , and was first presented in St. Petersburg , Russia in 1905 . The ballet has since influenced modern interpretations of Odette in Tchaikovsky 's Swan Lake and has inspired non @-@ traditional interpretations and various adaptations . 
 = = Background = = 
 Inspired by swans that she had seen in public parks and Alfred , Lord Tennyson 's poem " The Dying Swan " , Anna Pavlova ( who had just become a ballerina at the Mariinsky Theatre ) asked Michel Fokine to create a solo for her for a 1905 concert being given by artists from the chorus of the Imperial Mariinsky Opera . Fokine suggested Saint @-@ Saëns 's cello solo , Le Cygne ( which Fokine had been playing at home on a mandolin to a friend 's piano accompaniment ) and Pavlova agreed . A rehearsal was arranged and the short dance completed very quickly . Fokine remarked in Dance Magazine ( August 1931 ) : 
 It was almost an improvisation . I danced in front of her , she directly behind me . Then she danced and I walked alongside her , curving her arms and correcting details of poses . Prior to this composition , I was accused of barefooted tendencies and of rejecting toe dancing in general . The Dying Swan was my answer to such criticism . This dance became the symbol of the New Russian Ballet . It was a combination of masterful technique with expressiveness . It was like a proof that the dance could and should satisfy not only the eye , but through the medium of the eye should penetrate the soul . 
 In 1934 , Fokine told Arnold Haskell , author of <unk> : 
 Small work as it is , [ ... ] it was ' revolutionary ' then , and illustrated admirably the transition between the old and the new , for here I make use of the technique of the old dance and the traditional costume , and a highly developed technique is necessary , but the purpose of the dance is not to display that technique but to create the symbol of the everlasting struggle in this life and all that is mortal . It is a dance of the whole body and not of the limbs only ; it appeals not merely to the eye but to the emotions and the imagination . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The ballet was originally entitled The Swan but acquired its now familiar title following Pavlova 's tremulous interpretation of the work 's dramatic arc as the expiration of life . The dance is composed principally of supple upper body and arm movements and tiny , nibbling steps called pas de bourrée <unk> . 
 The French critic André Levinson wrote : 
 Arms folded , on tiptoe , she dreamily and slowly circles the stage . By even , gliding motions of the hands , returning to the background from whence she emerged , she seems to strive toward the horizon , as though a moment more and she will fly — exploring the confines of space with her soul . The tension gradually relaxes and she sinks to earth , arms waving faintly as in pain . Then faltering with irregular steps toward the edge of the stage — leg bones quiver like the strings of a harp — by one swift forward @-@ gliding motion of the right foot to earth , she sinks on the left knee — the aerial creature struggling against earthly bonds ; and there , transfixed by pain , she dies . 
 = = Performances and critical commentary = = 
 The Dying Swan was first performed by Pavlova at a gala in the Noblemen 's Hall , St. Petersburg , Russia , on Friday , 22 December 1905 , and first performed in the United States at the Metropolitan Opera House , New York , on 18 March 1910 . American dance critic and photographer Carl Van Vechten noted that the ballet was " the most exquisite specimen of [ Pavlova 's ] art which she has yet given to the public . " Pavlova performed the role some 4 @,@ 000 times and , on her deathbed in The Hague , reportedly cried , " Prepare my swan costume . " 
 Fokine 's granddaughter , Isabelle , notes that the ballet does not make " enormous technical demands " on the dancer but it does make " enormous artistic ones because every movement and every gesture should signify a different experience , " which is " emerging from someone who is attempting to escape death . " She notes that modern performances are significantly different from her grandfather 's original conception and that the solo today is often made to appear to be a variation of Swan Lake — " Odette at death 's door . " The ballet is not about a ballerina being able to transform herself into a swan , she states , but about death , with the swan simply being a metaphor for that . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Pavlova was recorded dancing The Dying Swan in a 1925 silent , nearly complete film , to which sound is often post @-@ applied . The short ballet has influenced interpretations of Odette in Tchaikovsky 's Swan Lake , particularly in the parting of the lovers in the first lakeside scene . 
 The dance was almost immediately adapted following its premiere by various ballerinas across the globe to suit their techniques and temperaments . As a result , Fokine published an official version of the choreography in 1925 , highlighted with 36 photographs of his wife Vera <unk> demonstrating the ballet 's sequential poses . At a later date , Kirov @-@ trained Natalia Makarova commented : 
 Of Fokine 's original choreography [ ... ] only scattered fragments remain [ ... ] he created only the <unk> [ a walking or running ballet step usually executed on the points of the toes ] for Pavlova . Subsequently , every performer [ ... ] has used the piece at her own taste and at her own risk [ ... ] In Russia I had danced <unk> 's version and [ ... ] experienced a certain discomfort [ ... ] from all the sentimental stuff — the rushing around the stage , the flailing of the arms [ ... ] to the contemporary eye , its conventions look almost ludicrous [ ... ] the dance needs total emotional abandon , conveying the image of a struggle with death or a surrender to it [ ... ] As for the emotional content , I was helped by Pavlova , whose film of the work I saw . Even today , her Swan is striking — the flawless feeling for style , the animated face — although certain melodramatic details seem superfluous . 
 The ballet has been variously interpreted and adapted . The 1917 Russian film The Dying Swan by director Yevgeni Bauer , for example , tells the story of an artist who strangles a ballerina . Maya Plisetskaya re @-@ interpreted the swan simply as elderly and stubbornly resisting the effects of aging , much like herself . Eventually the piece came to be considered one of Pavlova 's trademarks . More recently , Les Ballets <unk> de Monte Carlo perform a parody version that emphasizes every excess dormant in the choreography , and , in 2000 , street theatre artist Judith Lanigan created a hula hoop act based on the Fokine / Pavlova ballet divertissement that has been performed at international street theatre festivals , comedy and burlesque events , and in traditional and contemporary @-@ style circuses . 
 Several figure skaters have performed The Dying Swan with skate @-@ choreography inspired by the original ballet . Maribel Vinson ( 1936 Olympic bronze medallist from the US ) reviewed Sonja Henie 's 1936 professional debut for The New York Times and noted : 
 The crowd settled quickly into a receptive mood for Sonja 's famous interpretation of the Dying Swan of Saint @-@ Saëns . With spotlights giving the ice the effect of water at night , Miss Henie , outlined in a blue light , performed the dance made immortal by Pavlova . Whether one agrees that such posturing is suited to the medium of ice , there is no doubt that Miss Henie 's rendition is a lovely thing . Too much toe work at the start leaves the feeling that this does not belong to skating , but when she glides effortlessly back and forth , she is free as a disembodied spirit and there is an ease of movement that ballet never can produce . 
 Some ballerinas , including Ashley <unk> of New York City Ballet and Nina <unk> , formerly of American Ballet Theatre , have used " Dying Swan " arms in Swan Lake when making Odette 's exit at the end of Act II ( the first lakeside scene ) . 
 = Anahim hotspot = 
 The Anahim hotspot is a volcanic hotspot in central British Columbia , Canada . It is situated on the Interior Plateau , a large region that lies between the Cariboo and Monashee Mountains to the east , and the Hazelton Mountains , Coast Mountains to the west . As a geologic hotspot , it is a place that has experienced active volcanism over a long period of time . 
 <unk> from the mid @-@ Miocene period , it has recorded changes in the western @-@ moving North American Plate because it is believed to have been relatively stationary for tens of millions of years . Since then it has formed a line of volcanoes called the Anahim Volcanic Belt , stretching from the coast to the Interior Plateau near Quesnel . Each of the volcanoes was once over the hotspot , but migration of the North American Plate has pulled the volcanoes away from the hotspot 's magmatic source at a rate of 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) to 3 @.@ 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) per year . As a result , the volcanoes are progressively older to the west . The composition of magma to the volcanoes and its supply change with time as the volcanoes grow over the hotspot and migrate away . 
 = = Geological history = = 
 = = = Dike swarm emplacements = = = 
 The Anahim hotspot has a long history . About 13 and 12 million years ago , the Anahim hotspot created a peralkaline volcanic complex on what was then the coast of British Columbia , now heavily eroded to form the ~ 20 km ( 12 mi ) long Bella Bella and ~ 6 km ( 4 mi ) long Gale Passage dike swarms . Individual dikes are as thick as 20 m ( 66 ft ) and have basalt , trachyte , and comendite compositions . The converging dikes may mark the first appearance of the Anahim hotspot . During the early to middle Miocene era , the passage of the Anahim hotspot beneath the range created the central Coast Mountains ; this orogeny caused reactions with the North American Plate in late Miocene @-@ Pliocene time . 
 = = = Rainbow Range eruptive period = = = 
 During a period of 2 million years , extrusion of highly fluid basic and silicic lava flows built up the gently sloping Late Miocene Rainbow Range . It is one of three large peralkaline shield volcanoes that lie on an east @-@ west trend in west @-@ central British Columbia . Alkaline and peralkaline lava flows from four volcanic episodes make up an 845 m ( 2 @,@ 772 ft ) composite section on the north flank of the shield volcano . Basal <unk> trachyte flows are unconformably overlain by flows and flow breccias of <unk> . A sequence of 40 – 60 m ( 130 – 200 ft ) thick columnar @-@ jointed comendite flows blankets the underlying units and gives the volcano its shield @-@ like form . <unk> dikes , plugs , and minor capping flows are scattered over the north flank . <unk> flows , which commonly have a glassy <unk> at the base , account for 75 % of the lavas in the flank zone . The Rainbow shield was erupting until 6 @.@ 7 million years ago . 
 = = = Ilgachuz Range eruptive period = = = 
 Over a period of 2 million years , extrusion of highly fluid basic and silicic lava flows built up the gently sloping Late Miocene @-@ to @-@ Early Pliocene Ilgachuz Range . It is the second youngest of the three large <unk> shield volcanoes that lie on an east @-@ west trend in west @-@ central British Columbia with a diameter of 25 km ( 16 mi ) . The Ilgachuz shield was created by two chemically separate magmatic periods ; an early complex series of trachyte and rhyolite eruptions and late extrusion of a sequence of basaltic lava flows . The surface of the outer shield , cut by deeply incised radial valleys , rises to a complexly dissected summit area where remnants of a small central caldera and numerous felsic domes and basaltic feeders are exposed . The outer flanks of the shield merge with flat @-@ lying basalt of the Chilcotin Group , which is thought to have been formed by a back @-@ arc basin behind the Cascadia subduction zone . The volcano was spewing out ash , cinder , pumice , rhyolite , trachyte and basaltic lava up until 4 million years ago . 
 = = = Itcha Range eruptive period = = = 
 During a period of 3 million years , extrusion of undersaturated trachyte flows built up the gently sloping Late Pliocene @-@ to @-@ Pleistocene Itcha Range . It is the easternmost and youngest of the three large felsic shield volcanoes lying on an east @-@ west trend in west @-@ central British Columbia . It has a diameter of 15 km ( 9 mi ) . The broad scale morphology of the Itcha shield is given by the extensive lateral distribution of thick ( 70 – 150 m ( 230 – 490 ft ) ) felsic flows which erupted from fissure vents around a central vent to cover an area of 330 km3 ( 79 cu mi ) . Most late @-@ stage lavas capping the Itcha shield complex were erupted from cinder cones , tuff rings , and fissure vents in the eastern half of the complex about 80 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 = = = Nazko Cone eruptive period = = = 
 Throughout the Holocene epoch , the Anahim hotspot has energized numerous volcanoes . This volcanic activity has produced numerous Hawaiian eruptions , which created lava fountains , small cinder cones and lava flows . The youngest expression of the Anahim hotspot is Nazko Cone , which formed about 340 @,@ 000 years ago . The most recent eruptive activity at Nazko Cone occurred about 7 @,@ 200 years ago . This is very recent in geological terms , suggesting that the volcano may yet have some ongoing volcanic activity . The Rainbow Range is the largest Anahim volcano , although Nazko Cone is now the site of the most intense volcanic activity , located directly on top of the Anahim hotspot at . Its last eruption started with an eruption of two different progressions of runny lava flows , which resulted in an older , grey basalt becoming overlain by a younger , darker black basaltic lava flow . The passive eruptions were followed by a period of explosive eruptions . This explosive activity built three overlying cinder cones that broke by the two lava flows near the end of the explosive phase of activity . The last phase of explosive activity spread tephra to the north and east of the cones . The deepest deposits near the cone are less than 3 m ( 10 ft ) ; that they thin to less than a few centimetres only a few kilometres away , suggests that the explosive eruptions at Nazko Cone were fairly small . However , the last eruption from Nazko Cone could have started forest fires , since there is charcoal inside the tephra layer . 
 = = Petrology and geochemistry = = 
 Analysis of the chemical composition of the lavas gives important clues about the source and dynamics of the hotspot plume . Where hotspots occur under thick continental crust , basaltic magma is trapped in the less dense continental crust , which is heated and melts to form rhyolites . These rhyolites can be quite hot and form violent eruptions , despite their low water content . Such rhyolitic magma can be found at the western part of the Anahim Volcanic Belt , which contrasts the more basaltic material in the Nazko Cone area . This suggests that as the North American Plate moves westwards , the Anahim hotspot underlies thinner continental crust . This hypothesis has been verified by observation of the crustal regime in other compression margins – the thickest granitic structures are found near the margin itself , with the North American Plate becoming less compressed in regions away from the margin . In this case , the thinner crust would represent briefer travel time , thus reducing the time available for magma differentiation , whose end products are rhyolites . As most magma is basaltic in origin , the eruption would therefore contain more basaltic materials . A few igneous rock types with composition unlike basalt , such as <unk> , do occur at the small basaltic cinder cones and flows but are extremely rare . 
 Basaltic lava flows have a high <unk> ( iron and magnesium ) content and erupt at temperatures between 1000 ° C and 1200 ° C ; these values are higher than those of other common igneous rocks . Due to the high temperature of this lava flow , the lava would be extremely fluid ( it has low viscosity ) , allowing the lava to travel long distances from the magma source ( the volcano or vent ) . These extremely fluid lavas have flow speeds that depend heavily on underlying terrain , with a maximum of almost 60 kilometres per hour ( 37 mph ) in underground lava channels . Flow independent of such channels and tubes moves quite a bit slower , averaging speeds of 1 @.@ 6 km ( 1 mi ) per hour . However , this flow speed changes considerably within the flow , with speeds depending heavily on depth and degree of cooling that the flow has experienced ( essentially distance from the vent ) . Although the Nazko area flows would not be highly basaltic like those found in Iceland or Hawaii , lower depths are unlikely as viscosity is normally higher . 
 A few volcanic centers in the vicinity of the Bella Bella and Gale Passage dike swarms , such as Helmet Peak and <unk> Hill , which are members of the Milbanke Sound Group , may represent the westernmost of the Anahim volcanoes , but their ages are significantly different , provoking on @-@ going questions about their origin and connection to other regional volcanic activity . However , many volcanoes in that center are believed to be monogenetic , suggesting a monogenetic volcanic field may be responsible . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The source of the Anahim hotspot is a matter of controversy . Some geologists hypothesize that the Anahim hotspot is linked with an upper mantle plume ( <unk> ) rather than the more common deep mantle plume because of the small size of the Bella Bella and Gale Passage dike swarms . Others prefer to attribute the hotspot to tensional cracking of the lithosphere above the northern edge of the subducting Juan de Fuca and Explorer plates at the Cascadia subduction zone or interpreted as an edge effect of the subducting plates in the mantle . None of the hypotheses so far suggested is without critics . Part of the controversy is due to the rather sudden appearance of the hotspot in the geologic record . A number of hotspot models have been suggested to explain tensional cracking origins , however . Some of Earth 's more prominent hotspots were unified along with flood basalt volcanism and <unk> rifting . While mafic lava flows appear to merge laterally with the less silicon @-@ undersaturated lavas of the Chilcotin Group surrounding the Anahim Volcanic Belt , the particular nature and connection between the Anahim hotspot and the Chilcotin Group is unknown . Volcanic chemistry and isotopic composition of the Anahim Volcanic Belt do not distinguish between either a rift or a hotspot setting . 
 = = Future and present = = 
 Volcanism appears to have ceased in the western parts of the Anahim Volcanic Belt , but if that is correct , future eruptive activity can be expected in the Nazko Cone area and east of it . Future eruptions from the Anahim hotspot are most likely in the creation of basaltic cinder cones , but eruptions of less mafic magma , typical of the eastern portions of the Anahim Volcanic Belt , cannot be ruled out . 
 = = = Seismology = = = 
 The Anahim hotspot is the only notable earthquake zone in the Canadian Cordillera away from the British Columbia Coast . A series of < 3 @.@ 0 magnitude earthquakes began October 9 , 2007 with its epicenter in the McNaughton Lake region near Nazko Cone , which could signal the resumption of intense subterranean volcanic activity in the area . Thirty @-@ four such < 3 @.@ 0 magnitude earthquakes were observed on October 10 , 2007 alone . Since then more than 1 @,@ 000 small earthquakes have been recorded . They are thought to have originated 25 km ( 16 mi ) below the surface , but none of them have been felt by people . The cause of this seismic activity is believed to be the upwelling of 500 @,@ 000 m3 ( 650 @,@ 000 cu yd ) of magma , because the area is not close to any faults or tectonic plate boundaries . This is the first indication of potential volcanic activity in Canada since around 1830 to 1850 in northwestern British Columbia . 
 The recent earthquake swarms in the Anahim hotspot have aroused much interest from volcanologists and seismologists since they began on October 9 , 2007 . More than 1 @,@ 000 earthquakes have now been detected , and seven stations are now monitoring the area for further activity . The region 's earthquake swarms have given rise to speculation of a possible eruption , a possibility estimated around 10 % . An eruption in the region would not cause many fatalities , due to the region 's remoteness , but people engaged in logging and ranching in the region are at risk . The greatest threats would be from forest fires and possible health risks to those in the area if volcanic gasses or ash columns were released . Also , the Anahim hotspot is situated in the immediate proximity of a major air traffic route , and volcanic ash reduces visibility and can cause jet engine failure as well as damage to other aircraft systems . 
 = 1952 Groundhog Day tropical storm = 
 The extraordinary 1952 Groundhog Day Storm was the only Atlantic tropical cyclone on record in the month of February . First observed in the western Caribbean Sea on February 2 as a non @-@ frontal low , it moved rapidly throughout its duration and struck southwestern Florida early the next day as a gale @-@ force storm . In the state , the winds damaged some crops and power lines , but no serious damage was reported . The system became a tropical storm after emerging over the Atlantic Ocean before quickly transitioning into an extratropical cyclone on February 4 . Strong winds and waves washed a freighter ashore , but no injuries were related to the event . Subsequently , the storm brushed eastern New England , causing minor power outages , before it moved inland near Maine . There were no reported fatalities related to the storm . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On February 2 , Groundhog Day , a disturbance was first observed in the western Caribbean Sea . Winds were estimated at around 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) , and it tracked rapidly northward , initially to the north @-@ northwest . After passing near Cancún along the Yucatan Peninsula , it turned northeastward and brushed the northwest coast of Cuba . Early on February 3 the storm approached Key West , and shortly thereafter moved ashore near Cape Sable , Florida . It quickly crossed the state , passing near Miami before emerging into the western Atlantic Ocean . The Miami National Weather Service office recorded a wind gust of 68 mph ( 110 km / h ) , as well as sustained tropical storm force winds for about four hours ; the station also recorded a barometric pressure of 1004 mbar ( 29 @.@ 66 inHg ) . 
 After leaving Florida , the storm continued rapidly northeastward and transitioned into a tropical cyclone . Late on February 3 it reached its peak strength with maximum sustained winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . On February 4 it completed the transition into an extratropical cyclone off the coast of North Carolina . Around that time , gale force winds extended 100 miles ( 160 km ) to the east of the center . Later that day , it passed over Cape Cod , and early on February 5 it moved into eastern Maine . The Hurricane Research Division assessed the storm as losing its identity shortly thereafter , over New Brunswick . However , a map produced by the U.S. Weather Bureau indicated that the storm continued northward into the Gulf of Saint Lawrence and later crossed eastern Quebec and Labrador . By February 6 , it reached the ocean again , deepening to a minimum pressure of 988 mbar ( 29 @.@ 18 inHg ) . At that point , the Weather Bureau track ended , and as such the ultimate fate of the storm is unknown . 
 = = Impact and records = = 
 Residents and tourists in southern Florida were unprepared for the unusual off @-@ season storm . Winds of up to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) spread across the area , causing damage to windows and power lines . The storm dropped 2 – 4 inches ( 50 – 100 mm ) of precipitation along its path ; the combination of unseasonable rainfall and winds resulted in crop damage in Miami @-@ Dade County . 
 After the storm moved into the western Atlantic , the Miami U.S. Weather Bureau issued storm warnings for the North Carolina coastline from Wilmington to Cape Hatteras ; the region was warned to prepare for strong winds . The agency also issued a small craft advisory southward through Charleston , South Carolina . Offshore , the storm produced winds of up to 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) , as well as waves up to 35 feet ( 10 m ) in height . The combination of the winds and rough waves drove a freighter ashore along Portsmouth Island in the Outer Banks , after the engine was damaged when water entered the fuel line . The 26 person crew initially planned to evacuate , but they later decided to stay on the freighter as the U.S. Coast Guard were deployed to assist . The seas damaged a portion of the ship , but the entire crew was rescued without any injuries . The storm later brushed New England , bringing rain , fog , warmer temperatures , and gusty winds . The combination resulted in downed power poles and tree limbs , leaving 10 @,@ 000 houses without electricity . 
 The storm was described as a " freak " , forming about three months after the end of the hurricane season . The chief forecaster at Miami U.S. Weather Bureau , Grady Norton , remarked that he was unsure how the cyclone developed . It is the only tropical or subtropical storm on record during the month of February , and was the earliest tropical cyclone to strike the United States . Its structure initially was uncertain , and the storm was not included in the 1952 Atlantic hurricane season summary published by the Miami Weather Bureau office . Ultimately it was included in the tropical cyclone database . Had it been operationally treated as a tropical cyclone , it would have been named Tropical Storm Able . 
 = Gabriel Jones ( Virginia ) = 
 Gabriel Jones ( May 17 , 1724 – October 1806 ) was an 18th @-@ century Welsh American lawyer , legislator , court clerk and civil servant in the colony ( and later U.S. state ) of Virginia . 
 Jones attended Christ 's Hospital ( also known as " The Bluecoat School " ) , after which he served as an indentured apprentice studying jurisprudence under a solicitor in the Court of Chancery and of Lyon 's Inn in Middlesex . At the age of 21 , Jones was admitted to practice law following the completion of his apprenticeship . He was persuaded by either Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron , the landowner of the Northern Neck Proprietary , or his relative Hugh Mercer to return to Virginia , where he engaged in the practice of law . 
 Jones served as Clerk of Court for Hampshire County , Virginia ( now West Virginia ) for a tenure lasting 25 years ( 1757 – 1782 ) and represented Frederick , Hampshire , and Augusta counties as a member of the House of Burgesses of Virginia . In addition , Jones also served as the King 's Attorney for Augusta County and as the coroner for Frederick County . He was elected to represent Virginia at the Continental Congress but did not attend , and was elected to represent Rockingham County in the Virginia Ratifying Convention . Jones was an uncle of American pioneer John Gabriel Jones ( 1752 – 1776 ) , and he was a friend of both George Washington and Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Gabriel Jones was born on May 17 , 1724 , approximately 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from Williamsburg , in York County , Colony of Virginia . He was a son of John and Elizabeth Jones , who had arrived in Virginia several years earlier from Montgomeryshire in northern Wales , Great Britain , where Jones 's family was of noble descent . Jones 's father was a weaver . Jones 's elder sister Elizabeth was born on August 13 , 1721 , at the College of William & Mary in Williamsburg , and his younger brother John was born on June 12 , 1725 , at the same location as Jones . 
 According to Jones family tradition , Jones 's father lost a significant amount of his wealth while in Virginia , which brought about his family 's return to England in 1727 . Jones 's father 's death prior to 1727 also precipitated the family 's move , and following their relocation to England , Elizabeth raised Jones and his siblings in London where she had Jones 's sister baptized at St Giles in the Fields on February 20 , 1727 . 
 In April 1732 , Jones was granted admission to Christ 's Hospital ( also known as " The Bluecoat School " ) in London following his presentation by Thomas Sandford . Jones attended Christ 's Hospital for seven years . On April 12 , 1739 , he was discharged from the institution by his mother and John Houghton , a Solicitor in the Court of Chancery and of Lyon 's Inn in Middlesex . Despite its noble origins , Jones 's family was of limited means , and he served as an indentured apprentice studying jurisprudence under Houghton 's charge for a term of six years until 1745 . At the age of 21 , Jones was admitted to practice law following the completion of his apprenticeship . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = Return to Virginia = = = 
 Following his admission to the bar and the death of his mother in 1745 , Jones was persuaded by either Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron , the landowner of the Northern Neck Proprietary , or his relative Hugh Mercer to return to Virginia . Once he was " free of his indentures " and had " attained his majority " , Jones secured his return to Virginia . He settled first in Fredericksburg and later relocated to Frederick County , after which on March 1 , 1747 , he acquired a tract of land along Opequon Creek near present @-@ day Kernstown , where he resided for several years . Upon settling in Frederick County , Jones became the private secretary to Lord Fairfax . 
 = = = House of Burgesses tenures = = = 
 Jones was appointed to serve as the first King 's Attorney for Augusta County around April 1746 , at the age of 22 . The county 's court recommended Jones to the position , citing him " as a fit person to transact His Majesty 's affairs in this county " . Jones continued to reside in Frederick County while performing the duties of King 's Attorney in Augusta County . When the first appointed justices of Augusta County assembled on December 9 , 1745 , the body qualified Jones to practice as an " attorney @-@ at @-@ law " in the county . He was the first lawyer to reside within the then @-@ boundaries of Augusta County . Jones served in that position for two years until his election to represent Frederick County as a member of the House of Burgesses of Virginia in 1748 , and he was subsequently re @-@ elected to his seat for the 1749 legislative session . From 1748 to 1750 , Jones represented Frederick County alongside George Fairfax . 
 Jones was again elected to represent Frederick County in the House of Burgesses in 1752 , but resigned in 1753 to serve as the county 's coroner . From 1752 until 1754 , Jones represented Frederick County alongside George William Fairfax . In 1753 , Jones relocated from Kernstown in Frederick County to his estate " Bogota " in Augusta County ( present @-@ day Rockingham County near the modern unincorporated community of Port Republic ) . From 1754 to 1755 , Jones served alongside a Mr. Parker representing Hampshire County in the House of Burgesses . Jones and Parker were Hampshire County 's first representatives in the House of Burgesses following the county 's creation on May 1 , 1754 . Jones , along with Lord Fairfax , was appointed as a trustee for the towns of Winchester and Stephensburg ( present @-@ day Stephens City ) charged with laying out the towns and establishing regulations for the construction of residences in each town . 
 = = = Hampshire County Clerk of Court tenure = = = 
 In 1757 , Jones was appointed by Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron , to serve as Clerk of Court for Hampshire County . Jones was on close terms with Lord Fairfax , and George Rockingham Gilmer described Jones as a " kinsman , friend and executor of Lord Fairfax " . Despite the county 's establishment in 1754 , it was not until 1757 that formal record @-@ keeping was actualized in Hampshire County , due in part to the French and Indian War . While Archibald Wager was likely the first appointed Clerk of Court for Hampshire County , Jones was the first operational appointee to serve in the position . According to historian Wilmer L. Kerns in Hampshire County , West Virginia , 1754 – 2004 ( 2004 ) , Jones was " well @-@ organized " and had the " best penmanship of any clerk in the history of the county , in spite of being totally blind in his right eye " . Historians Hu Maxwell and Howard Llewellyn Swisher described Jones 's handwriting as " unmistakable " in their History of Hampshire County , West Virginia ( 1897 ) . 
 Around 1760 , Jones hired Samuel Dew of Richmond County to serve as his deputy clerk . Dew apprenticed under Jones for 21 years , occasionally performing duties as acting clerk . Due to his close relationship with Lord Fairfax , it is likely that Jones was Clerk of Court of neighboring counties also under the ownership of Lord Fairfax 's Northern Neck Proprietary . According to Maxwell and Swisher , Jones relied upon his deputy clerks , such as Dew , to transcribe and document court proceedings , which Jones traveled among the various counties to sign . 
 While serving as Clerk of Court , Jones was again elected to serve as a member of the House of Burgesses representing Augusta County from 1757 until 1758 and Hampshire County from 1758 until 1761 . It was during this period that Jones formed a close relationship with George Washington , and the two regularly corresponded . Jones was elected to serve a final term in the House of Burgesses representing Augusta County in 1771 . In 1774 , Jones was elected to represent Virginia in the Continental Congress but did not attend . When Jones 's Bogota estate became part of the newly minted Rockingham County following its creation from Augusta County in 1778 , Jones thus became a citizen of Rockingham and was summarily appointed as its Deputy Commonwealth 's Attorney . Jones was also commissioned to ascertain the " pay and subsistence " of the Virginia militia and damages caused by Cherokee and Catawba Native American tribes throughout the Virginia frontier . In addition , Jones was appointed , along with Samuel Washington and George Read , by the Continental Congress and Virginia to travel to Fort Pitt , Pennsylvania , to inquire about " the condition of affairs there " in 1777 . Following the death of Lord Fairfax in 1781 , Jones was one of the executors of Lord Fairfax 's will . 
 Jones served as Clerk of Court for Hampshire County for a tenure spanning 25 years until his retirement from the position in 1782 . In their History of Hampshire County , West Virginia ( 1897 ) , Maxwell and Swisher theorize that Jones retired from his position due in part to Lord Fairfax 's death the previous year and waning British influence in Virginia toward the conclusion of the American Revolutionary War . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 Following his retirement from his position as Clerk of Court for Hampshire County , Jones continued to remain active in Virginia political affairs . In 1784 , George Washington visited and dined with Jones at his home at Bogota . In 1788 , Jones and his brother @-@ in @-@ law Thomas Lewis were elected to represent Rockingham County at the Virginia Ratifying Convention , where both were fervent proponents for the adoption of the United States Constitution . Archibald Stuart of neighboring Augusta County traveled to Rockingham to canvass for Jones prior to the election , and in return , Jones gifted Stuart a chaise for he and his wife to return home in to Augusta County . Jones was among the first trustees of the Staunton Academy , following its incorporation by an act of the Virginia General Assembly on December 4 , 1792 . 
 Jones continued to practice law in Rockingham County until his death . The road upon which he regularly traveled between his residence Bogota and Rockingham County 's seat of Harrisonburg became known as " The Lawyer 's Road " , which evolved to its present name of " Lawyer Road " . Because of his prominence throughout the Valley of Virginia region , and possibly also due to the fact he may have been the first lawyer in Augusta County , Jones was nicknamed " The Valley Lawyer " . Jones died at his estate Bogota in October 1806 . 
 In the spring of 1887 , a memorial window to Jones and his wife was installed in a new Episcopal church erected near their former Bogota residence . Jones was further memorialized in historian Joseph Addison Waddell 's Annals of Augusta County , Virginia ( 1886 ) , in which Waddell remarked of Jones : " He was considered a man of great ability and unbending integrity . His only fault , or the only one which tradition tells of , was an extremely irritable temper , which , when aroused , expressed itself in the strongest terms he could command , mingled with no little profanity . Having a scorn of all dishonesty and meanness , he did not spare a miscreant by tongue or pen . " In his Historic Families of Kentucky ( 1889 ) , historian and genealogist Thomas Marshall Green said of Jones : " Gabriel Jones rose rapidly in his profession ; in attainments he was second to no man at the colonial bar ; in native ability he was conspicuous among those who stood in the first rank . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Jones was married on October 16 , 1749 , to Margaret Strother Morton ( 1726 – 1822 ) , the widow of George Morton and the daughter of William Strother and his wife Margaret Watts of King George County . Jones 's wife lived to be 97 , and was described by Waddell in his Annals of Augusta County , Virginia as " a lady of eminent Christian character " . Jones and his wife Margaret had three daughters , one son , and a child of unknown sex that died in infancy : Margaret Morton Jones Harvie , married to lawyer Colonel John Harvie of Albemarle County ; Elizabeth Jones Lewis , married to merchant John Lewis of Fredericksburg ( son of Fielding Lewis and his first wife Catharine Washington ) ; Anna Gabriella Jones Hawkins , married to John Hawkins of Kentucky ; and William Strother Jones ( born March 21 , 1756 ) , married to Fanny Thornton of Fredericksburg . 
 Jones was an Anglican . As early as 1750 , Jones used the same family crest and coat of arms as philologist Sir William Jones , indicating a possible familial relationship between the two . Physically , Jones was of short stature , and according to an extant contemporary portrait of him by artist John Drinker , Jones sported a wig and an eyepatch over his right eye . According to Jones 's descendants , it was supposed that his right eye was injured in his earlier years while others attributed the loss of his right eye to an accident during his later years . Jones was completely blind in his right eye , and had likely suffered his injury prior to his tenure as Clerk of Court for Hampshire County in 1757 . Philip Doddridge described Jones as wearing a bicorne hat , " frilled shirt bosom " , and waistbands . He further described Jones as sporting " powdered hair " , a blue coat , a white vest , a cravat , silk stockings , and silver knee and shoe buckles . 
 In his spare time during and between holding political appointments and serving in elected offices , Jones regularly embarked upon " pleasure trips " to various American cities including Baltimore and Richmond . Another known pastime of Jones 's was gaming . According to Maxwell and Swisher in their History of Hampshire County , West Virginia ( 1897 ) , Jones had been gambling over the course of several days while in Richmond until a final game left him with only one shilling remaining in his pocketbook . Jones was wearing a coat fastened with twelve gold buttons each valued at five dollars , and undeterred after losing his last shilling , he began staking one gold button at a time until he was left with one . Without hesitation , Jones removed his final button and remarked : " Here goes the last button on Gabe 's coat . " Maxwell and Swisher state that Jones 's remark " became a proverb in Hampshire County " and was used when someone had been driven to extremes and utilized what little resources were left at their disposal . 
 = = Landholdings = = 
 Jones settled in Frederick County and on March 1 , 1747 , he acquired a tract of land along Opequon Creek near present @-@ day Kernstown , where he resided for several years . On August 8 , 1751 , Jones acquired from Christopher Francisco of Pennsylvania 244 acres ( 99 ha ; 0 @.@ 381 sq mi ) of land along the northern side of the South Fork Shenandoah River in Augusta County ( later Rockingham County ) near the present @-@ day unincorporated community of Port Republic . 
 While still a resident in Frederick County , Jones purchased another 400 acres ( 160 ha ; 0 @.@ 63 sq mi ) on the northern side of the James River in Botetourt County . On December 3 , 1753 , Jones sold his property near Kernstown in Frederick County and relocated to his tract of land along the Shenandoah River , on which he established his estate later known as Bogota . Jones was the first to settle and construct a residence on his Bogota property upon his arrival in 1753 , and the estate received its name under Jones 's occupancy . Jones continued to reside at Bogota until his death in 1806 . 
 Following Jones 's death in 1806 , his widow Margaret Morton Jones continued to reside at Bogota until her own death in 1822 . <unk> Harvie , the son of Jones 's daughter Margaret Jones Harvie and her husband John Harvie , purchased the Bogota estate after the death of Jones 's wife , and Harvie subsequently sold the property in 1830 to Jacob Strayer , who built the current house in 1845 – 1847 . The original house erected and occupied by Jones was demolished shortly after the construction of the current house . The site of Jones 's house is presently located on property no longer part of the Bogota estate , which was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on March 25 , 2009 . A log tenant house estimated to have been built during the mid @-@ 18th century during the ownership of the Jones family is extant , and remains part of the current Bogota estate , as of 2008 . 
 = Circuit split = 
 In United States federal courts , a circuit split occurs when two or more different circuit courts of appeals provide conflicting rulings on the same legal issue . The existence of a circuit split is one of the factors that the Supreme Court of the United States considers when deciding whether to grant review of a case . Some scholars suggest that the Supreme Court is more likely to grant review of a case to resolve a circuit split than for any other reason . 
 Despite the Supreme Court 's desire to resolve conflicts between circuit courts , legal scholars disagree about whether circuit splits are detrimental or beneficial . Some argue that circuit splits are harmful because they create confusion and encourage forum shopping , while other scholars argue that variation among circuits allows local courts to experiment with new laws that reflect the values of local residents . Scholars have also observed that regional variations in different areas of the United States have provided certain circuits with a particular specialization or expertise in some subjects of the law . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Article III of the United States Constitution specifies that " [ t ] he judicial Power of the United States , shall be vested in one supreme Court , and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish . " In 1789 , Congress created the first system of intermediate appellate courts , known as federal circuit courts , which had appellate jurisdiction over certain matters decided by District Courts . These federal circuit courts consisted of two justices from the Supreme Court of the United States and one district court judge . In 1891 , Congress created the existing system of United States courts of appeals , which hear appeals from United States district courts within limited geographic areas . For example , the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit hears appeals originating from United States district courts in Louisiana , Mississippi , and Texas . Decisions in circuit courts are usually made by rotating three @-@ judge panels chosen from judges sitting within that circuit , and circuit courts also occasionally decide cases en banc . 
 Circuit courts do not collaborate or work with other circuits to resolve legal issues , and different circuit courts may reach conflicting conclusions about the same legal issue . Furthermore , cases decided in one circuit are not binding authority on other circuits . If the Supreme Court of the United States has not ruled on a legal issue , federal courts of appeals resolve these issues " as they see fit , subject only to a norm of <unk> stare decisis . " When a circuit split occurs , there is rarely an even numeric division among courts of appeals with regard to how the dispute should be resolved . In fact , one study found that courts of appeals split evenly in less than one third of all circuit splits . Occasionally , separate courts of appeals will reach three or more different conclusions with regard to the same legal issue . 
 = = Significance = = 
 Some scholars criticize the existence of circuit splits , while other scholars suggest that circuit splits may , in fact , be beneficial . Others simply argue that circuit splits may not be ideal , but problems associated with inter @-@ circuit conflicts are overstated . For example , Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals Judge Harvie Wilkinson once stated the " world will not end because a few circuit splits are left unresolved . " 
 = = = Criticisms of circuit splits = = = 
 Legal analysts have identified problems associated with circuit splits . Jesse M. <unk> , for example , suggests that circuit splits create a state of confusion and uncertainty for citizens . Because different laws are applied and enforced in different jurisdictions , Daniel J. Meador has argued that Circuit splits may create a judicial " Tower of Babel . " Additionally , Wayne A. Logan has argued that if courts speak with a unified voice , this will " secure popular respect for judicial authority . " Likewise , Matthew Lund cautions that circuit splits will lead to forum shopping , where litigants flock to jurisdictions with more favorable laws . Judge Kimberly A. Moore also suggests that circuit splits and forum shopping lead to economic inefficiency because outcomes are unpredictable and litigants are less likely to settle . 
 Scholars have also argued that inconsistent application of laws in different circuits is inherently unfair . Trevor W. Morrison , for example , claims that circuit splits create potential due process conflicts if criminal defendants are unaware that their behavior constitutes criminal activity in that circuit . An article in the New England Journal on Criminal & Civil Confinement also suggested that there is the potential for the unconstitutional ex post facto application of law after circuit splits are resolved . Additionally , Jesse M. <unk> argues that federal agencies tasked with enforcing laws throughout the United States may face challenges implementing regulatory measures when federal legislation is interpreted differently in separate circuits . 
 = = = Arguments in favor of circuit splits = = = 
 Legal scholars have also identified benefits associated with circuit splits . For example , Justice Louis Brandeis praised the fact that splits of opinion among courts allow jurisdictions to experiment with new developments in law without risking harm to other jurisdictions . Judge Diane P. Wood has suggested that circuit splits and " disagreements with colleagues force judges to sharpen their writing , push them to defend their positions , and from time to time persuade them that someone else 's perspective is preferable " . Amanda Frost has argued that negative attitudes toward circuit splits may hinder progress and creative problem solving because " [ c ] <unk> of appeals are generally hesitant to depart from precedent set in other jurisdictions , despite being under no obligation to adhere to decisions by sister circuits . " Consequently , Frost suggests that uniformity among circuits may be " overvalued . " Likewise , Wayne A. Logan suggests that Circuit splits may also be beneficial by virtue of the fact that citizens in different parts of the country have different preferences for how to structure their laws . Additionally , Judge J. Clifford Wallace has argued that there is nothing inherently wrong with different laws existing in different circuits , and " if conflicts were by their very nature unacceptable , the traditional rule denying <unk> status to out @-@ of @-@ circuit decisions probably would not have enjoyed its long history . " 
 = = Resolving circuit splits at the Supreme Court of the United States = = 
 One of the primary functions of the Supreme Court of the United States is to ensure that laws are interpreted uniformly among intermediate courts of appeal . Unless the legislature takes action , the United States Supreme Court is the only source of resolution for conflicts among intermediate courts of appeal . Consequently , the existence of a circuit split may be a key factor when the Supreme Court decides whether to accept a case . Although the Court always maintains discretion over whether it should grant review of a case , the Rules of the Supreme Court of the United States specifically state that the existence of a circuit split is one of the factors the Court considers when deciding whether to grant review . Philip Allen <unk> and H.W. Perry both claim that the existence of a circuit split is " the single most important <unk> factor " that determines whether the Supreme Court will grant review of a case . 
 Although federal judges are prohibited from commenting publicly " on the merits of a matter pending or impending in any court " , Judge Alfred T. Goodwin has stated that circuit court judges will occasionally create circuit splits to " hold the Supreme Court 's toes to the fire " and force the Supreme Court to overrule precedent in other circuits . Goodwin also wrote that " some of our number actually found it intellectually stimulating to challenge the Supreme Court from time to time " but that those judges were " usually were rewarded by a Nine Zip reversal " . Likewise , Judge Charles R. Wilson noted that when he drafted dissenting opinions , he would consider whether the parties planned to appeal the case to the Supreme Court of the United States , and " [ i ] f I believe that the parties will [ file an appeal ] , I write the dissent with the Supreme Court in mind " . C. Steven Bradford has also argued that circuit courts will " disregard a Supreme Court precedent if convinced that the Supreme Court would not follow it " . 
 A study of Supreme Court cases during the first six terms of the Roberts Court ( 2005 @-@ 2010 ) resolving circuit splits found that the Supreme Court upheld the view held by the majority of circuits in 51 @.@ 5 percent of all cases . This same study found the greatest agreement when deciding legal issues between the Fifth and Tenth circuits ( 80 @.@ 6 percent ) , the First and Second circuits ( 73 @.@ 5 percent ) , and the Fifth and Fourth circuits ( 73 @.@ 0 percent ) . The circuit courts that agreed the least frequently were the Ninth and Fourth circuits ( 39 @.@ 0 percent ) and the Ninth and Seventh circuits ( 39 @.@ 2 percent ) . Additionally , a study analyzing cases from the 2010 term found that nearly two thirds of Supreme Court decisions resolving circuit splits were decided unanimously or by an 8 @-@ 1 vote . Historically , the Supreme Court has reversed a high percentage of cases from the Ninth Circuit . In the 1996 @-@ 1997 term , the Supreme Court reversed twenty seven out of twenty eight cases on review from the Ninth Circuit . <unk> Herald attributes this high reversal rate to the Ninth Circuit 's liberal reputation , and former United States senator Conrad Burns claims the Ninth Circuit is " out of step " with the rest of the nation . 
 = = Specialization among circuit courts of appeals = = 
 The eleven numbered circuit courts of appeals and the District of Columbia Circuit have appellate jurisdiction over cases in almost every area of the law arising within the boundaries of that circuit . However , the subjects that appear more frequently in each circuit vary according to the kinds of cases that arise more often within the circuit 's boundaries . The District of Columbia Circuit , for example , hears a large number of administrative law cases . Likewise , the Second Circuit hears nearly one third of all federal securities law appeals , and the Fifth Circuit hears approximately one half of all federal immigration appeals . Eric Hansford argues that this has led to " specialized " courts with particular expertise with the subjects that appear before the court more frequently . Studies also suggest that the Supreme Court is more likely to affirm decisions of circuit courts when the circuit court has ruled on a case for which they possess special expertise . 
 In some specialized areas of the law , cases are assigned to a court of appeals that possesses expertise in that area of the law . For example , Congress created the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit as an exclusive federal court of appeals for patent cases . Congress noted that consolidating cases in a single court of appeals would " strengthen the United States patent system in such a way as to foster technological growth and industrial innovation . " Because of its role as a specialist court , circuit splits rarely exist between the Federal Circuit and other circuit courts of appeal . In his opinion in Markman v. Westview Instruments , Inc . , Justice David Souter observed that avoiding conflicting rulings among circuit courts in patent law cases benefits the economy by providing legal certainty to businesses . 
 = = Examples of existing circuit splits = = 
 The following are examples of existing splits of authority between different circuit courts of appeals : 
 The Sixth Circuit and the Tenth Circuit disagree with regard to whether police may seize an individual , without a warrant , based solely on the officers ' reasonable suspicion that the individual being seized committed a misdemeanor . 
 The Third Circuit , Fifth Circuit , and Ninth Circuit disagree with regard to whether the " special needs " exception permits warrantless strip searches of juveniles . 
 The Fifth Circuit and the Eleventh Circuit disagree with regard to whether prisoners have a reasonable expectation of privacy for correspondence with their attorney . 
 The First Circuit and the Fifth Circuit disagree with regard to the appellate standard of review for a trial court 's determination of the scope of defendant 's consent to search . 
 = Thomas Danforth = 
 Thomas Danforth ( baptized November 20 , 1623 – November 5 , 1699 ) was a politician , magistrate , and landowner in the Massachusetts Bay Colony . A conservative Puritan , he served for many years as one of the colony 's councilors and magistrates , generally leading opposition to attempts by the English kings to assert control over the colony . He accumulated land in the central part of the colony that eventually became a portion of Framingham , Massachusetts . His government roles included administration of territory in present @-@ day Maine that was purchased by the colony . 
 Danforth was a magistrate and leading figure in the colony at the time of the Salem witch trials , but did not sit on the Court of Oyer and Terminer . Despite this , he is inaccurately depicted in Arthur Miller 's play The Crucible and its movie adaptations as doing so . He is presented as a harsh and domineering judge , apparently conflated with William Stoughton , who is not even named in Miller 's play . In reality , Danforth is recorded as being critical of the conduct of the trials , and played a role in bringing them to an end . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thomas Danforth was born in Framlingham , Suffolk , England , and baptized on November 20 , 1623 . He was the eldest son of Nicholas Danforth ( 1589 – 1638 ) and Elizabeth Symmes ( 1596 – 1629 ) . Danforth immigrated with his father , brothers Samuel and Jonathan , and sisters Anna , Elizabeth , and Lydia to New England in 1634 , probably aboard the Griffin . The family , along with the 200 or so other passengers aboard , left England to escape persecution for their Puritan beliefs . William Laud had become archbishop of the Church of England in 1633 and begun a crackdown on Nonconformist religious practices ( such as those practiced by the more Calvinist Puritans ) that prompted a wave of migration to the New World . 
 = = Public service = = 
 Soon after his arrival in the Massachusetts Bay Colony Nicholas Danforth acquired property in Cambridge , becoming one of the town 's leading citizens and a member of the colony 's general court ( as its assembly was known ) . He died in 1638 , leaving his lands and the care of his younger children to Thomas . In 1643 Danforth was admitted a freeman of the colony , which conferred on him the right to vote and to participate in the colony 's political affairs . 
 He was appointed Treasurer of Harvard College in its charter of 1650 , and served as a steward of the college from 1669 to 1682 . From 1659 he sat on the colony 's council of assistants , and was elected deputy governor in 1679 . In 1665 Danforth was member of a commission that oversaw the extension of Massachusetts colonial authority over the territories of what is now southern Maine , which colonial surveyors had determined to fall within its borders . 
 Danforth 's politics and religion were relatively conservative , with one historian describing him as " the Pym of Massachusetts politics " . In 1661 the colony was rebuked by King Charles II for its mistreatment of Quakers ; the colonial government had banned Quakers from its territory under threat of death , and four of them had recently been hanged after repeatedly violating the ban . The king in his letter demanded that the colony allow Quakers and others freedom of religious expression . Danforth was one member of a committee that was established to formulate a response . The document the committee drafted was a conservative declaration that the colonial government was essentially sovereign except where its laws conflicted with English law . ( By the time the king 's letter arrived the colonial government had already lessened the harsh punishments for violating bans . ) Two committee members , magistrate Simon Bradstreet and minister John Norton , were sent to England to argue the colony 's case . 
 When King Philip 's War broke out in 1675 ( pitting many Native American tribes of southern New England against English colonists ) , Danforth was involved in some of the events of the war . Many colonists distrusted the Praying Indians ( Christianized Indians living peacefully in communities on the outskirts of English towns ) , some of whom were attacked by mobs of English settlers seeking revenge for attacks on their communities . Danforth , along with Daniel <unk> and the Indian missionary Reverend John Eliot , was a vocal supporter of the Praying Indians , and worked to prevent some of these excesses , at some personal risk . In one notable instance Danforth was aboard a small boat with other colonial officials in Boston Harbor en route to Long Island to inspect facilities for Praying Indians who had been relocated their " for their own safety " when a nearby ship apparently intentionally rammed the smaller vessel . No one was injured in the incident , but all of the older officials were dunked in the cold waters of the harbor . 
 In 1680 Danforth was chosen president in the District of Maine by the Massachusetts assembly . The colony had previously governed this territory ( roughly the land between the Piscataqua and Kennebec Rivers in what is now southwestern Maine ) , but its right to do so had been stripped by King Charles after protests by the heirs of Sir Ferdinando Gorges , who had long @-@ standing claims to the area . Agents for Massachusetts then purchased the territory from the Gorges heirs , and Danforth was appointed to administer it . The territory had been devastated and many properties abandoned during King Philip 's War , and Danforth acted in effect as a Lord Proprietor , making land grants and reestablishing towns such as Falmouth and North Yarmouth . Danforth was rewarded by the colony with a grant of an island in Casco Bay for this work , which he oversaw until 1686 . 
 Throughout the 1670s the Massachusetts leadership steadfastly refused to make changes to its administration that were demanded by King Charles . At the instigation of agent Edward Randolph , Charles made increasingly specific demands concerning freedom of religion and adherence to colonial trade regulations known as the Navigation Acts , and prepared to issue a quo warranto writ to demand the return of the colonial charter . Danforth was one of the leading opponents to making any accommodation to the king 's demands . The issue reached a peak in the 1684 election , in which Danforth stood for election as governor representing the hardline party . He was narrowly defeated by the more conciliatory Simon Bradstreet , but retained the post of deputy governor . The colony 's attempts at moderation were in vain — the charter was formally annulled on June 18 , 1684 . 
 In 1686 King James II established the Dominion of New England as a new colonial entity to govern all of New England . He appointed Massachusetts native Joseph Dudley as its first governor ; he was replaced later that year by Sir Edmund Andros . Both Dudley and Andros excluded Danforth from their councils , given his opposition to crown authority . The dominion reign , which did not include an elected assembly , was extremely unpopular in Massachusetts for a variety of reasons . When the Glorious Revolution deposed James , Massachusetts Puritan leaders orchestrated an uprising and arrested Andros , Dudley , and other dominion officials . In the period between the dominion 's collapse and the establishment of the Province of Massachusetts Bay in 1692 , the old colonial government was temporarily reestablished , and Danforth resumed his offices . 
 = = = Salem trials = = = 
 In 1692 , Danforth was acting governor during the early months of the witch hysteria in Salem and his name appears once in the Salem court records as part of a council which observed the proceedings on April 11 @.@ but his involvement ended in May upon the arrival of Sir William Phips , the first royal governor under the new charter of the Province of Massachusetts Bay . Danforth was not assigned to the special Court of Oyer and Terminer that Phips established shortly thereafter , and he was opposed to the manner in which magistrate William Stoughton conducted the witch trials , which unconditionally accepted spectral evidence in its proceedings , and vigorously presumed the guilt of the accused . In a letter by Thomas Brattle in October 8 , 1692 , Danforth is described as among a select group of " several about the Bay , men for understanding , judgement and piety ... that do utterly condemn the said proceedings , and do freely deliver their judgment ... " 
 After the Court of Oyer and Terminer stopped sitting , a new Superior Court was created , and , in December 1692 , Stoughton was elected by the governor 's council to head the court , defeating Danforth by three votes . In early 1693 , Danforth sat on Superior Court sessions conducted by Stoughton that continued to hear witchcraft cases , but without accepting spectral evidence . By this time the hysteria was dying down , and the court ( sometimes with Danforth leading after Stoughton temporarily removed himself in protest at the ban on spectral evidence and other reforms imposed by Governor Phips . Danforth was sympathetic to the plight of individuals accused , relocating some of them to his lands west of Boston ; Salem End Road in Framingham is part of the area where they settled . 
 = = Family and property = = 
 Danforth married Mary Withington in 1644 . The couple had 12 children , but half of these died before the age of three . Danforth was survived by only three of the others . Danforth died in Cambridge on November 5 , 1699 . 
 In 1662 Danforth began to acquire land to the west of Boston by way of land grants by the Great and General Court } after general surveys conducted by Edmund Rice at the behest of the Court . Originally known as " Danforth 's Farm " , he began to refer to the estate as " Framingham " in the 1670s in honor of his birthplace . Although Danforth continued to reside in Cambridge , he developed these lands , which came to number 15 @,@ 000 acres ( 61 km2 ) , by issuing 999 year leases rather than selling parcels . By the 1690s a number of somewhat discontiguous communities existed on the land , which petitioned the state for incorporation . Objections were made to the earliest petition ( of 1692 ) by Danforth , since it did not include all of his lands , and a number of subsequent petitions were objected to by neighboring communities . It was not until 1700 , after Danforth had died , that the town of Framingham was granted a charter . The town 's seal contains the words " Danforth 's Farm " in commemoration of this heritage . 
 Danforth , Maine is named in his honor . The Danforth Museum of Art , founded in 1975 , is located in Framingham . 
 = = Fictional character in The Crucible = = 
 In Arthur Miller 's play The Crucible , Danforth is depicted as the leading judicial figure overseeing the Salem trials . William Stoughton is not a character in the play , and Miller portrays Danforth as an honest but domineering and selfish judge , under whose authority many are imprisoned and sentenced to hang . When John Proctor , an accused , defies his authority at the end of the play by refusing to lie and sign a public confession saying that he is a witch and accusing others , he is mercilessly sentenced to hang . In an introduction to the play , Miller wrote that he had combined several persons and made other changes to the historical characters for dramatic purposes . 
 Miller also wrote the screenplay for the 1996 film version of the play , in which the name Danforth was retained ( portrayed by actor Paul Scofield ) as the principal judicial antagonist . In the 1957 film adaptation of the play , whose screenplay was written by Jean @-@ Paul Sartre , Danforth ( portrayed by Raymond Rouleau , who also directed the picture ) is portrayed the same way . 
 = Thomas Harrison ( architect ) = 
 Thomas Harrison ( 7 August ( baptised ) 1744 – 29 March 1829 ) was an English architect and bridge engineer who trained in Rome , where he studied classical architecture . Returning to England , he won the competition in 1782 for the design of Skerton Bridge in Lancaster . After moving to Lancaster he worked on local buildings , received commissions for further bridges , and designed country houses in Scotland . In 1786 Harrison was asked to design new buildings within the grounds of Lancaster and Chester castles , projects that occupied him , together with other works , until 1815 . On both sites he created accommodation for prisoners , law courts , and a shire hall , while working on various other public buildings , gentlemen 's clubs , churches , houses , and monuments elsewhere . His final major commission was for the design of Grosvenor Bridge in Chester . 
 Some of Harrison 's designs , including his buildings at Lancaster Castle , were Gothic in style , but most were Neoclassical , particularly those at Chester Castle . He was regarded at the time , and since , as a major influence in the emergence of the Greek Revival in British architecture . A bridge he designed at the start of his career , and another towards the end of his career , incorporated innovative features ; Skerton Bridge was the first substantial bridge in England to have a flat roadway , and the Grosvenor Bridge was the longest single @-@ arched masonry bridge in the world at the time of its construction . Many of Harrison 's structures have survived , most of them now designated by English Heritage as listed buildings . Despite his work being nationally admired he spent his entire career in northwest England , visiting London only occasionally ; most of his buildings were in Lancashire , Cheshire , and the nearby counties . 
 = = Early life and training = = 
 Thomas Harrison was born in Richmond , Yorkshire , England , the son of a joiner , also named Thomas . His precise date of birth is not known , but it is likely that he was baptised on 7 August 1744 . Little is known about his early life , other than he attended Richmond Grammar School , and it is presumed that he worked with his father . In 1769 he was sponsored by a local landowner , Sir Lawrence Dundas of Aske Hall , to join George <unk> ( who later became a landscape painter ) to study in Rome . Here he studied at the Accademia di San Luca , and during his seven years in Rome , amongst other activities , made drawings of Roman structures , including temples and Trajan 's Column . In 1770 Harrison submitted a design to Pope Clement XIV for converting the Vatican <unk> del Belvedere into a museum for antique statues . This was " favourably received but not in the end adopted " . Three years later he entered the Accademia 's competition to re @-@ plan the Piazza del Popolo . His design was unsuccessful , but it was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1777 . Following the failure of this design to be accepted , he petitioned the pope , and was awarded gold and silver medals , and made <unk> di Merito . He was then commissioned by the pope to alter the sacristy of St Peter 's , but the pope died before the work started . Harrison returned to England in 1776 , probably via France , as he made drawings of buildings in Nîmes and Paris . He produced designs for a bridge and a road in London , which were not accepted , and he returned to Richmond in 1778 . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Bridges = = = 
 The major works executed by Harrison at the start and end of his career were bridges : Skerton Bridge in Lancaster and Grosvenor Bridge in Chester , both of which incorporated innovative features . In 1782 he won the first prize in a competition to design a bridge to cross the River Lune at Lancaster and to replace a medieval bridge . After some amendments to the design , the foundation stone was laid in June 1783 , and Skerton Bridge was completed in September 1787 , at a cost of £ 14 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 1 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . The bridge was carried on five elliptical arches , and was the first in England to have a flat road surface . Harrison subsequently received further commissions for bridges , including St Mary 's Bridge in Derby ( 1788 – 93 ) , Harrington Bridge near Sawley , Derbyshire ( 1789 – 90 ) , and <unk> Bridge in Kendal , Cumbria ( 1791 – 94 ) , followed by smaller bridges in Lancashire and Cheshire . He was appointed unofficially as the bridge master of Lancashire , and having carried out the duties of country surveyor for Cheshire since 1800 , was officially appointed to the post in 1815 . Harrison 's later bridges in Cheshire included the Mersey Bridge at Warrington ( 1812 – 17 ) , and <unk> Bridge near Holmes Chapel ( 1815 – 16 ) . These were the only bridges he designed to be built in timber rather than in stone , and both have been replaced . They were the first bridges of their type to be built in England , and were his only bridges to be regarded as " failures " . During his career , Harrison was consulted about the design of other bridges in the country . 
 Towards the end of his career , Harrison worked on two bridges in Chester . At the time the only road crossing over the River Dee was the medieval Old Dee Bridge , which was becoming inadequate for the increasing volume of traffic . In 1825 Harrison added three new arches on the upstream side of the bridge , and built a footway that was corbeled @-@ out , also on the upstream side . Meanwhile , negotiations had been underway for a much more substantial bridge . In 1825 an Act of Parliament was passed for the Grosvenor Bridge to be built downstream from the Old Dee Bridge . To provide access to the new bridge , properties , including a church , had to be demolished , and Harrison was involved in designing the new approach to the bridge , which was named Grosvenor Street . He also prepared three different plans for the bridge , one in iron , the others in stone ; one of the stone bridges had three arches , the other a single arch spanning 200 feet ( 61 m ) . The single @-@ arch bridge would be the longest single @-@ arch stone bridge in the world at the time , and there were doubts about its stability . Harrison 's design was supported by the engineers James Trubshaw and John Rennie , and Trubshaw made a limestone model of the bridge to confirm its stability . By this time Harrison was aged over 80 , and in 1826 he resigned from the commission . Later that year the design was costed by Thomas Telford , and the town council subsequently accepted the design . Trubshaw was in charge of the construction , with Jesse Hartley as his clerk @-@ of @-@ works . The foundation stone was laid in 1827 by the Earl of Grosvenor ( after whose family the bridge was named ) , and work began the following year . It was formally opened in 1832 by the future Queen Victoria , and traffic began to cross it the following year . The total cost of the bridge was just under £ 50 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 4 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . Harrison did not live to see it completed , as he died in 1829 . 
 = = = Lancaster and Chester Castles = = = 
 Around the time that Harrison was involved in the construction of Skerton Bridge , he received other commissions for work in Lancaster . These included the addition of a clock tower to the Town Hall , the addition of a tower and spire to St John 's Church , and the building of Bridge Houses on the east side of Skerton Bridge . In October 1786 Harrison was asked to prepare plans for substantial improvements to Lancaster Castle ; in January that year he had also won the competition for major improvements to Chester Castle . He worked on both projects simultaneously for the next 30 years , and beyond that until 1815 in Chester , where he added further new buildings . In both projects he designed buildings for prisoners and prison staff , courtrooms and a Shire Hall . Both towns already had gaols , but there was a national move in the later part of the 18th century to improve them , following the campaigns by penal formers led by John Howard . Amongst these reforms were the separation of men and women , and of criminals and debtors , which were incorporated into Harrison 's designs . 
 = = = = Lancaster = = = = 
 Harrison did not create an overall plan for his work on the site ; a series of plans for different buildings were prepared and building works continued until 1792 . The new buildings had to be placed between the existing medieval castle buildings , including the keep , towers and the gatehouse . Harrison decided to design them with Gothic motifs , such as battlements and windows with pointed heads . Construction started in 1788 , and the first building to be completed was the Keeper 's House , standing to the right of the gatehouse . The next substantial building to be completed was the Female Felon 's Prison on the other side of the gatehouse . He designed an arcade on the south side of the keep to give some shelter to the debtors as they walked round their courtyard . He later added two storeys to provide more accommodation for debtors , and completed the Male Felon 's Prison to the north of the keep . By 1794 these buildings and other improvements had cost £ 10 @,@ 853 ( equivalent to £ 1 @,@ 120 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) , more than had been expected . By 1795 Harrison had moved from Lancaster to Chester , from where he continued to supervise the work on both sites . At Lancaster this work included rebuilding the Crown Court and the Shire Hall . At that time the Crown Court was held in the medieval hall of the castle , and civil cases were held in the Shire Hall in the keep . The new buildings form a symmetrical group to the west of the keep , and were completed in 1798 , although the internal decoration and furnishings were not finished until some years later by Joseph Gandy . The Crown Court is a simple rectangular room , measuring about 50 feet ( 15 m ) by 30 feet ( 9 m ) high and wide . The Shire Hall has a plan of half a polygon about 80 feet ( 24 m ) in diameter . Six Gothic columns support a panelled vault covering the main part of the courtroom . Around the perimeter is an arcade , and the judge 's bench has an elaborate canopy in Coade stone . The precise cost of these buildings is unknown , but in 1807 an estimate of more than £ 40 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 4 @,@ 550 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) was given . 
 = = = = Chester = = = = 
 In contrast with Lancaster , Harrison was able to prepare an organised plan for the gaol , as it was to be built on a new site behind the Elizabethan Shire Hall on land sloping down to the River Dee . Also in contrast to Lancaster , the buildings were to be in Neoclassical style . The <unk> 's House would stand behind the Shire Hall , overlooking the exercise courtyards . Inside the semi @-@ octagonal perimeter wall of the site would stand two @-@ storey blocks to house the prisoners . The site was staked @-@ out in November 1786 , but nothing could be done until the necessary Act of Parliament was passed the following July . Work started on the prisoners ' accommodation early in 1789 and on the <unk> 's House in early 1792 , and was completed two years later . Plans were then put in place for a new Shire Hall to replace the Elizabethan building , which was completed in 1802 . The Shire Hall was another structure in which Harrison made innovations , in this case the use of Greek architectural motifs . Its façade is about 250 feet ( 76 m ) long and 25 feet ( 8 m ) high , in nineteen bays with two storeys . At its centre is a Doric @-@ style portico with twelve columns , projecting forwards by about 10 feet ( 3 m ) . Its interior contains a semi @-@ circular courtroom with a diameter of 80 feet ( 24 m ) . Its curved wall has a colonnade of ten Ionic columns , and on each side of the judge 's bench are two similar columns . The room has a coffered semi @-@ dome . 
 In addition to courts , and now a gaol , Chester Castle also housed a garrison of soldiers . The forecourt of the Shire Hall formed a parade ground for the garrison , and Harrison designed two new buildings for the soldiers . On the west side of the parade ground he built an Armoury , and on the east side a matching block , with more utilitarian buildings behind , to act as the Barracks . Both of the blocks consists of a two @-@ storey building in nine bays , the fronts of which are decorated with Ionic half @-@ columns about 23 feet ( 7 m ) high . Harrison 's final building in the complex was a monumental gateway or Propylaea at the entrance to the forecourt . This consists of a central block , with two lateral pavilions that originally served as <unk> . The central block has a portico extending some 10 feet ( 3 m ) in front of the pavilions , with a double colonnade of four Doric monolithic columns standing 18 feet ( 5 m ) high . Above them is a triglyph frieze , and a low attic . The pavilions are lower than the central block , and decorated at their front with two Doric half @-@ columns between pilasters . At the back the pavilions project 10 feet ( 3 m ) beyond the central block and have four Doric columns . The structure , which was built between 1813 and 1815 , contains 22 monolithic columns . 
 = = = Gentlemen 's clubs and public buildings = = = 
 The first gentlemen 's club to be designed by Harrison was the Lyceum in Liverpool . This contained a newsroom , a coffee house , and new premises for the Liverpool Library . It was the first building in Liverpool to incorporate Greek motifs in its design . It includes one of the earliest recessed porticoes in England , and its exterior includes Doric and Ionic columns . Inside the building , the library is a circular room about 50 feet ( 15 m ) in diameter ; it is top @-@ lit with a dome . The newsroom and coffee room measure about 70 feet ( 21 m ) by 50 feet ( 15 m ) . The club was built between 1801 and 1802 at a cost of £ 11 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 890 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . In 1803 building commenced in Manchester of the Portico Library , which also incorporated a gentlemen 's club , and introduced Greek motifs to the city . Like the Liverpool club , it contains a recessed portico with Ionic columns and half @-@ columns . The interior measures about 60 feet ( 18 m ) by 40 feet ( 12 m ) ; the ground floor was used as the newsroom , the library books were arranged around a gallery , and again it was top @-@ lit with a dome . The building was completed in 1806 and cost about £ 6 @.@ 800 ( equivalent to £ 500 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . The third gentlemen 's club was the Commercial News Room in Chester , with three Ionic half @-@ columns on its main front . The newsroom measures about 40 feet ( 12 m ) by 25 feet ( 8 m ) . It opened in 1808 , and is smaller than the other club 's , costing about £ 2 @,@ 700 ( equivalent to £ 190 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . All the gentlemen 's clubs are still in existence , but two major buildings Harrison designed in Manchester have not survived . The Theatre Royal was built in 1806 – 07 at a cost of about £ 12 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 860 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) ; it could seat 1 @,@ 020 people , but was destroyed by fire in 1844 . Harrison also designed the Manchester Exchange to replace an earlier building with the same purpose . It contained a newsroom , library , dining room , and post office . The exchange was built between 1806 and 1809 , and had a semi @-@ circular front decorated with Doric half @-@ columns , but it has since been superseded by a larger building . 
 = = = Domestic and related structures = = = 
 While Harrison was working on Lancaster and Chester castles , he was also involved with domestic projects , four of them around Edinburgh in Scotland . The first consisted in making alterations to Gosford House for the 7th Earl of Wemyss . There is circumstantial evidence that he also designed the mausoleum in the grounds of the house , but a definite attribution cannot be made . This commission led , through personal contacts , for further work . The first was to build Kennet House near Clackmannan ( now demolished ) for Sir Thomas Dundas ; it was Harrison 's first major house . He then made extensions to Broomhall , a house near Dunfermline , for Thomas Bruce , 7th Earl of Elgin . Finally in Scotland , Harrison prepared plans for another new house , Colinton House near Edinburgh , for the banker Sir William Forbes . Following this , Harrison is credited with the design of Quernmore Park Hall , near Lancaster , for Charles Gibson , a house built between 1795 and 1798 . 
 In 1804 Harrison made a series of plans for the rebuilding of Lowther Hall in Westmorland , but these were not accepted . However he was successful with his plans to enlarge and remodel Gredington , a house in North Wales , for Lord Kenyon , executed between 1807 and 1811 at a cost of £ 6 @,@ 675 ( equivalent to £ 440 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . Between 1808 and 1810 Harrison converted three rooms on the west side of the first floor of Tabley House , near Knutsford , Cheshire , into a picture gallery for Sir John Fleming Leicester . This was followed by a series of new houses , <unk> Hall , near Lymm , Cheshire , Woodbank , on the edge of Stockport ( then in Cheshire ) , Glan @-@ yr @-@ Afon in <unk> , North Wales , Dee Hills House in Chester , and Grove House in Allerton near Liverpool . 
 In 1820 Harrison designed Watergate House on a corner site in Watergate Street , Chester ; it is one of the largest private houses in the town . The entrance to the house is on the corner , leading to a circular lobby and a square entrance hall , which is top @-@ lit by a dome with a lantern . Harrison 's last commission for a country house in Cheshire was his design for <unk> Lodge near the village of <unk> <unk> ; this has a porte @-@ cochère supported by four Doric columns . At about this time Harrison was also designing alterations to the east wing of Chirk Castle in North Wales . In late 1821 he was commissioned to work on Hardwick Grange near <unk> in Shropshire for Rowland Hill , 1st Viscount Hill , which involved alterations to the front of the house , and the addition of a new dining @-@ room . At the request of the owner , this was in Gothic style ; the house has since been demolished . In 1822 – 23 Harrison built a house for himself , St Martin 's Lodge in Nicholas Street , Chester , which consists of a simple villa . His last work for a private client was again for Roland Hill , a building called the Citadel in Hawkstone Park , Shropshire . It was built as a dower house for his mother , and has the appearance of a small castle , with three circular battlemented towers . 
 = = = Ecclesiastical buildings = = = 
 Only a small proportion of Harrison 's work was on churches . In 1804 he re @-@ faced the south side of St Peter 's Church in Chester , and he carried out further alterations to the church in 1813 . Between 1805 and 1806 he redesigned the nave of St John the Baptist 's Church in Whittington , Shropshire , which had been badly damaged in a storm . He did design one new church , the Wesleyan Methodist Church in St John Street , Chester , which was built in 1811 . Although his design was used for the exterior , the internal decoration and fittings were planned by his main contractor , William Cole , and the church has been much altered since . In 1810 came the commission for what is described as " without doubt his [ Harrison 's ] best work at a church " , to rebuild the steeple of the Church of Our Lady and Saint Nicholas , Liverpool . Earlier that year the spire on the medieval tower had collapsed , destroying the tower in the process . The work was completed in 1815 at a cost of over £ 22 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 1 @,@ 470 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . The steeple has a height of 120 feet ( 37 m ) , its buttresses rising above the top of the tower as pinnacles , the open @-@ work spire being supported by flying buttresses . Harrison also designed a domed ceiling for St Paul 's Church in Liverpool , but this has since been demolished . 
 Between 1814 and 1816 a chapel was built to Harrison 's design at West Hall , High Legh to replace an earlier chapel . This was a simple building that burnt out in 1891 , some of its fabric being incorporated into a new church on the site , St John 's Church . In 1818 the Right Revd George Law , bishop of Chester , asked Harrison to carry out work on the south transept of Chester Cathedral , which was showing signs of instability . This work involved building deep buttresses at the south end of the transept , and giving some attention to the gutters . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Harrison designed a variety of other structures , one of the most important of which was the replacement of Northgate in Chester , at the suggestion of Earl Grosvenor , mayor of the city in 1807 . The other three gateways , Eastgate , <unk> , and Watergate , which carried the footway of the City Walls over the medieval entrances to the city , had been replaced during the 18th century . The earl wanted the structure to be designed in Gothic style , but Harrison advised that it would be more fitting to the adjacent Roman walls for it to be Neoclassical , and after much debate this was accepted . The gateway consists of three arches , a wide central arch for vehicles , and two narrower arches for pedestrians , incorporating pairs of monolithic Doric columns . Harrison then designed Denbighshire Infirmary in North Wales , built between 1810 and 1813 , and in about 1820 he made some internal alterations to the Chester Exchange . In 1820 Harrison was consulted by Magdalen College , Oxford , about improvements to New Building , a block of the college built in 1733 , and on other alterations . His plans for New Building were adopted , and the additions were made in 1824 at a cost of £ 2 @,@ 600 ( equivalent to £ 210 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . 
 Harrison was also involved in the building of a series of monuments . His first commission was to design the Jubilee Tower on the summit of Moel <unk> , the highest point of the Clwydian Range in North Wales , to celebrate the Golden Jubilee of George III in 1810 . This consisted of an obelisk in two stages on a broad base . The obelisk collapsed in 1862 , and the base was remodelled in 1970 to make a viewing platform . The design of Lord Hill 's Column in Shrewsbury , Shropshire , has been attributed to Harrison , but this is incorrect . The architect was Edward Haycock , but Harrison did make alterations to the design , changing the style of the column , and adding a pedestal with statues of lions ; and Harrison did supervise the construction . Harrison designed The Marquess of Anglesey 's Column in Llanfairpwll on Anglesey to commemorate the feats of Henry Paget , 1st Marquess of Anglesey . This was constructed in 1816 – 17 at a cost of nearly £ 2 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 130 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . His last memorial was a ceremonial gateway at Holyhead , also on Anglesey , to commemorate the landing there of George IV in 1821 . It consists of an archway with Doric columns , and cost £ 600 ( equivalent to £ 38 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) , and was opened in 1824 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Harrison married Margaret Shackleton at Lancaster Priory in 1785 . The couple had three children who survived childhood ; a son , John , who died in 1802 , and two daughters . Harrison died aged 85 at his home , St Martin 's Lodge , Chester , in 1829 . He was buried in the churchyard of St Bridget 's Church , Chester , but his remains were moved to Blacon Cemetery when the churchyard was cleared in about 1964 . His estate amounted to £ 6 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 480 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . 
 = = Present day = = 
 An additional arch was added to Skerton Bridge in about 1849 to allow for the passage of the " Little " North Western Railway ( since closed ) beneath it . The bridge continues to be used by heavy traffic . A survey in 1995 concluded that the bridge is still strong enough to carry vehicles ten times the weight of the heaviest vehicles of the time it was built . Grosvenor Bridge remains in use , carrying the <unk> road over the River Dee , and is still the longest single @-@ span masonry bridge in Britain . 
 Other than the smaller bridges , almost all the structures designed by Harrison have been designated as listed buildings by English Heritage , Cadw , or Historic Scotland . Some of the buildings he completely designed ( rather than altered ) have been listed at the highest levels , Grade I in England and Wales , and Category A in Scotland . Grade I includes buildings that " are of exceptional interest , sometimes considered to be internationally important " ; only 2 @.@ 5 % of listed buildings are in this Grade . Category A consists of " buildings of national or international importance , either architectural or historic , or fine little @-@ altered examples of some particular period , style or building type " , and includes about 8 % of the Scottish listed buildings . These structures are , in Chester , Grosvenor Bridge , and Northgate , and in Scotland , the Mausoleum at Gosford House , and Colinton House . Lancaster Castle as a whole is listed at Grade I , and at Chester Castle four of Harrison 's buildings are listed separately at this Grade : the main block containing the Shire Hall , the Propylaea , and the two blocks flanking the forecourt . 
 A number of Harrison 's structures in England and Wales are listed at Grade II * , the middle grade for those that are " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " ; 5 @.@ 5 % of all listed buildings are Grade II * . They include Skerton Bridge , Bridge Houses , Lancaster , St Mary 's Bridge , Derby , Quernmore Park Hall , the Lyceum in Liverpool , The Portico Library in Manchester , Woodbank in Stockport , the Marquess of Anglesey 's Column , Watergate House in Chester , and the Citadel at Hawkstone Park . 
 = = Appraisal = = 
 That Harrison was a fine innovative designer of bridges is evidenced by the continuing successful use by modern heavy traffic on Skerton and Grosvenor Bridges , and on St Mary 's Bridge in Derby . As an architect , the editors of the Cheshire volume of the Buildings of England series describe him as " one of the most important of Cheshire 's architects " . Harrison 's first biographer , Arthur Blomfield , said he was " almost , if not quite , the first architectural genius in the kingdom " . 
 Although most of his designs were in Neoclassical style , he also created buildings in Gothic style , for example at Lancaster Castle , and Hardwick Grange . Nevertheless , he is considered to be one of the main influences in the Greek Revival of architecture in the late 18th and early 19th centuries . The architectural historian Giles Worsley describes him as " the first English architect to grasp the full potential of the Greek Revival " , and David Watkin says he is the " finest " of the architects who revived the forms of Greek architecture . Of the Shire Hall in Chester Castle , Worsley says it is " the first serious monument of the Greek Revival " . Writing about Harrison 's designs at Chester Castle , Pevsner says " What he [ Harrison ] has achieved here is one of the most powerful monuments of the Greek Revival in the whole of England " . 
 Harrison spent the whole of his career in the northwest of England and , other than his houses in Scotland and his work in Oxford , his works were confined to Lancashire , Cheshire , Shropshire , Cumbria , Derbyshire , and North Wales . He was never a member of the Royal Academy or any other London @-@ based institution , and only a rare visitor to London once his practice was established . Nevertheless , Charles Cockerell ( later to become the president of the Royal Institute of British Architects ) said of him in 1828 that he was " undoubtedly the noblest genius in architecture we have had " . 
 = Charles Atangana = 
 Charles Atangana ( c . 1880 – 1 September 1943 ) , also known by his birth name , Ntsama , and his German name , Karl , was the paramount chief of the Ewondo and Bane ethnic groups during much of the colonial period in Cameroon . Although from an unremarkable background , Atangana 's loyalty and friendship with colonial priests and administrators secured him successively more prominent posts in the colonial government . He proved himself an intelligent and diplomatic administrator and an eager collaborator , and he was eventually named paramount chief of two Beti @-@ <unk> subgroups , the Ewondo and Bane peoples . His loyalty and acquiescence to the German Empire was unquestioning , and he even accompanied the Germans on their escape from Africa in World War I. 
 After a brief stay in Europe , Atangana returned to his homeland in Cameroon , which by then was a League of Nations mandate territory under the administration of the French Third Republic . The French doubted his loyalties at first , but Atangana served them with the same ardour he had shown the Germans and regained his post as paramount chief . During the remainder of his life , he oversaw the Westernisation of his subjects and the improvement of his domains despite the erosion of his powers due to French policies and unrest among his people . He never advocated resistance to the European powers , preferring to embrace the European as a means of personal enrichment and in the service of African interests . After his death in 1943 , Atangana was largely forgotten . However , since Cameroon 's independence in 1960 , Cameroonian scholars have rediscovered his story . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ntsama Atangana was born sometime between 1876 and 1885 in Mvolyé , a small village in what is today Yaoundé , Cameroon . His parents gave him the drum name " He who is known by the nations " . He was the eleventh of twelve children born to <unk> Atangana , a headman of the Mvog <unk> sublineage of the Ewondo ethnic group . <unk> Atangana was one of thousands of minor Beti leaders living between the Sanaga and Nyong rivers , each charged with providing for his compound and the extended family and slaves who lived there . His father died when Ntsama Atangana was about six years old . 
 Little is known about Atangana 's childhood . Like other Beti boys , he would have learned to fish , hunt , and trap , and would have memorised his family 's genealogy and folk wisdom . Explorers from the German Empire appeared near his village in 1887 in search of a direct route to the ivory trade in the savannas to the north . They had claimed Beti lands as part of their Kamerun colony in 1884 , and by February 1889 they had established a permanent base in the area , which they named Jaunde after the local people . The Ewondo opposed the foreigners at first , although Atangana was probably not yet old enough to participate in the fighting . After the defeat of <unk> <unk> in 1895 and others like it , Ewondo resistance waned . The Germans randomly appointed chiefs and mayors to serve under them , and took local youths to perform menial tasks ; Atangana was among them , sent by his uncle to be a houseboy . 
 Ewondo who learned German were highly favoured in the early days of the colonial regime . Station commander Hans Dominik sent four such individuals to attend the mission school of the German Pallottine Fathers in Kribi , a settlement on the coast . There , Atangana learned German language , history , and geography ; mathematics ; and Roman Catholicism . Father Heinrich <unk> especially liked the boy , and Atangana became the first Ewondo baptised a Roman Catholic ; he took the Christian name Karl . Atangana 's schooling had just ended when members of the Bulu ethnic group , one closely related to the Ewondo , invaded Kribi and sacked the school and church in 1899 . Atangana waited out the revolt in Douala with the Fathers until the colonial militia defeated the rebels the following year . 
 = = Early career = = 
 In August 1900 , the commander of German forces at Victoria ( present @-@ day Limbe ) appointed Atangana interpreter for 500 Bulu hostages , who were being pressed into labour . Atangana kept the post for six months and took up extra duties as a nurse . The colonisers next sent Atangana to <unk> to work as an office clerk . At some point between the end of his schooling in Kribi and the end of his service in Victoria , Atangana met Marie <unk> , a woman from a village called <unk> . Although she was a little older and living as a kept woman by a German functionary , Atangana married her . She would eventually bear him two children : Jean <unk> and Katerina ( or Catherine ) <unk> . 
 Atangana was a devout Christian , and he supported the church throughout his life with land and gifts . He opposed popular Beti <unk> practices , and he was an opponent of an Ewondo initiation rite called the <unk> ; his efforts led to its eventual eradication from Beti society . In 1901 he secured land for the Pallottine Fathers to build a mission in Jaunde , thus opening East and South Kamerun to Catholic <unk> . Nevertheless , Atangana supported traditional Ewondo customs on marriage . On widows , he said , 
 My colleagues and I . . . can only reply in demanding the upholding of custom , which requires the widow to be the property of the heir until her liberation , which can only take effect after the return of her <unk> . She must remain with him as long as this return is not made . 
 Early in 1902 , the colonial government appointed him their representative to the Ewondo people , and interpreter and clerk for the Germans posted in Jaunde . He was tasked with organising a census and tax collection system . He chose 300 headmen to be tax collectors , of whom the Germans approved 233 . Atangana negotiated a cut of 5 % for the collectors , much to their delight . 
 Hans Dominik became the Jaunde post commander in 1904 . For the next six years , Atangana accompanied him on at least fifteen administrative patrols and probative excursions . Atangana proved an astute diplomat , in one case negotiating with a group of rebellious <unk> and thus averting a confrontation between the tribesmen and the Germans . Atangana helped open posts in such wide @-@ ranging places as <unk> , <unk> @-@ <unk> , <unk> , Ngaoundéré , Garoua , and <unk> . The Germans largely kept themselves segregated from their African subjects , but Dominik and Atangana defied these standards and grew close , even dining together in the same tent on occasion . Back in Jaunde , Atangana gained responsibilities valued by the regime , such as overseeing a poll tax in October 1908 . 
 In 1907 , members of the Mvog Ada sublineage revolted against the colonial government over Atangana 's appointment as their official interpreter . The plot included a conspiracy to poison Atangana , but word leaked to him . He informed his masters , and on 11 April , six plotters were put to death and two others imprisoned . 
 Dominik died on 16 November 1910 . That same year , Atangana returned to Jaunde and received an administrative post , perhaps as head of the Ewondo @-@ Bane court , which presided over civil disputes and small claims and was the conduit through which the Germans transmitted communiqués ( and gauged the response to them ) . However , he resigned the post when the head of his sublineage died ; Atangana took over as headman of the sublineage and Mvolyé village . 
 In late 1911 , Atangana voyaged to Germany to teach Ewondo at the Colonial Institute of the University of Hamburg . He stayed there for about one year and transcribed Ewondo history and folklore for translation into German . His writings eventually became the Jaunde @-@ Texte , an important source document on Ewondo history and culture . In 1913 , he met Kaiser Wilhelm II in Germany and Pope Pius X in Rome . He returned to Kamerun the following year . 
 = = Paramount chief = = 
 The Germans had seen some success in uniting disparate groups under single individuals called paramount chiefs ( <unk> ) . Atangana was chosen for this position among the Ewondo and Bane either before his trip to Germany or soon after . This was technically only a temporary appointment ; his subjects would have to approve it a year later to make it permanent . They had little alternative ; Atangana was already the primary conduit of information to and from the Germans . 
 Some emulation of European manners and dress was expected of all chiefs , but Atangana seems to have genuinely preferred European styles to African ones . He endeavoured to fit himself into the German mould of an ideal administrator . He wrote , " To dare to approach the Germans it is necessary to abandon the traits which displease them , to become their friend and then be valued by them . " Accordingly , Atangana ate German food ; formed a European @-@ style , 20 @-@ piece orchestra ; and ordered a large , Germanic mansion to be built . This latter project requiring construction of a brickyard and sawmill and earned Atangana another epithet , <unk> <unk> , " the man whose house is so large that it had a roof divided into nine sections instead of the two sections of an ordinary dwelling . " The number nine has great significance in Beti folklore . 
 Atangana was suspicious of anyone who might supplant him as the Germans ' favourite . He wrote , 
 A number of persons who associated themselves with Europeans and proved themselves useful to white people achieved positions in the native society through fraud and extortion . But the Europeans , having noticed it , stopped it . They could discern natives of the noble class by their loyalty and honesty . 
 Atangana won over other chiefs and headmen through gifts , tax cuts , flattery , and intervention on their behalf . He lavished attention on visitors from out of town , letting them stay at his palace and use his horses , and treating them to feasts . In addition to flattering them , this allowed him to monitor their activities and dealings with the colonial authorities . His clerk appointees in Jaunde informed him of the doings of both the Germans and his subjects . Atangana gained a substantial amount of wealth . He owned workshops and sold produce from five plantations to provision impressed railway construction workers . 
 The paramount chief maintained some loyalty for his subjects . He persuaded the Germans to carry out infrastructure improvements such as the building of roads , schools , health clinics , and churches ; and he defended his subjects from colonial reprisals . In one instance , an Ewondo interpreter fired a gun during a dispute with a German , an offence punishable with a stiff prison sentence . Atangana interceded , and the man 's punishment was reduced to porter duty . However , the paramount chief remained completely loyal to the governors . In 1914 , for example , representatives of Duala leader Rudolf Duala Manga Bell tried to secure Atangana 's backing for a pan @-@ Kamerun revolt . Atangana kept the plot under wraps , but he instructed the envoy to urge Manga Bell to reconsider . 
 Atangana 's appointment irritated members of the Bulu ethnic group . They feared they might one day lose German favour , or worse yet , fall under the dominion of the Ewondo . This culminated in the 1912 Bulu uprising led by Martin @-@ Paul Samba , a German @-@ trained man much like Atangana . The rebellion was crushed and Samba executed . 
 = = World War I = = 
 The Allied West African Campaign of World War I reached Kamerun in 1914 . Douala fell on 17 September , and the Germans regrouped at Jaunde . Beti informants alerted Atangana as to the Allies ' progress , and as the loss of Jaunde seemed inevitable , Atangana prepared to escape with his masters . He and the chiefs under him gave their posts to weaker relatives so they could more easily take them back should the Germans return . They held out in Jaunde until 1 January 1916 , when troops of the British Army captured the town , and the German soldiers and missionaries fled into the forest . Atangana and 72 Ewondo and Bane chiefs , along with 14 – 20 @,@ 000 villagers ( mostly soldiers and their families ) , led them through . A Beti folk song , " Atangana Ntsama , the War Is Over " , tells of the retreat and shows the conflict between those Beti who supported Atangana and those who opposed him : 
 Atangana Ntsama , the war is over . . . 
 <unk> ! Atangana Ntsama , the war is over ! 
 The cannon are broken , 
 Go tell it to the son of Ndono Edoa , 
 To the great man who is the son of Ndono Edoa , 
 Run quickly , why do you languish there ? 
 All you Ewondo , come and run quickly , 
 Come and run quickly , brothers ; 
 Go tell it to <unk> <unk> , son of Ndono Edoa . 
 How is it that you would like me to leave so many goods behind ? 
 <unk> ! They will surprise you in your greed ! 
 Such richness . I should take some ! 
 You others , move off , what are you doing there ? 
 Friend , there were as many goods as in a market ; 
 Friend , we have marched through all of that without taking anything ! 
 They reached Spanish Guinea in February and surrendered to the unaligned representatives of Spain under the Restoration . The Spanish government of Álvaro Figueroa Torres gave the Beti land to settle and agreed to transport the Germans to the nearby island of Fernando Po . Atangana and members of his family accompanied them . In 1918 , the Germans sent Atangana and six other chiefs to Spain , where they would witness if necessary that the Germans had treated their African subjects humanely . In September 1919 , Atangana had an audience with King Alfonso XIII of Spain and urged him to support the Germans in these proceedings . Atangana remained in Madrid for two years and stayed a month in Barcelona to retrieve money he had deposited through the Basel Mission . 
 Meanwhile , Ewondo lands came under the administration of the French Third Republic under a League of Nations mandate . Atangana , now known by the French version of his name , Charles , wrote the French government to swear his allegiance and demand <unk> to his homeland . He received his wish in June 1920 and arrived in Douala on 28 November 1920 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Atangana 's unfailing loyalty and subservience to Germany prevented the French from ever fully trusting him . His first task under the new colonial regime was to supervise gangs of forced road @-@ construction labourers in the town of <unk> . In Atangana 's absence , the French had appointed a Beti headman named Joseph Atemengue as their local representative in Jaunde ( now known by the French spelling , Yaoundé ) . However , Atemengue never enjoyed the popularity Atangana had among the Beti . Atangana tried to secure an alliance with him by sending his 20 @-@ year @-@ old , German @-@ educated daughter , Katerina , to marry him , but she eventually fled from the much older Atemengue and back to her father . Atangana 's work performance convinced the French to let him return to Yaoundé in late 1921 or early 1922 . 
 Soon thereafter , Atemengue was made chief of the local court , and Atangana was again appointed paramount chief ( chef supérieur ) . He received a seat on the Council of Notables , a body the French had introduced to act as liaisons to their subjects and advisors to the administration . Atangana set up a cabinet based on those he had observed in Spain , but he never allowed it to do much , and its members were not accustomed to European @-@ style administration . It disbanded in 1925 . 
 The French granted the chiefs significantly less power than had their German predecessors . Atangana 's major role was simple : to enforce the <unk> of French rule . Governor General Van <unk> wrote in 1917 that , " the chiefs have no power of their own of any kind because there are not two authorities in the circle : French authority and indigenous authority ; there is only one . Only the commander of the circle commands . " As a colonial administrator , Atangana was expected to collect taxes , help the French introduce cocoa and coffee plantations , and mobilise chiefs to secure the labour to work these estates . In 1924 , the French introduced a requisition system to procure food for the Yaoundé urban community and for rail labourers ; Atangana was responsible for rallying the chiefs to gather the necessary provisions from rural farmers ; the exact methods used by the chiefs was left to them . Cocoa production in the South and Centre provinces increased even during the Great Depression , partially as a result of these efforts . He reorganised the chiefs and their duties and tried to <unk> his subjects by encouraging them to wear European @-@ style clothing , use new building methods and house styles , and work to improve roads . 
 Most of the chiefs respected Atangana as their spokesman and leader , and the Beti at large deferred to him prestige and power . A new system of status had evolved under his rule : a cadre of minor bureaucrats , envoys , interpreters , and office staff worked for Atangana and the other chiefs independent of the French government and were completely dependent on the chiefs . Atangana set up a private police force , for example , known as the <unk> in Ewondo . The entire class recognised its reliance on the chiefs and gave them loyalty in exchange for protection and pay , and the chiefs relied on these functionaries to swiftly fulfill their duties to the French regime . 
 Nevertheless , the Beti at large detested French forced labour practices and taxes . Some people fled to the bush before the tax collector arrived ; others circumvented taxes by counting wives as out @-@ of @-@ town visitors or waiting until the last minute to pay and thus reducing the collector 's cut of the tax money . If the taxes were not collected to the satisfaction of the colonial administrators , Atangana himself was expected to make up some of the difference . To counter these minor rebellions , chiefs could punish their subjects with 15 days in jail or 100 franc fines without due process of law . This was meant to be reserved for only certain infractions , but Atangana and other chiefs interpreted it broadly to include all sorts of difficult behaviour . Atangana and his sub @-@ chiefs were expected to discipline such difficult subjects . He exerted continual pressure on the sub @-@ chiefs , who in turn placed constant pressure on the villagers to pay taxes and supply labourers . 
 Nevertheless , his wealth continued to grow . In 1922 , his salary was 6 @,@ 000 francs per year , and in 1938 , it had risen to 24 @,@ 000 francs per year . Atangana also received 2 % of all taxes collected by lower chiefs , pay for his legal role , and stipends for organising road construction . Oral informants have reported that as early as 1924 , he owned enormous plantations with as much as 1 km ² of cocoa , 1 @.@ 1 km ² of palms , 5 km ² of food crops , and 500 head of livestock . The amounts may be exaggerated , but Atangana was by all accounts a wealthy man . He owned two lorries and a car by 1926 , which he used to haul produce from his plantations . By the 1930s , important chiefs such as Atangana could earn more than 400 @,@ 000 francs per year on tax collecting alone . 
 The 278 Beti chiefs under Atangana 's control began to oppose his primacy by the mid @-@ 1920s . His control fell especially among the Bane . In 1924 , the Bane filed a complaint against Atangana in court , claiming , " We work always and it is Atangana who receives the money . For all the things that we have sent to the Europeans , such as chickens and eggs , through Atangana , we have received nothing . " They plotted to raise their own paramount chief and to drum up sentiment against Atangana among the common people . The French arrested the plotters for refusing to pay their taxes and provide labourers . This left Atangana still head of the Bane , but his influence had been severely curtailed . 
 In 1925 , the French reduced the number of Beti chiefs to 40 and removed the chiefs of Yaoundé from Atangana 's direct control . However , in 1928 the Yaoundé chiefs were deemed quarrelsome and incompetent , and Atangana was once again placed over them . In 1929 , he wrote a work on traditional Beti society in which he tried to hide his unremarkable childhood by taking the title of " King " and claiming descent from a fictitious line of Ewondo royalty . By the end of the decade , he was the head of perhaps 130 @,@ 000 people , the chief of Mvolyé village , and the supervisor of eight sectional chiefs and 72 village chiefs . In reality , his position was one of prestige but little actual power . 
 Collecting taxes and finding labour grew increasingly difficult as the decade progressed , thanks to greater access to paying employment in Yaoundé and on the plantations . Atangana 's 1938 proposal for the reorganisation of Yaoundé 's administration shows the frustration he experienced at that time : 
 the local people do not know what endurance means . . . [ and ] work with ill @-@ will for the administration or for private concerns , where they seek refuge as a safeguard when the administration gives the chiefs an order in the public interest or for their own good . 
 He further complained , " Notables , with their diminished influence , are almost inert in relation to the growing number of their recalcitrant subjects " and suggested that a chief could hardly control more than 5 @,@ 000 people . Atangana is not even mentioned in a French report on their African leaders from 1939 . However , he retained the right to announce the appointment of new chiefs and to claim that both he and the French had selected them . 
 Atangana travelled frequently in the French colonial period . He made a point of attending his subjects ' weddings and funerals , for example . He had more opportunities to visit Europe , including the Paris Colonial Exposition in 1931 and the French Colonial Conference in 1935 . In 1938 , his wife died . Atangana was a handsome man by Ewondo standards : strong , well groomed , with a reputation as a good fighter , dancer , and husband . He remarried on 6 January 1940 to Julienne or <unk> <unk> , a young Beti woman of the Mvog Manga sublineage from the village <unk> . She bore him two children : Marie @-@ Thérèse and René Grégoire . Atangana seems to have adhered to Catholic strictures against polygamy , despite the fact that other Beti chiefs at the time had several hundred wives . 
 Atangana lobbied in his later life for public health causes , such as the eradication of sleeping sickness . He never supported the expansion of Cameroun 's public school system , since he believed that educated subjects might one day challenge his rule . Atangana 's health began to fail him beginning in August 1943 . On 1 September , he died in Mvolyé , Yaoundé . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 No one took over as paramount chief upon Atangana 's death . His opulent palace went unoccupied and fell into ruins . However , traditional Cameroonian chieftaincies were re @-@ established on 11 July 1977 by Decree # 77 / 609 , and by the 1990s , Cameroonian ethnic groups had rejuvenated these dormant traditions . Atangana 's daughter Marie @-@ Thérèse became the new Ewondo paramount chief . In December 2000 , she began the renovation of his palace at <unk> , Yaoundé , a project that would cost an estimated 150 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 francs CFA . 
 The colonialism that Atangana had supported was ruinous in Cameroon . Production centred on enriching the chiefs , wooing of foreign investment , and the apparatus of colonial administration , and building only that infrastructure that would aid in the transport and export of cash crops . Nevertheless , Atangana 's story became part of Beti folklore . For example , Beti storytellers related his tale in oral poems and songs that took up to a full night to recite . His legacy was largely forgotten by the nation at large between his death and Cameroonian independence . However , the nationalist scholarship that blossomed after Cameroon 's independence in 1960 resurrected his story . Charles Atangana Avenue in downtown Yaoundé is named for him . A statue in his likeness tops a hill nearby , which had fallen into disrepair by 2000 . 
 = USS Constellation vs La Vengeance = 
 The USS Constellation vs La Vengeance , or the Action of 1 February 1800 , was a single @-@ ship action fought between frigates of the French Navy and the United States Navy during the Quasi @-@ War . The battle resulted in the American frigate USS Constellation severely damaging the French frigate La Vengeance and forcing her to flee . 
 In 1798 , an undeclared war had begun between the United States and France due to French seizures of American merchantmen . As part of an American effort to deter French attacks , Commodore Thomas Truxton led an American naval squadron that was dispatched to the Lesser Antilles . Learning that regular French naval forces were in the region , Truxton set out in his flagship Constellation and sailed to Guadeloupe to engage them . On 1 February 1800 , while nearing the French colony , Constellation met François Marie Pitot 's frigate La Vengeance of the French Navy . Despite Pitot 's attempts to flee , his frigate was drawn into a heavy engagement with Constellation . Although the French frigate struck her colors ( surrendered ) twice , Constellation was unable to take La Vengeance as a prize . Eventually Pitot was able to escape with his frigate to Curaçao , though only after sustaining severe casualties and damage to his vessel . Truxton 's ship sustained light damage and sailed to Jamaica for repairs before returning home to a hero 's welcome . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1800 , the Quasi @-@ War between the United States and France was in full force . In order to prevent French attacks against American merchantmen in the Caribbean , the United States Navy maintained four squadrons of vessels in the region . One such squadron was commanded by Commodore Thomas Truxton , and tasked with patrolling the Lesser Antilles . Taking command on 19 January 1800 after arriving at Saint Kitts in his flagship USS Constellation , Truxton 's squadron consisted of four frigates , three schooners , and a ship @-@ rigged man of war . Besides the numerous privateers operating in the area , the only French naval forces in Truxton 's area of operations were the frigate La Vengeance under François Marie Pitot and the corvette La Berceau under Louis <unk> . Both vessels had arrived at Guadeloupe on 10 December 1799 escorting the new administrators of the French colony . Once at Saint Kitts Truxton dispersed his squadron , giving each ship orders to cruise independently . He then set sail for Guadeloupe on 30 January 1800 with his flagship Constellation , intending to challenge the French frigate and corvette there . The same day , Pitot in La Vengeance left Guadaloupe 's capital of Basse @-@ Terre for France . 
 By this point in the Quasi @-@ War , the 1 @,@ 265 @-@ ton Constellation carried 38 cannon despite officially being classified by the United States Navy as a 36 @-@ gun frigate . Previously her armament had consisted of 24 @-@ pounder guns , but these had proven inefficient during Truxton 's action with L 'Insurgente and as a result were removed and replaced with twenty @-@ eight 18 @-@ pounder cannon and ten 24 @-@ pounder carronades . Truxton and his crew were hardened veterans and were well prepared for a fight . Their French counterparts were not as ready for an engagement . Pitot 's frigate was carrying a large quantity of specie as well as 36 American prisoners of war and 80 passengers , two of whom were generals . Under such circumstances Pitot intended to avoid an engagement if possible , even though La Vengeance was a more heavily armed vessel carrying eight 42 @-@ pounder carronades , twenty @-@ eight 18 @-@ pounders , and sixteen 12 @-@ pounder cannon . The French also had a distinct advantage in the event of a boarding action , as Constellation had only 310 men to La Vengeance 's complement of 380 crew . 
 = = Engagement = = 
 On 1 February 1800 at 07 : 00 , Truxton 's crew spotted what appeared to be a 54 @-@ gun frigate flying British colors two leagues off the Basse @-@ Terre roadstead . In an effort to communicate with the mysterious frigate , Constellation flew British colors . Pitot had sighted the American ship by 07 : 45 . Thinking the vessel chasing him was a superior 55 @-@ gun warship , he sought to avoid conflict , and continued to sail with the wind rather than head north as he had originally intended . In an effort to increase her speed , the French frigate 's crew put out studding sails to catch more wind . The behavior of Pitot 's frigate signaled to Truxton that she was really a French warship , so he ordered Constellation cleared for action and gave chase . By 08 : 00 he struck the British colors and raised the American flag . As he closed with La Vengeance he shouted through a speaking trumpet for the French vessel to surrender . 
 At this point the action began , with Pitot 's stern chasers opening fire upon Constellation . In an effort to cut the American frigate 's advantage in speed , La Vengeance changed course to the south @-@ east where the wind would give her an advantage . As he maneuvered his vessel , Pitot was able to unleash a broadside aimed at Constellation 's rigging . The American frigate waited to return fire until she 'd gained the weather gage . Now having the advantage of the wind , Truxton 's opening double @-@ shotted broadside slammed into the port side of La Vengeance 's hull . Sailing side by side , the two frigates continued to engage each other for two and a half hours while Truxton attempted unsuccessfully to move his ship into a raking fire position . As the French tended to aim for the rigging , at one point Constellation 's <unk> were shot away and the frigate lost her maneuverability until they could be replaced . 
 La Vengeance prepared for a boarding action when the two frigates drew closer together at 22 : 45 , but this attempt was foiled when Constellation fired broadsides of grapeshot at Pitot 's ship while American marines fired their muskets and hurled grenades down from the rigging . With the French ship drawing off , the two vessels began a longer range round shot duel that lasted until 02 : 00 on 2 February 1800 , when La Vengeance struck her colors for the second time . At some point earlier in the action , Pitot had struck his flag but the Americans did not notice because of darkness . Truxton moved Constellation to within 25 yards ( 23 m ) of his vanquished opponent aiming to take her as a prize . The American commodore 's ambitions were spoiled when at 03 : 00 Constellation 's mainmast fell overboard , killing several topmen who went down with it . With the Americans unable to come alongside his vessel , Pitot took advantage of the situation and simply slipped away into the darkness . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Casualties were heavy on both sides , and both vessels were in such poor condition that each commander thought he had sunk his opponent . Most of La Vengeance 's rigging had been blown away ; only the lower foremast , lower mizzenmast , and bowsprit were operational . Pitot set course for Curaçao and was forced to ground his vessel there to prevent her from sinking . The number of French casualties is somewhat unclear : official French accounts report 28 dead and 40 wounded , while accounts from Curaçao state that the French frigate had lost 160 men . Once Pitot reached Curaçao he was beset with further problems . La Vengeance remained out of action for months due to difficulties in acquiring support needed to repair the frigate from the Dutch officials there . A French expedition to seize the island brought the materiel needed to repair the frigate , but when asked to help attack the island Pitot refused and slipped away to Guadaloupe . 
 Constellation had suffered heavy damage with 15 of her crew slain and a further 25 wounded , of whom 11 later died . The ship sailed to Port Royal , Jamaica , for a refit , but Truxton could not complete the necessary repairs because of a shortage of naval stores . The ship left Jamaica a week after she arrived , with only her mainmast replaced . After escorting a convoy of 14 merchantmen back to the United States , Truxton sailed his battered frigate to Hampton Roads for a proper refit . Only after he returned to the United States did the American commodore finally learn that the La Vengeance had not been sunk . Truxton was considered a hero and received considerable praise for his actions . In response to his battle with Pitot 's frigate , the American government commended Truxton with a Congressional Gold Medal depicting the battle . James C. Jarvis , a 13 @-@ year @-@ old Midshipman who was killed when the mainmast collapsed , became famous for his bravery during the battle . 
 = Berkshire No. 7 = 
 Berkshire No. 7 is a wood and steel barge constructed in 1935 . It is historically important as a transitional canal barge and as one of the few surviving wooden @-@ hulled canal boats . It was used to transport bulk cargo , including shipping fertilizer , from Connecticut to Long Island Sound . It sank in 1974 along with the Elmer S. Dailey and the Priscilla Dailey . The sunken vessel has deteriorated to the point that a salvage operation could result in breaking it apart . The Berkshire No. 7 was added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 21 , 1978 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Berkshire No. 7 is a small wood and steel canal barge that measures 104 feet ( 32 m ) long with a 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) beam . The depth of the hold is listed at 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) and it had a listed capacity of 216 tons . It is a transitional canal barge with steel framing and wood planking over the skeleton . Clouette describes the hull as being " nearly rectangular in profile , section and plan , with squared @-@ off stern and bluntly rounded bow . Low bulwarks with scuppers rise slightly to a peak where they join the prominently projecting stem " . The superstructure is primarily of a single low coaming with convex hatch covers that runs almost the full length of the shop . A rectangular cabin rises up above the coaming and has a companionway in the rear . The Berkshire No. 7 is listed in the U.S. Registry as # <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 The Berkshire No. 7 was constructed in 1935 by Jacobson and Peterson , Inc. in Brooklyn , New York , for Stewart J. Dailey , a former mule driver on the Erie Canal who later became a partner in a Tonawanda , New York , shipbuilding company and afterwards opened his own business , S. J. Dailey Company . The barge was used to ferry materials , including shipping fertilizer from Connecticut to Long Island Sound between 1941 and 1972 . Afterwards it was moored in Bridgeport Harbor together with the Elmer S. Dailey and Priscilla Dailey . In the spring of 1974 , one of the barges began to take on water , dragging down the other two . No part of the Berkshire No. 7 is visible above water . 
 = = Importance = = 
 The Berkshire No. 7 has historical importance because of its design , which reflects the construction of 19th @-@ century canal boats . However , there is no record that the barge was ever used on a canal . The barge is one of two surviving wooden @-@ hulled canal boats in existence . It was added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 21 , 1978 . Its nomination and listing is unusual because the Berkshire No. 7 was not yet 50 years old at the time of its nomination , and it sank in 1974 . It and the other two barges that sank with it are the only shipwrecks in Connecticut listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 In 1998 , the historic status of the barges was a concern for the Port Authority of Bridgeport Harbor , as the sunken ships interfered with a billion @-@ dollar redevelopment project . Over the years , the barges had deteriorated so that a salvage operation would likely result in them breaking apart . No action had been taken by 2003 , but a report noted that prior to any activity of the Berkshire No. 7 , the Federal Transit Administration and / or the City of Bridgeport should document the barge with photos and a technical description . Specifics regarding the documentation based on the activity would be archived at the State Historic Preservation Office and the Mystic Seaport Museum . 
 = Constitutional Convention ( United States ) = 
 The Constitutional Convention ( also known as the Philadelphia Convention , the Federal Convention , or the Grand Convention at Philadelphia ) took place from May 25 to September 17 , 1787 , in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . Although the Convention was intended to revise the Articles of Confederation , the intention from the outset of many of its proponents , chief among them James Madison and Alexander Hamilton , was to create a new government rather than fix the existing one . The delegates elected George Washington to preside over the Convention . The result of the Convention was the creation of the United States Constitution , placing the Convention among the most significant events in the history of the United States . 
 The most contentious disputes revolved around the composition and election of the Senate , how " proportional representation " was to be defined ( whether to include slaves or other property ) , whether to divide the executive power between three persons or invest the power into a single president , how to elect the president , how long his term was to be and whether he could run for reelection , what offenses should be impeachable , the nature of a fugitive slave clause , whether to allow the abolition of the slave trade , and whether judges should be chosen by the legislature or executive . Most of the time during the Convention was spent on deciding these issues , while the powers of legislature , executive , and judiciary were not heavily disputed . Once the Convention began , the delegates first agreed on the principles of the Convention , then they agreed on Madison 's Virginia Plan and began to modify it . A Committee of Detail assembled during the July 4 recess and produced a rough draft . Most of this rough draft remained in place , and can be found in the final version of the constitution . After the final issues were resolved , the Committee on Style produced the final version , and it was voted on and sent to the states . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 Before the Constitution was drafted , the nearly 4 million inhabitants of the 13 newly independent states were governed under the Articles of Confederation , created by the Second Continental Congress . It soon became evident to nearly all that the chronically underfunded Confederation government , as originally organized , was inadequate for managing the various conflicts that arose among the states . As the Articles of Confederation could only be amended by unanimous vote of the states , any state had effective veto power over any proposed change . In addition , the Articles gave the weak federal government no taxing power : it was wholly dependent on the states for its money , and had no power to force delinquent states to pay . 
 Once the immediate task of winning the American Revolutionary War had passed , the states began to look to their own interests , and disputes arose . These included a dispute between Maryland and Virginia over the Potomac River and opposition to Rhode Island 's imposing taxes on all traffic passing through it on the post road that linked all the states . James Madison suggested that state governments should appoint commissioners " to take into consideration the trade of the United States ; to examine the relative situation and trade of said states ; to consider how far a uniform system in their commercial regulations may be necessary to their common interests and permanent harmony " . 
 In September 1786 , at the Annapolis Convention , delegates from five states called for a Constitutional Convention in order to discuss possible improvements to the Articles of Confederation . The Constitutional Convention took place in Philadelphia on May 14 , 1787 . Rhode Island , fearing that the Convention would work to its disadvantage , boycotted the Convention and , when the Constitution was put to the states , initially refused to ratify it . 
 = = The Convention = = 
 Due to the difficulty of travel in the late 18th century , very few of the selected delegates were present on the designated day of May 14 , 1787 , and it was not until May 25 that a quorum of seven states was secured . ( New Hampshire delegates would not join the Convention until more than halfway through the proceedings , on July 23 . ) James Madison arrived first , and soon most of the Virginia delegation arrived . While waiting for the other delegates , the Virginia delegation produced the Virginia Plan , which was designed and written by James Madison . On May 25 , the delegations convened in the Pennsylvania State House . 
 George Washington was unanimously elected president of the Convention , and it was agreed that the discussions and votes would be kept secret until the conclusion of the meeting . Although William Jackson was elected as secretary , his records were brief and included very little detail . Madison 's Notes of Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787 , supplemented by the notes of Robert Yates , remain the most complete record of the Convention . Throughout the debate , delegates constantly referred to precedents from history in support of their position . Most commonly , they referred to the history of England , in particular the Glorious Revolution ( often simply called " The Revolution " ) , classical history ( mainly the Roman Republic and the leagues of Greek city @-@ states ) , and recent precedents from Holland and Germany . 
 Outside the Convention in Philadelphia , there was a national convening of the Society of the Cincinnati . Washington was said to be embarrassed . The 1776 " old republican " delegates like Elbridge Gerry ( MA ) found anything military or hereditary anathema . The Presbyterian Synod of Philadelphia and New York convention was meeting to redefine its Confession , dropping the faith requirement for civil authority to prohibit false worship . Protestant Episcopalian Washington attended a Roman Catholic Mass and dinner . Revolution veteran Jonas Phillips , of the Mikveh Israel Synagogue , petitioned the Convention to avoid a national oath including belief in both Old and New Testaments . Merchants of Providence , Rhode Island , petitioned for consideration , even though their Assembly had not sent a delegation . 
 Manasseh Cutler came directly from the U.S. Capital in New York and found himself a frequent dinner guest among the delegates . He carried grants of five million acres to parcel out among The Ohio Company and " speculators " , some of whom would be found among those attending the Convention . A Philadelphia guest of Robert Morris , Noah Webster would write a pamphlet as " A Citizen of America " immediately after the signing . " Leading Principles of the Federal Convention " advocated adoption of the Constitution . It was published much earlier and more widely circulated than today 's better known Federalist Papers . 
 = = = James Madison 's blueprint = = = 
 While waiting for the Convention to formally begin , James Madison sketched out his initial draft , which became known as the Virginia Plan and reflected his views as a strong nationalist . By the time the rest of the Virginia delegation arrived , most of the Pennsylvania delegation had arrived as well . They agreed on Madison 's plan , and formed what came to be the predominant coalition . By the time the Convention started , the only blueprints that had been assembled were Madison 's Virginia Plan , and Charles Pinckney 's plan . As Pinckney didn 't have a coalition behind his plan , Madison 's plan was the starting point for deliberations . 
 The Convention agreed on several principles . Most importantly , they agreed that the Convention should go beyond its mandate merely to amend the Articles of Confederation , and instead should produce a new constitution outright . While some delegates thought this illegal , the Articles of Confederation were closer to a treaty between sovereign states than they were to a national constitution , so the genuine legal problems were limited . Another principle they agreed on was that the new government would have all the powers of the Confederation Congress , plus additional powers over the states . Once agreeing on these principles , the Convention voted on the Virginia plan and signaled their approval for it . Once this was done , they began modifying it . 
 Madison 's plan operated on several assumptions that were not seriously challenged . During the deliberations , few raised serious objections to the planned bicameral congress , nor the separate executive function , nor the separate judicial function . As English law had typically recognized government as having two separate functions , law making embodied in the legislature , and law executing embodied in the king and his courts , the division of the legislature from the executive and judiciary was a natural and uncontested point . 
 The division of the legislature into an upper and lower house wasn 't questioned either , despite the obscure origins of the English House of Lords and its role as the representative of the hereditary nobility . Americans had seldom known any but bicameral legislatures , both in Britain and in most state governments . The main exceptions to this were the dysfunctional Confederation Congress and the unicameral Pennsylvania legislature , which was seen as quickly vacillating between partisan extremes after each election . Experience had convinced the delegates that an upper house was necessary to tame the passions of the lower classes against the interests of wealthy merchants and landowners . Since America had no native hereditary aristocracy , the character of this upper house was designed to protect the interests of this wealthy elite , the " minority of the opulent , " against the interests of the lower classes , who constituted the majority of the population . 
 On Thursday , June 7 , it was proposed that senators should be chosen directly by the state legislatures , instead of by popular vote , as this method was more likely to preserve the power of the upper classes . Convention delegate Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts observed that " the great mercantile interest and of stockholders , is not provided for in any mode of election @-@ they will however be better represented if the State legislatures choose the second branch . " The proposal was carried unanimously . 
 The delegates also agreed with Madison that the executive function had to be independent of the legislature . In their aversion to kingly power , American legislatures had created state governments where the executive was beholden to the legislature , and by the late 1780s this was widely seen as being a source of paralysis . The Confederation government was the ultimate example of this . 
 Furthermore , in the English tradition , judges were seen as being agents of the King and his court , who represented him throughout his realm . Madison believed that in the American states , this direct link between state executives and judges was a source of corruption through patronage , and thought the link had to be severed between the two , thus creating the " third branch " of the judiciary which had been without any direct precedent before this point . Madison , however , did not believe that the judiciary should be truly independent , but rather beholden to the legislature rather than the executive . At the Convention , some sided with Madison that the legislature should choose judges , while others believed the president should choose judges . A compromise was eventually reached that the president should choose judges and the Senate confirm them . 
 In a few areas , Madison 's plan included provisions that had little support among the delegates . Few agreed with Madison that the legislature should be able to invalidate state laws , so the idea was dropped . While most thought there should be some mechanism to invalidate bad laws by congress , few agreed with Madison that a board of the executive and judges should decide on this . Instead , the power was given solely to the executive in the form of the veto . Many also thought this would be useful to protect the executive , whom many worried might become beholden to an imperial legislature . Also , during the deliberations , the New Jersey Plan was introduced , although it was more of a protest to the excessive national character of the Virginia plan , and was not seriously considered . The office of Vice President was also included later in the deliberations , mainly to provide the president a successor if he was unable to complete his term . 
 = = = The early debate = = = 
 Each state was allowed to cast a single vote either for or against a proposal during the debates in accordance with the majority opinion of the state 's delegates . Throughout the Convention , delegates would regularly come and go , with only 30 – 40 being present on a typical day . Consequently , if a state 's delegates were equally divided in their views on a given proposal , or if too few of the state 's delegates were in attendance to establish a quorum for the delegation when votes were being cast on a particular proposal , that state 's delegation had essentially no effect on the outcome of the vote on the proposal . Thus , for example , after two of New York 's three delegates abandoned the Convention in mid July with no intention of returning , New York was left unable to vote on any further proposals at the Convention , although Hamilton would continue to periodically attend and occasionally to speak during the debates . 
 The first area of major dispute was the manner by which the lower house would be apportioned . A minority wanted it to be apportioned so that all states would have equal weight , though this was never seriously considered . Most wanted it apportioned in accordance with some mixture of property and population . Though there was discussion on how to calculate property for this purpose , the issue of property was later dropped because of its difficulty , and an assumption that property would closely correlate to population . 
 Most accepted the desire among the slave states to count slaves as part of the population , although their servile status was raised as a major objection against this . The Three @-@ Fifths Compromise assessing population by adding the number of free persons to three @-@ fifths of " all other persons " ( slaves ) was agreed to without serious dispute . In 1783 , when attempting to assess a national taxation system , the Confederation Congress had considered a three fifths ratio , which did not achieve unanimity . This compromise resulted in a large coalition of states , including the small slave states of South Carolina and Georgia , backing the Virginia plan and thus expanding the power of the primary coalition . That the lower house was to be elected directly by the voters was also accepted without major dispute . 
 More contentious than the lower house was the question of the upper house . Few agreed with Madison that its members should be elected by the lower house . James Wilson suggested election by popular vote versus election by state legislature , but his proposal was shot down 10 @-@ 1 by the delegates . Most delegates didn 't question the intelligence of the voters , rather what concerned them was the slowness by which information spread in the late 18th century . 
 At the time of the Convention , they noted that local newspapers said little of current events , and what little they had was sketchy and dated . Local papers even said little about the meeting of the Convention . Alexander Hamilton proposed extending the term in office for senators to life , considering earlier proposals of four and seven years inefficient to enable the " rich and well born " to have a " distinct , permanent share in the government , " which could " check the imprudence of democracy . " Moreover , Hamilton proposed that senators not be elected directly by the general public , but by " electors " chosen for that purpose . 
 Besides the problems of direct election , the new Constitution was seen as such a radical break with the old system , by which delegates were elected to the Confederation Congress by state legislatures , that the Convention agreed to retain this method of electing senators to make the constitutional change less radical . The more difficult problem was the issue of apportionment . The Connecticut delegation offered a compromise , whereby the number of representatives for each state in the lower house would be apportioned based on the relative size of the state 's population , while the number of representatives in the upper house would be the same for all of the states , irrespective of size . The large states , fearing a diminution of their influence in the legislature under this plan , opposed this proposal . Unable to reach agreement , the delegates decided to leave this issue for further consideration later during the meeting . 
 The delegates couldn 't agree on whether the executive should be a single person , or a board of three . Many wished to limit the power of the executive and thus supported the proposal to divide the executive power between three persons . The possible problems of this system , in addition to the knowledge that George Washington would probably be the first president , calmed the fears enough so that the proponents of a singular executive could accumulate a large coalition . This issue came up occasionally after the matter was settled , but was never again seriously doubted . 
 Another issue concerned the election of the president . Few agreed with Madison that the executive should be elected by the legislature . There was widespread concern with direct election , because information diffused so slowly in the late 18th century , and because of concerns that people would only vote for candidates from their state or region . A vocal minority wanted the national executive to be chosen by the governors of the states . 
 The issue was one of the last major issues to be resolved , and was done so in the electoral college . At the time , before the formation of modern political parties , there was widespread concern that candidates would routinely fail to secure a majority of electors in the electoral college . The method of resolving this problem therefore was a contested issue . Most thought that the house should then choose the president , since it most closely reflected the will of the people . This caused dissension among delegates from smaller states , who realized that this would put their states at a disadvantage . To resolve this dispute , the Convention agreed that the house would elect the president if no candidate had an electoral college majority , but that each state delegation would vote as a bloc , rather than individually . 
 As the Convention was entering its second full month of deliberations , it was decided that further consideration of the prickly question of how to apportion representatives in the national legislature should be referred to a committee composed of one delegate from each of the eleven states that were present at that time at the Convention . The members of this " Grand Committee , " as it has come to be known , included Elbridge Gerry , Oliver Ellsworth , Robert Yates , William Paterson , Gunning Bedford , Jr . , George Mason , William Davie , John Rutledge , Abraham Baldwin , and Benjamin Franklin . In its report to the Convention on July 5 , the committee offered a compromise . The large states had opposed the Connecticut Compromise , because they felt it gave too much power to the smaller states . The Grand Committee 's proposal made two important modifications . It added the requirement that revenue bills originate in the lower house and not be subject to modification by the upper house ( although this Origination Clause would later be modified so that revenue bills could be amended in the upper house , or Senate ) . 
 The proposal also specified that each senator — rather than each state delegation — was to get one vote , and that each state would have multiple senators . This meant that the senators would each be voting individually , rather than as a bloc by state as delegates always had . This made senators free agents , presumably acting on behalf of their state at large , rather than as mere agents of the state legislatures . As such , the Senate would bring a federal character to the government , not because senators were elected by state legislatures , but because each state was equally represented in the Senate , which was the main aim of the smaller states . It was this , not simply Madison 's earlier agreement to replace the word national with the word federal , that convinced the delegates that the Constitution had a federal character . The final document was thus a mixture of Madison 's original " national " constitution and the desired " federal " Constitution that many of the delegates sought . 
 = = = The first draft = = = 
 The Convention adjourned from July 26 to August 6 to await the report of the Committee of Detail , which was to produce a first draft of the Constitution . It was chaired by John Rutledge , with the other members including Edmund Randolph , Oliver Ellsworth , James Wilson , and Nathaniel Gorham . 
 Though the committee did not record minutes of its proceedings , three key surviving documents offer clues to the committee ’ s handiwork : an outline by Randolph with edits by Rutledge , extensive notes and a second draft by Wilson , also with Rutledge ’ s edits , and the committee ’ s final report to the Convention . From this evidence it is thought that the committee used the original Virginia Plan , the decisions of the Convention on modifications to that plan , and other sources , such as the Articles of Confederation , provisions of the state constitutions , and even Charles Pinckney 's plan , to produce the first full draft , which author David O. Stewart has called a " remarkable copy @-@ and @-@ paste job . " 
 Randolph adopted two rules in preparing his initial outline : that the Constitution should only include essential principles , avoiding minor provisions that would change over time , and that it should be stated in simple and precise language . 
 Much of what was included in the committee ’ s report consisted of numerous details that the Convention had never discussed but which the committee correctly viewed as uncontroversial and unlikely to be challenged ; and as such , much of the committee ’ s proposal would ultimately be incorporated into the final version of the Constitution without debate . Examples of these details included the Speech and Debate Clause , which grants members of Congress immunity for comments made in their jobs , and the rules for organizing the House of Representatives and the Senate . 
 However , Rutledge , himself a former state governor , was determined that while the new national government should be stronger than the Confederation government had been , the national government ’ s power over the states should not be limitless ; and at Rutledge ’ s urging , the committee went beyond what the Convention had proposed . As Stewart describes it , the committee " hijacked " and remade the Constitution , altering critical agreements the Convention delegates had already made , enhancing the powers of the states at the expense of the national government , and adding several far @-@ reaching provisions that the Convention had never discussed . 
 The first major change , insisted on by Rutledge , was meant to sharply curtail the essentially unlimited powers to legislate “ in all cases for the general interests of the Union ” that the Convention only two weeks earlier had agreed to grant the Congress . Rutledge and Randolph worried that the broad powers implied in the language agreed on by the Convention would have given the national government too much power at the expense of the states . In Randolph ’ s outline the committee replaced that language with a list of 18 specific “ enumerated ” powers , many adopted from the Articles of Confederation , that would strictly limit the Congress ’ authority to measures such as imposing taxes , making treaties , going to war , and establishing post offices . Rutledge , however , was not able to completely convince all of the members of the committee to accept the change . Over the course of a series of drafts , a catchall provision ( the “ Necessary and Proper Clause ” ) was eventually added , most likely by Wilson , a nationalist little concerned with the sovereignty of individual states , giving the Congress the broad power “ to make all Laws that shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers , and all other powers vested by this Constitution in the government of the United States , or in any department or officer thereof . ” Another revision of Wilson ’ s draft also placed eight specific limits on the states , such as barring them from independently entering into treaties and from printing their own money , providing a certain degree of balance to the limits on the national government intended by Rutledge ’ s list of enumerated powers . In addition , Wilson ’ s draft modified the language of the Supremacy Clause adopted by the Convention , to ensure that national law would take precedence over inconsistent state laws . 
 These changes set the final balance between the national and state governments that would be entered into the final document , as the Convention never challenged this dual @-@ sovereignty between nation and state that had been fashioned by Rutledge and Wilson . 
 Another set of radical changes introduced by the Committee of Detail proved far more contentious when the committee ’ s report was presented to the Convention . On the day the Convention had agreed to appoint the committee , Southerner Charles Cotesworth Pinckney , of South Carolina , had warned of dire consequences should the committee fail to include protections for slavery in the Southern states , or allow for taxing of Southern agricultural exports . Pinckney and his fellow Southern delegates must have been delighted to see that the committee had included three provisions that explicitly restricted the Congress ’ authority in ways favorable to Southern interests . The proposed language would bar the Congress from ever interfering with the slave trade . It would also prohibit taxation of exports , and would require that any legislation concerning regulation of foreign commerce through tariffs or quotas ( that is , any laws akin to England 's “ Navigation Acts ” ) pass only with two @-@ thirds majorities of both houses of Congress . While much of the rest of the committee ’ s report would be accepted without serious challenge on the Convention floor , these last three proposals would provoke outrage from Northern delegates and slavery opponents . 
 The final report of the committee , which became the first draft of the Constitution , was the first workable constitutional plan , as Madison 's Virginia Plan had simply been an outline of goals and a broad structure . Even after it issued this report , the committee continued to meet off and on until early September . 
 = = = Further modifications and concluding debate = = = 
 Another month of discussion and relatively minor refinement followed , during which several attempts were made to alter the Rutledge draft , though few were successful . Some wanted to add property qualifications for people to hold office , while others wanted to prevent the national government from issuing paper money . Madison in particular wanted to push the Constitution back in the direction of his Virginia plan . 
 One important change that did make it into the final version included the agreement between northern and southern delegates to empower Congress to end the slave trade starting in 1808 . Southern and northern delegates also agreed to strengthen the Fugitive Slave Clause in exchange for removing a requirement that two @-@ thirds of Congress agree on " navigation acts " ( regulations of commerce between states and foreign governments ) . The two @-@ thirds requirement was favored by southern delegates , who thought Congress might pass navigation acts that would be economically harmful to slaveholders . 
 Once the Convention had finished amending the first draft from the Committee of Detail , a new set of unresolved questions were sent to several different committees for resolution . The Committee of Detail was considering several questions related to habeas corpus , freedom of the press , and an executive council to advise the president . Two committees addressed questions related to the slave trade and the assumption of war debts . 
 A new committee was created , the Committee on Postponed Parts , to address other questions that had been postponed . Its members , such as Madison , were delegates who had shown a greater desire for compromise and were chosen for this reason as most in the Convention wanted to finish their work and go home . The committee dealt with questions related to the taxes , war making , patents and copyrights , relations with Indian tribes , and Franklin 's compromise to require money bills to originate in the House . The biggest issue they addressed was the presidency , and the final compromise was written by Madison with the committee 's input . They adopted Wilson 's earlier plan for choosing the president by an electoral college , and settled on the method of choosing the president if no candidate had an electoral college majority , which many such as Madison thought would be " nineteen times out of twenty " . 
 The committee also shortened the president 's term from seven years to four years , freed the president to seek re @-@ election after an initial term , and moved impeachment trials from the courts to the Senate . They also created the office of the vice president , whose only roles were to succeed a president unable to complete a term of office and to preside over the Senate . The committee transferred important powers from the Senate to the president , for example the power to make treaties and appoint ambassadors . One controversial issue throughout much of the Convention had been the length of the president 's term , and whether the president was to be term limited . The problem had resulted from the understanding that the president would be chosen by Congress ; the decision to have the president be chosen instead by an electoral college reduced the chance of the president becoming beholden to Congress , so a shorter term with eligibility for re @-@ election became a viable option . 
 Near the end of the Convention , Gerry , Randolph , and Mason emerged as the main force of opposition . Their fears were increased as the Convention moved from Madison 's vague Virginia Plan to the concrete plan of Rutledge 's Committee of Detail . Some have argued that Randolph 's attacks on the Constitution were motivated by political ambition , in particular his anticipation of possibly facing rival Patrick Henry in a future election . The main objection of the three was the compromise that would allow Congress to pass " navigation acts " with a simple majority in exchange for strengthened slave provisions . Among their other objections was an opposition to the office of vice president . 
 Though most of their complaints did not result in changes , a couple did . Mason succeeded in adding " high crimes and misdemeanors " to the impeachment clause . Gerry also convinced the Convention to include a second method for ratification of amendments . The report out of the Committee of Detail had included only one mechanism for constitutional amendment , in which two @-@ thirds of the states had to ask Congress to convene a convention for consideration of amendments . Upon Gerry 's urging , the Convention added back the Virginia Plan 's original method whereby Congress would propose amendments that the states would then ratify . All amendments to the Constitution have been made through this latter method . 
 Despite their successes , these three dissenters grew increasingly unpopular as most other delegates wanted to bring the Convention 's business to an end and return home . As the Convention was drawing to a conclusion , and delegates prepared to refer the Constitution to the Committee on Style to pen the final version , one delegate raised an objection over civil trials . He wanted to guarantee the right to a jury trial in civil matters , and Mason saw in this a larger opportunity . Mason told the Convention that the constitution should include a bill of rights , which he thought could be prepared in a few hours . Gerry agreed , though the rest of the committee overruled them . They wanted to go home , and thought this was nothing more than another delaying tactic . 
 Few at the time realized how important the issue would become , with the absence of a bill of rights becoming the main argument of the anti @-@ Federalists against ratification . Most of the Convention 's delegates thought that states already protected individual rights , and that the Constitution did not authorize the national government to take away rights , so there was no need to include protections of rights . Once the Convention moved beyond this point , the delegates addressed a couple of last @-@ minute issues . Importantly , they modified the language that required spending bills to originate in the House of Representatives and be flatly accepted or rejected , unmodified , by the Senate . The new language empowered the Senate to modify spending bills proposed by the House . 
 = = = Drafting and signing = = = 
 Once the final modifications had been made , the Committee of Style and Arrangement was appointed " to revise the style of and arrange the articles which had been agreed to by the house . " Unlike other committees , whose members were named so the committees included members from different regions , this final committee included no champions of the small states . Its members were mostly in favor of a strong national government and unsympathetic to calls for states ' rights . They were William Samuel Johnson ( Connecticut ) , Alexander Hamilton ( New York ) , Gouverneur Morris ( Pennsylvania ) , James Madison ( Virginia ) , and Rufus King ( Massachusetts ) . On Wednesday , September 12 , the report of the " committee of style " was ordered printed for the convenience of the delegates . For three days , the Convention compared this final version with the proceedings of the Convention . The Constitution was then ordered engrossed on Saturday , September 15 by Jacob <unk> , and was submitted for signing on September 17 . It made at least one important change to what the Convention had agreed to ; King wanted to prevent states from interfering in contracts . Although the Convention never took up the matter his language was now inserted , creating the contract clause . 
 Gouverneur Morris is credited , both now and then , as the chief draftsman of the final document , including the stirring preamble . Not all the delegates were pleased with the results ; thirteen left before the ceremony , and three of those remaining refused to sign : Edmund Randolph of Virginia , George Mason of Virginia , and Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts . George Mason demanded a Bill of Rights if he was to support the Constitution . The Bill of Rights was not included in the Constitution submitted to the states for ratification , but many states ratified the Constitution with the understanding that a bill of rights would soon follow . Shortly before the document was to be signed , Gorham proposed to lower the size of congressional districts from 40 @,@ 000 to 30 @,@ 000 citizens . A similar measure had been proposed earlier , and failed by one vote . George Washington spoke up here , making his only substantive contribution to the text of the Constitution in supporting this move . The Convention adopted it without further debate . Gorham would sign the document , although he had openly doubted whether the United States would remain a single , unified nation for more than 150 years . Ultimately , 39 of the original 55 delegates ended up signing , but it is likely that none were completely satisfied . Their views were summed up by Benjamin Franklin , who said , 
 I confess that There are several parts of this Constitution which I do not at present approve , but I am not sure I shall never approve them . ... I doubt too whether any other Convention we can obtain , may be able to make a better Constitution . ... It therefore astonishes me , Sir , to find this system approaching so near to perfection as it does ; and I think it will astonish our enemies ... 
 Rhode Island never sent delegates , and two of New York 's three delegates did not stay at the Convention for long . Therefore , as George Washington stated , the document was executed by " eleven states , and Colonel Hamilton . " Washington signed the document first , and then moving by state delegation from north to south , as had been the custom throughout the Convention , the delegates filed to the front of the room to sign their names . 
 At the time the document was signed , Franklin gave a persuasive speech involving an anecdote on a sun that was painted on the back of Washington 's Chippendale chair . As recounted in Madison 's notes : 
 Whilst the last members were signing it Doctor . Franklin looking towards the Presidents Chair , at the back of which a rising sun happened to be painted , observed to a few members near him , that Painters had found it difficult to distinguish in their art a rising from a setting sun . I have said he , often and often in the course of the Session , and the vicissitudes of my hopes and fears as to its issue , looked at that behind the President without being able to tell whether it was rising or setting : But now at length I have the happiness to know that it is a rising and not a setting Sun . 
 The Constitution was then submitted to the states for ratification , pursuant to its own Article VII . 
 = = Proposed plans = = 
 Several plans were introduced , with the most important plan being that of James Madison ( the Virginia Plan ) . The Convention 's work was mostly a matter of modifying this plan . Charles Pinckney also introduced a plan , although this wasn 't considered and its exact character has been lost to history . After the Convention was well under way , the New Jersey Plan was introduced though never seriously considered . It was mainly a protest to what some delegates thought was the excessively radical change from the Articles of Confederation . Alexander Hamilton also offered a plan after the Convention was well under way , though it included an executive serving for life and therefore the delegates felt it too closely resembled a monarchy . Historians are unsure how serious he was about this , and some have speculated that he may have done it to make Madison 's plan look moderate by comparison . The Connecticut Compromise wasn 't a plan but one of several compromises offered by the Connecticut delegation . It was key to the ultimate ratification of the constitution , although was only included after being modified by Benjamin Franklin in order to make it more appealing to larger states . 
 = = = Virginia Plan = = = 
 Prior to the start of the Convention , the Virginian delegates met and , drawing largely from Madison 's suggestions , came up with what came to be known as the Virginia Plan , also known as the Large State Plan . For this reason , James Madison is sometimes called the Father of the Constitution . Presented by Virginia governor Edmund Randolph on May 29 , 1787 , the Virginia Plan proposed a very powerful bicameral legislature . Both houses of the legislature would be determined proportionately . The lower house would be elected by the people , and the upper house would be elected by the lower house . The executive would exist solely to ensure that the will of the legislature was carried out and would therefore be selected by the legislature . The Virginia Plan also created a judiciary , and gave both the executive and some of the judiciary the power to veto , subject to override . 
 = = = New Jersey Plan = = = 
 After the Virginia Plan was introduced , New Jersey delegate William Paterson asked for an adjournment to contemplate the Plan . Under the Articles of Confederation , each state had equal representation in Congress , exercising one vote each . The Virginia Plan threatened to limit the smaller states ' power by making both houses of the legislature proportionate to population . On June 14 and 15 , 1787 , a small @-@ state caucus met to create a response to the Virginia Plan . The result was the New Jersey Plan , otherwise known as the Small State Plan . 
 Paterson 's New Jersey Plan was ultimately a rebuttal to the Virginia Plan , and was much closer to the initial call for the Convention : drafting amendments to the Articles of Confederation to fix the problems in it . Under the New Jersey Plan , the existing Continental Congress would remain , but it would be granted new powers , such as the power to levy taxes and force their collection . An executive branch was created , to be elected by Congress ( the plan allowed for a multi @-@ person executive ) . The executives would serve a single term and were subject to recall on the request of state governors . The plan also created a judiciary that would serve for life , to be appointed by the executives . Lastly , any laws set by Congress would take precedence over state laws . When Paterson reported the plan to the Convention on June 15 , 1787 , it was ultimately rejected , but it gave the smaller states a rallying point for their interests . 
 = = = Hamilton 's plan = = = 
 Unsatisfied with the New Jersey Plan and the Virginia Plan , Alexander Hamilton proposed his own plan . It also was known as the British Plan , because of its resemblance to the British system of strong centralized government . In his plan , Hamilton advocated virtually doing away with state sovereignty and consolidating the states into a single nation . The plan featured a bicameral legislature , the lower house elected by the people for three years . The upper house would be elected by electors chosen by the people and would serve for life . The plan also gave the Governor , an executive elected by electors for a life @-@ term of service , an absolute veto over bills . State governors would be appointed by the national legislature , and the national legislature had veto power over any state legislation . 
 Hamilton presented his plan to the Convention on June 18 , 1787 . The plan was perceived as a well @-@ thought @-@ out plan , but it was not considered , because it resembled the British system too closely . It also contemplated the loss of most state authority , which the states were unwilling to allow . 
 = = = Pinckney 's plan = = = 
 Immediately after Randolph finished laying out the Virginia Plan , Charles Pinckney of South Carolina presented his own plan to the Convention . As Pinckney did not reduce it to writing , the only evidence we have are Madison 's notes , so the details are somewhat vague . It was a confederation , or treaty , among the thirteen states . There was to be a bicameral legislature made up of a Senate and a House of Delegates . The House would have one member for every one thousand inhabitants . The House would elect Senators who would serve by rotation for four years and represent one of four regions . Congress would meet in a joint session to elect a President , and would also appoint members of the cabinet . Congress , in joint session , would serve as the court of appeal of last resort in disputes between states . Pinckney did also provide for a supreme Federal Judicial Court . The Pinckney plan was not debated , but it may have been referred to by the Committee of Detail . 
 = = = Connecticut Compromise = = = 
 The Connecticut Compromise , forged by Roger Sherman from Connecticut , was proposed on June 11 . In a sense it blended the Virginia ( large @-@ state ) and New Jersey ( small @-@ state ) proposals . Ultimately , however , its main contribution was in determining the apportionment of the Senate , and thus retaining a federal character in the constitution . Sherman sided with the two @-@ house national legislature of the Virginia Plan , but proposed " That the proportion of suffrage in the 1st. branch [ house ] should be according to the respective numbers of free inhabitants ; and that in the second branch or Senate , each State should have one vote and no more . " This plan failed at first , but on July 23 the question was finally settled . 
 What was ultimately included in the constitution was a modified form of this plan . In the Committee of Detail , Benjamin Franklin added the requirement that revenue bills originate in the house , and rather than the state delegations voting as a bloc as instructed by their state legislatures , Franklin 's modification made them free agents . As such , the Senate would bring a federal character to the government , not because senators were elected by state legislatures , but because each state was equally represented . 
 = = Slavery = = 
 Among the most controversial issues confronting the delegates was that of slavery . Slavery was widespread in the states at the time of the Convention . Twenty @-@ five of the Convention 's 55 delegates owned slaves , including all of the delegates from Virginia and South Carolina . Slaves comprised approximately one @-@ fifth of the population of the states ; and apart from northernmost New England , where slavery had largely been eliminated , slaves lived throughout all regions of the country . The majority of the slaves ( more than 90 % ) , however , lived in the South , where approximately 1 in 3 families owned slaves ( in the largest and wealthiest state , Virginia , that figure was nearly 1 in 2 families ) . The entire agrarian economy of the South was based on slave labor , and the Southern delegates to the Convention were unwilling to accept any proposals that they believed would threaten the institution . 
 Whether slavery was to be regulated under the new Constitution was a matter of such intense conflict between the North and South that several Southern states refused to join the Union if slavery were not to be allowed . Delegates opposed to slavery were forced to yield in their demands that slavery practiced within the confines of the new nation be completely outlawed . However , they continued to argue that the Constitution should prohibit the states from participating in the international slave trade , including in the importation of new slaves from Africa and the export of slaves to other countries . The Convention postponed making a final decision on the international slave trade until late in the deliberations because of the contentious nature of the issue . During the Convention 's late July recess , the Committee of Detail had inserted language that would prohibit the federal government from attempting to ban international slave trading and from imposing taxes on the purchase or sale of slaves . The Convention could not agree on these provisions when the subject came up again in late August , so they referred the matter to an eleven @-@ member committee for further discussion . This committee helped work out a compromise : Congress would have the power to ban the international slave trade , but not for another twenty years ( that is , not until 1808 ) . In exchange for this concession , the federal government 's power to regulate foreign commerce would be strengthened by provisions that allowed for taxation of slave trades in the international market and that reduced the requirement for passage of navigation acts from two @-@ thirds majorities of both houses of Congress to simple majorities . 
 Another contentious slavery @-@ related question was whether slaves would be counted as part of the population in determining representation of the states in the Congress , or would instead be considered property and as such not be considered for purposes of representation . Delegates from states with a large population of slaves argued that slaves should be considered persons in determining representation , but as property if the new government were to levy taxes on the states on the basis of population . Delegates from states where slavery had become rare argued that slaves should be included in taxation , but not in determining representation . 
 Finally , delegate James Wilson proposed the Three @-@ Fifths Compromise . This was eventually adopted by the Convention . 
 = = Delegates = = 
 The states had originally appointed seventy representatives to the Convention , but a number of the appointees did not accept or could not attend , leaving 55 delegates who would ultimately craft the Constitution . 
 Almost all of the fifty @-@ five delegates had taken part in the Revolution , with at least twenty @-@ nine having served in the Continental forces , most in positions of command . All but two or three had served in colonial or state government during their careers . The vast majority ( about 75 % ) of the delegates were or had been members of the Confederation Congress , and many had been members of the Continental Congress during the Revolution . Several had been state governors . Just two delegates , Roger Sherman and Robert Morris , would be signatories to all three of the nation ’ s founding documents : the Declaration of Independence , the Articles of Confederation , and the Constitution . 
 More than half of the delegates had trained as lawyers ( several had even been judges ) , although only about a quarter had practiced law as their principal means of business . There were also merchants , manufacturers , shippers , land speculators , bankers or financiers , two or three physicians , a minister , and several small farmers . Of the twenty @-@ five who owned slaves , sixteen depended on slave labor to run the plantations or other businesses that formed the mainstay of their income . Most of the delegates were landowners with substantial holdings , and most , with the possible exception of Roger Sherman and William Few , were very comfortably wealthy . George Washington and Robert Morris were among the wealthiest men in the entire country . 
 ( * ) Did not sign the final draft of the U.S. Constitution . Randolph , Mason , and Gerry were the only three present in Philadelphia at the time who refused to sign . 
 The names of several prominent Founders are notable for their not having participated in the Constitutional Convention . Thomas Jefferson was abroad , serving as the minister to France ( nonetheless , Jefferson , in a letter to John Adams , would describe the delegates approvingly as a gathering of “ demi @-@ gods ” ) . John Adams was in Britain , serving as minister to that country , but he wrote home to encourage the delegates . Patrick Henry refused to participate because he " smelt a rat in Philadelphia , tending toward the monarchy . " Also absent were John Hancock and Samuel Adams . Many of the states ’ older and more experienced leaders may have simply been too busy with the local affairs of their states to attend the Convention , which had originally been planned to strengthen the existing Articles of Confederation , not to write a constitution for a completely new national government . 
 = The Real Thing ( Gwen Stefani song ) = 
 " The Real Thing " is a song by American singer and songwriter Gwen Stefani from her debut solo studio album , Love . Angel . Music . Baby . ( 2004 ) . It was written by Stefani , Linda Perry , and her then @-@ husband Gavin Rossdale , who is credited as " GMR " . Nellee Hooper produced the song , with Mark " Spike " Stent serving as an additional producer . An Europop and synthpop ballad , " The Real Thing " talks about mutual love between two lovers . 
 Interscope Records released the track as a promotional single exclusively in the Philippines a year after the album 's release . It was released as a CD single that featured a remix by the music duo Wendy & Lisa . The remix was also included on the deluxe edition of L.A.M.B. , as well as on the international version of the album . 
 After its release , " The Real Thing " received generally favorable reviews from critics . Critics appreciated the " vintage " production of the song and labeled it a stand @-@ out track on the album , while also noting its New Order influence . Stefani performed the single throughout her 2005 Harajuku Lovers Tour in a vintage red bathing suit along with a group of breakdancers and the Harajuku Girls . The live performance was praised and compared to Madonna and Cyndi Lauper . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 While writing and recording for her debut album , Stefani cited her major influences as Club Nouveau , Lisa Lisa , Prince , New Order , The Cure and early Madonna and advised the producers and writers that she wanted a similar sound for the album . According to MTV 's Jennifer Vineyard , musician and <unk> Linda Perry " put Gwen in a headlock " during a party after the Grammys and told her they could make beautiful music together " ; however , Stefani felt scared and insecure about working with Perry . While recording at Perry 's house , Stefani was initially insecure about her writing process and " would go into another room to try to write some lyrics , and when she came back , Perry would already have the whole song nailed . " After a writing session where " What You Waiting For ? " was created , Stefani became less insecure and felt more comfortable when making songs . After working with other musicians , Stefani and Perry worked together on " The Real Thing " . On October 3 , 2005 , Interscope Records released the song as a promotional single exclusively in the Philippines . The label released a CD single , which featured the album version and a remix by Wendy & Lisa of the song . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " The Real Thing " was written by Gwen Stefani , Linda Perry and Gavin Rossdale , who is credited as " GMR " on the album 's booklet , while production was done by Nellee Hooper and Mark " Spike " Stent . New Order vocalist Bernard Sumner and bassist Peter Hook also contributed to the song while music duo Wendy & Lisa were in charge of providing guitar and keyboards respectively . The song has two versions : the first is a mid @-@ tempo Europop and synthpop ballad , and the second , which is a slow version remixed by Wendy & Lisa called : " Wendy & Lisa Slow Mix " . Lyrically , the song discusses mutual love between a couple . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon release , the song received mixed reviews from contemporary music critics . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine called the song a " slice of vintage euro @-@ pop perfection , " while John Murphy of musicOMH named it " another poppy ballad which gets away with some cheesy lyrics by being touchingly sincere , making it probably the best track on the album . " Jennifer Nine of Yahoo ! Music agreed , labeling it an " airy , <unk> fresh album stand @-@ out [ that ] soars lump @-@ <unk> along on a <unk> evocative Peter Hook bassline like some dreamy combination of Cyndi Lauper ’ s ' Time After Time ' and Ms Ciccone ’ s ' True Blue ' . Jason Damas of PopMatters claimed that the song " takes us back closer to No Doubt territory again , this time wedding a distinctively Peter Hook ( of New Order ) influenced bass line to a sweet pop ballad . " 
 Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone called her " some kind of visionary " for getting New Order on the same track as Wendy and Lisa . Kathi Kamen Goldmark of <unk> agreed , noting that the addition of the musicians " actually works . " Anthony Carew of Neumu called it an " obligatory cut [ ... ] where great care was taken to get that neo @-@ vintage sound sounding just right . " Charles Merwin of Stylus Magazine was more critical , calling it " tepid " , while Nick Sylvester of Pitchfork Media was overall displeased by the song , heavily comparing it to New Order 's " Bizarre Love Triangle " and stating : " Anyone remotely involved with ' The Real Thing ' should find a stray dog and let it bite him " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Stefani included the song on the setlist for both of her worldwide concert tours : Harajuku Lovers Tour and The Sweet Escape Tour . In his review of the video album Harajuku Lovers Live , Canoe.ca 's James Stevenson , wrote " the Harajuku Girls donned 40s @-@ era bathing suits and carried plastic beach balls while Stefani herself was glamorously decked out in a red @-@ and @-@ white @-@ polka dot suit in one of many costume changes " ; the Harajuku Girls are a dance troupe that has performed with Stefani on multiple occasions . Stevenson highlighted the performance as one of the standout on the concert , noting that it " set [ s ] the bar high early in the evening . " Corey Moss of MTV News compared the performance to Madonna 's and noted that the song " could have been titled ' Lucky Star 2005 . " During his review of the concert 's video album , Glenn Meads of the Manchester Evening News described Stefani 's performances as " reminiscent of Cyndi Lauper . " Stefani performed the " Slow Jam Mix " of the song during her The Sweet Escape Tour ( 2007 ) ; the performance also included Stefani in a 1940s @-@ style bathing suit , once again accompanied by the Harajuku Girls . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits = = 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Love . Angel . Music . Baby . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Jan Zamoyski = 
 Jan Zamoyski or <unk> ( Latin : Ioannes de Zamość ; 1542 – 1605 ) was a Polish nobleman , magnate , and the 1st <unk> of Zamość . Royal Secretary from 1566 , Deputy <unk> ( Chancellor ) of the Crown from 1576 , Lord Grand @-@ Chancellor of the Crown from 1578 , and Grand Hetman of the Crown from 1581 . General Starost of Kraków from 1580 to 1585 , Starost of Bełz , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Tartu . Important advisor to Kings Sigismund II Augustus and Stephen Báthory , he was one of the major opponents of Bathory 's successor , Sigismund III Vasa , and one of the most skilled diplomats , politicians and statesmen of his time , standing as a major figure in the politics of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth throughout his life . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Childhood and education = = = 
 Jan Zamoyski was born on 19 March 1542 to Stanisław Zamoyski and Anna <unk> in <unk> . He started his education in a school in Krasnystaw but when he was thirteen years old he was sent to study abroad ; from 1555 to 1559 he was a <unk> at the royal court in Paris . Already at this young age he attended lectures at the Sorbonne University and Collège de France . In 1559 he briefly visited Poland , then attended the University of Strasbourg ; after a few months there he moved to University of Padua , where from 1561 he studied law and received a doctorate in 1564 . During his years abroad he converted from Calvinism to Roman Catholicism . 
 During his education , he became active in university politics , and in 1563 he was elected the rector of the law department . Around that time he also wrote De <unk> Romano , a brochure about Ancient Rome government . He returned to the Commonwealth in 1565 , and was the first person to receive a commendation letter from the senate of the Republic of Venice . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 After returning to Poland , he was appointed to the Royal Chancellery , and soon became a favorite secretary to King Sigismund II . In 1567 he commanded a royal task force , sent to remove the noble family of <unk> from the royal lands they were decreed to hold illegally . Another major task he completed at that time was the reorganization of the Chancellery archive . 
 In 1571 he married Anna <unk> ; his wife and their young son died shortly afterwards , in 1572 . After the extinction of the Jagiellon dynasty in 1572 during the election sejm ( special session of the Commonwealth parliament ) he used his influence to enforce the <unk> election ( meaning all nobles had the right to vote for the new king during the upcoming Polish – Lithuanian royal election , 1573 ) . However , his proposal for majority voting did not pass , which opened the process for abuses of liberum veto in the future . He was a colleague of Mikołaj Sienicki and Hieronim <unk> , and with them he was one of the leaders of a faction of the lesser and middle nobility ( szlachta ) in the Commonwealth , whose goal was the reform the country - the execution movement - preserving the unique constitutional and parliamentary government of the Commonwealth with the dominant role of poorer nobility ( Golden Freedom ) . He was so influential and popular among the lesser nobility that he was known as the " first tribune of nobility " or " Polish Gracchus . " 
 = = = Chancellor and hetman = = = 
 In that first election he was in favour of Henryk II <unk> ( later , Henry III of France ) . Subsequently he was part of the diplomatic mission that traveled to France to finish formalities with the newly elected king . He also published a pamphlet praising the new king , and thus suffered a loss of face when Henryk secretly abandoned Poland and returned to France . During the following 1575 election he was an vocal enemy of the Habsburg dynasty and its candidate , and this anti @-@ Habsburg stance , resounding among the lesser nobility , helped him regain his popularity . For the king , Zamoyski championed the case of a Polish candidate , which ended up in the marriage of Anna Jagiellon with the anti @-@ Habsburg Stephen Bathory of Transylvania . 
 Bathory thanked Zamoyski by granting him the office of Deputy Chancellor on 16 May 1576 . He participated on Batory 's side in the quelling of the Danzig rebellion in 1576 – 1577 , sponsoring a chorągiew of <unk> ( cavalry unit ) and participating in close combat on several occasions . In 1577 he married again , this time marrying Krystyna Radziwiłł , daughter of magnate Mikołaj Radziwiłł Czarny ; this made him a close ally of the Radziwiłł family , the most powerful family in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania . In 1578 he received the post of the Grand Crown Chancellor . That year poet Jan Kochanowski dedicated his <unk> <unk> <unk> , the first Polish tragedy , to him . 
 He took part in the preparation for a war against Muscovy in 1579 – 1581 , where he contributed a group of 400 or 600 mercenaries . Through he had little prior military background nor experience , he was interested in mastering the military art , and proved to be an adept learner . With Batory 's support , he begun filling in for some of the roles of Grand Crown Hetman Mikołaj <unk> , particularly when <unk> was not present . While not campaigning , he was also instrumental in ensuring that the ongoing political support for the war . In 1580 he was hit by another personal tragedy , as his wife died in labor , together with their child ; entering a short period of depression . 
 Later that year , in August , he captured Velizh in September he participated in the siege of Velikiye Luki , and then took <unk> . On 11 August 1581 he received the nomination for the post of Grand Crown Hetman ; this nomination , although uncontroversial at that time , was technically illegal . Following that he participated in the long and inconclusive Siege of Pskov , which ended with the Peace of Yam @-@ <unk> in 1582 . Though Zamoyski failed to capture Pskov , he drained the Russian resources , and the ongoing siege was a major reason for the final treaty , which was highly favorable to Poland . 
 In June 1583 Zamoyski took his third wife , Gryzelda Bathory , a relative of king Bathory himself . In May 1584 Zamoyski 's men captured Samuel Zborowski , a noble whose death sentence for treason and murder had been pending for roughly a decade , shortly afterwards with Bathory 's consent Zborowski was executed . This political conflict between Báthory , Zamoyski and the Zborowski family , framed as the clash between the monarch and the nobility , would be a major recurring controversy in internal Polish politics for many years , beginning with a major dispute at the Sejm of 1585 . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 After the death of Batory in 1586 , Zamoyski helped Sigismund III Vasa gain the Polish throne , fighting in the brief civil war against the forces supporting Habsburg archduke Maximilian III of Austria . The camp supporting Sigismund was rallied around Zamoyski , whereas Maximilian was supported by the Zborowski family . Zamoyski defended Kraków and defeated Maximilian 's forces in the Battle of Byczyna in 1588 . In that battle , which Sławomir Leśniewski describes as " one of the most important in Polish history , and the most important in Zamoyski 's military career " , Maximilian was taken prisoner and in the resulting Treaty of Bytom and Będzin of 1589 had to give up all pretenses to the Polish crown . Later that year Zamoyski proposed a reform of the royal elections , which failed to pass the Sejm . 
 From 1589 Zamoyski , in his role as the hetman , tried to prevent the intensifying Tatar incursions along the Commonwealth south @-@ eastern border , but with little success . In order to deal with the recurring disturbances in that region Zamoyski developed a plan to turn Moldavia into a buffer zone between the Commonwealth and the Ottoman Empire ; this would lead to a lengthy campaign . 
 = = = In opposition to the throne = = = 
 Meanwhile , in internal Commonwealth politics , early on in Sigismund III 's reign , Zamoyski , who was once a staunch supporter of the Commonwealth kings , begun to distance himself from the King . Sigismund had quickly allied himself with the Habsburgs , much to chancellors dissatisfaction . Zamoyski was dissatisfied with Sigismund 's early plans to use Poland as a stepping stone to gaining the Swedish crown , as Sigismund was plotting to cede the Polish crown to the Habsburgs in exchange for their support of his right to the Swedish throne . The new King feared the chancellor 's power , but due to Commonwealth laws he was unable to dismiss him from his posts . He offered him a prestigious voivode of Kraków office , but Zamoyski declined , as if he was to accept , the law would require him to resign from his slightly less prestigious but more influential chancellorship . By 1590 – 1591 Zamoyski was seen as one of the king 's staunchest opponents . Open quarrel between king and chancellor broke out during the Sejm of 1591 , culminating in a heated exchange of words and the king storming out of the chamber . Despite their tensed relations , neither the king nor the chancellor wanted a civil war ; soon after their quarrel Zamoyski would issue a public apology to the king and their uneasy relationship would continue until Zamoyski 's death . 
 In 1594 Zamoyski once again failed to stop a Tatar incursion in the southern borders . The next year was much more successful , as in Moldavia in 1595 he was victorious in the Battle of Cecora , and helped hospodar Ieremia Movilă ( Jeremi <unk> ) gain the throne . In 1600 he fought against Michael the Brave ( Michał <unk> , Mihai Viteazul ) , hospodar of Wallachia and the new Prince of Transylvania , who had conquered Moldavia a few months earlier . He defeated him under <unk> ( <unk> ) and restored Ieremia to the throne . He also helped his brother , Simion Movilă to become brief ruler of Wallachia , thus spreading the influence of the Commonwealth to the Central Danube . 
 In 1600 and 1601 Zamoyski took part in the war against Sweden commanding the Commonwealth forces in Livonia ( Inflanty ) . At the same time he was a vocal opponent of that war on the political scene . In 1600 he recaptured several strongholds from the Swedes and a year later captured Wolmar on 19 December 1601 Fellin on 16 May 1602 , and <unk> <unk> on 30 September 1602 . The rigours of the campaign , however , placed a strain on his health , and he resigned the command . 
 At the Sejm of 1603 Zamoyski led opposition to the governance reforms proposed by Sigismund ; seeing in them intentions of transforming the Commonwealth into an absolute monarchy . Later , he also opposed Sigismund 's plans to intervene in the civil war plaguing Muscovy ( the Time of Troubles and the Dymitriads ) . He clashed with Sigismund for the final time during the Sejm of January 1605 . 
 Zamoyski died suddenly on 3 June 1605 , due to a stroke . His fortune was inherited by his single son , Tomasz Zamoyski . 
 = = Assessment and legacy = = 
 = = = Remembrance = = = 
 Fame of Zamoyski , significance in life , endured after his death . He was praised by artists such as Szymon <unk> and Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz , and historians , including Stanisław Staszic , Stanisław Tarnowski and Artur <unk> . There were also those critical of him : Hugo Kołłątaj , Józef Szujski , Michał <unk> . Nonetheless , Polish historiography and culture treatment of Zamoyski is mostly positive , and historian Janusz Tazbir remarked that Zamoyski posthumous career was even more magnificent than his real one . Leśniewski , ending his recent biography of Zamoyski , concludes that he is a significant , if controversial , figure of Polish Renaissance . 
 Zamoyski was the subject of several paintings and drawings . Most notably , he is one of the characters in two large paintings by Jan Matejko , featured on the Skarga 's Sermon and Batory at Pskov . 
 = = = Political and military leader = = = 
 Having control of both the Chancellorship and the Grand Hetman office , Zamoyski was one of the most powerful people in the country , having obtained both the power of Grand Hetman ( commander in chief of the armed forces ) and that of chancellor , combined for the first time in the hands of one person . He was responsible for much of the Polish internal and foreign policies . He is considered to be one of the most prominent statesmen in Polish history . 
 Even though his military career begun almost as an afterthought , or by accident , Zamoyski is also remembered as one of the most accomplished Polish military commanders . In his tactics , he favored sieges , flanking maneuvers , conserving his forces , and the new Western art of fortification and artillery . The war with Muscovy shown him to be a skilled commander in sieges , and latter events would prove him to be an equally able leader in the open field . 
 = = = Wealth and cultural patronage = = = 
 Zamoyski gathered a significant fortune ; his estates generated a revenue of over 200 @,@ 000 zloties in the early 17th century . His personal lands covered 6 @,@ 445 square kilometres ( 2 @,@ 488 sq mi ) , and included eleven towns and over 200 villages . He was a royal caretaker of another dozen or so cities and over 600 villages . <unk> , his personal and leased lands covered over 17 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 6 @,@ 600 sq mi ) , with 23 towns and cities and 816 villages . In 1589 he succeeded in establishing the Zamoyski Family Fee Tail ( <unk> <unk> ) , a de facto duchy . Zamoyski supported economical development of his lands , investing in colonization of frontiers , and the development of industry , both small ( sawmills , breweries , mills and such ) and large ( his lands had four iron mills and four glass factories ) . 
 His most prized creation was the capital of his Fee Tail , the city of Zamość , founded in 1580 , built and designed as a Renaissance citta <unk> or " ideal city " by the Italian architect Bernardo <unk> . In the city , in 1595 he founded the Akademia <unk> , the third university in the history of education in Poland . In addition to Zamość , he also funded four other towns : <unk> , <unk> , Busza and <unk> . 
 Zamoyski collected a significant library , and was a patron of numerous artists in his Fee Tail . Artists under his patronage included the poets Jan Kochanowski and Szymon <unk> , and the writer and historian Joachim Bielski . 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Zamoyski was not a deeply religious person , and his conversion from Protestantism to Catholicism was primarily pragmatic . Leśniewski notes that Zamoyski was often motivated by greed , for example during the Danzig Rebellion , when he supported lenient treatment of the rebels , and during the 1577 – 1578 negotiations with , when he favored the solution of George Frederick , Margrave of Brandenburg @-@ Ansbach ; in both cases his decision was likely influenced by bribes or favors . In another example , Leśniewski describes how Zamoyski openly demanded rewards following his victory at Byczyna , and tried to include an article favoring him in the Bytom and Będzin treaty . He further notes , critically , that with raising power and political success Zamoyski begun displaying negative qualities , such as egoism and arrogance . Zamoyski was ruthless to those weaker than him . At the same time , he was respected by his opponents , widely recognized as highly intelligent , a cunning strategist and tactician in matters political and military , and a popular political leader . He valued the good of the country at least as high as his own , and although he could have become the king after a victorious civil war against Sigismund , he preferred to act within the limits of law instead , avoiding a war that could devastate the country , and thus curbing his own ambitions . 
 = Pussy Riot = 
 Pussy Riot is a Russian feminist punk rock protest group based in Moscow . 
 Founded in August 2011 , it has a variable membership of approximately 11 women ranging in age from about 20 to 33 ( as of 2012 ) . The group has staged unauthorised provocative guerrilla performances in unusual public locations , which were edited into music videos and posted on the Internet . The collective 's lyrical themes include feminism , LGBT rights , and opposition to Russian President Vladimir Putin , whom the group considers a dictator , and to his links with the leadership of the Russian Orthodox Church . 
 On February 21 , 2012 , five members of the group staged a performance in Moscow 's Cathedral of Christ the Savior . The group 's actions were eventually stopped by church security officials . By that evening , the collective had turned the performance into a music video entitled " Punk Prayer – Mother of God , Chase Putin Away ! " The women said their protest was directed at the Orthodox Church leader 's support for Putin during his election campaign . The head of the Russian Orthodox Church , Patriarch Kirill I , said the performers were doing the work of the devil . 
 On March 3 , 2012 , two of the group members , Nadezhda Tolokonnikova and Maria Alyokhina , were arrested and charged with hooliganism . A third member , Yekaterina Samutsevich , was arrested on March 16 . Denied bail , they were held in custody until their trial began in late July . On August 17 , 2012 , the three members were convicted of " hooliganism motivated by religious hatred " , and each was sentenced to two years ' imprisonment . Two other members of the group , who escaped arrest after the February protest , reportedly left Russia fearing prosecution . On October 10 , following an appeal , Samutsevich was freed on probation and her sentence suspended . The sentences of the other two women were upheld . In late October 2012 , Alyokhina and Tolokonnikova were sent to separate prisons . 
 The trial and sentence attracted considerable criticism , particularly in the West . The case was adopted by human rights groups including Amnesty International , which designated the women prisoners of conscience , and by a number of prominent entertainers . Public opinion in Russia was generally less sympathetic towards the women . Putin stated that the band had " undermined the moral foundations " of the nation and " got what they asked for " . Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev said he did not think the three members of Pussy Riot should have been sent to jail , but stressed that the release of the remaining two imprisoned members was a matter for the courts . Having served 21 months , Tolokonnikova and Alyokhina were released on December 23 , 2013 , after the State Duma approved an amnesty . 
 In February 2014 , a statement was made anonymously on behalf of some Pussy Riot members that both Alyokhina and Tolokonnikova were no longer members . However , both were among the group that performed as Pussy Riot during the Winter Olympics in Sochi , where group members were attacked with whips and pepper spray by Cossacks who were employed as security . On 6 March 2014 , Nadezhda Tolokonnikova and Maria Alyokhina were assaulted and sprayed with green paint by local youths in Nizhny Novgorod . 
 = = Origins and musical style = = 
 Pussy Riot is a collective formed in August 2011 . Their name is in English and is written in the Latin rather than Cyrillic alphabet . It usually appears thus in the Russian press , but sometimes the name is transliterated as " <unk> <unk> " . It comprises around 11 performers and about 15 people who handle the technical work of shooting and editing their videos , which are posted on the Internet . Their costumes are usually brightly colored dresses and tights , even in bitterly cold weather , with their faces masked by balaclavas , both while performing and during interviews . During interviews they use nicknames such as " Balaclava " , " Cat " , " Seraph " , " Terminator " , and " Blondie " . In an interview with <unk> , a band member described their two @-@ minute concerts as performance art , creating images of " pure protest , saying : super heroes in balaclavas and acid bright tights seize public space in Moscow . " Another band member , who goes by the pseudonym <unk> , told the <unk> Novosti newspaper that the group is open to women recruits with limited musical talents . She said : " You don 't have to sing very well . It 's punk . You just scream a lot . " 
 The group cites punk rock and Oi ! bands Angelic Upstarts , Cockney Rejects , Sham 69 and The 4 @-@ Skins as their main musical influences . The band also cite American punk rock band Bikini Kill , performance artist Karen Finley and the riot grrrl movement of the 1990s as inspirations . They stated : 
 What we have in common is impudence , politically loaded lyrics , the importance of feminist discourse and a non @-@ standard female image . The difference is that Bikini Kill performed at specific music venues , while we hold unsanctioned concerts . On the whole , Riot Grrrl was closely linked to Western cultural institutions , whose equivalents don 't exist in Russia . 
 Tolokonnikova , her husband Pyotr Verzilov , and Samutsevich were all members of the anarchist art collective " Voina " from the group 's early days in 2007 , until an acrimonious split in 2009 . Following the split , they formed a separate Moscow @-@ based group , also named " Voina " , saying that they had as much right to use this name as Voina founder Oleg <unk> . 
 = = Ideology = = 
 The musical performance group was organized , in part , due to anger over what members saw as government policies that discriminate against women , citing legislation that " placed restrictions on legal abortions " . According to Tolokonnikova , Pussy Riot is " part of the global anti @-@ capitalist movement , which consists of anarchists , Trotskyists , feminists and autonomists . " Pussy Riot uses Situationist @-@ style guerrilla performances . Tolokonnikova stated : 
 Pussy Riot 's performances can either be called dissident art or political action that engages art forms . Either way , our performances are a kind of civic activity amidst the repressions of a corporate political system that directs its power against basic human rights and civil and political liberties . 
 In a February 2012 interview with Vice magazine , Pussy Riot member " <unk> " named her major feminist influences as Simone de Beauvoir , Andrea Dworkin , Emmeline Pankhurst , Shulamith Firestone , Kate Millett , Rosi <unk> and Judith Butler . 
 In an email interview with The St. Petersburg Times , the group explained their political positions further , saying that members ' perspectives ranged from anarchist to liberal left , but that all were united by feminism , anti @-@ authoritarianism and opposition to Putin , whom members regard as continuing the " aggressive imperial politics " of the Soviet Union . Group concerns include education , health care , and the centralization of power , and the group supports regional autonomy and grass roots organizing . Members regard unsanctioned rallies as a core principle , saying that authorities do not see rallies that they have sanctioned as a threat and simply ignore them . For this reason , all of Pussy Riot 's performances are illegal , and use co @-@ opted public space . Interviewed by the BBC during rehearsals the day before the Cathedral of Christ the Savior performance , band members argued that only vivid , illegal actions bring media attention . 
 Pussy Riot members have been outspoken in their support of LGBT rights , and in a 2012 interview confirmed that the group includes at least one member of a sexual minority . Both Tolokonnikova and Samutsevich participated in the banned 2011 Gay Pride rally in Moscow , and were briefly detained after the rally was broken up by police . Pussy Riot 's LGBT rights advocacy is seen in a negative light by conservative Russians ; according to a Levada poll published in 2010 , 74 % of Russians view homosexuality as a " moral perversion " or " mental illness " . 
 = = = Feminism = = = 
 Pussy Riot 's mass appeal ( particularly ) in the Western media has seen various famous figures and activists including Madonna , Paul McCartney , Lady Gaga , Björk and many others publicly show support for the group . This appeal from popular culture has been mostly due to the group 's feminist notions . Pussy Riot see themselves as feminist artists , who have various musical , literary , and political influences , such as Riot <unk> , Bikini Kill , Oi ! , Cockney Rejects , and by writers , activists and artists such as Alexandra Kollontai , Judith Butler , Karen Finley , Simone de Beauvoir , Vladimir Bukovsky and many more . The media tends to overlook the meaning behind Pussy Riot 's feminism ; the cultural context of it is vastly different to that of Western feminism . Pussy Riot 's feminism focuses on the repression created by authoritarian regimes that create idealised ideas of sexism , sex and family life . Pussy Riot make it clear that feminism in Russia is still an issue and that post @-@ feminism has not been achieved as many people would like to believe . Pussy Riot 's Russian cultural context must be acknowledged and their feminist notions must be seen differently from those of Western feminism because in places such as the United States , feminism has evolved to general " women 's issues " , whereas in Russia this is not the case . In Russia feminism is seen as something " that could destroy Russia " as said by Kirill , the head of the Russian Orthodox Church . 
 = = Songs and videos = = 
 Pussy Riot has released seven songs and five videos . An Associated Press reporter described them as " badly recorded , based on simple riffs and scream @-@ like singing " , and stated that critics had dismissed them as " amateur , provocative and obscene " . The A.V. Club described them as an " excellent band " with " fuzzed @-@ out guitars and classic Riot Grrrl chants " . In an opinion piece for The New York Times , Pitchfork Media reviewer Michael <unk> wrote , " judging [ Pussy Riot ] on artistic merit would be like chiding the Yippies because <unk> the Immortal , the pig they ran for president in 1968 , was not a viable candidate . " 
 Pussy Riot have not released any conventional albums . However , their songs are freely available for download on a number of internet sites , collected together under the title <unk> <unk> ( " Kill the sexist " ) . 
 = = = " Kill the Sexist " = = = 
 On October 1 , 2011 , Tolokonnikova and Samutsevich gave a lecture on " punk feminism " as members of Voina . They played a recording of the song " <unk> <unk> " ( " Kill the Sexist " ) , billing the performers as " a new Russian punk band called Pussy Riot " . This track featured extensive sampling of the Cockney Rejects ' 1979 recording " I 'm Not a Fool " . 
 = = = " Release the <unk> " = = = 
 Their first public performance as members of Pussy Riot was in November 2011 . Several masked women performed " <unk> <unk> " ( " Release the <unk> " ) atop a scaffold in a Moscow subway and from the top of trolley cars , while tearing apart down feather pillows , showering feathers onto the train platform below . The song recommends that Russians protest upcoming parliamentary elections , by throwing cobblestones during street clashes . " Your ballots will be used as toilet paper by the Presidential Administration " , the group said on its blog . Their first video was uploaded to YouTube on November 6 . The musical track once again used extensive sampling , this time from the Angelic Upstarts ' 1978 recording " Police Oppression " . The video of the performance quickly went viral and generated a flurry of interest from the Russian press . 
 = = = " Kropotkin Vodka " = = = 
 Later that month the group re @-@ emerged , with several members playing " Kropotkin Vodka " on the roof of an automobile display unit in a luxury @-@ store district and in the windows of fashion boutiques , while another member discharged a fire extinguisher into the air . The song takes its title from Russian anarcho @-@ communist Peter Kropotkin , and metaphorically concerns the assassination of " Kremlin bastards " by fatal poisoning . 
 = = = " Death to Prison , Freedom to Protests " = = = 
 On December 14 , 2011 , the group performed atop a garage beside the Moscow Detention Center No. 1 prison , where opposition activists were being held among the prisoners . Political activists Alexey <unk> and Ilya Yashin had been arrested one week earlier at a mass protest against the results of the State Duma elections . Pussy Riot played their song " <unk> <unk> , svobodu <unk> " ( " Death To Prison , Freedom To Protests " ) , and were applauded by the prisoners watching from inside the bars of the jail cell windows . 
 = = = " Putin Zassal " = = = 
 On January 20 , 2012 , in what the Associated Press described as their " breakthrough performance " , eight members of the group performed a song on the <unk> Mesto in Red Square , entitled " Putin Zassal " . The title has been variously translated by English language media as " Putin has <unk> Himself " , " Putin <unk> Out " , " Putin Got Scared " and " Putin is Wetting Himself " . The song called for a popular revolt against the Russian government and an occupation of Red Square . According to a Pussy Riot member identified as " <unk> " , the song was inspired by the events of December 24 , 2011 , during which approximately 100 @,@ 000 people attended anti @-@ Putin rallies in central Moscow . She told the Financial Times : " We saw how troops were moving around Moscow , there were helicopters in the sky , the military was put on alert . The regime just wet its pants on that day . And the symbol of the regime is Putin . " During the performance a member ignited a smoke bomb , which led to Pussy Riot members being arrested and briefly detained on administrative charges , a Russian legal term similar to a summary offence or misdemeanor . A judge found two members of the group , <unk> and <unk> , " guilty under article 20 @.@ 2 of the Administrative Code ( violation of the rules for conducting rallies and pickets ) and imposed a fine of 500 rubles on each . " 
 = = = " Mother of God , Drive Putin Away " = = = 
 On February 21 , 2012 , as part of a protest movement against the re @-@ election of Vladimir Putin , five women from the group entered the Cathedral of Christ the Savior of the Russian Orthodox Church in Moscow . There was no church service in session at the time , and only a few people were in the cathedral . Removing their winter clothes , they put on colorful balaclavas , walked up the steps leading to the altar , and began to jump around , punching the air . After less than a minute , they were escorted outside the building by guards . Film of the performance was later combined with footage shot at a different church , identified by Russian Orthodox Church spokesman Vsevolod Chaplin as the Epiphany Cathedral in <unk> , to create a video clip for the song , which they entitled " Punk Prayer : Mother of God Drive Putin Away " . 
 The song , which they described as a punk <unk> ( <unk> prayer ) , borrowed its opening melody and refrain from Sergei Rachmaninoff 's " <unk> Devo , <unk> " ( Ave Maria ) , from the All Night Vigil . In the song , they invoked the name of the Virgin Mary , urging her to get rid of Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin and to " become a feminist " , claiming that she would support them in their protests . They alluded to close ties between the church and the KGB ( " Black robes , golden epaulettes " ) , criticized the subservience of many Russians to the church ( " Parishioners crawl bowing " ) and attacked the church 's traditionalist views on women ( " So as not to offend His Holiness , women must bear children and love " ) . They used the crude epithet " <unk> <unk> " , which has been used to translate " holy shit " in Hollywood movies , but is rarely used in idiomatic Russian ; it literally translates as " shit of the Lord " . They later explained " It is an idiomatic expression , related to the previous verse – about the fusion of Moscow patriarchy and the government . ' Holy shit ' is our evaluation of the situation in the country . " They referred to Russian Orthodox Patriarch Kirill I , as a " <unk> " ( bitch ) and accused him of believing more in Putin than in God . 
 Growing ties between church and state in Russia have been a target of criticism and protest . The Russian Patriarch , Kirill , had openly supported Putin 's 2012 re @-@ election , calling Putin a " miracle from God " , who had " rectified the crooked path of history " . After the cathedral performance , members of Pussy Riot said the church is a " weapon in a dirty election campaign " and called Putin " a man who is as far as can be from God 's truth " . This performance led to the arrest and prosecution of three of their members . 
 = = = " Putin Lights Up the Fires " = = = 
 Pussy Riot released a single in August 2012 as the court case against three of their members drew to a close . It was called " Putin <unk> <unk> " ( " Putin Lights Up The Fires " ) , and had lyrics referring to issues around the case . Among other demands , the lyrics request that " Seven years [ imprisonment ] is not enough , give us eighteen ! " 
 = = Arrest and prosecution = = 
 On February 26 , a criminal case was opened against the band members who had participated in the February 21 , 2012 Moscow cathedral performance . On March 3 , Maria Alyokhina and Nadezhda Tolokonnikova , two alleged members of Pussy Riot , were arrested by the Russian authorities and accused of hooliganism . Both women at first denied being members of the group and started a hunger strike in protest against being held in jail away from their young children . The defendants were held without bail . On March 16 , another woman , Yekaterina Samutsevich , who had earlier been questioned as a witness in the case , was similarly arrested and charged . 
 Defense attorney Nikolai <unk> said that both Tolokonnikova and Samutsevich were also members of the Voina group , and both had previously staged disruptive protests in the <unk> Court building , where they would be judged . He argued that their two previous attempts to disrupt proceedings would bias the judge , and preclude a fair outcome at that location . " I believe that the judge will certainly remember my clients , and could easily take offense to it , and therefore could not make an objective decision " . The three detained members of Pussy Riot were declared political prisoners by the Union of Solidarity with Political Prisoners ( SPP ) . On March 25 , Amnesty International named them prisoners of conscience due to " the severity of the response of the Russian authorities " . 
 Speaking at a liturgy in Moscow 's Deposition of the Robe Church on March 21 , Patriarch Kirill condemned Pussy Riot 's actions as blasphemous , saying that the " Devil has laughed at all of us … We have no future if we allow mockery in front of great shrines , and if some see such mockery as a sort of bravery , an expression of political protest , an acceptable action or a harmless joke . " The church 's membership varied in its opinions on the case ; a petition calling for the women to be forgiven was signed by approximately 5 @,@ 000 lay members . Patriarch Kirill spoke of " his heart breaking with bitterness " when he heard that some Orthodox Christians sought mercy and forgiveness for the women . 
 Formal charges against the group were presented on June 4 , the indictment running to 2 @,@ 800 pages . By late June 2012 , disquiet over the trio 's detention without setting a trial date and concern over what was regarded as excessive and arbitrary treatment , led to the writing of an open letter . It was signed by leading opposition figures , as well as by director Fyodor Bondarchuk , a supporter of Putin , and actors <unk> <unk> and Yevgeny <unk> , both of whom had appeared in campaign videos supporting Putin 's re @-@ election . Singer Alla <unk> appealed on the women 's behalf , stating that they should be ordered to perform community service rather than imprisoned . Meanwhile , Nikita Mikhalkov , head of the Russian Cinematographers ' Union , stated that he would gladly sign an open letter against them . 
 On July 4 , the defendants were informed that they would have to finish preparing their defense by July 9 . They announced a hunger strike in response , saying that two working days was inadequate time to finish preparing their trial defense . On July 21 , the court extended their pre @-@ trial detention by a further six months . 
 = = Trial , conviction , and sentencing = = 
 The trial of the three women started in Moscow 's <unk> District Court on July 30 , 2012 . Charged with " premeditated hooliganism performed by an organized group of people motivated by religious hatred or hostility , " they faced possible sentences of up to seven years in prison . In early July , a poll conducted in Moscow found that half of the respondents opposed the trial while 36 percent supported it ; the rest being undecided . Putin stated that while he saw " nothing good " about the band 's protest , " Nonetheless , I don 't think that they should be judged so harshly for this . " 
 The defendants pleaded not guilty , saying that they had not meant their protest to be offensive . " We sang part of the refrain ' Holy shit ' , " Tolokonnikova said in court . " I am sorry if I offended anyone with this . It is an idiomatic expression , related to the previous verse — about the fusion of Moscow patriarchy and the government . ' Holy shit ' is our evaluation of the situation in the country . This opinion is not blasphemy . " Their lawyers stated that the circumstances of the case had revived the Soviet @-@ era tradition of the show trial . On August 15 , 20 protesters wearing balaclavas gathered in support of Pussy Riot at Christ the Savior Cathedral , and held up placards reading " Blessed are the merciful " . Cathedral guards quickly moved against the protesters , trying to detain them and taking off their balaclavas . 
 Pussy Riot said their protest was a political statement , but prosecutors said the band was trying to " incite religious hatred " against the Orthodox Church . In " Putin Zassal " , Pussy Riot had stated " The Orthodox Religion is a hardened penis / <unk> its subjects to accept conformity " , among other examples of the group 's antagonism to the Church as an organization , which it views as corrupt . Thus central issues of the case were the definition of " hatred " against a religion , and whether blasphemy can exist in a secular state . Pavel <unk> , Chairman of the Agora Human Rights Association , said that defense lawyers were able to maximize publicity by creating " a huge public outcry over the case " , but at the expense of defendants ' liability . 
 All three were convicted by the judge and sentenced to two years in a penal colony on August 17 , 2012 . The judge stated that they had " crudely undermined the social order " with their protest , showing a " complete lack of respect " for believers . Mark Feygin , a lawyer for the trio , stated that they would appeal the verdict , but that " Under no circumstances will the girls ask for a pardon [ from Putin ] … They will not beg and humiliate themselves before such a bastard " . Tolokonnikova stated that " Our imprisonment serves as a clear and unambiguous sign that freedom is being taken away from the entire country . " 
 Both supporters and critics of the band demonstrated at their sentencing hearing . Opposition leader Sergei <unk> , who was protesting in support of the band , was detained by police . Former world chess champion and long standing opposition member Garry Kasparov , who tried to attend the reading of the verdict , was arrested and beaten . 
 Former Finance Minister Alexei <unk> described the verdict as " yet another blow to the court system and citizens ' trust in it " , harming the country 's international image . Putin responded that religious organizations should be protected , because " the country has very grave memories of the initial period of Soviet rule , when a huge number of priests suffered . Many churches were destroyed and all our traditional faiths suffered huge damage . " 
 = = = Appeal to the Moscow City Court = = = 
 On October 1 , 2012 , an appellate hearing was postponed in the Moscow City Court ( a regional court , similar to the supreme court of a republic ) after Samutsevich informed a panel of three judges that she wished to terminate the representation of her defense attorneys as " My position in the criminal case does not coincide with their position . " 
 In an interview for his 60th birthday broadcast on October 7 , shortly before the appeal was heard , Putin said that Pussy Riot had " undermined the moral foundations " of the country and that they " got what they asked for " . In response , Pussy Riot lawyer Violetta Volkova accused Putin of putting pressure on the court . 
 On October 10 , Samutsevich 's new lawyer , Irina Khrunova , argued that her client had not in fact committed the acts of hooliganism in the church as she was prevented from accessing the <unk> by church security . The court appeared to accept this argument , and released Samutsevich on two years ' probation . However , the judges rejected the appeals of Tolokonnikova and Alyokhina , upholding their convictions and sentences . 
 Writing for The New Republic , Russian @-@ American journalist Julia Ioffe commented that by arguing that Samutsevich was innocent because she had not participated , Khrunova 's defense had implied that Tolokonnikova and Alyokhina had in fact committed a crime , and had cut off " the one path to redemption that the group actually had : ignoring the court ’ s proceedings and denying its legitimacy " . Some commentators saw Samutsevich 's unexpected release as a divide and rule tactic on the part of the authorities . Details later emerged of an alleged <unk> ( " mother hen " ) , a prisoner who spies on fellow inmates and manipulates them into co @-@ operating with the authorities in return for privileges and early parole . A convicted fraudster named Irina Orlova was placed in the same cell as Samutsevich , where she apparently gained her trust and persuaded her to change lawyers . Any alleged agreement with authorities would have required Samutsevich to publicly denounce her former lawyers . 
 = = = Imprisonment = = = 
 Initial reports had suggested that the women would serve their sentence in one of three provinces . The decision upon a general @-@ security women 's corrective labor colony ( the most common type of prison in Russia ) in the Republic of Mordovia , approximately 400 kilometers from Moscow , was later confirmed by Tolokonnikova 's husband . The women asked authorities to let them serve their sentence at the pre @-@ trial detention facility in Moscow . Their request was denied , and Tolokonnikova and Alyokhina were then dispatched to penal colonies in Mordovia and Perm Oblast , respectively . 
 The IK @-@ 2 and IK @-@ 14 penal colonies in <unk> , <unk> @-@ <unk> District , Mordovia , are the most common destinations for women prisoners sentenced in Moscow . It is the former location of the <unk> labor camp complex of the Gulag system . Tolokonnikova was incarcerated in IK @-@ 14 , whereas Alyokhina was sent to IK @-@ 32 in Perm . The latter is a colony for first @-@ time offenders , which houses a sewing factory , and an experimental vocational program to re @-@ train women prisoners to become digital cartoon animators . Conditions in IK @-@ 32 are relatively favorable , and neither prisoners nor human rights monitors have filed complaints about its conditions . Meanwhile , IK @-@ 14 has a harder reputation . 
 In November 2012 , Alyokhina requested to be voluntarily placed in solitary confinement , citing " strained relations " with her fellow prisoners . Tolokonnikova also has experienced friction with inmates at IK @-@ 14 , who have regarded her " at best with contempt , at worst with hostility " , according to a report by Aleksey <unk> , Coordinator of the Human Rights Center " Russian Verdict " . 
 On September 23 , 2013 Tolokonnikova announced that she was staging a hunger strike in protest at alleged human rights violations in the prison . A translation of her letter describing the prison conditions was published in The Guardian . On September 27 , 2013 , she was placed in the medical ward after not eating for five days . 
 = = Trial reactions = = 
 In response to questions posed by The Guardian and handed to the band via their lawyer , Pussy Riot accused Putin and the Russian Orthodox Church of orchestrating the case . Samutsevich said in December 2012 that " more than anything , what many people didn 't see during the trial were those moments when our ' right to defence ' was violated . It 's not that we were helpless , it was a situation of despair . " In an interview with The Guardian , she continued : " The trial was built in such a way that we couldn 't defend ourselves . They didn 't listen to us . We could have sat downstairs , where you wait till you 're taken to the courtroom , and not go in at all and everything would 've gone the same way . The fact that we took part physically [ in the trial ] didn 't actually change anything . " 
 Russian human rights activist Lyudmila <unk> called the judgment politically motivated and " not in line with the law , common sense or mercy " . Opposition activist Alexey <unk> described Pussy Riot as " fools who commit petty crimes for the sake of publicity " , but opposed the verdict , which he believed had been " written by Vladimir Putin " as " revenge " , for a stunt not socially dangerous enough to justify keeping the women behind bars . Russian fiction writer Boris <unk> attended the protests on the day of the conviction and said , " Putin has doomed himself to another year @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half of international shame and humiliation . " Irina <unk> , a parliamentary deputy of Putin 's United Russia party , praised the conviction , stating that " they deserved it " . On September 13 , 2012 , Russian Prime Minister Dmitri Medvedev called for the women 's early release , saying that the time they had already served awaiting trial was sufficient punishment , and further incarceration would be " counterproductive " . On November 2 , he said that he would not have sent the three Pussy Riot members to prison , reiterating that their pre @-@ trial detention was enough , but stressed that setting free the two remaining prisoners was a matter for the courts . 
 The foreign ministries of the United States and of European Union nations called the sentence " disproportionate " . President Barack Obama expressed disappointment , and the White House stated that it had " serious concerns about the way that these young women have been treated by the Russian judicial system . " 
 According to BBC Monitoring , in the European and American press there was " almost universal condemnation " of the two @-@ year sentence imposed on the three members of the group . While many newspaper editorials and opinion columns were critical of the performance in the Cathedral , very few thought a two @-@ year prison sentence was an appropriate punishment , arguing that the action should have been treated as a public order crime and punished by a fine or community service . 
 Simon Jenkins of The Guardian argued the West was being hypocritical , in that excessively harsh prison terms are by no means unknown in Western countries . Some in the media also raised concerns that a place of worship is not an appropriate venue for any form of protest , and that Pussy Riot 's cause did not morally justify their actions . The Roman Catholic Pope Benedict XVI expressed his solidarity with the position of the Russian Orthodox Church on the “ acts of vandalism " at the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour , and expressed surprise at the reaction of some media organizations to those events . 
 = = Trial aftermath = = 
 On June 30 , 2013 Vladimir Putin signed a bill imposing jail terms and fines for insulting people 's religious feelings , which some have seen as a response to the " punk prayer " performed by the Pussy Riot in a Moscow cathedral . In a " Live TV " ( Russian : " <unk> <unk> " ) show aired on September 30 , 2013 by Rossiya 1 TV channel , Maria Alyokhina pledged to do no more shows at churches . " We 've paid attention to the fact that , as it turns out , since 2013 this has been a criminal offense , and we 've repeatedly heard opinions from people whom we take seriously . This is basically the reason why we wouldn 't go to the Cathedral of Christ the Savior again – or , unquestionably , to any other church for that matter , " Alyokhina said . 
 Though they were due for release in March , 2014 , on December 19 , 2013 Russian President Vladimir Putin announced that Tolokonnikova and Alyokhina would be freed under a general amnesty . Putin said the amnesty was not drafted with Pussy Riot in mind but to mark the 20th anniversary of Russia 's post @-@ Soviet constitution . The announcement of amnesty came during a Putin press conference in which he revealed plans to release several other high @-@ profile political prisoners in Russia , such as Mikhail <unk> and members of Greenpeace . 
 = = = Internal disputes = = = 
 In a letter from prison after their sentences were upheld , Tolokonnikova and Alyokhina disowned the actions of Tolokonnikova 's husband , Verzilov , accusing him of having co @-@ opted Pussy Riot by acting as its frontman without their consent : " His statements are lies , in the name of giving himself the status of the founder and legal representative of Pussy Riot , when in fact , he is not . Actually , Pyotr Verzilov has occupied Pussy Riot through this strange , quasi @-@ fraudulent activity . As a representative of the group , I am outraged . " Samutsevich expressed surprise at the letter , while Verzilov declined to comment , saying " I do not understand it . We are going to find out what happened " . The previous week , Verzilov himself had released a statement to the Echo of Moscow radio station , stating that he was neither a member nor a representative of Pussy Riot . 
 A trademark dispute arose in October and November 2012 , when it was discovered that the group 's defense attorney , Mark Feygin , had attempted to register " Pussy Riot " as a trademarked brand name in Russia . On April 6 , 2012 , Feygin applied to <unk> without the knowledge of his clients , seeking to assign the brand to a company owned by his wife , Natalia <unk> @-@ Feygin . This would give them exclusive rights to produce Pussy Riot @-@ branded products . Furthermore , <unk> @-@ Feygin has already received an advance payment of 30 @,@ 000 euros to produce a film about the Pussy Riot trial , with an additional 170 @,@ 000 euros payable upon completion of the contract , and 40 percent of the profits of worldwide sales of videos . The trademark application was rejected by <unk> , leaving the ultimate fate of the Pussy Riot brand , estimated without promotion to be worth USD $ 1 million , undecided . 
 On 19 November , Feygin and the two other original lawyers for Pussy Riot withdrew from the case prior to Tolokonnikova 's appeal , stating that they felt the court would be more likely to grant the appeal if the three were no longer a part of the defense . Samutsevich criticized the original legal team for allegedly using the trial for personal publicity rather than securing the release of the defendants . On 21 November , Samutsevich 's lawyer told the press that Samutsevich was considering requesting that Feygin and the other original lawyers be disbarred for failing to return her passport and other belongings . Feygin responded via Twitter that Samutsevich was part of a " defamation campaign organized by the authorities " , while another member of the legal team , Violeta Volkova , responded that the claims were " part of an agreement that allowed her to break free of the case " . On 21 January 2013 , Feygin , Volkova , and Nicholas <unk> filed suit against Khrunova and Kommersant for defamation . 
 In a letter dated February 1 , 2013 and published by her father on the Echo of Moscow web site , Tolokonnikova distanced herself from Samutsevich , saying " Samutsevich hasn 't written to me for two months . That 's it , to me she is already dead . There will be no more talk of collaborating after this . " 
 = = = Public opinion in Russia = = = 
 The court 's decision aroused " little sensation " domestically . Many Russians were outraged by Pussy Riot 's church protest and supported " the right of the majority to worship in peace " . The Soviet government had destroyed the Christ the Savior Cathedral in the 1930s ( it was rebuilt in the 1990s ) , adding to the location 's significance to believers . At the conclusion of the trial , a series of Levada Center polls showed that , of 1600 Russians surveyed in 45 cities nationwide , 42 % also believed Pussy Riot had been arrested for insulting the shrines and beliefs of the Orthodox Church . Meanwhile , 29 % saw it as a case of general hooliganism , while only 19 % saw it as a political protest against Putin . Overall opinion was for the most part negative or indifferent . Only 6 % sympathised with Pussy Riot , while 41 % felt antipathy towards them . 44 % believed the trial was " fair and impartial " , while 17 % believed it was not . Of those following the case , 86 % favored some form of punishment , ranging from prison to forced labor or fines , while 5 % said they should not have been punished at all . A prison sentence of 2 to 7 years was seen as appropriate by 33 % , whereas 43 % saw two or more years as excessive , and a further 15 % said the defendants should not have been prosecuted in court . A research assessment by the <unk> company noted that , in online discussion forums , " there was clearly an awareness of being judged by the global community , whose response was referred to in some cases as ' hysterical ' and unfair " . 
 The conservatism of the public has been criticized by some Russian commentators . Levada Center director Lev Gudkov commented on the results , stating that most Russians get their information from television , and therefore perceive events in accordance with the state 's " official version " . 
 In the statement published after the sentence had been announced , the Russian Orthodox Church stated that while the actions of Pussy Riot were offensive to " millions of people , " the Church called " on the state authorities to show mercy to the people convicted within the framework of the law , in the hope that they will refrain from repeating blasphemous actions . " Vsevolod Chaplin , chairman of the <unk> Department for the Cooperation of Church and Society of the Moscow Patriarchate , accused Pussy Riot of blasphemy , insulting believers and " kindling hatred between believers and atheists " . 
 = = = Pussy Riot and Voina = = = 
 The connection between Pussy Riot and the political performance art group Voina has been highlighted by some of the group 's critics , and was called an " aggravating moral circumstance " in the eyes of the conservative public ( which constitutes about 60 per cent of Russians ) . Pussy Riot members Nadezhda Tolokonnikova and Yekaterina Samutsevich were members of Voina from 2007 until the group split in 2009 , and participated in a number of Voina 's provocative art performances . 
 Tolokonnikova was part of a performance in which couples were photographed having sex in the <unk> State Biology Museum in Moscow in February 2008 . This exhibitionist act was intended as a satire of Dmitry Medvedev 's call to increase the birth rate in Russia , but was typically described as an " orgy " by the media . President Putin , in an interview about whether the prison sentence was justified , also invoked the defendants ' prior actions in Voina stunts : " They had a group sex session in a public place . They then uploaded it onto the Internet . The authorities should have looked into this , too . " 
 Some critics made little or no distinction between Pussy Riot and Voina , incorrectly attributing past actions of Voina to Pussy Riot . In particular , a notorious performance by Voina in St. Petersburg , in which a woman stole a chicken from a supermarket by stuffing it in her vagina , is sometimes cited by detractors of Pussy Riot . However , there is no evidence that members of Moscow @-@ based Pussy Riot participated in this action . 
 = = = International support = = = 
 During the trial , the three women became an international cause célèbre due to their treatment . Many international artists , politicians , and musicians voiced support for the release of Pussy Riot , or expressed concern about the fairness of their trial , including Madonna , who openly expressed her support at a Moscow concert , Björk , who dedicated her song " Declare Independence " to their cause and invited them to join her on stage to perform the song with her , Paul McCartney , and Aung San Suu Kyi . While acknowledging the support , members of Pussy Riot distanced themselves from Western artists , and reiterated their opposition to the capitalist model of art as commodity : One of them , identified as Orange , said : 
 We ’ re flattered , of course , that Madonna and Björk have offered to perform with us . But the only performances we ’ ll participate in are illegal ones . We refuse to perform as part of the capitalist system , at concerts where they sell tickets . 
 French singer Mireille Mathieu , who has frequently performed in Russia , was one of the few western entertainers to speak out against Pussy Riot , saying they had committed a sacrilege . Nevertheless , she asked for “ indulgence ” ( lenience or pardon ) for the three women . 
 From 2012 to 2014 , The Voice Project coordinated donations through an international legal defense and support fund for Tolokonnikova and Alyokhina of during their imprisonment , which supported the women 's legal expenses , supplied them with provisions while in the prison camps and child care , in addition to safety monitoring by local Russian lawyers . The Voice Project also conducted a number of viral campaigns in advocacy for the women during their imprisonment , such as the " Where is Nadya ? " campaign , during Tolokonnikova 's 26 @-@ day disappearance following her hunger strike , during which she was transferred to a Krasnoyarsk prison hospital . During Tolokonnikova 's imprisonment , The Voice Project also made an urgent appeal to United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture Juan E. Méndez , requesting that the UN pressure the Russian Federation to enforce international laws on human rights and torture in regards to minimum standards set by UN protocols and the European Convention on Human Rights . 
 A letter of support from 120 members of the German parliament , the Bundestag , was sent to the Russian Ambassador to Germany , Vladimir <unk> . It described proceedings against the women as disproportionate and draconian . On August 9 , 2012 , 200 Pussy Riot supporters in Berlin marched , wearing colored balaclavas , in a show of support for the group . Attending the trial , British MP and Shadow Foreign Office Minister for Human Rights , Kerry McCarthy , also backed the group , describing proceedings as “ surreal ” . Lech Wałęsa criticised the church performance as “ tasteless ” , but nevertheless wrote to Putin urging him to pardon the women . 
 Amnesty International called the conviction “ a bitter blow for freedom of expression ” . Hugh Williamson , of Human Rights Watch , stated that the “ charges and verdict … distort both the facts and the law .... These women should never have been charged with a hate crime and should be released immediately . ” <unk> 19 , Freedom House , and the International Federation for Human Rights also issued statements condemning the sentence . On September 21 , 2012 , the Feminist Press published an e @-@ book entitled Pussy Riot ! A Punk Prayer for Freedom to raise funds for the legal defense team . 
 On September 22 , Yoko Ono awarded the band the biennial LennonOno Grant for Peace , stating that she intended to work for the group ’ s immediate release . In October 2012 , Pussy Riot was announced as a finalist for the European Parliament ’ s Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought , named for Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov . The prize ultimately went to Iranian human rights lawyer <unk> <unk> and filmmaker Jafar <unk> . The city of Wittenberg , where Martin Luther nailed his Ninety Five Theses to the church door , nominated Pussy Riot for its annual Martin Luther “ Fearless Speech ” prize . The nomination provoked opposition from many theology experts , including leadership of the Evangelical Church in Germany ( EKD ) . In November the prize was awarded to a group of Regensburg restaurateurs for an anti @-@ Nazi campaign . 
 While attending the Women in the World Summit in New York on 4 April 2014 , Hillary Clinton posed with band members Nadezhda Tolokonnikova and Maria <unk> for a picture she later posted on Twitter . Clinton referred to Pussy Riot as a group of " strong and brave young women " who " refuse to let their voices be silenced . " 
 = = = Protests and peripheral events = = = 
 Protests were held around the world after the sentence was announced . Amnesty International declared August 17 " Pussy Riot Global Day " for activists . People gathered in New York City , where actress Chloë Sevigny , Karen Finley and others read statements by the convicted members of the band . In Bulgaria , people put masks , similar to those worn by Pussy Riot , on a Soviet sculpture . About 100 people protested outside the Russian consulate in Toronto . In Edinburgh , Scotland , Fringe performers read trial testimony . In Serbia , the far @-@ right activist group Nasi released a video game in which members of Pussy Riot were targets ; the group spoke in support of the trio 's imprisonment . Meanwhile , Estonian programmers launched an imitation of the Internet game " Angry Birds " , poking fun at Russian authorities . 
 In Kiev , Inna Shevchenko , a topless feminist activist from the group <unk> , used a chainsaw to destroy a four @-@ meter wooden sculpture of Christ on the cross , on a hill overlooking the city center . The cross had been erected during the Orange Revolution of 2004 – 2005 , to commemorate victims of Stalin 's repression . The desecration of the cross was repudiated by Maria Alyokhina of Pussy Riot , who said " Their surprise displays and protests against authoritarianism are similar to us , but we look at feminism differently , especially the form of speech . We wouldn 't take our clothes off , and will not . Their latest action , the sawing of the cross , does not create a feeling of solidarity , unfortunately . " 
 In August , at the Embassy of Russia in Washington , D.C. there was a protest and concert by punk bands . On August 19 , two men and a woman dressed as Pussy Riot staged a protest during a service in Germany 's Cologne Cathedral . The trio yelled slogans and held up a banner reading " Free Pussy Riot and all prisoners " in English . They were taken out by cathedral officials and then were charged with disturbing a religious service and breaching the peace . <unk> Stadt @-@ Anzeiger , a local newspaper , reported that " disturbing a religious establishment " could result in a fine or up to three years imprisonment ; they were eventually given suspended fines of 1200 Euros and 3 months probation . Assault charges were dropped . One of the three , identified as " Patrick H. " , appealed his conviction and sentence ; the court upheld his conviction and replaced his sentence with a fine of 150 Euros . 
 Crosses were also cut down in at least four locations in Russia . A United Russia MP stated that the incidents were inspired by Pussy Riot , calling the actions " true Satanism " . Conservative Orthodox activists staged counter @-@ demonstrations , bursting into a pro @-@ Pussy Riot event at a theatre , and shouting slogans such as " Repent " , and " Why do you hate the Russian people ? " An art museum curated by <unk> who had supported Pussy Riot was also invaded . 
 In early September 2012 , unidentified vandals drew a " feminist caricature " of Saint Nino on <unk> Church in Tbilisi , Georgia , accompanied by the English @-@ language words " Free Pussy Riot ! " On September 16 , Yuri <unk> , a 62 @-@ year @-@ old St. Petersburg native residing in Germany , poured ink over an icon in the Cathedral of Christ the Savior in support of Pussy Riot . He was charged under the article of the Criminal Code for hooliganism . Maria Alyokhina explicitly condemned cutting down crosses and splashing ink on icons during her unsuccessful appeal against her sentence on October 10 . 
 On October 31 , 2012 , Comedy Central aired the South Park episode " A <unk> for Applause " , which ends with Jesus ripping open his robe to reveal the slogan " Free Pussy Riot " . The episode explores the need for people to believe in a cause greater than themselves and our tendency to abandon good sense in support of these causes . 
 In August 2013 , there was a Pussy Riot Solidarity Concert , outside the Russian Embassy in Washington , D.C. 
 = = = Pussy Riot ! A Punk Prayer for Freedom = = = 
 On September 21 , 2012 the Feminist Press released an eBook entitled Pussy Riot ! A Punk Prayer for Freedom compiling writings about the punk collective . The book is a compilation of the band 's lyrics and poetry along with collected letters and material from the trial . Tributes by figures such as Yoko Ono , Eileen Myles , Johanna <unk> , Karen Finley , Justin Vivian Bond , and JD Samson are also included . The Press collaborated closely with the band 's members , and proceeds from the book 's sales were given in support of Pussy Riot 's legal defense . The book was released in print in February 2013 . Containing statements from the October 10 appeal , the print version also includes new tributes by Bianca Jagger , Peaches & Simonne Jones , Tobi Vail , Barbara Browning , and Vivien Goldman . 
 = = = Documentary films = = = 
 In January 2013 a film on the Pussy Riot case was released by British documentary film making company Roast Beef Productions . The working title was Show Trial : The Story of Pussy Riot ; subsequently it was released as Pussy Riot : A Punk Prayer . It was directed by Mike Lerner and Maksim <unk> , and featured publicly available footage of the court proceedings and interviews with the families of the band members , but no interviews with the band members themselves . It debuted at the 2013 Sundance film festival , after which Pussy Riot 's Yekaterina Samutsevich fielded questions from the audience via Skype . Among other things she reiterated that she had no intention of turning Pussy Riot into a commercial venture . The film won a World Cinema Documentary Special Jury Award for " Punk Spirit " at the festival . The HBO network subsequently bought the U.S. television rights to the film despite lukewarm critical reviews . The BBC showed the film in October 2013 ; the British newspaper reviews were favourable . The film was among 15 documentaries short listed for a 2014 Academy Award , however it did not make the final list of nominees . 
 Pussy versus Putin is a 2013 documentary film chronicling the history of the group , directed by the Russian film collective , Gogol 's Wives . The film received the NTR <unk> Award for Best Mid @-@ Length Documentary at the 2013 International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam . 
 = = Subsequent court cases and other events = = 
 = = = Claims for moral damages = = = 
 In August 2012 Novosibirsk resident Irina <unk> filed a claim for 30 @,@ 000 rubles ( about $ 1 @,@ 000 ) for moral damages , claiming that a Pussy Riot video had caused her headaches and increased blood pressure . The claim was rejected by the <unk> District Court in Moscow on September 7 , 2012 . Similar claims by <unk> resident Yuri <unk> and Novosibirsk resident Ivan <unk> were dismissed by the same court on October 3 , as was a subsequent appeal by <unk> to the Moscow City Court on February 18 , 2013 . 
 = = = Extremist videos decision = = = 
 In early November 2012 prosecutors applied under anti @-@ extremism legislation to <unk> District Court to ban several Pussy Riot videos , including the video of the group 's performance in the Cathedral of Christ the Savior . Materials found to be extremist by a court are added to the Federal List of Extremist Materials maintained by the Ministry of Justice , potentially making it a criminal offense to disseminate them within Russia . After a hearing on November 29 , four Pussy Riot videos , including the " punk prayer " , were declared extremist . The ruling restricted access to the videos and to Pussy Riot 's LiveJournal blog and other websites . 
 Damir <unk> of the Agora human rights group argued that the anti @-@ extremism laws were being applied inappropriately , saying " Everyone says that the [ Cathedral of Christ the Savior ] video hurt the feelings of religious people , but it didn 't contain any calls for extremist actions , so it cannot be extremist " . Yekaterina Samutsevich called the ruling a " direct recognition of artistic censorship " in Russia . 
 = = = Requests for sentence deferment = = = 
 In the case of mothers of young children , Russian law allows for deferment of a prison sentence until the child reaches the age of 14 . Such a request was controversially granted in 2011 to Anna <unk> , who had been sentenced to two years and six months prison for vehicular manslaughter . It was alleged that her request was granted due to her family connections . 
 On 19 October 2012 , the <unk> District Court in Moscow rejected an appeal for deferment of sentence filed by Violetta Volkova on behalf of Tolokonnikova and Alyokhina , on the grounds that the case did not fall within its jurisdiction . Tolokonnikova subsequently filed an appeal with the <unk> @-@ <unk> District Court in Mordovia , where she was imprisoned , and Alyokhina with the <unk> District Court in Perm . Alyokhina 's appeal was rejected on January 16 , 2013 , the judge stating that the presence of her child was already taken into account during her original sentence . 
 On 24 July 2013 , a Russian court turned down an appeal by Maria Alyokhina against a previous court ruling that denied her an early release on parole . 
 = = = Release from prison = = = 
 On December 19 , 2013 , the state Duma approved a general amnesty for various prisoners ; among those who qualified for amnesty were those in prison for non @-@ violent offences and mothers of young children . It was expected that Tolokonnikova and Alyokhina would be among those who were released . Their release was confirmed on December 23 , 2013 . 
 Following her release , Alyokhina went to meet with human rights activists . " We didn 't ask for any pardon . I would have sat here until the end of my sentence because I don 't need mercy from Putin , " Maria Alyokhina told the New York Times after her release . " I think this is an attempt to improve the image of the current government , a little , before the Sochi Olympics — particularly for the Western Europeans . But I don 't consider this humane or merciful . This is a lie . " Tolokonnikova also said , " Whether one likes it or not , going to the Olympics in Russia is an acceptance of the internal political situation in Russia , an acceptance of the course taken by a person who is interested in the Olympics above all else — Vladimir Putin . " 
 The two said that they would not be performing in shows but were starting an organization to work for better conditions for prison inmates and that they still wanted Putin removed from government . Both said that Soviet dissident Vladimir Bukovsky is their role model , a man whom Tolokonnikova said is a " human rights champion undeterred by fear . " 
 = = = Amnesty International concert and membership controversy = = = 
 Nadezhda Tolokonnikova and Maria Alyokhina participated in the February 6 , 2014 Amnesty International concert in Barclays Center , Brooklyn , New York City . They were invited to the stage by Madonna . The same day a group of anonymous participants of the Pussy Riot group who avoided prosecution for their performance published an open letter protesting Tolokonnikova and Alyokhina calling themselves members of Pussy Riot . The letter claimed that : 
 In response Tolokonnikova and Alyokhina stated that : 
 When we were jailed , Pussy Riot immediately became very popular and widely known , and it turned from just a group to essentially an international movement . Anybody can be Pussy Riot , you just need to put on a mask and stage an active protest of something in your particular country , wherever that may be , that you consider unjust . And we ’ re not here as the leaders of Pussy Riot or determining what Pussy Riot is and what it does or what it says . We are just two individuals that spent two years in jail for taking part in a Pussy Riot protest action . 
 = = = Presence at the Sochi Winter Olympics = = = 
 Tolokonnikova , Alyokhina , and three unidentified women planned to perform a song called " Putin Will Teach You to Love the Motherland " as Pussy Riot during the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi . The action was supposed to be concerned with the prisoners in the <unk> Square case , corrupt Olympic officials , the plight of the arrested environmentalist Yevgeny <unk> and suppressed freedoms in Russia . On February 18 , 2014 they were detained in Sochi together with a group of 12 @-@ 15 people including Yevgeny Feldman , a Novaya Gazeta journalist . The authorities explained that the arrest was in connection with a theft at a hotel in Sochi . In a few hours they were released from an Adler police station . According to BBC correspondent Rafael <unk> the five women left the police station in balaclavas singing their song " Putin Will Teach You to Love the Motherland " on the streets of Adler . 
 On February 19 , 2014 during the second attempt to film " Putin Will Teach You to Love the Motherland " near the building of Sochi Seaport the group was beaten by uniformed Cossacks working in a security capacity for the Olympics . The same day a representative of the International Olympic Committee urged Pussy Riot not to perform at Sochi Olympic Park stating that it would be inappropriate . He also stated that the arrest of Pussy Riot in Sochi is not connected to the Olympic Games . An attorney for the band members stated they were treated at a hospital for injuries received during the attack . 
 The video of the performance was published on YouTube on 19 February 2014 by the group . 
 = = = Assault in Nizhny Novgorod = = = 
 On March 6 , 2014 , during a visit to Nizhny Novgorod as part of a campaign for prisoners ' rights , a group of unknown men wearing Ribbon of Saint George medals doused group members Nadezhda Tolokonnikova , Maria Alyokhina , and <unk> <unk> with green @-@ coloured chemicals or paint , allegedly damaging their eyes . Alyokhina also suffered a concussion after being hit with a jar containing the paint or chemical . 
 = = = European Court of Human Rights = = = 
 In 2014 , Maria Alyokhina and Nadezhda Tolokonnikova brought suit in the European Court of Human Rights , for their arrest and detention . 
 In May 2015 Maria Alyokhina and Nadezhda Tolokonnikova together with Tolokonnikova 's husband Pyotr Verzilov , Krasnodar artist <unk> <unk> and activist Alexey Nekrasov brought another suit in the European Court of Human Rights over police inaction and refusal to prosecute Cossacks who attacked Pussy Riot during their video shoot at the Sochi Winter Olympics ( " Putin Will Teach You to Love the Motherland " ) . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Pussy Riot members Nadezhda Tolokonnikova and Maria Alyokhina appeared in House of Cards season 3 , episode 3 as themselves . The episode also features Pussy Riot concert footage . 
 Nadezhda Tolokonnikova appeared in artist Fawn Rogers ' " I Love You And That Makes Me God " . 
 In 2016 the Norwegian <unk> <unk> releases a cover version in English of the song Punk Prayer by Pussy Riot in his album <unk> . 
 = Karlheinz Stockhausen = 
 Karlheinz Stockhausen ( German pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ̩ ] ; 22 August 1928 – 5 December 2007 ) was a German composer , widely acknowledged by critics as one of the most important ( Barrett 1988 , 45 ; Harvey <unk> , 705 ; Hopkins 1972 , 33 ; Klein 1968 , 117 ) but also controversial ( Power 1990 , 30 ) composers of the 20th and early 21st centuries . Another critic calls him " one of the great visionaries of 20th @-@ century music " ( Hewett 2007 ) . He is known for his groundbreaking work in electronic music , aleatory ( controlled chance ) in serial composition , and musical <unk> . 
 He was educated at the Hochschule für Musik Köln and the University of Cologne , later studying with Olivier Messiaen in Paris and with Werner Meyer @-@ Eppler at the University of Bonn . One of the leading figures of the Darmstadt School , his compositions and theories were and remain widely influential , not only on composers of art music , but also on jazz and popular music . His works , composed over a period of nearly sixty years , eschew traditional forms . In addition to electronic music — both with and without live performers — they range from miniatures for musical boxes through works for solo instruments , songs , chamber music , choral and orchestral music , to a cycle of seven full @-@ length operas . His theoretical and other writings comprise ten large volumes . He received numerous prizes and distinctions for his compositions , recordings , and for the scores produced by his publishing company . 
 His notable compositions include the series of nineteen Klavierstücke ( Piano Pieces ) , Kontra @-@ Punkte for ten instruments , the electronic / musique @-@ concrète Gesang der Jünglinge , Gruppen for three orchestras , the percussion solo <unk> , Kontakte , the cantata Momente , the live @-@ electronic Mikrophonie I , Hymnen , <unk> for six vocalists , Aus den sieben Tagen , Mantra for two pianos and electronics , Tierkreis , Inori for soloists and orchestra , and the gigantic opera cycle Licht . 
 He died of sudden heart failure at the age of 79 , on 5 December 2007 at his home in Kürten , Germany . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Stockhausen was born in Burg Mödrath , the " castle " of the village of Mödrath . The village , located near Kerpen in the Cologne region , was displaced in 1956 to make way for lignite strip mining , but the castle itself still stands . Despite its name , the building is not actually a castle at all , but rather was a manor house built in 1830 by a local businessman named Arend . Because of its imposing size , locals began calling it Burg Mödrath ( Mödrath Castle ) . From 1925 to 1932 it was the maternity home of the <unk> district , and after the war it served for a time as a shelter for war refugees . In 1950 , the owners , the Düsseldorf chapter of the Knights of Malta , turned it into an orphanage , but it has subsequently returned to private ownership and is today a private residence again ( Anon. n.d. ; Anon . 1950 ) . 
 His father , Simon Stockhausen , was a schoolteacher , and his mother Gertrud ( née <unk> ) was the daughter of a prosperous family of farmers in Neurath in the Cologne Bight . A daughter , Katherina , was born the year after Karlheinz , and a second son , Hermann @-@ Josef ( " <unk> " ) followed in 1932 . Gertrud played the piano and accompanied her own singing but , after three pregnancies in as many years , experienced a mental breakdown and was institutionalized in December 1932 , followed a few months later by the death of her younger son , Hermann ( Kurtz 1992 , 8 , 11 , 13 ) . 
 From the age of seven , Stockhausen lived in Altenberg , where he received his first piano lessons from the Protestant organist of the Altenberg Cathedral , Franz @-@ Josef <unk> ( Kurtz 1992 , 14 ) . In 1938 his father remarried . His new wife , <unk> , had been the family 's housekeeper . The couple had two daughters ( Kurtz 1992 , 18 ) . Because his relationship with his new stepmother was less than happy , in January 1942 Karlheinz became a boarder at the teachers ' training college in Xanten , where he continued his piano training and also studied oboe and violin ( Kurtz 1992 , 18 ) . In 1941 he learned that his mother had died , ostensibly from leukemia , although everyone at the same hospital had supposedly died of the same disease . It was generally understood that she had been a victim of the Nazi policy of killing " useless eaters " ( Stockhausen <unk> , 20 – 21 ; Kurtz 1992 , 19 ) . The official letter to the family falsely claimed she had died 16 June 1941 , but recent research by Lisa <unk> , a student at the <unk> in Montabaur , has determined that she was gassed along with 89 other people at the <unk> Euthanasia Centre in Hesse @-@ Nassau on 27 May 1941 ( Anon . 2014 ) . Stockhausen dramatized his mother 's death in hospital by lethal injection , in Act 1 scene 2 ( " <unk> " ) of the opera Donnerstag aus Licht ( Kurtz 1992 , 213 ) . In the autumn of 1944 , he was conscripted to serve as a stretcher bearer in Bedburg ( Kurtz 1992 , 18 ) . In February 1945 , he met his father for the last time in Altenberg . Simon , who was on leave from the front , told his son , " I 'm not coming back . Look after things " . By the end of the war , his father was regarded as missing in action , and may have been killed in Hungary ( Kurtz 1992 , 19 ) . A comrade later reported to Karlheinz that he saw his father wounded in action ( Maconie 2005 , 19 ) . Fifty @-@ five years after the fact , a journalist writing for the Guardian newspaper stated unequivocally , though without offering any fresh evidence , that Simon Stockhausen was killed in Hungary in 1945 ( O 'Mahony 2001 ) . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 From 1947 to 1951 , Stockhausen studied music pedagogy and piano at the Hochschule für Musik Köln ( Cologne Conservatory of Music ) and musicology , philosophy , and Germanics at the University of Cologne . He had training in harmony and counterpoint , the latter with Hermann Schroeder , but he did not develop a real interest in composition until 1950 . He was admitted at the end of that year to the class of Swiss composer Frank Martin , who had just begun a seven @-@ year tenure in Cologne ( Kurtz 1992 , 28 ) . At the <unk> Ferienkurse in 1951 , Stockhausen met Belgian composer Karel Goeyvaerts , who had just completed studies with Olivier Messiaen ( analysis ) and Darius Milhaud ( composition ) in Paris , and Stockhausen resolved to do likewise ( Kurtz 1992 , 34 – 36 ) . He arrived in Paris on 8 January 1952 and began attending Messiaen 's courses in aesthetics and analysis , as well as Milhaud 's composition classes . He continued with Messiaen for a year , but he was disappointed with Milhaud and abandoned his lessons after a few weeks ( Kurtz 1992 , 45 – 48 ) . In March 1953 , he left Paris to take up a position as assistant to Herbert Eimert at the newly established Electronic Music Studio of <unk> Rundfunk ( <unk> ) ( from 1 January 1955 , <unk> Rundfunk , or WDR ) in Cologne ( Kurtz 1992 , 56 – 57 ) . In 1963 , he succeeded Eimert as director of the studio ( <unk> @-@ <unk> 1988 , 19 ) . From 1954 to 1956 , he studied phonetics , acoustics , and information theory with Werner Meyer @-@ Eppler at the University of Bonn ( Kurtz 1992 , 68 – 72 ) . Together with Eimert , Stockhausen edited the journal Die Reihe from 1955 to 1962 ( Grant 2001 , 1 – 2 ) . 
 = = = Career and adult life = = = 
 = = = = Family and home = = = = 
 On 29 December 1951 , in Hamburg , Stockhausen married Doris Andreae ( Kurtz 1992 , 45 ; Maconie 2005 , 47 ) . Together they had four children : <unk> ( b . 1953 ) , Christel ( b . 1956 ) , Markus ( b . 1957 ) , and Majella ( b . 1961 ) ( Kurtz 1992 , 90 ; Tannenbaum 1987 , 94 ) . They were divorced in 1965 ( <unk> 2013 ) . On 3 April 1967 , in San Francisco , he married Mary <unk> , with whom he had two children : <unk> ( b . 22 January 1966 ) and Simon ( b . 1967 ) ( Kurtz 1992 , 141 , 149 ; Tannenbaum 1987 , 95 ) . They were divorced in 1972 ( <unk> 2013 ; Stockhausen @-@ Stiftung [ 2013 ] ) . 
 Four of Stockhausen 's children became professional musicians ( Kurtz 1992 , 202 ) , and he composed some of his works specifically for them . A large number of pieces for the trumpet — from Sirius ( 1975 – 77 ) to the trumpet version of In Freundschaft ( 1997 ) — were composed for and premièred by his son Markus ( Kurtz 1992 , 208 ; M. Stockhausen 1998 , 13 – 16 ; Tannenbaum 1987 , 61 ) . Markus , at the age of 4 years , had performed the part of The Child in the Cologne première of <unk> , alternating performances with his sister Christel ( Maconie 2005 , 220 ) . Klavierstück XII and Klavierstück XIII ( and their versions as scenes from the operas Donnerstag aus Licht and Samstag aus Licht ) were written for his daughter Majella , and were first performed by her at the ages of 16 and 20 , respectively ( Maconie 2005 , 430 , 443 ; Stockhausen Texte , 5 : 190 , 255 , 274 ; Stockhausen Texte , 6 : 64 , 373 ) . The saxophone duet in the second act of Donnerstag aus Licht , and a number of synthesizer parts in the Licht operas , including Klavierstück XV ( " Synthi @-@ Fou " ) from Dienstag , were composed for his son Simon ( Kurtz 1992 , 222 ; Maconie 2005 , 480 , 489 ; Stockhausen Texte , 5 : 186 , 529 ) , who also assisted his father in the production of the electronic music from Freitag aus Licht . His daughter Christel is a flautist who performed and gave a course on interpretation of Tierkreis in 1977 ( Stockhausen Texte , 5 : 105 ) , later published as an article ( C. Stockhausen 1978 ) . 
 In 1961 , Stockhausen acquired a parcel of land in the vicinity of Kürten , a village east of Cologne , near <unk> Gladbach in the <unk> Land . He had a house built there , which was designed to his specifications by the architect Erich Schneider @-@ Wessling , and he resided there from its completion in the autumn of 1965 ( Kurtz 1992 , 116 – 17 , 137 – 38 ) . 
 = = = = Teaching = = = = 
 After lecturing at the Internationale Ferienkurse für Neue Musik at Darmstadt ( first in 1953 ) , Stockhausen gave lectures and concerts in Europe , North America , and Asia ( Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 2 , 14 – 15 ) . He was guest professor of composition at the University of Pennsylvania in 1965 and at the University of California , Davis in 1966 – 67 ( Kramer 1998 ; Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 2 – 3 ) . He founded and directed the Cologne Courses for New Music from 1963 to 1968 , and was appointed Professor of Composition at the Hochschule für Musik Köln in 1971 , where he taught until 1977 ( Kurtz 1992 , 126 – 28 , 194 ; Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 3 ) . In 1998 , he founded the Stockhausen Courses , which are held annually in Kürten ( Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 6 – 9 , 15 ) . 
 = = = = Publishing activities = = = = 
 From the mid @-@ 1950s onward , Stockhausen designed ( and in some cases arranged to have printed ) his own musical scores for his publisher , Universal Edition , which often involved unconventional devices . The score for his piece Refrain , for instance , includes a rotatable ( refrain ) on a transparent plastic strip . Early in the 1970s , he ended his agreement with Universal Edition and began publishing his own scores under the Stockhausen @-@ Verlag imprint ( Kurtz 1992 , 184 ) . This arrangement allowed him to extend his notational innovations ( for example , dynamics in <unk> [ the first scene of Mittwoch aus Licht ] are coded in colour ) and resulted in eight German Music Publishers Society Awards between 1992 ( Luzifers Tanz ) and 2005 ( Hoch @-@ Zeiten , from Sonntag aus Licht ) ( Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 12 – 13 ) . The score of Momente , published just before the composer 's death in 2007 , won this prize for the ninth time ( Deutscher <unk> 2009 ) . 
 In the early 1990s , Stockhausen reacquired the licenses to most of the recordings of his music he had made to that point , and started his own record company to make this music permanently available on Compact Disc ( Maconie 2005 , 477 – 78 ) . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Stockhausen died of sudden heart failure on the morning of 5 December 2007 in Kürten , North Rhine @-@ Westphalia . Just the night before , he had finished a work ( then recently commissioned ) for performance by the Mozart Orchestra of Bologna ( Bäumer 2007 ) . He was 79 years old . 
 = = Compositions = = 
 Stockhausen wrote 370 individual works . He often departs radically from musical tradition and his work is influenced by Olivier Messiaen , Edgard Varèse , and Anton Webern , as well as by film ( Stockhausen <unk> ) and by painters such as Piet Mondrian ( Stockhausen <unk> , 94 ; Stockhausen Texte , 3 : 92 – 93 ; Toop 1998 ) and Paul Klee ( Maconie 2005 , 187 ) . 
 = = = 1950s = = = 
 Stockhausen began to compose in earnest only during his third year at the conservatory ( Kurtz 1992 , 26 – 27 ) . His early student compositions remained out of the public eye until , in 1971 , he published <unk> für Doris , Drei Lieder for alto voice and chamber orchestra , Choral for a cappella choir ( all three from 1950 ) , and a Sonatine for Violin and Piano ( 1951 ) ( Maconie 1990 , 5 – 6 , 11 ) . 
 In August 1951 , just after his first Darmstadt visit , Stockhausen began working with a form of <unk> serial composition that rejected the twelve @-@ tone technique of Schoenberg ( Felder 1977 , 92 ) . He characterized many of these earliest compositions ( together with the music of other , like @-@ minded composers of the period ) as <unk> ( " punctual " or " <unk> " music , commonly mistranslated as " pointillist " ) Musik , though one critic concluded after analysing several of these early works that Stockhausen " never really composed punctually " ( <unk> 1981 ) . Compositions from this phase include <unk> ( 1951 ) , the Klavierstücke I – IV ( 1952 — the fourth of this first set of four Klavierstücke , titled Klavierstück IV , is specifically cited by the composer as an example of " punctual music " ( Stockhausen Texte , 2 : 19 ) ) , and the first ( unpublished ) versions of Punkte and Kontra @-@ Punkte ( 1952 ) ( Stockhausen Texte , 2 : 20 ) . However , several works from these same years show Stockhausen formulating his " first really ground @-@ breaking contribution to the theory and , above all , practice of composition " , that of " group composition " , found in Stockhausen 's works as early as 1952 and continuing throughout his compositional career ( Toop 2005 , 3 ) . This principle was first publicly described by Stockhausen in a radio talk from December 1955 , titled " <unk> : Klavierstück I " ( Stockhausen Texte , 1 : 63 – 74 ) . 
 In December 1952 , he composed a <unk> <unk> , realized in Pierre Schaeffer 's Paris musique concrète studio . In March 1953 , he moved to the <unk> studio in Cologne and turned to electronic music with two Electronic Studies ( 1953 and 1954 ) , and then introducing spatial placements of sound sources with his mixed concrète and electronic work Gesang der Jünglinge ( 1955 – 56 ) . Experiences gained from the Studies made plain that it was an unacceptable oversimplification to regard timbres as stable entities ( Stockhausen Texte , 1 : 56 ) . Reinforced by his studies with Meyer @-@ Eppler , beginning in 1955 , Stockhausen formulated new " statistical " criteria for composition , focussing attention on the aleatoric , directional tendencies of sound movement , " the change from one state to another , with or without returning motion , as opposed to a fixed state " ( <unk> and <unk> 1998 , 98 – 99 ) . Stockhausen later wrote , describing this period in his compositional work , " The first revolution occurred from 1952 / 53 as musique concrète , electronic tape music , and space music , entailing composition with transformers , generators , modulators , <unk> , etc ; the integration of all concrete and abstract ( synthetic ) sound possibilities ( also all noises ) , and the controlled projection of sound in space " ( Stockhausen <unk> , 127 , reprinted in Schwartz , Childs , and Fox 1998 , 374 ) . His position as " the leading German composer of his generation " ( Toop 2001 ) was established with Gesang der Jünglinge and three concurrently composed pieces in different media : Zeitmaße for five woodwinds , Gruppen for three orchestras , and Klavierstück XI ( Kohl 1998a , 61 ) . The principles underlying the latter three compositions are presented in Stockhausen 's best @-@ known theoretical article , " . . . wie die Zeit <unk> . . . " ( " . . . How Time Passes . . . " ) , first published in 1957 in vol . 3 of Die Reihe ( Stockhausen Texte , 1 : 99 – 139 ) . 
 His work with electronic music and its utter fixity led him to explore modes of instrumental and vocal music in which performers ' individual capabilities and the circumstances of a particular performance ( e.g. , hall acoustics ) may determine certain aspects of a composition . He called this " variable form " ( Wörner 1973 , 101 – 105 ) . In other cases , a work may be presented from a number of different perspectives . In <unk> ( 1959 ) , for example , he began using graphic notation for instrumental music . The score is written so that the performance can start on any page , and it may be read upside down , or from right to left , as the performer chooses ( Stockhausen Texte , 2 , 73 – 100 ) . Still other works permit different routes through the constituent parts . Stockhausen called both of these possibilities " polyvalent form " ( Stockhausen Texte , 1 : 241 – 51 ) , which may be either open form ( essentially incomplete , pointing beyond its frame ) , as with Klavierstück XI ( 1956 ) , or " closed form " ( complete and self @-@ contained ) as with Momente ( 1962 – 64 / 69 ) ( <unk> 2004 , 97 – 98 ) . 
 In many of his works , elements are played off against one another , simultaneously and successively : in Kontra @-@ Punkte ( " Against Points " , 1952 – 53 ) , which , in its revised form became his official " opus 1 " , a process leading from an initial " point " texture of isolated notes toward a florid , ornamental ending is opposed by a tendency from diversity ( six timbres , dynamics , and durations ) toward uniformity ( timbre of solo piano , a nearly constant soft dynamic , and fairly even durations ) ( Stockhausen Texte , 2 , 20 – 21 ) . In Gruppen ( 1955 – 57 ) , fanfares and passages of varying speed ( superimposed durations based on the harmonic series ) are occasionally flung between three full orchestras , giving the impression of movement in space ( Maconie 2005 , 486 ) . 
 In his Kontakte for electronic sounds ( optionally with piano and percussion ) ( 1958 – 60 ) , he achieved for the first time an isomorphism of the four parameters of pitch , duration , dynamics , and timbre ( Stockhausen 1962 , 40 ) . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 In 1960 , Stockhausen returned to the composition of vocal music ( for the first time since Gesang der Jünglinge ) with Carré for four orchestras and four choirs ( Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 18 ) . Two years later , he began an expansive cantata titled Momente ( 1962 – 64 / 69 ) , for solo soprano , four choir groups and thirteen instrumentalists ( Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 18 ) . In 1963 , Stockhausen created Plus @-@ Minus , " 2 × 7 pages for realisation " containing basic note materials and a complex system of transformations to which those materials are to be subjected in order to produce an unlimited number of different compositions ( Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 20 ; Toop 2005 , 175 – 78 ) . Through the rest of the 1960s , he continued to explore such possibilities of " process composition " in works for live performance , such as <unk> ( 1967 ) , <unk> , and Spiral ( both 1968 ) , culminating in the verbally described " intuitive music " compositions of Aus den sieben Tagen ( 1968 ) and Für <unk> Zeiten ( 1968 – 70 ) ( Fritsch 1979 ; Kohl 1981 , 192 – 93 , 227 – 51 ; Kohl 1998b , 7 ; ( Toop 2005 , 191 – 92 ) ) . Some of his later works , such as <unk> ( 1972 ) and the first three parts of <unk> ( 1974 ) , also fall under this rubric ( Maconie 2005 , 254 , 366 – 68 ) . Several of these process compositions were featured in the all @-@ day programmes presented at Expo 70 , for which Stockhausen composed two more similar pieces , Pole for two players , and Expo for three ( Kohl 1981 , 192 – 93 ; Maconie 2005 , 323 – 24 ) . In other compositions , such as Stop for orchestra ( 1965 ) , Adieu for wind quintet ( 1966 ) , and the Dr. K <unk> , which was written in 1968 – 69 in honour of Alfred Kalmus of Universal Edition , he presented his performers with more restricted improvisational possibilities ( Maconie 2005 , 262 , 267 – 68 , 319 – 20 ) . 
 He pioneered live electronics in <unk> ( 1964 / 67 / 2003 ) for orchestra and electronics ( Kohl 1981 , 51 – 163 ) , Mikrophonie I ( 1964 ) for tam @-@ tam , two microphones , two filters with <unk> ( 6 players ) ( Maconie 1972 ; Maconie 2005 , 255 – 57 ) , Mikrophonie II ( 1965 ) for choir , Hammond organ , and four ring modulators ( Peters 1992 ) , and Solo for a melody instrument with feedback ( 1966 ) ( Maconie 2005 , 262 – 65 ) . Improvisation also plays a part in all of these works , but especially in Solo ( Maconie 2005 , 264 ) . He also composed two electronic works for tape , Telemusik ( 1966 ) and Hymnen ( 1966 – 67 ) ( Kohl 2002 ; Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 21 ) . The latter also exists in a version with partially improvising soloists , and the third of its four " regions " in a version with orchestra ( Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 21 ) . At this time , Stockhausen also began to incorporate pre @-@ existent music from world traditions into his compositions ( Kohl 1981 , 93 – 95 ; Stockhausen Texte , 4 , 468 – 76 ) . Telemusik was the first overt example of this trend ( Kohl 2002 , 96 ) . 
 In 1968 , Stockhausen composed the vocal sextet <unk> , for the Collegium Vocale Köln , an hour @-@ long work based entirely on the overtones of a low B @-@ flat ( Toop 2005 , 39 ) . In the following year , he created Fresco for four orchestral groups , a <unk> ( " foyer music " ) composition ( Maconie 2005 , 321 ) . This was intended to be played for about five hours in the <unk> and grounds of the <unk> auditorium complex in Bonn , before , after , and during a group of ( in part simultaneous ) concerts of his music in the auditoriums of the facility ( Maconie 2005 , 321 – 23 ) . The overall project was given the title Musik für die <unk> ( Maconie 2005 , 296 ) . This had precedents in two collective @-@ composition seminar projects that Stockhausen gave at Darmstadt in 1967 and 1968 : Ensemble and Musik für ein Haus ( <unk> 1968 ; <unk> 1970 ; <unk> 2004 ; Maconie 2005 , 321 ) , and would have successors in the " park music " composition for five spatially separated groups , <unk> ( " Star Sounds " ) of 1971 , the orchestral work Trans , composed in the same year and the thirteen simultaneous " musical scenes for soloists and duets " titled Alphabet für Liège ( 1972 ) ( Maconie 2005 , 334 – 36 , 338 , 341 – 43 ) . 
 = = = " Space music " and Expo ' 70 = = = 
 Since the mid @-@ 1950s , Stockhausen had been developing concepts of <unk> in his works , not only in electronic music , such as the 5 @-@ channel Gesang der Jünglinge ( 1955 – 56 ) and Telemusik ( 1966 ) , and 4 @-@ channel Kontakte ( 1958 – 60 ) and Hymnen ( 1966 – 67 ) . Instrumental / vocal works like Gruppen for three orchestras ( 1955 – 57 ) and Carré for four orchestras and four choirs ( 1959 – 60 ) also exhibit this trait ( Stockhausen Texte 2 : 71 – 72 , 49 – 50 , 102 – 103 ; Stockhausen 1989 , 105 – 108 ; Cott 1973 , 200 – 201 ) . In lectures such as " Music in Space " from 1958 ( Stockhausen Texte , 1 : 152 – 75 ) , he called for new kinds of concert halls to be built , " suited to the requirements of spatial music " . His idea was 
 a spherical space which is fitted all around with loudspeakers . In the middle of this spherical space a sound @-@ permeable , transparent platform would be suspended for the listeners . They could hear music composed for such standardized spaces coming from above , from below and from all points of the compass . ( Stockhausen Texte , 1 : 153 ) 
 In 1968 , the West German government invited Stockhausen to collaborate on the German Pavilion at the 1970 World Fair in Osaka and to create a joint multimedia project for it with artist Otto <unk> . Other collaborators on the project included the pavilion 's architect , Fritz Bornemann , Fritz Winckel , director of the Electronic Music Studio at the Technical University of Berlin , and engineer Max <unk> . The pavilion theme was " gardens of music " , in keeping with which Bornemann intended " planting " the exhibition halls beneath a broad lawn , with a connected auditorium " sprouting " above ground . Initially , Bornemann conceived this auditorium in the form of an amphitheatre , with a central orchestra podium and surrounding audience space . In the summer of 1968 , Stockhausen met with Bornemann and persuaded him to change this conception to a spherical space with the audience in the centre , surrounded by loudspeaker groups in seven rings at different " latitudes " around the interior walls of the sphere ( Kurtz 1992 , 166 ; <unk> 1996 ) . 
 Although Stockhausen and <unk> 's planned multimedia project , titled <unk> @-@ <unk> , was developed in detail ( Stockhausen Texte , 3 : 155 – 74 ) , the World Fair committee rejected their concept as too extravagant and instead asked Stockhausen to present daily five @-@ hour programs of his music ( Kurtz 1992 , 178 ) . Stockhausen 's works were performed for 5 ½ hours every day over a period of 183 days to a total audience of about a million listeners ( Wörner 1973 , 256 ) . According to Stockhausen 's biographer , Michael Kurtz , " Many visitors felt the spherical auditorium to be an oasis of calm amidst the general hubbub , and after a while it became one of the main attractions of Expo 1970 " ( Kurtz 1992 , 179 ) . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 Beginning with Mantra for two pianos and electronics ( 1970 ) , Stockhausen turned to formula composition , a technique which involves the projection and multiplication of a single , double , or triple melodic @-@ line formula ( Kohl 1983 – <unk> ; Kohl 1990 ; Kohl 2004 ) . Sometimes , as in Mantra and the large orchestral composition with mime soloists , Inori , the simple formula is stated at the outset as an introduction . He continued to use this technique ( e.g. , in the two related solo @-@ clarinet pieces , <unk> [ Harlequin ] and Der kleine <unk> [ The Little Harlequin ] of 1975 , and the orchestral Jubiläum [ Jubilee ] of 1977 ) through the completion of the opera @-@ cycle Licht in 2003 ( <unk> 1982 ; Conen 1991 ; Kohl 1983 – <unk> ; Kohl 1990 ; Kohl 1993 ; Kohl 2004 ; Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 10 ) . Some works from the 1970s did not employ formula technique — e.g. , the vocal duet " Am Himmel <unk> ich " ( In the Sky I am Walking , one of the 13 components of the multimedia Alphabet für Liège , 1972 , which Stockhausen developed in conversation with the British biophysicist and lecturer on mystical aspects of sound vibration Jill <unk> ) , " Laub und Regen " ( Leaves and Rain , from the theatre piece <unk> ( 1974 ) , the unaccompanied @-@ clarinet composition Amour , and the choral opera <unk> gibt das Leben ( Breathing Gives Life , 1974 / 77 ) — but nevertheless share its simpler , melodically oriented style ( Conen 1991 , 57 ; Kurtz 1992 , 192 – 93 ) . Two such pieces , Tierkreis ( " Zodiac " , 1974 – 75 ) and In Freundschaft ( In Friendship , 1977 , a solo piece with versions for virtually every orchestral instrument ) , have become Stockhausen 's most widely performed and recorded compositions ( Anon . <unk> ; <unk> 2007 ; Nordin 2004 ) . 
 This dramatic simplification of style provided a model for a new generation of German composers , loosely associated under the label neue <unk> or New Simplicity ( <unk> 1981 ) . The best @-@ known of these composers is Wolfgang Rihm , who studied with Stockhausen in 1972 – 73 . His orchestral composition Sub @-@ <unk> ( 1974 – 75 ) quotes the formula of Stockhausen 's Inori ( 1973 – 74 ) , and he has also acknowledged the influence of Momente on this work ( Frobenius 1981 , 53 + note 59 – 60 ) . 
 Other large works by Stockhausen from this decade include the orchestral Trans ( 1971 ) and two music @-@ theatre compositions utilizing the Tierkreis melodies : Musik im <unk> ( " Music in the Belly " ) for six percussionists ( 1975 ) , and the science @-@ fiction " opera " Sirius ( 1975 – 77 ) for eight @-@ channel electronic music with soprano , bass , trumpet , and bass clarinet , which has four different versions for the four seasons , each lasting over an hour and a half ( Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 24 – 25 ) . 
 = = = 1977 – 2003 = = = 
 Between 1977 and 2003 , Stockhausen composed seven operas in a cycle titled Licht : Die sieben Tage der Woche ( " Light : The Seven Days of the Week " ) ( Maconie 2005 , 403 – 544 ) . The Licht cycle deals with the traits associated in various historical traditions with each weekday ( Monday 
 = birth and fertility , Tuesday = 
 conflict and war , Wednesday 
 = reconciliation and cooperation , Thursday = 
 traveling and learning , etc . ) and with the relationships between three archetypal characters : Michael , Lucifer , and Eve ( Kohl 1983 – 84b , 489 ; Stockhausen Texte , 6 : 152 – 56 , 175 , 200 – 201 ) . Each of these characters dominates one of the operas ( Donnerstag [ Thursday ] , Samstag [ Saturday ] , and Montag [ Monday ] , respectively ) , the three possible pairings are foregrounded in three others , and the equal combination of all three is featured in Mittwoch ( Wednesday ) ( Kohl 1990 , 274 ) . 
 Stockhausen 's conception of opera was based significantly on ceremony and ritual , with influence from the Japanese Noh theatre ( Stockhausen , Conen , and <unk> 1989 , 282 ) , as well as Judeo @-@ Christian and Vedic traditions ( Bruno 1999 , 134 ) . In 1968 , at the time of the composition of Aus den sieben Tagen , Stockhausen had read a biography by Satprem about the Bengali guru Sri Aurobindo ( <unk> 2009 ) , and subsequently he also read many of the published writings by Aurobindo himself . The title of Licht owes something to Aurobindo 's theory of " Agni " ( the Hindu and Vedic fire deity ) , developed from two basic premises of nuclear physics ; Stockhausen 's definition of a formula and , especially , his conception of the Licht <unk> , also owes a great deal to Sri Aurobindo 's category of the " <unk> " ( Peters 2003 , 227 ) . Similarly , his approach to voice and text sometimes departed from traditional usage : Characters were as likely to be portrayed by instrumentalists or dancers as by singers , and a few parts of Licht ( e.g. , Luzifers Traum from Samstag , Welt @-@ Parlament from Mittwoch , Lichter @-@ Wasser and Hoch @-@ Zeiten from Sonntag ) use written or improvised texts in simulated or invented languages ( Kohl 1983 – 84b , 499 ; Moritz 2005 ; Stockhausen 1999 , 18 – 25 ; Stockhausen <unk> , 20 ; Stockhausen 2003 , 20 ) . 
 The seven operas were not composed in " weekday order " but rather starting ( apart from <unk> in 1977 , which became the first act of Dienstag ) with the " solo " operas and working toward the more complex ones : Donnerstag ( 1978 – 80 ) , Samstag ( 1981 – 83 ) , Montag ( 1984 – 88 ) , Dienstag ( 1977 / 1987 – 91 ) , Freitag ( 1991 – 94 ) , Mittwoch ( 1995 – 97 ) , and finally Sonntag ( 1998 – 2003 ) ( Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 3 – 7 , 26 – 48 ) . 
 Stockhausen had dreams of flying throughout his life , and these dreams are reflected in the Helikopter @-@ <unk> ( the third scene of Mittwoch aus Licht ) , completed in 1993 . In it , the four members of a string quartet perform in four helicopters flying independent flight paths over the countryside near the concert hall . The sounds they play are mixed together with the sounds of the helicopters and played through speakers to the audience in the hall . Videos of the performers are also transmitted back to the concert hall . The performers are synchronized with the aid of a click track , transmitted to them and heard over headphones ( Stockhausen <unk> , 215 ) . 
 The first performance of the piece took place in Amsterdam on 26 June 1995 , as part of the Holland Festival ( Stockhausen <unk> , 216 ) . Despite its extremely unusual nature , the piece has been given several performances , including one on 22 August 2003 as part of the Salzburg Festival to open the Hangar @-@ 7 venue ( Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 7 ) , and the German première on 17 June 2007 in Braunschweig as part of the Stadt der Wissenschaft 2007 Festival ( Stockhausen @-@ Stiftung 2007 ) . The work has also been recorded by the <unk> Quartet . 
 In 1999 he was invited by Walter Fink to be the ninth composer featured in the annual <unk> of the Rheingau Musik Festival . 
 In 1999 , BBC producer Rodney Wilson asked Stockhausen to collaborate with Stephen and Timothy Quay on a film for the fourth series of Sound on Film International . Although Stockhausen 's music had been used for films previously ( most notably , parts of Hymnen in Nicolas Roeg 's Walkabout in 1971 ) , this was the first time he had been asked to provide music specially for the purpose . He adapted 21 minutes of material taken from his electronic music for Freitag aus Licht , calling the result Zwei <unk> ( Two Couples ) , and the Brothers Quay created their animated film , which they titled In Absentia , based only on their reactions to the music and the simple suggestion that a window might be an idea to use ( Anon . 2001 ) . When , at a preview screening , Stockhausen saw the film , which shows a madwoman writing letters from a bleak asylum cell , he was moved to tears . The Brothers Quay were astonished to learn that his mother had been " imprisoned by the Nazis in an asylum , where she later died . … This was a very moving moment for us as well , especially because we had made the film without knowing any of this " ( <unk> 2001 ) . 
 = = = 2003 – 2007 = = = 
 After completing Licht , Stockhausen embarked on a new cycle of compositions , based on the hours of the day , entitled Klang ( " Sound " ) . Twenty @-@ one of these pieces were completed before the composer 's death ( Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 49 – 50 ) . The first four works from this cycle are First Hour : Himmelfahrt ( Ascension ) , for organ or synthesizer , soprano and tenor ( 2004 – 2005 ) ; Second Hour : Freude ( Joy ) for two harps ( 2005 ) ; Third Hour : <unk> <unk> ( Natural <unk> ) for piano ( 2005 – 2006 ) ; and Fourth Hour : Himmels @-@ Tür ( Heaven 's Door ) for a percussionist and a little girl ( 2005 ) ( Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 49 ) . The Fifth Hour , <unk> ( Harmonies ) , is a solo in three versions for flute , bass clarinet , and trumpet ( 2006 ) ( Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 49 ) . The Sixth through Twelfth hours are chamber @-@ music works based on the material from the Fifth Hour ( Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 49 ) . The Thirteenth Hour , Cosmic Pulses , is an electronic work made by superimposing 24 layers of sound , each having its own spatial motion , among eight loudspeakers placed around the concert hall ( Stockhausen <unk> ) . Hours 14 through 21 are solo pieces for bass voice , baritone voice , basset @-@ horn , horn , tenor voice , soprano voice , soprano saxophone , and flute , respectively , each with electronic accompaniment of a different set of three layers from Cosmic Pulses ( Stockhausen @-@ Verlag 2010 , 50 ) . The twenty @-@ one completed pieces were first performed together as a cycle at the Festival <unk> Köln on 8 – 9 May 2010 , in 176 individual concerts ( Gimpel 2010 ) . 
 = = Theories = = 
 In the 1950s and early 1960s , Stockhausen published a series of articles that established his importance in the area of music theory . Although these include analyses of music by Mozart , Debussy , Bartók , Stravinsky , Goeyvaerts , Boulez , Nono , Johannes Fritsch , Michael von Biel , and , especially , Webern ( Stockhausen Texte , 1 : 24 – 31 , 39 – 44 , 75 – 85 , 86 – 98 ; Stockhausen Texte , 2 : 136 – 39 , 149 – 66 , 170 – 206 ; Stockhausen Texte , 3 : 236 – 38 ; Stockhausen Texte , 4 : 662 – 63 ) , the items on compositional theory directly related to his own work are regarded as the most important generally . " Indeed , the Texte come closer than anything else currently available to providing a general compositional theory for the postwar period " ( Morgan 1975 , 16 ) . His most celebrated article is " ... wie die Zeit <unk> ... " ( " . . . How Time Passes . . . " ) , first published in the third volume of Die Reihe ( 1957 ) . In it , he expounds a number of temporal conceptions underlying his instrumental compositions Zeitmaße , Gruppen , and Klavierstück XI . In particular , this article develops ( 1 ) a scale of twelve tempos analogous to the chromatic pitch scale , ( 2 ) a technique of building progressively smaller , integral subdivisions over a basic ( fundamental ) duration , analogous to the overtone series , ( 3 ) musical application of the concept of the partial field ( time fields and field sizes ) in both successive and simultaneous proportions , ( 4 ) methods of projecting large @-@ scale form from a series of proportions , ( 5 ) the concept of " statistical " composition , ( 6 ) the concept of " action duration " and the associated " variable form " , and ( 7 ) the notion of the " directionless temporal field " and with it , " polyvalent form " ( Stockhausen Texte , 1 : 99 – 139 ) . 
 Other important articles from this period include " <unk> und <unk> Musik " ( " Electronic and Instrumental Music " , 1958 , Stockhausen Texte , 1 : 140 – 51 ; Stockhausen 2004 ) , " Musik im Raum " ( " Music in Space " , 1958 , Stockhausen Texte , 1 : 152 – 75 ) , " Musik und <unk> " ( " Music and Graphics " , 1959 , Stockhausen Texte , 1 : 176 – 88 ) , " <unk> " ( 1960 , Stockhausen Texte , 1 : 189 – 210 ) , " Die Einheit der <unk> Zeit " ( " The Unity of Musical Time " , 1961 , Stockhausen Texte , 1 : 211 – 21 ; Stockhausen 1962 ) , and " <unk> und Entdeckung " ( " Invention and Discovery " , 1961 , ( Stockhausen Texte , 1 : 222 – 58 ) ) , the last summing up the ideas developed up to 1961 . Taken together , these temporal theories 
 suggested that the entire compositional structure could be conceived as " timbre " : since " the different experienced components such as colour , harmony and melody , meter and rhythm , dynamics , and form correspond to the different segmental ranges of this unified time " [ Stockhausen Texte , 1 : 120 ] , the total musical result at any given compositional level is simply the " spectrum " of a more basic duration — i.e. , its " timbre , " perceived as the overall effect of the overtone structure of that duration , now taken to include not only the " rhythmic " subdivisions of the duration but also their relative " dynamic " strength , " envelope , " etc . 
 … 
 Compositionally considered , this produced a change of focus from the individual tone to a whole complex of tones related to one another by virtue of their relation to a " fundamental " — a change that was probably the most important compositional development of the latter part of the 1950s , not only for Stockhausen 's music but for " advanced " music in general . ( Morgan 1975 , 6 ) 
 Some of these ideas , considered from a purely theoretical point of view ( divorced from their context as explanations of particular compositions ) drew significant critical fire ( Backus 1962 , Fokker 1968 , Perle 1960 ) . For this reason , Stockhausen ceased publishing such articles for a number of years , as he felt that " many useless polemics " about these texts had arisen , and he preferred to concentrate his attention on composing ( Stockhausen Texte , 4 : 13 ) . 
 Through the 1960s , although he taught and lectured publicly ( Stockhausen Texte , 3 : 196 – 211 ) , Stockhausen published little of an analytical or theoretical nature . Only in 1970 did he again begin publishing theoretical articles , with " <unk> " , the abstract for his six seminar lectures for the <unk> Ferienkurse ( Stockhausen ' Texte , 3 : 222 – 29 ) . The seminars themselves , covering seven topics ( " <unk> and Macro @-@ Continuum " , " Collage and <unk> " , " Expansion of the Scale of Tempos " , " Feedback " , " Spectral Harmony — <unk> Modulation " , " Expansion of Dynamics — A Principle of Mikrophonie I " , and " Space Music — Spatial Forming and Notation " ) were published only posthumously ( Stockhausen 2009 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Musical influence = = = 
 Stockhausen 's two early Electronic Studies ( especially the second ) had a powerful influence on the subsequent development of electronic music in the 1950s and 1960s , particularly in the work of the Italian Franco <unk> and the Poles Andrzej <unk> and Włodzimierz <unk> ( Skowron 1981 , 39 ) . The influence of his Kontra @-@ Punkte , <unk> and Gruppen may be seen in the work of many composers , including Igor Stravinsky 's Threni ( 1957 – 58 ) and Movements for piano and orchestra ( 1958 – 59 ) and other works up to the Variations : Aldous Huxley In Memoriam ( 1963 – 64 ) , whose rhythms " are likely to have been inspired , at least in part , by certain passages from Stockhausen 's Gruppen " ( <unk> 2005 , 340 ) . Though music of Stockhausen 's generation may seem an unlikely influence , Stravinsky said in a 1957 conversation : 
 I have all around me the spectacle of composers who , after their generation has had its decade of influence and fashion , seal themselves off from further development and from the next generation ( as I say this , exceptions come to mind , Krenek , for instance ) . Of course , it requires greater effort to learn from one 's juniors , and their manners are not invariably good . But when you are seventy @-@ five and your generation has overlapped with four younger ones , it <unk> you not to decide in advance " how far composers can go , " but to try to discover whatever new thing it is makes the new generation new . ( Stravinsky and Craft 1980 , 133 ) 
 Amongst British composers , Sir Harrison Birtwistle readily acknowledges the influence of Stockhausen 's Zeitmaße ( especially on his two wind quintets , <unk> and Choruses and Five Distances ) and Gruppen on his work more generally ( Cross 2000 , 48 ; Cross 2001 ; Hall 1984 , 3 , 7 – 8 ; ( Hall 1998 , 99 , 108 ) ; ( Pace 1996 , 27 ) ) . Brian Ferneyhough says that , although the " technical and speculative innovations " of Klavierstücke I – IV , <unk> and Kontra @-@ Punkte escaped him on first encounter ( Ferneyhough 1988 ) , they nevertheless produced a " sharp emotion , the result of a beneficial shock engendered by their boldness " ( Ferneyhough 1988 ) and provided " an important source of motivation ( rather than of imitation ) for my own investigations " ( Ferneyhough 1988 ) . While still in school , he became fascinated upon hearing the British première of Gruppen , and 
 listened many times to the recording of this performance , while trying to penetrate its secrets — how it always seemed to be about to explode , but managed nevertheless to escape unscathed in its core — but scarcely managed to grasp it . Retrospectively , it is clear that from this confusion was born my interest for the formal questions which remain until today . ( Ferneyhough 1988 ) 
 With respect to Stockhausen 's later work , he said , 
 I have never subscribed ( whatever the inevitable personal distance ) to the thesis according to which the many transformations of vocabulary characterizing Stockhausen 's development are the obvious sign of his inability to carry out the early vision of strict order that he had in his youth . On the contrary , it seems to me that the constant reconsideration of his premises has led to the maintenance of a remarkably tough thread of historical consciousness which will become clearer with time . . . . I doubt that there has been a single composer of the intervening generation who , even if for a short time , did not see the world of music differently thanks to the work of Stockhausen . ( Ferneyhough 1988 ) 
 In a short essay describing Stockhausen 's influence on his own work , Richard Barrett concludes that " Stockhausen remains the composer whose next work I look forward most to hearing , apart from myself of course " and names as works that have had particular impact on his musical thinking Mantra , Gruppen , Carré , Klavierstück X , Inori , and Jubiläum ( Barrett 1998 ) . 
 French composer and conductor Pierre Boulez once declared , " Stockhausen is the greatest living composer , and the only one whom I recognize as my peer " ( Anon . 1967 ; Anon . 1971 ) . Boulez also acknowledged the influence of performing Stockhausen 's Zeitmaße on his subsequent development as a conductor ( Boulez 1976 , 79 – 80 ) . Another French composer , Jean @-@ Claude Éloy , regards Stockhausen as the most important composer of the second half of the 20th century , and cites virtually " all his catalog of works " as " a powerful <unk> [ sic ] , and a true revelation " ( Éloy 2008 ) . 
 Dutch composer Louis Andriessen acknowledged the influence of Stockhausen 's Momente in his pivotal work Contra tempus of 1968 ( <unk> 2001 ) . German composer Wolfgang Rihm , who studied with Stockhausen , was influenced by Momente , Hymnen , and Inori ( Williams 2006 , 382 ) . 
 At the Cologne <unk> Festival in 1960 , the Danish composer Per <unk> heard Stockhausen 's Kontakte as well as pieces by Kagel , Boulez , and Berio . He was profoundly affected by what he heard and his music suddenly changed into " a far more discontinuous and disjunct style , involving elements of strict organization in all parameters , some degree of <unk> and controlled improvisation , together with an interest in collage from other musics " ( Anderson 2001 ) . 
 Jazz musicians such as Miles Davis ( Bergstein 1992 ) , Cecil Taylor , Charles Mingus , Herbie Hancock , Yusef Lateef ( Feather 1964 ; <unk> 2006 ) , and Anthony Braxton ( Radano 1993 , 110 ) cite Stockhausen as an influence . 
 Stockhausen was influential within pop and rock music as well . Frank Zappa acknowledges Stockhausen in the liner notes of Freak Out ! , his 1966 debut with The Mothers of Invention . On the back of The Who 's second LP released in the US , " Happy Jack " , their primary composer and guitarist Pete Townshend , is said to have " an interest in Stockhausen " . Rick Wright and Roger Waters of Pink Floyd also acknowledge Stockhausen as an influence ( Macon 1997 , 141 ; Bayles 1996 , 222 ) . San Francisco psychedelic groups Jefferson Airplane and the Grateful Dead are said to have done the same ( Prendergast 2000 , 54 ) ; Stockhausen himself says the former band included students of Luciano Berio , and the Grateful Dead were " well orientated toward new music " ( Stockhausen Texte , 4 : 505 ) . Founding members of Cologne @-@ based experimental band Can , Irmin Schmidt and Holger Czukay , both studied with Stockhausen at the Cologne Courses for New Music ( Stockhausen Texte , 3 : 196 , 198 , 200 ) . German electronic pioneers Kraftwerk also say they studied with Stockhausen ( <unk> 2003 , 228 ) , and Icelandic vocalist Björk has acknowledged Stockhausen 's influence ( <unk> 1998 , 15 ; Björk 1996 ; Ross 2004 , 53 & 55 ) . 
 = = = Wider cultural renown = = = 
 Stockhausen , along with John Cage , is one of the few avant @-@ garde composers to have succeeded in penetrating the popular consciousness ( Anon . 2007b ; Broyles 2004 ; Hewett 2007 ) . The Beatles included his face on the cover of Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band ( Guy and Llewelyn @-@ Jones 2004 , 111 ) . This reflects his influence on the band 's own avant @-@ garde experiments as well as the general fame and notoriety he had achieved by that time ( 1967 ) . In particular , " A Day in the Life " ( 1967 ) and " Revolution 9 " ( 1968 ) were influenced by Stockhausen 's electronic music ( Aldgate , Chapman , and Marwick 2000 , 146 ; MacDonald 1995 , 233 – 34 ) . Stockhausen 's name , and the perceived strangeness and supposed <unk> of his music , was even a punchline in cartoons , as documented on a page on the official Stockhausen web site ( Stockhausen Cartoons ) . Perhaps the most caustic remark about Stockhausen was attributed to Sir Thomas Beecham . Asked " Have you heard any Stockhausen ? " , he is alleged to have replied , " No , but I believe I have trodden in some " ( Lebrecht 1983 , 334 , annotated on 366 : " Apocryphal ; source unknown " ) . 
 Stockhausen 's fame is also reflected in works of literature . For example , he is mentioned in Philip K. Dick 's 1974 novel Flow My Tears , the Policeman Said ( Dick 1993 , 101 ) and in Thomas Pynchon 's 1966 novel The Crying of Lot 49 . The Pynchon novel features " The Scope " , a bar with " a strict electronic music policy " . Protagonist <unk> Maas asks " a hip <unk> " about a " sudden chorus of whoops and <unk> " coming out of " a kind of jukebox . " He replies , " That 's by Stockhausen ... the early crowd tends to dig your Radio Cologne sound . Later on we really swing " ( Pynchon 1999 , 34 ) . 
 The French writer Michel <unk> acknowledges that Stockhausen 's music " taught me a lot " , mentioning in particular the electronic works Gesang der Jünglinge and Hymnen ( <unk> 1982 , 204 ) . 
 Later in his life , Stockhausen was portrayed by at least one journalist , John O 'Mahony of the Guardian newspaper , as an eccentric , for example being alleged to live an effectively polygamous lifestyle with two women , to whom O 'Mahoney referred as his " wives " , while at the same time stating he was not married to either of them ( O 'Mahoney 2001 ) . In the same article , O 'Mahony claims Stockhausen said he was born on a planet orbiting the star Sirius . In the German newspaper Die Zeit , Stockhausen stated that he was educated at Sirius ( see Controversy below ) . 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 Robin Maconie finds that , " Compared to the work of his contemporaries , Stockhausen 's music has a depth and rational integrity that is quite outstanding ... His researches , initially guided by Meyer @-@ Eppler , have a coherence unlike any other composer then or since " ( Maconie 1989 , 177 – 78 ) . Maconie also compares Stockhausen to Beethoven : " If a genius is someone whose ideas survive all attempts at explanation , then by that definition Stockhausen is the nearest thing to Beethoven this century has produced . Reason ? His music lasts " ( Maconie 1988 ) , and " As Stravinsky said , one never thinks of Beethoven as a superb orchestrator because the quality of invention transcends mere craftsmanship . It is the same with Stockhausen : the intensity of imagination gives rise to musical impressions of an elemental and seemingly unfathomable beauty , arising from necessity rather than conscious design " ( Maconie 1989 , 178 ) . 
 Christopher Ballantine , while comparing and contrasting the categories of experimental and avant @-@ garde music , concludes that 
 Perhaps more than any other contemporary composer , Stockhausen exists at the point where the dialectic between experimental and avant @-@ garde music becomes manifest ; it is in him , more obviously than anywhere else , that these diverse approaches converge . This alone would seem to suggest his remarkable significance . ( Ballantine 1977 , 244 ) 
 Igor Stravinsky expressed great , but not uncritical , enthusiasm for Stockhausen 's music in the conversation books with Robert Craft ( e.g. , Craft and Stravinsky 1960 , 118 ) and for years organised private listening sessions with friends in his home where he played tapes of Stockhausen 's latest works ( Stravinsky 1984 , 356 ; Craft 2002 , 141 ) . In an interview published in March 1968 , however , he says of an unidentified person , 
 I have been listening all week to the piano music of a composer now greatly esteemed for his ability to stay an hour or so ahead of his time , but I find the alternation of note @-@ clumps and silences of which it consists more monotonous than the <unk> of the dullest eighteenth @-@ century music . ( [ Craft ] 1968 , 4 ) 
 The following October , a report in <unk> Muzyka ( Anon . 1968 ) translated this sentence ( and a few others from the same article ) into Russian , substituting for the conjunction " but " the phrase " Ia <unk> v <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( " I am referring to Karlheinz Stockhausen " ) . When this translation was quoted in Druskin 's Stravinsky biography , the field was widened to all of Stockhausen 's compositions and Druskin adds for good measure , " indeed , works he calls unnecessary , useless and uninteresting " , again quoting from the same <unk> Muzyka article , even though it had made plain that the characterization was of American " university composers " ( Druskin 1974 , 207 ) . 
 Early in 1995 , BBC Radio 3 sent Stockhausen a package of recordings from contemporary artists Aphex Twin , Richie <unk> ( <unk> ) , Scanner and Daniel Pemberton , and asked him for his opinion on the music . In August of that year , Radio 3 reporter Dick Witts interviewed Stockhausen about these pieces for a broadcast in October , subsequently published in the November issue of the British publication The Wire asking what advice he would give these young musicians . Stockhausen made suggestions to each of the musicians , who were then invited to respond . All but <unk> obliged ( Witts 1995 ) . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Throughout his career , Stockhausen excited controversy . One reason for this is that his music displays high expectations about " shaping and transforming the world , about the truth of life and of reality , about the creative departure into a future determined by spirit , " so that Stockhausen 's work " like no other in the history of new music , has a polarizing effect , arouses passion , and provokes drastic opposition , even hatred " ( Ulrich 2001 , 25 ) . Another reason was acknowledged by Stockhausen himself in a reply to a question during an interview on the Bavarian Radio on 4 September 1960 , reprinted as a foreword to his first collection of writings : 
 I have often been reproached — especially recently — for being too candid , and through this making not a few enemies for myself — being undiplomatic . … It must be admitted : I am not gifted as an esotericist , not as a mystic or a hermit , and not as a diplomat ; it corresponds that my love of my fellow humans expresses itself in candour … I hope my enemies will not on this account destroy me ; I also hope my enemies find forms of retort that I can find richly fanciful , witty , pertinent , instructive — that grant me respect through a noble and truly humane form of enmity . ( Stockhausen Texte , 1 : 12 – 13 ) 
 After the student revolts in 1968 , musical life in Germany became highly politicized , and Stockhausen found himself a target for criticism , especially from the leftist camp who wanted music " in the service of the class struggle " . Cornelius Cardew and Konrad Boehmer denounced their former teacher as a " servant of capitalism " . In a climate where music mattered less than political ideology , some critics held that Stockhausen was too <unk> , while others complained he was too mystical ( Kurtz 1992 , 188 – 89 ) . 
 = = = = Scandal at the Fresco premiere = = = = 
 As reported in the German magazine Der Spiegel , the première ( and only performance to date ) on 15 November 1969 of Stockhausen 's work Fresco for four orchestral groups ( playing in four different locations ) was the scene of a scandal . The rehearsals were already marked by objections from the orchestral musicians questioning such directions as " glissandos no faster than one octave per minute " and others phoning the artists union to clarify whether they really had to perform the Stockhausen work as part of the orchestra . In the backstage warm @-@ up room at the premiere a hand @-@ lettered sign could be seen saying : " We 're playing , otherwise we would be fired " . During the première the parts on some music stands suddenly were replaced by placards reading things like " Stockhausen @-@ Zoo . Please don 't feed " , that someone had planted . Some musicians , fed up with the <unk> , left after an hour , though the performance was planned for four to five hours . Stockhausen fans protested , while Stockhausen foes were needling the musicians asking : " How can you possibly participate in such crap ? " ( " Wie <unk> ihr <unk> so eine Scheiße machen ! " ) . At one point someone managed to switch off the stand lights , leaving the musicians in the dark . After 260 minutes the performance ended with nobody participating any more ( Anon . 1969 ) . 
 = = = = Sirius star system = = = = 
 In an obituary in the German newspaper Die Zeit , Karlheinz Stockhausen was quoted as having said : 
 I was educated at Sirius and want to return to there , although I am still living in Kürten near Cologne . ( <unk> 2007 ) 
 On hearing about this , conductor Michael Gielen stated : " When he said he knew what was happening at Sirius , I turned away from him in horror . I haven 't listened to a note since " , and called Stockhausen 's statements " hubris " and " nonsense " , while at the same time defending his own belief in astrology : " Why should these large celestial bodies exist if they do not stand for something ? I cannot imagine that there is anything senseless in the universe . There is much we do not understand " ( Hagedorn 2010 ) . 
 = = = = September 11 attacks = = = = 
 In a press conference in Hamburg on 16 September 2001 , Stockhausen was asked by a journalist whether the characters in Licht were for him " merely some figures out of a common cultural history " or rather " material appearances " . The composer replied , " I pray daily to Michael , but not to Lucifer . I have renounced him . But he is very much present , like in New York recently " ( Stockhausen 2002 , 76 ) . The same journalist then asked how the events of 11 September had affected him , and how he viewed reports of the attack in connection with the harmony of humanity represented in Hymnen . He answered : 
