 Well , what happened there is , of course — now all of you must adjust your brains — the biggest work of art there has ever been . The fact that spirits achieve with one act something which we in music could never dream of , that people practise ten years madly , fanatically for a concert . And then die . [ Hesitantly . ] And that is the greatest work of art that exists for the whole Cosmos . Just imagine what happened there . There are people who are so concentrated on this single performance , and then five thousand people are driven to Resurrection . In one moment . I couldn 't do that . Compared to that , we are nothing , as composers . [ ... ] It is a crime , you know of course , because the people did not agree to it . They did not come to the " concert " . That is obvious . And nobody had told them : " You could be killed in the process . " ( Stockhausen 2002 , 76 – 77 ) 
 ( To see how the excerpt appeared out of its context , and in English translation , see Tommasini 2001 . For a translation of a larger context of the exchange , see <unk> 2011 . The full text of the press conference , in German , is printed as Stockhausen 2002 . ) 
 As a result of the reaction to the press report of Stockhausen 's comments , a four @-@ day festival of his work in Hamburg was canceled . In addition , his pianist daughter announced to the press that she would no longer appear under the name " Stockhausen " ( <unk> and McAuliffe 2003 , 7 ) . 
 In a subsequent message , he stated that the press had published " false , defamatory reports " about his comments , and clarified as follows : 
 At the press conference in Hamburg , I was asked if Michael , Eve and Lucifer were historical figures of the past and I answered that they exist now , for example Lucifer in New York . In my work , I have defined Lucifer as the cosmic spirit of rebellion , of anarchy . He uses his high degree of intelligence to destroy creation . He does not know love . After further questions about the events in America , I said that such a plan appeared to be Lucifer 's greatest work of art . Of course I used the designation " work of art " to mean the work of destruction personified in Lucifer . In the context of my other comments this was unequivocal . ( Stockhausen <unk> ) 
 = = Honours = = 
 Amongst the numerous honours and distinctions that were bestowed upon Stockhausen are : 
 1964 German gramophone critics award ; 
 1966 and 1972 <unk> award for orchestral works ( Italy ) ; 
 1968 Grand Art Prize for Music of the State of North Rhine @-@ Westphalia ; Grand Prix du Disque ( France ) ; Member of the Free Academy of the Arts , Hamburg ; 
 1968 , 1969 , and 1971 Edison Prize ( Netherlands ) ; 
 1970 Member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Music ; 
 1973 Member of the Academy of Arts , Berlin ; 
 1974 Federal Cross of Merit , 1st class ( Germany ) ; 
 1977 Member of the Philharmonic Academy of Rome ; 
 1979 Member of the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters ; 
 1980 Member of the European Academy of Science , Arts and Letters ; 
 1981 Prize of the Italian music critics for Donnerstag aus Licht ; 
 1982 German gramophone prize ( German Phonograph Academy ) ; 
 1983 Diapason d 'or ( France ) for Donnerstag aus Licht ; 
 1985 Commandeur de l 'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres ( France ) ; 
 1986 Ernst von Siemens Music Prize ; 
 1987 Honorary Member of the Royal Academy of Music , London ; 
 1988 Honorary Citizen of the <unk> community ( Gemeinde Kürten website ( archive from 10 December 2008 ; accessed 18 March 2016 ) ) ; 
 1989 Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences ; 
 1990 Prix Ars Electronica , Linz , Austria ; 
 1991 Honorary Fellow of the Royal Irish Academy of Music ; <unk> <unk> of the Accademia Nazionale di Santa Caecilia , Rome ; Honorary Patron of Sound Projects Weimar ; 
 1992 IMC @-@ UNESCO Picasso Medal ; Distinguished Service Medal of the German state North Rhine @-@ Westphalia ; German Music Publishers Society Award for the score of Luzifers Tanz ( 3rd scene of Saturday from Light ) ; 
 1993 Patron of the European Flute Festival ; Diapason d 'or for Klavierstücke I – XI and Mikrophonie I and II ; 
 1994 German Music Publishers Society Award for the score <unk> ( Act 1 of Tuesday from Light ) ; 
 1995 Honorary Member of the German Society for Electro @-@ Acoustic Music ; Bach Award of the city of Hamburg ; 
 1996 Honorary doctorate ( Dr. <unk> h. c . ) of the Free University of Berlin ; Composer of the European Cultural Capital Copenhagen ; Edison Prize ( Netherlands ) for Mantra ; Member of the Free Academy of the Arts Leipzig ; Honorary Member of the Leipzig Opera ; Cologne Culture Prize ; 
 1997 German Music Publishers Society Award for the score of <unk> ( 1st scene of Wednesday from Light ) ; Honorary member of the music ensemble LIM ( <unk> de <unk> Musical ) , Madrid ; 
 1999 Entry in the Golden Book of the city of Cologne ; 
 2000 German Music Publishers Society Award for the score of Evas <unk> ( Act 1 of Monday from Light ) ; 
 2000 – 2001 The film In Absentia made by the Quay Brothers ( England ) to concrete and electronic music by Karlheinz Stockhausen won the Golden Dove ( first prize ) at the International Festival for Animated Film in Leipzig . More awards : Special Jury Mention , Montreal , <unk> 2000 ; Special Jury Award , Tampere 2000 ; Special Mention , Golden Prague Awards 2001 ; Honorary Diploma Award , Cracow 2001 ; Best Animated Short Film , 50th Melbourne International Film Festival 2001 ; Grand Prix , Turku Finland 2001 ; 
 2001 German Music Publishers Society Award for the score Helicopter String Quartet ( 3rd scene of Wednesday from Light ) ; Polar Music Prize of the Royal Swedish Academy of the Arts ; 
 2002 Honorary Patron of the Sonic Arts Network , England ; 
 2003 German Music Publishers Society Award for the score of <unk> ( 4th scene of Wednesday from Light ) ; 
 2004 Associated member of the Academie Royale des Sciences , des Lettres & des Beaux @-@ arts ( Belgium ) ; Honorary doctorate ( Dr. <unk> h. c . ) of the Queen 's University in Belfast ; German Music Publishers Society Award for the score of Stop and Start for 6 instrumental groups ; 
 2005 German Music Publishers Society Award for the score of Hoch @-@ Zeiten for choir ( 5th scene of Sunday from Light ) . 
 2006 Honorary member of the Accademia Filarmonica di Bologna 
 2008 On 22 August , Stockhausen 's birthday , the <unk> in his home town of Kürten was renamed Karlheinz @-@ Stockhausen @-@ Platz in his honour ( Bäumer 2008 ) . 
 2008 On 10 October , the Studio for Electronic Music of the Royal Conservatory of The Hague in the Netherlands changed its name to Karlheinz Stockhausen Studio . 
 2009 German Music Publishers Society Award for the score of Momente for solo soprano , four choral groups , and 13 instrumentalists . 
 2010 The municipality of Kürten adopts the designation " <unk> " in honour of the late composer ( <unk> 2010 ) . 
 = = Notable students = = 
 = Battle of Chochiwon = 
 The Battle of Chochiwon was an early engagement between United States and North Korean forces during the Korean War , taking place in the villages of Chonui and Chochiwon in western South Korea on July 10 – 12 , 1950 . After three days of intense fighting , the battle ended in a North Korean victory . 
 The United States Army 's 21st Infantry Regiment , 24th Infantry Division was assigned to delay two advancing North Korean People 's Army divisions following communist victories at Osan , Pyongtaek , and Chonan earlier in the month . The regiment deployed along roads and railroads in between the two villages , attempting to slow the advance as much as possible . 
 Aided by air strikes , U.S. Army units were able to inflict substantial damage on the North Korean armor and other vehicles , but were overwhelmed by North Korean infantry . The two understrength U.S. battalions fought in several engagements over the three @-@ day period and suffered massive losses in personnel and equipment , but were able to delay the North Korean forces for several days , allowing the remainder of the 24th Infantry Division to set up blocking positions along the Kum River near the city of Taejon . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Outbreak of war = = = 
 On the night of June 25 , 1950 , 10 divisions of the North Korean People 's Army launched a full @-@ scale invasion on the nation 's neighbor to the south , the Republic of Korea . Advancing with 89 @,@ 000 men in six columns , the North Koreans caught the South Korean Army by surprise , resulting in a disastrous rout for the South Koreans who were disorganized , ill @-@ equipped , and unprepared for war . Numerically superior , North Korean forces destroyed isolated resistance , pushing steadily down the peninsula against the South Koreans who could muster just 38 @,@ 000 men to the front @-@ line to oppose them . The majority of the South Korean forces retreated in the face of the invasion , and by June 28 the North Koreans had captured the capital Seoul , and forced the government and its shattered forces to withdraw further southwards . 
 Meanwhile , the United Nations Security Council voted to send assistance to the collapsing country and United States President Harry S. Truman subsequently ordered ground troops into the nation . However , U.S. forces in the Far East had been steadily decreasing since the end of World War II , five years earlier . At the time , the closest force was the 24th Infantry Division of the Eighth United States Army , stationed in Japan under the command of William F. Dean . Tellingly , the division was under strength and most of its equipment was antiquated due to reductions in military spending . Yet in spite of these deficiencies the division was ordered into South Korea , tasked with taking the initial " shock " of the North Korean advances until the rest of the Eighth Army could arrive and establish a defense . 
 = = = Early engagements = = = 
 The plan was to airlift one battalion of the 24th Infantry Division into South Korea via C @-@ 54 Skymaster transport aircraft and quickly block advancing North Korean forces while the remainder of the division was transported on ships . The 21st Infantry Regiment was identified as the most combat @-@ ready of the 24th Infantry Division 's three regiments , and the 21st Infantry 's 1st Battalion was selected because its commander , Lieutenant Colonel Charles B. Smith , was the most experienced , having commanded a battalion at the Battle of Guadalcanal during World War II . On July 5 , Task Force Smith engaged North Korean forces at the Battle of Osan , delaying over 5 @,@ 000 North Korean infantry for seven hours before being routed and forced back . 
 During that time , the U.S. 34th Infantry Regiment set up a line between the villages of Pyongtaek and Ansong , 10 miles ( 16 km ) south of Osan , to fight the next delaying action against the advancing North Korean forces . The 34th Infantry Regiment was similarly unprepared for a fight ; in the ensuing action , most of the regiment withdrew to Chonan without engaging the enemy . The 1st Battalion , left alone against the North Koreans resisted their advance in the brief and disastrous Battle of Pyongtaek . The 34th Infantry was unable to stop North Korean armor . After a 30 @-@ minute fight , the 34th mounted a disorganized retreat in which many soldiers abandoned equipment and retreated without resisting the North Korean forces . The Pyongtaek — Ansong line was unable to delay the North Korean force significantly or inflict heavy casualties on them . 
 The regiment subsequently retreated to Chonan , where , the next night the 3rd Battalion was heavily engaged in another delaying action . The 34th Infantry lost its commander , Colonel Robert R. Martin as well as two thirds of its 3rd Battalion 's strength . The exhausted 34th Infantry Regiment retreated to the Kum River , near the 24th Infantry Division 's headquarters . The 24th Infantry Division would make one final delaying action before it would be forced to make its final stand around Taejon , the only major defensible city left before the Pusan Perimeter being established by the Eighth Army . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Having pushed back U.S. forces at Osan , Pyongtaek , and Chonan , the North Korean 4th Infantry Division , supported by elements of the 105th Armored Division , continued its advance down the Osan — Chonan road , up to 12 @,@ 000 men strong under division commander Lee Kwon Mu in two infantry regiments supported by dozens of tanks . Behind it , the North Korean 3rd Infantry Division had yet to engage the American forces . 
 = = = Airstrikes = = = 
 By July 7 , the 21st Infantry Regiment had been established at Chochiwon , one of two roads to the Kum River and Taejon . The regiment was ordered to keep the road through the region open so supplies and ammunition could flow through it to the 34th Infantry Regiment on the front lines . The Americans spent several days unloading supplies from locomotives in the village . After blowing up all bridges north of the town , 1st Battalion was established on the Chochiwon road at Chonui , 12 miles ( 19 km ) south of Chonan . Supporting it were one battery of 155 @-@ mm howitzers from the 11th Field Artillery Battalion and A Company of the 78th Heavy Tank Battalion with M24 Chaffee light tanks , as well as B Company of the 3rd Engineer Combat Battalion which was assigned to construct roadblocks and prepare bridges for demolition . 
 Around mid @-@ afternoon on July 9 , observers with the 1st Battalion , 21st Infantry spotted a column of 200 vehicles led by 11 North Korean T @-@ 34 tanks , subsequently calling for an airstrike . For the next few hours the U.S. Air Force ravaged the North Korean column with repeated bombings and strafing , and by sunset half of the vehicles were destroyed or burning and a large portion of the infantry had also been killed . The next day , a similar airstrike by B @-@ 26 Invaders , F @-@ 80 and F @-@ 82 Twin Mustang aircraft of the Fifth Air Force took place around Pyongtaek , with 38 North Korean tanks , seven half @-@ tracks and 117 other trucks destroyed , in addition to a large number of infantry . Much of the village of Chonui was left burning , although it had already been abandoned by South Korean soldiers and civilians . In addition , the airstrikes caused some of the largest losses of North Korean armor of the war , and were a major blow against the T @-@ 34 tanks which had been so successful during previous encounters . 
 = = = Fight at Chonui = = = 
 Meanwhile , the 1st Battalion , 21st Infantry back at Chonui remained understrength . Half of the force had constituted Task Force Smith at Osan . B and C Companies were thus still refitting at Chochiwon , leaving A and D Companies to hold the line with a handful of replacements to fill the extra positions . The battalion numbered around 500 men in total . The 1st Battalion emplaced on hills overlooking the south road of Chonui , northwest of Chochiwon and prepared to meet and delay the advancing North Korean forces , while the 3rd Battalion emplaced behind it in reserve . Around <unk> on July 10 , the Americans began to detect North Korean movement through the morning fog . Fifteen minutes after daybreak , a whistle blew , immediately followed by small arms fire on the American positions . American forces at first fired indiscriminately into the fog until the regimental commander , Richard W. Stephens , stopped them . At 0700 the 1st Battalion then came under heavy mortar fire , and A Company on the leftmost ridge was assailed with fire from higher ground by North Korean forces of the 4th Infantry Division . The American forces began using 4 @.@ 2 @-@ inch mortars on the North Korean positions in order to prevent them from advancing directly on their positions . Around 0800 the fog began to lift , and the Americans spotted four T @-@ 34 tanks in the village and subsequently called for another airstrike . 
 North Korean forces , meanwhile , flanked the American positions under cover of fog . The Koreans passed around the Americans ' right flank and attacked the mortar positions in the rear . T @-@ 34 tanks also joined in the fight , and also passed around the American flanks while obscured by the fog . Around 0900 the North Korean forces in Chonui initiated a frontal assault on the 1st Battalion , 21st Infantry 's positions . An observer with the unit called in artillery and pushed back the North Korean infantry inflicting heavy casualties on the assaulting force . By 1100 , the North Korean infantry , supported by several T @-@ 34s , was pressing on A Company 's position , which was undermanned . At 1125 the requested airstrike came in ; American aircraft rocketed the T @-@ 34s to no effect while strafing the Korean forces attacking A Company . The aircraft were able to push back the attack for several minutes before running out of ammunition and being forced to leave . The North Korean troops immediately resumed their assault . 
 One of A Company 's platoons , under the command of Lieutenant Ray Bixler , faced most of the pressure of the North Korean assault . Tank fire had destroyed the American wire communications to their artillery , which began to fall on their own positions in the belief that they had been overrun with North Koreans , before Stephens was able to call it off . In the meantime , at 1135 Bixler 's platoon was surrounded and destroyed , most of the men of the platoon were killed in their foxholes by the North Korean infantry . Following this , men on the right flank began deserting their positions regardless of Stephens ' efforts to keep them there . Finally at 1205 , Stephens ordered his men to withdraw . American forces had great difficulty retreating through the wet rice paddies , and a disorganized retreat followed as they attempted to pull back . During the retreat , several U.S. aircraft returned and , mistaking the soldiers of the 1st Battalion , 21st Infantry for North Koreans , began to strafe them . The aircraft inflicted no casualties , but the battalion overall had suffered 20 percent casualties with 33 killed and 35 wounded during the engagement , as well as 14 killed in the mortar company . 
 = = = American counterattack = = = 
 As 1st Battalion retreated , Stephens ordered 3rd Battalion to counterattack the North Koreans on the ridge to regain the position . The American attack was aggressive and 3rd Battalion was able to regain most of the ground , rescuing 10 Americans captured in the first attack in the process . During the attack , the 3rd Battalion uncovered evidence of North Korean war crimes ; six men from 1st Battalion 's heavy mortar company were discovered executed , with their hands tied behind their backs . Several M24 Chaffee light tanks , newly arrived from Pusan , were brought in 3rd Battalion 's assault , the first use of U.S. armor in the war . The <unk> disabled a T @-@ 34 while suffering two destroyed throughout the day . During this time , the North Korean 4th Division pressed on south , bypassing Chonui to the west . Following it was the North Korean 3rd Infantry Division , one day behind , granting the Americans time to rest and prepare new defenses . The 3rd Battalion held the position until just before 2400 , when it withdrew to its previous position with most of the equipment that had been lost by 1st Battalion earlier in the day . At that position , the men discovered North Korean forces occupying its old foxholes , and K Company engaged in a one @-@ hour firefight to drive them off . Meanwhile , 1st Battalion withdrew south to new blocking positions 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) outside of Chochiwon . 
 At 0630 on July 11 , four T @-@ 34s advanced on 3rd Battalion 's position , passing through a minefield without suffering any casualties . Following the tanks , about 1 @,@ 000 North Korean infantry of the North Korean 3rd Infantry Division conducted a double envelopment of the battalion , setting up roadblocks in its rear to prevent resupply and evacuation of wounded . Simultaneously , heavy mortar fire struck the battalion 's command post , destroying its communications center and ammunition stocks , and inflicting heavy casualties . American forward observers were unable to communicate with the artillery due to the lack of communications equipment . The attack by the North Koreans was well coordinated , and it is likely that North Korean forces driven from the position in the night had been able to gather intelligence about the battalion 's position . In the ensuing fight , American forces were overwhelmed again , fighting in desperate hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . 
 North Korean machine guns continued to assault the American lines , and Americans who had expended their ammunition were forced to use their weapons as clubs . Of 667 men in 3rd Battalion , over 60 percent became casualties , including the battalion commander , Lieutenant Colonel Carl Jensen , and much of the battalion staff . Shattered , 3rd Battalion was forced to withdraw in small groups , many of its soldiers already captured or forced to escape on foot through the countryside back to American lines . Most of the retreating men were also captured . Remaining soldiers formed a provisional company of 150 for the retreat . In total 90 percent of the battalion 's equipment , including weapons and helmets , was lost . Another four of the M24 tanks were also destroyed without disabling any of the North Korean <unk> . 
 = = = Chochiwon falls = = = 
 Under Smith , 1st Battalion emplaced on hills overlooking the road into Chochiwon , resting the night of July 11 with no contact from the North Koreans until the next day . Just after dawn on July 12 , the American battalion first encountered North Korean patrols followed by an attack on their left flank by a North Korean force estimated as battalion sized at 0930 . Soon afterward , some 2 @,@ 000 North Koreans began a direct assault on 1st Battalion 's position , supported by heavy artillery . Stephens decided the understrength battalion , with its large percentage of replacements , could not hold its position long and ordered it to withdraw . Smith subsequently moved the battalion from the line one company at a time and the retreat was orderly . By nightfall , the entire regiment had moved by truck to a blocking position at <unk> @-@ ni , across the Kum River close to Taejon . In the meantime , U.S. forces on the westerly <unk> road fought a series of minor engagements to delay North Korean forces traveling down that road before retreating across the Kum river . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The U.S. 21st Infantry Regiment suffered 228 killed , 61 wounded , 215 captured , and 27 missing in the battle ; a total of 531 casualties . Of those , 130 of the captured and 20 of the missing died . Additionally , 23 other American units engaged in the region suffered 31 killed , 79 wounded , 15 captured and 9 missing ; in total a further 134 casualties . This brought the total number of casualties for the three @-@ day period to 665 and made Chochiwon the bloodiest battle for American forces yet in the conflict ; greater than the casualty counts at Osan , Pyongtaek and Chonan combined . The loss of materiel was also great with the 21st Infantry Regiment losing enough equipment and materiel to outfit two rifle battalions , and enough clothing to equip 975 men . Against these losses North Korean casualties could not be estimated due to a lack of communication among fighting units , which limited the value of American signals intelligence . 
 Despite these losses the U.S. 21st Infantry Regiment was praised for its efforts to defend Chochiwon and Chonui . Roy Appleman , a historian for the U.S. Army called it " the most impressive performance yet of American troops in Korea . " Indeed , the regiment was able to successfully delay North Korean forces for three days in the fighting , despite suffering heavily in casualties and equipment losses , and in doing so the action bought enough time for the rest of the 24th Infantry Division to set up defenses around Taejon . The 21st Infantry Regiment subsequently joined the 34th Infantry Regiment and the 19th Infantry Regiment in setting up positions along the Kum River near Taejon , and the entire 24th Infantry Division would make its stand there during the Battle of Taejon over the next week . In that fight , the division would be overrun and forced to retreat again . However , the delaying actions of the division would give the U.S. forces in Pusan time to set up the Pusan Perimeter , where the North Korean and UN forces would fight for several months in the Battle of Pusan Perimeter , eventually defeating the North Korean Army . 
 = Georgina Kenaghan = 
 Georgina Kenaghan ( born 1984 ) is an Australian goalball coach and psychologist . She won the 2012 NSW / ACT Inspiration Medal in the Pride of Australia Awards . As the coach of the Australia women 's national goalball team , she led the team at the 2010 World Championships in Great Britain , the first time the national team had competed internationally in three years . She coached the team at the 2011 IBSA Goalball Continental Championships and Paralympic Qualifier , and was the national team coach for Australia at the 2012 Summer Paralympics , where the team did not win a single game . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Kenaghan is a psychologist but took leave from her job to prepare for the 2012 Paralympics when she was 28 years old . Her father is Terry Kenaghan , the man who helped bring goalball to Australia in 1980 . In 2012 , Peter Corr nominated her for an Inspiration Medal in the Pride of Australia Awards . She won the NSW / ACT Award . Her father accepted the award on her behalf as she was in London at the time , coaching the national team . 
 = = Goalball = = 
 Kenaghan coaches the Australia women 's national goalball team . The Daily Telegraph called her " one of Australia 's most successful sports coaches " . 
 She coached the team at the 2010 World Championships in Great Britain , the first time the national team had played in three years . In 2011 , she represented goalball as part of a " Come & Try Day " sporting event in Western Australia . She used the 2011 Australian National Goalball competition as an opportunity to evaluate national team players . In 2011 , she coached the Australian side at the IBSA Goalball Continental Championships and Paralympic Qualifier and guided the team to a 6 @-@ 2 win over the New Zealand women 's national goalball team to secure Paralympic qualification . She coached the team in their win against Israel that was part of the competition . 
 Kenaghan was the head coach of the Aussie Belles going to the 2012 Summer Paralympics . The team qualifying for the Games was a surprise as the Australian Paralympic Committee had been working on player development with an idea of the team qualifying for the 2016 Summer Paralympics . An Australian team had not participated since the 2000 Summer Paralympics when they earned an automatic selection as hosts and the team finished last in the competition . The country has not medalled in the event since 1976 . Players she coached on the national team included Meica Christensen . Her team lost all three games and did not advance out of the group stage . In the team 's game against Canada , she substituted players in order to improve the team 's chance of winning . 
 = Pillars of Eternity = 
 Pillars of Eternity is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Obsidian Entertainment and published by Paradox Interactive . It was released for Microsoft Windows , OS X , and Linux on March 26 , 2015 . The game is a spiritual successor to the Baldur 's Gate and Icewind Dale series , along with Planescape : Torment . Obsidian started a crowdfunding campaign on Kickstarter for it in September 2012 . The campaign raised over US $ 4 million , which was the highest funded video game at the time . The game uses the Unity engine . 
 The game takes place in the fantasy world of Eora , mainly inside the nation of Dyrwood . The infants in the Dyrwood are plagued by a recent phenomenon in which they become " hollowborn " upon birth , meaning they are born with no soul . During the beginning of the game , the protagonist experiences an awakening of power due to a disastrous supernatural event , discovering they are a " Watcher " : a person who can see past lives and interact with souls . The objective of the game is to find out what caused their awakening and how to solve the hollowborn problem . 
 Pillars of Eternity received critical acclaim upon its release ; many critics praised the game for its world and immersive writing , along with the strategic combat , and also said that it is a worthy successor to the games it was inspired by . The game also won various awards and accolades , including best RPG of 2015 . A two @-@ part expansion pack , Pillars of Eternity : The White March was released in August 2015 and February 2016 , respectively . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Pillars of Eternity is a role @-@ playing game that features a party @-@ based real @-@ time @-@ with @-@ pause tactical gameplay , fixed isometric user interface for the game @-@ world with two @-@ dimensional pre @-@ rendered backdrops , in a similar vein as its spiritual predecessors Baldur 's Gate , Icewind Dale series and Planescape : Torment . As the player 's characters explore an area map , it is unveiled . There is a fog of war effect on areas the player has already explored and has moved away from . The character classes and game mechanics are similar to Dungeons & Dragons , but are a proprietary system created for the game . The game does not reward experience points for killing enemies , but for completing quests and discovering new areas . 
 The game starts with a character creation screen where the player can choose items for their playable character , such as their physical appearance , race and creed . The player can choose to play as one of the eleven available classes : fighter , barbarian , paladin , ranger , wizard , druid , monk , priest , rogue , chanter and cipher . Each of them make the gameplay different ; for example , the cipher can use the soul of an enemy in order to attack them , and druids can shapeshift into a beast and cast spells . The protagonist 's class can also influence the number of available dialogue options . The player may adventure with up to five other characters out of a total of eight that they can pick up on their travels . These are fleshed out characters with unique personalities and appearances . Additionally , the protagonist can hire party members which the player creates in local taverns , but at a monetary cost . 
 The game has optional side quests that do not advance the main plot , which feature fleshed out supporting characters and multiple outcomes . According to a writer for Digital Spy , most of these are not " fetch quests " . During the game , the protagonist can build up a reputation depending on their actions . Non @-@ playable characters will react differently to him or her depending on this , and it can also affect the outcome of certain events in the game . The game features a scouting mode in which the party can sneak , which allows the player to avoid being seen by enemies . During scouting , the party can spot hidden items and traps , which the player can disarm and use against enemies . 
 Damage from enemies to the player 's characters affect an endurance and health pool . While endurance regenerates after combat , health can only be restored by resting . The party can either set up camp , or rest in an inn . If a character in the party have their endurance drained , they are knocked out until the end of combat . If a companion has their health reduced to zero then they become permanently dead . 
 The player can choose from five skills to beat situations : Stealth , Athletics , Lore , Mechanics and Survival . As the player fights more creatures , then more information is added to their bestiary . This helps the player to find out information about how to attack them effectively . Early in the game , the protagonist will take over a stronghold , that acts as the party 's fortress which can be upgraded . 
 = = Story = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The story takes place in the world of Eora , in a region placed in the southern hemisphere called the Eastern Reach , an area roughly the size of Spain . The Eastern Reach contains several nations , including the Free Palatinate of Dyrwood – a former colony of the mighty <unk> Empire that won its independence through a revolutionary war – the <unk> Republics – a confederation of sovereign city @-@ states – and the <unk> Regency of <unk> – a quasi @-@ theocratic state ruled by priests of the god <unk> . 
 Technologically and socially , most of the civilizations in Eora are in what roughly corresponds to the early stages of the Renaissance . Firearms are still a relatively new invention and are quite cumbersome to use , and as a result their use is not very widespread . They have , however , proven quite effective against magic users . 
 A factor of great conflict all over Eora is the recent scientific discovery that souls are not mere metaphysical abstractions , but quantifiable , measurable objects that can be transferred , stored , or molded . Souls are the basis of magic , as accessing their power is what allows certain people to use it . Souls leave the body upon death , and go through a largely unknown process before reincarnating into a newborn body . Every soul does , however , have embedded memories from their previous lives , and through certain processes a person 's soul can be " Awakened " , meaning they gain awareness of these past lives . Though the study of souls , called <unk> , is still a young field of science , the implications for society at large has been vast , and lead to rapid advances in technology and caused several rifts and clashes in the different religious communities , which has marked the era as a time of great turmoil . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The player character can be male or female and one of six available races , and the game typically refers to him or her as " The Watcher " . Over the course of the adventure , the player can recruit up to eight secondary characters as companions . Available companions include : <unk> , a fighter and worshiper of one of the game 's gods , <unk> ; <unk> , a wizard and child of parents who served nobility ; Durance , a priest and follower of <unk> , a goddess of war and fire ; <unk> , a ranger who is on a quest to search for an elder from her village ; Grieving Mother , a strange cipher who can not normally be fully seen by other people , and has a personal connection to the hollowborn problem ; <unk> , a paladin who works for the <unk> Republics ; Kana Rua , a chanter who was sent by his people to recover a book of sacred text ; and <unk> , a druid who has been banished from his tribe . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The player is a foreigner who arrives in the Dyrwood . Their caravan is hit by a mysterious storm that kills everyone but them . Taking refuge in a cave , the player character witnesses some cultists perform a ritual on a machine that can strip souls from their bodies . Exposed to these energies , the player character becomes a Watcher , a person able to read souls . The player character also becomes Awakened , able to access memories of their past lives . This curses the Watcher with waking visions and an inability to sleep . In time , the Watcher will go mad from this , so they set out to track down the cultists and reverse the curse . 
 Dyrwood is cursed by the <unk> Plague : children are being born without souls , leaving them unresponsive like vegetables . Many people blame animancers , the scientists who study and manipulate souls . Investigating the curse , the Watcher discovers that the <unk> ' souls have in fact been stolen by a cult known as the <unk> Key , led by a priest named Thaos , and that Thaos is framing animancers for the Plague . This campaign culminates in a riot where animancers are lynched and their college is destroyed . 
 The Watcher and his companions pursue Thaos to Twin Elms , where they finally learn the truth behind Thaos ' actions . The gods are synthetic beings created by ancient animancers to serve as a civilizing force for the world . Thaos is the last survivor of their order , and his eternal mission is to ensure that nobody ever discovers the gods ' secret . To this end , he works to discredit and suppress <unk> wherever it flourishes . He stole the souls of the <unk> to empower the goddess <unk> , who hates <unk> and would see it destroyed . Though the other gods have an interest in protecting their secret , they do not want <unk> to dominate them , and so aid the Watcher in confronting Thaos . 
 The Watcher slays Thaos in his lair . The ending varies depending on the Watcher 's choices in the game . 
 = = Development = = 
 Pillars of Eternity was developed by Obsidian Entertainment and published by Paradox Interactive . The game uses a modified version of the Unity game engine made specifically for Pillars of Eternity . The game was directed by Josh Sawyer . There were multiple competing pitches for Pillars of Eternity 's storyline within the studio , and the one worked on by Eric <unk> and George <unk> ultimately won , after which <unk> , who previously worked as a writer on the company 's Fallout : New Vegas , was designated the game 's lead narrative designer . Also involved in production are Adam <unk> , Chris Avellone and Tim Cain . The audio director of Pillars of Eternity is Justin Bell , who also composed the game . Bell stated he was inspired by the music of Baldur 's Gate and Icewind Dale when composing the game 's music . 
 On September 10 , 2012 , Obsidian 's webpage began teasing about a brand new game ( entitled " Project X " ) , it initially was a number 4 encircled by an Ouroboros . The next day it was revealed to be a countdown . On September 14 , 2012 , the Kickstarter campaign went live revealing further details of the project . It completed its 1 @.@ 1 million dollars objective in just over 24 hours , and the first set of " stretch goals " were announced . Pillars of Eternity surpassed the $ 1 @.@ 6 million mark five days after the fund @-@ raising began . It was announced an OS X version of the game would be provided together with a DRM @-@ free option through GOG.com. A Linux version was announced on September 21 , 2012 . It passed the $ 2 million mark on September 26 , 2012 . On October 8 , 2012 , it was announced that Wasteland 2 would be offered to backers who pledged US $ 165 ( and above ) . In the last day of the campaign , Pillars of Eternity surpassed Double Fine Adventure as Kickstarter 's most @-@ funded videogame at the time . 
 Feargus Urquhart , Obsidian 's CEO , explained why they chose to use a crowd funding model for Pillars of Eternity instead of the traditional developer and publisher arrangement : " What Kickstarter does is let us make a game that is absolutely reminiscent of those great games , since trying to get that funded through a traditional publisher would be next to impossible . " In an interview , Josh Sawyer said that being free of the limitations of a publisher would enable them to " delve into more mature subject matter [ ... ] slavery , hostile prejudice ( racial , cultural , spiritual , sexual ) , drug use and trade , and so on will all help flesh out the story " . Obsidian was said to be inspired by <unk> Entertainment 's success of using Kickstarter to fund Wasteland 2 . Chris Avellone said during the project 's announcement that if the campaign were to succeed , Pillars of Eternity would become a franchise . He also ruled out a possible console port of the game , saying , " Those [ console ] limitations affect RPG mechanics and content more than players may realize ( especially for players who 've never played a PC RPG and realize what 's been lost over the years ) , and often doesn 't add to the RPG experience . " Additionally , he has pledged to write a novella set in the game world . 
 On October 16 , 2012 , Pillars of Eternity 's Kickstarter funding campaign concluded with a total of $ 3 @,@ 986 @,@ 929 , becoming the most highly funded video game on the Kickstarter platform at the time . Together with further funds collected via PayPal , its budget rose to $ 4 @,@ 163 @,@ 208 . In December 2013 , Obsidian announced that the official title for the game would be Pillars of Eternity , dropping the working title Project Eternity . They also launched a poll asking backers whether or not they would support further fundraising . 
 In March 2014 , it was announced that Paradox Interactive would publish the game . It was stated that Paradox 's role would be taking care of marketing and distribution of the game , while Obsidian still retains the rights to the intellectual property . On March 11 , 2015 , a preview video of the documentary series , titled Road to Eternity , was released . It has been revealed that the money Obsidian Entertainment raised for the game through its Kickstarter campaign saved it from closure , as it had been suffering from financial problems following its cancellation of a game for the " next @-@ generational consoles " in 2012 . 
 = = Release = = 
 On March 17 , 2015 , Obsidian confirmed that Pillars of Eternity went gold , indicating it was being prepared for production and release . The game was released for Microsoft Windows , OS X , and Linux on March 26 , 2015 . Several editions of the game were released , including a Champion Edition which has a campaign almanac , a map of the game , the soundtrack of the game , wallpapers , and ringtones , and a Royal Edition which includes the Champion Edition items along with a strategy guide , concept art , and a novella which was written by Chris Avellone . 
 = = = Expansion pack = = = 
 A two @-@ part expansion , Pillars of Eternity : The White March , was announced by Obsidian at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2015 . Part I was released on August 25 , 2015 , and Part II was released on February 16 , 2016 . It extended the game , raised the level cap , and added new party members and abilities . Part I and II currently hold a score of 76 % and 79 % on Metacritic respectively , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Pillars of Eternity was met with positive reviews upon its release ; it is currently listed on Metacritic with a score of 89 / 100 , indicating " generally favorable reviews " according to the site . The Escapist wrote that while it caters to a nostalgic fan base , it is an " excellent " role @-@ playing game on its own merit , and also said that is the best isometric role @-@ playing game to come out " in years " . PC Gamer said that Obsidian made their best game thus far with Pillars of Eternity , and also wrote that it is a worthy successor to the games it was inspired by . IGN praised the game , saying that it is a representation of what is good about old school role @-@ playing games . Digital Spy lauded Pillars of Eternity , writing that it is a " masterclass in role @-@ playing game development " . 
 Game Revolution said that Pillars of Eternity 's combat is " deep and engaging " ; similarly , Metro wrote that the combat is " highly complex " . GameSpot said that the combat is the game 's best component , and also gave praise to the battle music . Gameplanet praised the game for its strategic combat and level @-@ based progression . Game Informer noted the combat 's customizability in the game , including the ability to change the difficulty and set options for auto @-@ pausing . However , the review criticized the pathfinding in the game . 
 Pillars of Eternity 's graphics and artwork were well received . Gameplanet called the art design in the game " excellent " . Game Informer said that the game 's maps are " thoughtfully crafted " , and that the detail on the characters and their equipment is " incredible " . Metro noted the game 's higher resolution than older isometric games such as Baldur 's Gate , saying that it benefits its " gorgeous " artwork . The review also praised the game 's lighting and particle effects . The Escapist said that the spell effects in the game are " quite visually impressive " and that the character models are an improvement from traditional isometric games ; however , the reviewer said that the backgrounds are not as impressive as " some of the more picturesque older titles " . IGN criticized the game 's art style , calling it " dated " . Gameplanet found the game 's voice acting to be " excellent " , saying that none of it is over acted . Game Informer echoed this statement , and also wrote that the game 's sound and music is " delicate and beautiful " . 
 GameSpot called Pillars of Eternity 's writing " lovely " . Particular praise was given by the reviewer to the character of the Grieving Mother , whose personal story he said was intriguing and " mysterious " . PC Gamer also praised the writing , saying that it is " rich " and " evocative " . Destructoid praised the plot and the world 's reactivity to the player , writing , " the main plot is packed with twists and surprises with staggering ramifications for a world players will feel they have become part of . " IGN said that characters in the game , both major and minor , have elaborate characterization , but found the fact that only some characters have voice acting to be an annoyance . Eurogamer criticized the game 's lack of humor , with the writer of the review saying that he wanted characters in the same vein as Minsc from Baldur 's Gate and Morte from Planescape : Torment in Pillars of Eternity to " lighten the mood " . The writer further said that he found the quests in the game to be " fairly stock " and the characters " forgettable " . 
 As of February 2016 , the game has sold over 700 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = 2005 FIFA Club World Championship Final = 
 The 2005 FIFA Club World Championship Final was a football match played between São Paulo of Brazil , the CONMEBOL club champions , and Liverpool of England , the UEFA club champions , on 18 December 2005 at the International Stadium , Yokohama , Japan . It was the final match of the 2005 FIFA Club World Championship , a competition for the winners of the primary cup competitions of FIFA 's continental members . The Club World Championship replaced the Intercontinental Cup , which both teams had competed in before . São Paulo had won the Intercontinental Cup twice in 1992 and 1993 , while Liverpool had lost twice in 1981 and 1984 . 
 The teams qualified for the championship by winning their continent 's primary cup competition . São Paulo won the 2005 Copa Libertadores , defeating Brazilian team Atlético Paranaense 5 – 1 . Liverpool won the 2004 – 05 UEFA Champions League , defeating Italian team Milan 3 – 2 in a penalty shootout after the match had finished 3 – 3 . Both teams played one match in the championship en route to the final . São Paulo beat 2005 AFC Champions League winners Al @-@ Ittihad 3 – 2 , while Liverpool beat 2005 CONCACAF Champions ' Cup winners Deportivo Saprissa 3 – 0 . 
 Watched by a crowd of 66 @,@ 821 , São Paulo took the lead in the first half when Mineiro scored . Liverpool missed a number of chances to equalise in the first half . In the second half they had the majority of the possession and also had three goals disallowed . Despite all their chances they were unable to score against São Paulo who held on to win the match 1 – 0 . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 São Paulo qualified for the FIFA Club World Championship as the reigning Copa Libertadores winners . They had won the 2005 Copa Libertadores beating Atlético Paranaense 5 – 1 over two @-@ legs in the final . It would be São Paulo 's first appearance in the competition , although they had won the forerunner to the competition , the Intercontinental Cup twice , in 1992 and 1993 . 
 Liverpool had qualified for the Club World Championship as a result of winning the 2004 – 05 UEFA Champions League . They beat Italian team Milan 3 – 2 in a penalty shootout after the match had finished 3 – 3 . Like São Paulo , Liverpool were competing in the competition for the first time , although they had appeared twice in the Intercontinental Cup , losing in 1981 and 1984 . 
 Both teams entered the competition in the semi @-@ finals . São Paulo 's opponents were the winners of the 2005 AFC Champions League , Al @-@ Ittihad . A 3 – 2 victory with two goals from Amoroso and a penalty from goalkeeper Rogério Ceni ensured São Paulo 's progression to the final . Liverpool faced 2005 CONCACAF Champions ' Cup winners Deportivo Saprissa . They won the match 3 – 0 , Peter Crouch scored twice and Steven Gerrard also scored as Liverpool reached the final . 
 Both teams were well into their respective domestic competitions . São Paulo 's domestic season had finished two weeks before the final . They finished the 2005 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A in 11th position after 42 games , they won and lost 16 games each and drew 10 . Liverpool were in the middle of their domestic season , they were competing in the 2005 – 06 Premier League . They were second in the table and won their last match before the competition 2 – 0 , against Middlesbrough . The victory meant Liverpool had gone 10 matches without conceding a goal , which equalled a club record . 
 São Paulo manager Paulo <unk> was adamant that his team would have to improve on their performance in the semi @-@ final if they were to win the match : " We 're going to have to improve certain aspects of our play if we want to win the final . " <unk> was not worried about Liverpool 's aerial threat , but was expecting them to keep the ball during the match : " English teams are well known for their aerial excellence , But Liverpool are a side that can keep the ball very well too as they proved when winning the Champions League . " 
 Liverpool manager Rafael Benítez would take control of the team for the final , despite the death of his father earlier in the week . Benitez was confident that his Liverpool team would be capable of beating São Paulo : " We are playing with confidence and strength . I think we can beat anyone . " Liverpool Striker Crouch who scored twice in the semi @-@ final was as adamant as his manager about winning the competition . Adding that " We 've not travelled all the way to Japan to go sightseeing . " 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Before the start of the match , a minute 's silence was held , in memory of Rafa Benítez 's father Francesco who died of heart failure on the Wednesday before the final . Both teams took the pitch wearing black armbands as a mark of respect . The match was delayed further when a fan invaded the pitch , he headed for one of the goals and got stuck in the goal before being caught . São Paulo lined up in a 3 – 5 – 2 formation , while Liverpool opted for a 4 – 4 – 1 – 1 formation . Liverpool had the first chance of the match inside the opening 79 seconds . Liverpool captain Steven Gerrard 's cross into the penalty area was met by Fernando Morientes , but the striker headed wide of the goal . Liverpool created more chances with Luis García missing the goal twice from headers . São Paulo had only created one chance , a shot from striker Amoroso , but they began to grow in confidence . They pressed forward after Amoroso 's shot and defender <unk> nearly scored with a lob from the halfway line which just went over the crossbar . 
 São Paulo 's pressure resulted in them taking the lead in the 27th minute . A chipped pass from <unk> to Mineiro found the midfielder in space who put the ball beyond Liverpool goalkeeper Pepe Reina to give the Brazilians a 1 – 0 lead . It was the first goal Liverpool had conceded in over 1 @,@ 041 minutes of play . Immediately afterwards , Liverpool had a corner , which almost resulted in a goal . Xabi Alonso took the corner which found García , but his shot hit the woodwork . Liverpool had another chance 30 minutes into the match , but again he failed to score with a header . Gerrard had a chance to equalise five minutes later , but he put his shot wide after Harry Kewell had passed him the ball . Liverpool continued to create chances and in the 39th minute García saw his header into the far corner saved by São Paulo goalkeeper Rogério Ceni . From the resulting corner Liverpool defender Sami Hyypiä shot straight at Ceni . He had another chance late in the first half , but his header was saved by Ceni . 
 Liverpool had the first scoring opportunity of the half , six minutes into the second half . Liverpool were awarded a free @-@ kick 25 yards from the goal . Gerrard 's subsequent shot was saved by Ceni . Ceni made another save soon afterwards when he tipped a cross from Kewell onto the crossbar . Liverpool did score on the hour mark , but the goal was disallowed . García 's headed goal was ruled out for offside . Soon afterwards Morientes had another chance to score , but his overhead kick went over the crossbar . Liverpool had another goal disallowed soon afterwards . Alonso 's corner from which Hyypiä was adjudged to have drifted out of play before the defender scored . 
 São Paulo made the first substitution of the match in the 75th minute when striker <unk> replaced <unk> . Liverpool made two substitutions four minutes later in an attempt to equalise . John Arne Riise and Florent Sinama Pongolle replaced Stephen Warnock and Mohamed Sissoko . They made their final substitution in the 85th minute when Peter Crouch replaced Morientes . Liverpool had a third goal disallowed in the 89th minute ; substitute Sinama Pongolle 's goal was disallowed after the assistant referee had flagged García as being offside in the build @-@ up to the goal . Liverpool had a final chance before the end of the match , but García put his shot wide . No further goals were scored and the referee blew for full @-@ time with the final score 1 – 0 to São Paulo . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Much of the talk after the match centred on Liverpool 's three disallowed goals . Liverpool manager Rafael Benítez was incensed by the referee 's decisions and remonstrated with the officials after the final whistle . Benitez was clear that at least one of the goals should not have been disallowed : " We knew that one of the goals was a goal , clear . " He also questioned the competency of the officials stating : " You wouldn 't get a Mexican referee and a Canadian linesman in the final of the World Cup . " Midfielder Luis García , who had a goal disallowed , summed up the feeling in the Liverpool : " We feel cheated . " 
 São Paulo goalkeeper Rogério Ceni was named as man of the match and also won the Golden Ball as the best player of the competition . Ceni was gracious in receiving the awards stating : " The awards are nice to have but the win was not just about me " Ceni dedicated the awards to those at the club saying : " When I look in these awards I see the faces of my team @-@ mates , the coach and everyone involved at the club . " São Paulo manager was delighted with his team after the victory and agreed with Ceni that the victory was a team effort : " It was a collective victory " he also said that it was " a great achievement for the club . " Goalscorer Mineiro was equally overjoyed with the victory stating : " It is the happiest moment in my career . " 
 = Plymouth Colony = 
 Plymouth Colony ( sometimes New Plymouth or Plymouth Bay Colony ) was an English colonial venture in North America from 1620 to 1691 . The first settlement of the Plymouth Colony was at New Plymouth , a location previously surveyed and named by Captain John Smith . The settlement served as the capital of the colony , and is the modern town of Plymouth , Massachusetts . At its height , Plymouth Colony occupied most of the southeastern portion of the modern state of Massachusetts . 
 Plymouth Colony was founded by a group of Separatists initially known as the <unk> Emigration and Anglicans , who came to be known as the Pilgrims . It was one of the earliest successful colonies to be founded by the English in North America , along with Jamestown and other settlements in Virginia , and the first sizable permanent English settlement in the New England region . The colony was able to establish a treaty with Chief Massasoit which helped to ensure its success ; in this , they were aided by Squanto , a Native American of the Patuxet people . It played a central role in King Philip 's War ( 1675 @-@ 1678 ) , one of the earliest of the Indian Wars . Ultimately , the colony was merged with the Massachusetts Bay Colony and other territories in 1691 to form the Province of Massachusetts Bay . 
 Despite the colony 's relatively short existence , Plymouth holds a special role in American history . A significant proportion of the citizens of Plymouth were fleeing religious persecution and searching for a place to worship as they saw fit , rather than being entrepreneurs like many of the settlers of Jamestown . The social and legal systems of the colony became closely tied to their religious beliefs , as well as English custom . Many of the people and events surrounding Plymouth Colony have become part of American folklore , including the North American tradition known as Thanksgiving and the monument known as Plymouth Rock . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Plymouth Colony was founded by a group of people ( separatists ) who later came to be known as the " Pilgrims . " The core group ( roughly 40 % of the adults and 56 % of the family groupings ) was part of a congregation of Christian separatists ( Congregationalists ) led by William Bradford . The congregation began to feel the pressures of religious persecution while still in the English village of Scrooby , near East Retford , Nottinghamshire . In 1607 , Archbishop Tobias Matthew raided homes and imprisoned several members of the congregation . The congregation then left England in 1609 and emigrated to the Netherlands , first to Amsterdam and then to Leiden . 
 In Leiden , the congregation gained the freedom to worship as they chose , but Dutch society was unfamiliar to them . Scrooby had been an agricultural community , whereas Leiden was a thriving industrial center , and the pace of life was hard on the Separatists . The community remained close @-@ knit , but their children began adopting Dutch language and customs , and some were also going into the Dutch Army . The Separatists were also still not free from the persecutions of the English Crown . English authorities came to Leiden to arrest William Brewster in 1618 , after he published comments highly critical of the King of England and the Anglican Church . Brewster escaped arrest , but the events spurred the congregation to move even farther from England . 
 The Congregation obtained a land patent from the London Virginia Company in June 1619 , after declining the opportunity to settle south of Cape Cod in New Netherland because of their desire to avoid the Dutch influence . This land patent allowed them to settle at the mouth of the Hudson River . They then sought financing through the Merchant Adventurers , a group of businessmen who principally viewed the colony as a means of making a profit . Upon arriving in America , the Pilgrims began working to repay their debts . 
 Using the financing secured from the Merchant Adventurers , the Colonists bought provisions and obtained passage on two ships : the Mayflower and the Speedwell . They had intended to leave early in 1620 , but they were delayed several months due to difficulties in dealing with the Merchant Adventurers , including several changes in plans for the voyage and in financing . The Congregation and the other colonists finally boarded the Speedwell in July 1620 in the Dutch port of <unk> . 
 = = = Mayflower voyage = = = 
 The " Speedwell " was re @-@ rigged with larger masts before leaving Holland and setting out to meet the " Mayflower " in Southampton , England , around the end of July 1620 . ( The Mayflower was purchased in London . ) The original captains were Captain Reynolds for the Speedwell and Captain Christopher Jones for the Mayflower . Other passengers joined the group in Southampton , including William Brewster , who had been in hiding for the better part of a year , and a group of people known to the Leiden congregation as " The Strangers . " This group was largely made up of people recruited by the Merchant Adventurers to provide practical assistance to the colony and additional hands to work for the colony 's ventures . The term was also used for many of the indentured servants . 
 Among the Strangers were Myles Standish , who was the colony 's military leader , Christopher Martin , who had been designated by the Merchant Adventurers to act as shipboard governor during the trans @-@ Atlantic trip , and Stephen Hopkins , a veteran of a failed colonial venture that may have been the inspiration for Shakespeare 's The Tempest . The group that later became the Leiden Leaders after the merging of ships included John Carver , William Bradford , Edward Winslow , William Brewster , and Isaac Alberton . 
 The departure of the Mayflower and Speedwell for America was beset by delays . Further disagreements with the Merchant Adventurers held up the departure in Southampton . A total of 120 passengers finally departed on August 5 — 90 on the Mayflower and 30 on the Speedwell . Leaving Southampton , the Speedwell experienced significant leakage , which required the ships to immediately put in at Dartmouth . The leakage was partly caused by being over masted and being pressed too much with sail . Repairs were completed , then a further delay ensued awaiting favorable winds . The two ships finally set sail on August 23 and made it only two hundred miles beyond Land 's End before another major leak in the Speedwell forced the expedition to return again to England , this time to the port of Plymouth . The Speedwell was found to be unseaworthy ; some passengers abandoned their attempt to emigrate , while others joined the Mayflower , crowding the already heavily burdened ship . Later , it was speculated that the crew of the Speedwell had intentionally sabotaged the ship to avoid having to make the treacherous trans @-@ Atlantic voyage . The delays had significant consequences ; the cost of the repairs and port fees required that the colonists sell some of their invaluable provisions , but , more importantly , the delays meant that everyone had to spend the entire winter on board the Mayflower off Cape Cod in what could only be described as squalid conditions . 
 The Mayflower departed Plymouth , England , on September 6 , 1620 , with 102 passengers and about 30 crew members in the small , 106 foot @-@ long ship . The seas were not severe during the first month in the Atlantic but , by the second month , the ship was being hit by strong north @-@ Atlantic winter gales , causing it to be badly shaken with water leaks from structural damage . There were many obstacles throughout the trip , including multiple cases of seasickness and the bending and cracking of a main beam of the ship . One death occurred , that of William Button . 
 After two months at sea , land was sighted on November 9 off the coast of Cape Cod . They attempted to sail south to the designated landing site at the mouth of the Hudson but ran into trouble in the region of Pollack Rip , a shallow area of shoals between Cape Cod and Nantucket Island . With winter approaching and provisions running dangerously low , the passengers decided to return north to Cape Cod Bay and abandon their original landing plans . 
 = = = Prior exploration and settlements = = = 
 The Pilgrims were not the first people in the area . Besides the indigenous tribes , there had been nearly a century of exploration , fishing , and settlement by Europeans . John Cabot 's discovery of Newfoundland in 1497 had laid the foundation for the extensive English claims over the east coast of North America . One of the earliest maps of New England was produced c . 1540 by cartographer Giacomo Gastaldi and erroneously identified Cape Breton with the Narragansett Bay . The resulting map completely omits most of the New England coast . European fishermen had been plying the waters off the New England coast for much of the 16th and 17th centuries . 
 Frenchman Samuel de Champlain had explored the area extensively in 1605 . He had specifically explored Plymouth Harbor , which he called " Port St. Louis , " and made an extensive and detailed map of it and the surrounding lands . Patuxet , the native village upon which the town of Plymouth was later built , was shown by Champlain as a thriving settlement . However , an epidemic wiped out up to 90 % of the Native Americans along the Massachusetts coast in 1617 – 1619 , including the Patuxet , before the arrival of the Mayflower . The epidemic has traditionally been thought to be smallpox , but a recent analysis has concluded that it may have been a lesser @-@ known disease called leptospirosis . The absence of any serious native opposition to settlement by the Pilgrims may have been a pivotal event to their success and to English colonization in the Americas . 
 Popham Colony , also known as Fort St. George , was organized by the Plymouth Company ( unrelated to Plymouth Colony ) and founded in 1607 . It was settled on the coast of Maine and was beset by internal political struggles , sickness , and weather problems . It was abandoned in 1608 . 
 Captain John Smith of Jamestown fame had explored the area in 1614 and is credited with naming the region of New England . He named many locations using approximations of Native American words . The future site of the Pilgrim 's first settlement was originally named " Accomack " by Smith . In consultation with Prince Charles , son of King James , Smith changed " Accomack " to New Plymouth . A map published in his 1616 work A Description of New England clearly shows the site of the future Pilgrim settlement named " New Plimouth . " 
 In the Mayflower settlers ' first explorations of Cape Cod , they came across evidence that Europeans had previously spent extensive time there . They discovered remains of a European fort and uncovered a grave that contained the remains of both an adult European male and a Native American child . 
 = = = Landings at Provincetown and Plymouth = = = 
 The Mayflower anchored at Provincetown Harbor on November 11 , 1620 . The Pilgrims did not have a patent to settle this area ; thus , some passengers began to question their right to land , complaining that there was no legal authority to establish a colony . In response to this , a group of colonists drafted and ratified the first governing document of the colony , the Mayflower Compact , while still aboard the ship as it lay off @-@ shore . The intent of the compact was to establish a means of governing the colony , though it did little more than confirm that the colony would be governed like any English town . It did , however , serve the purpose of relieving the concerns of many of the settlers . This social contract was written and signed by 41 Separatist men . It was modeled on the church covenants that Congregationalists used to form new congregations . It made clear that the colony should be governed by " just and equal laws , " and those who signed it promised to keep these laws . 
 The group remained on board the ship through the next day , a Sunday , for prayer and worship . The immigrants finally set foot on land at what became Provincetown on November 13 . The first task was to rebuild a shallop , a shallow draft boat that had been built in England and disassembled for transport aboard the Mayflower . It would remain with the Pilgrims while the Mayflower returned to England . On November 15 , Captain Myles Standish led a party of sixteen men on an exploratory mission , during which they disturbed a Native American grave and located a buried cache of Indian corn . The following week , Susanna White gave birth to son Peregrine White on the Mayflower . He was the first English child born to the Pilgrims in the New World . The shallop was finished on November 27 , and a second expedition was undertaken using it , under the direction of Mayflower master Christopher Jones . Thirty @-@ four men went , but the expedition was beset by bad weather ; the only positive result was that they found a Native burial ground and corn that had been intended for the dead , taking the corn for future planting . A third expedition along Cape Cod left on December 6 ; it resulted in a skirmish with local Native Americans known as the " First Encounter " near modern @-@ day Eastham , Massachusetts . The colonists decided to look elsewhere , having failed to secure a proper site for their settlement , and fearing that they had angered the local Native Americans by robbing their corn stores and firing upon them . The Mayflower left Provincetown Harbor and set sail for Plymouth Harbor . 
 The Mayflower dropped anchor in Plymouth Harbor on December 16 and spent three days looking for a settlement site . They rejected several sites , including one on Clark 's Island and another at the mouth of the Jones River , in favor of the site of a recently abandoned Native American settlement named Patuxet . The location was chosen largely for its defensive position . The settlement would be centered on two hills : Cole 's Hill , where the village would be built , and Fort Hill , where a defensive cannon would be stationed . Also important in choosing the site was that the prior Native villagers had cleared much of the land making agriculture relatively easy . Fresh water for the colony was provided by Town Brook and Billington Sea . There are no contemporaneous accounts to verify the legend , but Plymouth Rock is often hailed as the point where the colonists first set foot on their new homeland . 
 The area where the colonists settled had been identified as " New Plymouth " in maps by John Smith published in 1614 . The colonists elected to retain the name for their own settlement , in honor of their final point of departure from England : Plymouth , Devon . 
 = = = First winter = = = 
 On December 21 , 1620 , the first landing party arrived at the site of what later became the settlement of Plymouth . Plans to immediately begin building houses , however , were delayed by inclement weather until December 23 . As the building progressed , twenty men always remained ashore for security purposes , while the rest of the work crews returned each night to the Mayflower . Women , children , and the infirm remained on board the Mayflower ; many had not left the ship for six months . The first structure was a " common house " of wattle and daub , and took two weeks to complete in the harsh New England winter . In the following weeks , the rest of the settlement slowly took shape . The living and working structures were built on the relatively flat top of Cole 's Hill , and a wooden platform was constructed atop nearby Fort Hill to support the cannon that would defend the settlement . 
 During the winter , the Mayflower colonists suffered greatly from lack of shelter , diseases such as scurvy , and general conditions onboard ship . Many of the able @-@ bodied men were too infirm to work ; 45 out of 102 immigrants died and were buried on Cole 's Hill . Thus , only seven residences ( of a planned nineteen ) and four common houses were constructed during the first winter . By the end of January , enough of the settlement had been built to begin unloading provisions from the Mayflower . In mid @-@ February , after several tense encounters with local Native Americans , the male residents of the settlement organized themselves into military orders ; Myles Standish was designated as the commanding officer . By the end of the month , five cannons had been defensively positioned on Fort Hill . John Carver was elected governor to replace Governor Martin . 
 On March 16 , 1621 , the first formal contact occurred with the Indians ( or Native Americans ) . A Native American named Samoset , originally from Pemaquid Point in modern Maine , walked boldly into the midst of the settlement and proclaimed , " Welcome , Englishmen ! " He had learned some English from interacting with English fishermen and trappers ( most probably from Bristol ) operating in the region . It was during this meeting that the Pilgrims learned how the previous residents of the Native American village of Patuxet had died of an epidemic thought to be smallpox . They also discovered that the supreme leader of the region was a Wampanoag Native American sachem ( chief ) by the name of Massasoit ; and they learned of the existence of Squanto ( also known by his full Massachusett name of Tisquantum ) , a Native American originally from Patuxet . Squanto had spent time in Europe and spoke English quite well . Samoset spent the night in Plymouth and agreed to arrange a meeting with some of Massasoit 's men . 
 Massasoit and Squanto were apprehensive about the Pilgrims . In Massasoit 's first contact with the English , several men of his tribe had been killed in an unprovoked attack by English sailors . He also knew of the Pilgrims ' theft of the corn stores in their landings at Provincetown . Squanto had been abducted in 1614 by English explorer Thomas Hunt and had spent five years in Europe , first as a slave for a group of Spanish monks , then in England . He had returned to New England in 1619 , acting as a guide to explorer Capt. Robert Gorges . Massasoit and his men had massacred the crew of the ship and had taken in Squanto . 
 Samoset returned to Plymouth on March 22 with a delegation from Massasoit that included Squanto ; Massasoit joined them shortly thereafter . After an exchange of gifts , Massasoit and Governor Carver established a formal treaty of peace . This treaty ensured that each people would not bring harm to the other , that Massasoit would send his allies to make peaceful negotiations with Plymouth , and that they would come to each other 's aid in a time of war . 
 On April 5 , 1621 , after being anchored for almost four months in Plymouth Harbor , the Mayflower set sail for England . Nearly half of the original 102 passengers had died during the first winter . As William Bradford wrote , " of these one hundred persons who came over in this first ship together , the greatest half died in the general mortality , and most of them in two or three months ' time " . By November 1621 , only 53 pilgrims were alive to celebrate the harvest feast which modern Americans know as " The First Thanksgiving " . Of the 18 adult women , 13 died the first winter while another died in May . Only four adult women were left alive for the Thanksgiving . 
 Several of the graves on Cole 's Hill were uncovered in 1855 ; their bodies were disinterred and moved to a site near Plymouth Rock . 
 = = = " First Thanksgiving " = = = 
 The autumn celebration in late 1621 that has become known as " The First Thanksgiving " was not known as such to the Pilgrims . The first " Thanksgiving " as the Pilgrims would have called it ( referring to solemn ceremony of praise and thanks to God for a congregation 's good fortune ) did not occur until 1623 , in response to the good news of the arrival of additional colonists and supplies . That event probably occurred in July and consisted of a full day of prayer and worship and probably very little revelry . 
 The event now commemorated in the United States at the end of November each year is more properly described as a harvest festival . The original festival was probably held in early October 1621 and was celebrated by the 53 surviving Pilgrims , along with Massasoit and 90 of his men . Three contemporaneous accounts of the event survive : Of Plymouth Plantation by William Bradford ; <unk> 's Relation probably written by Edward Winslow ; and New England 's Memorial by Plymouth Colony Secretary ( and Bradford 's nephew ) Capt. Nathaniel Morton . The celebration lasted three days and featured a feast that included numerous types of waterfowl , wild turkeys and fish procured by the colonists , and five deer brought by the Native Americans . 
 = = = Early relations with the Native Americans = = = 
 After the departure of Massasoit and his men , Squanto remained in Plymouth to teach the Pilgrims how to survive in New England , for example using dead fish to fertilize the soil . For the first few years of colonial life , the fur trade was the dominant source of income , buying furs from Native Americans and selling to Europeans , beyond subsistence farming . Shortly after the departure of the Mayflower , Governor Carver suddenly died . William Bradford was elected to replace him and went on to lead the colony through much of its formative years . 
 As promised by Massasoit , numerous Native Americans arrived at Plymouth throughout the middle of 1621 with pledges of peace . On July 2 , a party of Pilgrims led by Edward Winslow ( who later became the chief diplomat of the colony ) set out to continue negotiations with the chief . The delegation also included Squanto , who acted as a translator . After traveling for several days , they arrived at Massasoit 's capital , the village of Sowams near Narragansett Bay . After meals and an exchange of gifts , Massasoit agreed to an exclusive trading pact with the English ; thus , the French were no longer welcome , though they were also frequent traders in the area . Squanto remained behind and traveled throughout the area to establish trading relations with several tribes . 
 In late July , a boy named John Billington became lost for some time in the woods around the colony . It was reported that he was found by the Nauset , the same group of Native Americans on Cape Cod from whom the Pilgrims had unwittingly stolen corn seed the prior year upon their first explorations . The English organized a party to return Billington to Plymouth . The Pilgrims agreed to reimburse the Nauset for the corn which they had taken in return for the Billington boy . This negotiation did much to secure further peace with the Native Americans in the area . 
 During their dealings with the <unk> over the release of John Billington , the Pilgrims learned of troubles that Massasoit was experiencing . Massasoit , Squanto , and several other Wampanoags had been captured by Corbitant , sachem of the Narragansett tribe . A party of ten men under the leadership of Myles Standish set out to find and execute Corbitant . While hunting for Corbitant , they learned that Squanto had escaped and Massasoit was back in power . Several Native Americans had been injured by Standish and his men and were offered medical attention in Plymouth . They had failed to capture Corbitant , but the show of force by Standish had garnered respect for the Pilgrims and , as a result , nine of the most powerful sachems in the area signed a treaty in September , including Massasoit and Corbitant , pledging their loyalty to King James . 
 In May 1622 , a vessel named the Sparrow arrived carrying seven men from the Merchant Adventurers whose purpose was to seek out a site for a new settlement in the area . Two ships followed shortly thereafter carrying sixty settlers , all men . They spent July and August in Plymouth before moving north to settle in modern Weymouth , Massachusetts at a settlement which they named Wessagussett . The settlement of Wessagussett was short @-@ lived , but it provided the spark for an event that dramatically changed the political landscape between the local Native American tribes and the English settlers . Reports reached Plymouth of a military threat to Wessagussett , and Myles Standish organized a militia to defend them . However , he found that there had been no attack . He therefore decided on a pre @-@ emptive strike , an event which historian Nathaniel Philbrick calls " Standish 's raid " . He lured two prominent Massachusett military leaders into a house at Wessagussett under the pretense of sharing a meal and making negotiations . Standish and his men then stabbed and killed the two unsuspecting Native Americans . The local sachem named Obtakiest was pursued by Standish and his men but escaped with three English prisoners from Wessagussett , whom he then executed . Within a short time , Wessagussett was disbanded , and the survivors were integrated into the town of Plymouth . 
 Word quickly spread among the Native American tribes of Standish 's attack ; many Native Americans abandoned their villages and fled the area . As noted by Philbrick : " Standish 's raid had irreparably damaged the human ecology of the region .... It was some time before a new equilibrium came to the region . " Edward Winslow reports in his 1624 memoirs Good News from New England that " they forsook their houses , running to and fro like men distracted , living in swamps and other desert places , and so brought manifold diseases amongst themselves , whereof very many are dead " . Lacking the trade in furs provided by the local tribes , the Pilgrims lost their main source of income for paying off their debts to the Merchant Adventurers . Rather than strengthening their position , Standish 's raid had disastrous consequences for the colony , as attested by William Bradford in a letter to the Merchant Adventurers : " [ W ] e had much damaged our trade , for there where we had [ the ] most skins the Indians are run away from their habitations " . The only positive effect of Standish 's raid seemed to be the increased power of the Massasoit @-@ led Wampanoag tribe , the Pilgrims ' closest ally in the region . 
 = = = Growth of Plymouth = = = 
 A second ship arrived in November 1621 named the Fortune , sent by the Merchant Adventurers one year after the Pilgrims first set foot in New England . It arrived with 37 new settlers for Plymouth . However , the ship had arrived unexpectedly and also without many supplies , so the additional settlers put a strain on the resources of the colony . Among the passengers of the Fortune were several additional people of the original Leiden congregation , including William Brewster 's son Jonathan , Edward Winslow 's brother John , and Philip Delano ( the family name was earlier " de la Noye " ) whose descendants include President Franklin Delano Roosevelt . The Fortune also carried a letter from the Merchant Adventurers chastising the colony for failure to return goods with the Mayflower that had been promised in return for their support . The Fortune began its return to England laden with £ 500 worth of goods ( equivalent to £ 78 thousand in 2010 , or $ 119 thousand at PPP ) , more than enough to keep the colonists on schedule for repayment of their debt . However , the Fortune was captured by the French before she could deliver her cargo to England , creating an even larger deficit for the colony . 
 In July 1623 , two more ships arrived : the Anne , under the command of Captain " Master " William Peirce and Master John Bridges ; and the Little James , under the command of Captain Emanuel Altham . These ships carried 96 new settlers , among them <unk> , including William Bradford 's future wife Alice , and William and Mary Brewster 's daughters Patience and Fear . Some of the passengers who arrived on the Anne were either unprepared for frontier life or undesirable additions to the colony and returned to England the next year . According to Gleason Archer , " those who remained were not willing to join the colony under the terms of the agreement with the Merchant Adventurers . They had embarked for America upon an understanding with the Adventurers that they might settle in a community of their own , or at least be free from the bonds by which the Plymouth colonists were enslaved . A letter addressed to the colonists and signed by thirteen of the merchants recited these facts and urged acceptance of the new comers on the specified terms . " The new arrivals were allotted land in the area of the Eel River , known as <unk> Hole , which became <unk> , a mile south of Plymouth Rock . 
 In September 1623 , another ship arrived carrying settlers destined to refound the failed colony at Weymouth , and they stayed temporarily at Plymouth . In March 1624 , a ship arrived bearing a few additional settlers and the first cattle . A 1627 division of cattle lists 156 colonists divided into twelve lots of thirteen colonists each . Another ship arrived in August 1629 , also named the Mayflower , with 35 additional members of the Leiden congregation . Ships arrived throughout the period between 1629 and 1630 carrying new settlers , though the exact number is unknown ; contemporaneous documents claimed that , by January 1630 , the colony had almost 300 people . In 1643 , the colony had an estimated 600 males fit for military service , implying a total population of about 2 @,@ 000 . By 1690 , on the eve of the dissolution of the colony , the estimated total population of Plymouth County , the most populous , was 3 @,@ 055 people . It is estimated that the entire population of the colony at the point of its dissolution was around 7 @,@ 000 . For comparison , it is estimated that more than 20 @,@ 000 settlers had arrived in Massachusetts Bay Colony between 1630 and 1640 ( a period known as the Great Migration ) , and the English population of all New England was estimated to be about 60 @,@ 000 by 1678 . Plymouth was the first colony in the region but , by the time of its annexation , it was much smaller than Massachusetts Bay Colony . 
 = = = Military history = = = 
 = = = = Myles Standish = = = = 
 Myles Standish was the military leader of Plymouth Colony from the beginning . He organized and led the first party to set foot in New England , an exploratory expedition of Cape Cod upon arrival in Provincetown Harbor . He also led the third expedition , during which Standish fired the first recorded shot by the Pilgrim settlers in an event known as the First Encounter . Standish had training in military engineering from the University of Leiden , and it was he who decided the defensive layout of the settlement when they finally arrived at Plymouth . Standish also organized the able @-@ bodied men into military orders in February of the first winter . During the second winter , he helped design and organize the construction of a large palisade wall surrounding the settlement . Standish led two early military raids on Indian villages : the raid to find and punish Corbitant for his attempted coup , and the killing at Wessagussett called " Standish 's raid " . The former had the desired effect of gaining the respect of the local Indians ; the latter only served to frighten and scatter them , resulting in loss of trade and income . 
 = = = = Pequot War = = = = 
 The first major war in New England was the Pequot War of 1637 . The war 's roots go back to 1632 , when a dispute arose between Dutch fur traders and Plymouth officials over control of the Connecticut River Valley near modern Hartford , Connecticut . Representatives from the Dutch East India Company and Plymouth Colony both had deeds which claimed that they had rightfully purchased the land from the Pequots . A sort of land rush occurred as settlers from Massachusetts Bay and Plymouth colonies tried to beat the Dutch in settling the area ; the influx of English settlers also threatened the Pequot . Other confederations in the area sided with the English , including the Narragansetts and Mohegans , who were the traditional enemies of the Pequots . The event that sparked formal hostilities was the capture of a boat and the murder of its captain John Oldham in 1636 , an event blamed on allies of the Pequots . In April 1637 , a raid on a Pequot village by John Endicott led to a retaliatory raid by Pequot warriors on the town of Wethersfield , Connecticut , where some 30 English settlers were killed . This led to a further retaliation , where a raid led by Captain John Underhill and Captain John Mason burned a Pequot village to the ground near modern Mystic , Connecticut , killing 300 Pequots . Plymouth Colony had little to do with the actual fighting in the war . 
 When it appeared that the war would resume , four of the New England colonies ( Massachusetts Bay , Connecticut , New Haven , and Plymouth ) formed a defensive compact known as the United Colonies of New England . Edward Winslow was already known for his diplomatic skills , and he was the chief architect of the United Colonies . His experience in the United Provinces of the Netherlands during the Leiden years was key to organizing the confederation . John Adams later considered the United Colonies to be the prototype for the Articles of Confederation , which was the first attempt at a national government . 
 = = = = King Philip 's War = = = = 
 King Philip was the younger son of Massasoit and the heir of Massasoit 's position as sachem of the Pokanoket and supreme leader of the Wampanoag . ( He was also known as Metacomet and other variations on that name . ) He became sachem upon the sudden death of his older brother <unk> , also known as Alexander , in 1662 . 
 The cause of the war stems from the increasing numbers of English colonists and their demand for land . As more land was purchased from the Native Americans , they were restricted to smaller territories for themselves . Native American leaders such as King Philip resented the loss of land and looked for a means to slow or reverse it . Of specific concern was the founding of the town of Swansea , which was located only a few miles from the Wampanoag capital at Mount Hope . The General Court of Plymouth began using military force to coerce the sale of Wampanoag land to the settlers of the town . 
 The proximate cause of the conflict was the death of a Praying Indian named John Sassamon in 1675 . Sassamon had been an advisor and friend to King Philip ; however , Sassamon 's conversion to Christianity had driven the two apart . Accused in the murder of Sassamon were some of Philip 's most senior lieutenants . A jury of twelve Englishmen and six Praying Indians found the Native Americans guilty of murder and sentenced them to death . To this day , some debate exists whether King Philip 's men actually committed the murder . 
 Philip had already begun war preparations at his home base near Mount Hope where he started raiding English farms and pillaging their property . In response , Governor Josiah Winslow called out the militia , and they organized and began to move on Philip 's position . King Philip 's men attacked unarmed women and children in order to receive a ransom . One such attack resulted in the capture of Mary Rowlandson . The memoirs of her capture provided historians with much information on Native American culture during this time period . 
 The war continued through the rest of 1675 and into the next year . The English were constantly frustrated by the Native Americans ' refusal to meet them in pitched battle . They employed a form of guerilla warfare that confounded the English . Captain Benjamin Church continuously campaigned to enlist the help of friendly Native Americans to help learn how to fight on an even footing with Philip 's warrior bands , but he was constantly rebuffed by the Plymouth leadership who mistrusted all Native Americans , thinking them potential enemies . Eventually , Governor Winslow and Plymouth military commander Major William Bradford ( son of the late Governor William Bradford ) relented and gave Church permission to organize a combined force of English and Native Americans . After securing the alliance of the Sakonnet , he led his combined force in pursuit of Philip , who had thus far avoided any major battles in the war that bears his name . Throughout July 1676 , Church 's band captured hundreds of Native American warriors , often without much of a fight , though Philip eluded him . Church was given permission to grant amnesty to any captured Native Americans who would agree to join the English side , and his force grew immensely . Philip was killed by a Pocasset Indian , and the war soon ended as an overwhelming English victory . 
 Eight percent of the English adult male population is estimated to have died during the war , a rather large percentage by most standards . The impact on the Native Americans was far higher , however . So many were killed , fled , or shipped off as slaves that the entire Native American population of New England fell by sixty to eighty percent . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 In 1686 , the entire region was reorganized under a single government known as the Dominion of New England ; this included the colonies of Plymouth , Rhode Island , Massachusetts Bay , Connecticut , and New Hampshire . In 1688 , New York , West Jersey , and East Jersey were added . The President of the Dominion Edmund Andros was highly unpopular , and the union did not last . The union was dissolved after news of the Glorious Revolution reached Boston in April 1689 , and the citizens of Boston rose up and arrested Andros . When news of these events reached Plymouth , its magistrates reclaimed power . 
 The return of self @-@ rule for Plymouth Colony was short @-@ lived , however . A delegation of New Englanders led by Increase Mather went to England to negotiate a return of the colonial charters that had been nullified during the Dominion years . The situation was particularly problematic for Plymouth Colony , as it had existed without a formal charter since its founding . Plymouth did not get their wish for a formal charter ; instead , a new charter was issued , combining Plymouth Colony , Massachusetts Bay Colony , and other territories . The official date of the proclamation was October 17 , 1691 , ending the existence of Plymouth Colony , though it was not put into force until the arrival of the charter of the Province of Massachusetts Bay on May 14 , 1692 , carried by the new royal governor Sir William Phips . The last official meeting of the Plymouth General Court occurred on June 8 , 1692 . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The most important religious figure in the colony was John Robinson , an original pastor of the Scrooby congregation and religious leader of the separatists throughout the Leiden years . He never actually set foot in New England , but many of his theological pronouncements shaped the nature and character of the Plymouth church . For example , Robinson stated that women and men have different social roles according to a law of nature , though neither was lesser in the eyes of God . Robinson taught that men and women have distinct but complementary roles in church , home , and society as a whole . He referred to women as the " weaker vessel " . In matters of religious understanding , he proclaimed that it was the man 's role to educate and " guide and go before " women . He also said that women should be " subject " to their husbands . Robinson also dictated the proper methods of child rearing — he prescribed a strict upbringing with a strong emphasis on corporal punishment . He believed that a child 's natural inclination towards independence was a manifestation of original sin and should thus be repressed . 
 The Pilgrims themselves were a subset of an English religious movement known as Puritanism , which sought to " purify " the Anglican Church of its " Catholic " trappings . The movement sought to return the church to its original state and to practice Christianity as was done in the times of the Apostles . Following Martin Luther 's and John Calvin 's Reformation , Puritans believed that the Bible was the only true source of religious teaching and that any additions made to Christianity had no place in Christian practice , especially with regard to church traditions , such as clerical vestments or the use of Latin in church services . In particular , they were strongly opposed to the Anglicans ' episcopal form of church government . They believed that the church was a community of Christians who made a covenant with God and with one another . Their congregations had a democratic structure . Ministers , teachers , and lay church elders were elected by and responsible to the entire congregation ( Calvinist Federalism ) . Each congregation was independent of all the others and directly subject to God 's ( or Christ 's ) government ( theocracy ) , hence the name Congregationalism . The Pilgrims distinguished themselves from the Puritans in that they sought to " separate " themselves from the Anglican Church , rather than reform it from within . It was this desire to worship from outside of the Anglican Communion that led them first to the Netherlands and ultimately to New England . 
 Each town in the colony was considered a single church congregation ; in later years , some of the larger towns split into two or three congregations . Church attendance was mandatory for all residents of the colony , while church membership was restricted to those who had converted to the faith . In Plymouth Colony , it seems that a simple profession of faith was all that was required for acceptance . This was a more liberal doctrine than some other New England congregations , such as those of the Massachusetts Bay Colony , where it was common to subject those seeking formal membership to strict and detailed cross @-@ examinations . There was no central governing body for the churches . Each individual congregation was left to determine its own standards of membership , hire its own ministers , and conduct its own business . 
 The church was undoubtedly the most important social institution in the colony . The Bible was the primary religious document of the society , and it also served as the primary legal document . Church attendance was not only mandatory , but membership was socially vital . Education was carried out for almost purely religious purposes . The laws of the colony specifically asked parents to provide for the education of their children , " at least to be able duly to read the Scriptures " and to understand " the main Grounds and Principles of Christian Religion " . It was expected that the male head of the household would be responsible for the religious well @-@ being of all its members , children and servants alike . 
 Most churches used two acts to sanction its members : censure and excommunication . Censure was a formal reprimand for behavior that did not conform with accepted religious and social norms , while excommunication involved full removal from church membership . Many perceived social evils , from fornication to public drunkenness , were dealt with through church discipline rather than through civil punishment . Church sanctions seldom held official recognition outside church membership and seldom resulted in civil or criminal proceedings . Nevertheless , such sanctions were a powerful tool of social control . 
 The Pilgrims practiced infant baptism . The public baptism ceremony was usually performed within six months of birth . 
 Marriage was considered a civil ceremony , rather than a religious one . Such an arrangement may have been a habit that had developed during the Leiden years , as civil marriage was common in the Netherlands . However , the Pilgrims saw this arrangement as biblical , there being no evidence from Scripture that a minister should preside over a wedding . 
 Besides the theology espoused by their religious leaders , the people of Plymouth Colony had a strong belief in the supernatural . Richard Greenham was a Puritan theologian whose works were known to the Plymouth residents , and he counseled extensively against turning to magic or wizardry to solve problems . The Pilgrims saw Satan 's work in nearly every calamity that befell them ; the dark magical arts were very real and present for them . They believed in the presence of malevolent spirits who brought misfortune to people . For example , in 1660 , a court inquest into the drowning death of Jeremiah Burroughs determined that a possessed canoe was to blame . Massachusetts Bay Colony experienced an outbreak of witchcraft scares in the 17th century , but there is little evidence that Plymouth was engulfed in anything similar . Witchcraft was listed as a capital crime in the 1636 codification of the laws by the Plymouth General Court , but there were no actual convictions of witches in Plymouth Colony . The court records only show two formal accusations of witchcraft . The first , of <unk> Holmes in 1661 , never went to trial . The second , of Mary Ingram in 1677 , resulted in trial and acquittal . 
 = = = Marriage and family life = = = 
 Edward Winslow and Susanna White both lost their spouses during the harsh winter of 1620 – 1621 , and the two became the first couple to be married in Plymouth . Governor Bradford presided over the civil ceremony . 
 In Plymouth Colony , " courtships were usually initiated by the young people themselves , but as a relationship progressed toward something more permanent , the parents became more directly involved . " Parents were concerned with the moral and religious qualities of the proposed spouse , as well as the financial means of each party 's family . The first step toward marriage was generally a betrothal or pre @-@ contract , a ceremony carried out before two witnesses in which the couple pledged to wed in due time . Several weeks or months after the betrothal was contracted , the couple 's intentions were published . " A betrothed couple was considered to have a special status , not married but no longer unmarried either . " Sexual contact was prohibited between a betrothed couple , but the penalty for it was one @-@ fourth of what it was for single persons , and records indicate a relatively high number of babies born less than nine months after a wedding ceremony . 
 Marriage was considered the normal state for all adult residents of the colony . Most men first married in their mid @-@ twenties and women around age 20 . Second marriages were not uncommon , and widows and widowers faced social and economic pressures to remarry . On average , most widows and widowers remarried within six months to a year . Most adults who reached marriageable age lived into their sixties , so effectively two @-@ thirds of a person 's life was spent married . 
 Women in Plymouth Colony had more extensive legal and social rights compared to 17th @-@ century European norms . Women were considered equal to men before God from the perspective of the Church . God 's grace was available equally to all professed Christians . Women were , however , expected to take traditionally feminine roles , such as child @-@ rearing and maintaining the household , in Puritan families . 
 Plymouth women enjoyed extensive property and legal rights , unlike in Europe where women had few rights . A wife in Plymouth could not be legally " written out " of her husband 's will and was guaranteed a full third of the family 's property upon his death . Women were parties to contracts in Plymouth , most notably prenuptial agreements . It was common for brides @-@ to @-@ be ( and not , notably , their fathers ) to enter into contractual agreements on the consolidation of property upon marriage . In some cases , especially in second marriages , women were given exclusive right to retain control of their property separately from their husbands . Women were also known to occasionally sit on juries in Plymouth , a remarkable circumstance in seventeenth century legal practice . Historians James and Patricia Scott Deetz cite a 1678 inquest into the death of Anne Batson 's child , where the jury was composed of five women and seven men . 
 Family size in the colony was large by modern American standards , though childbirth was often spaced out , with an average of two years between children . Most families averaged five to six children living under the same roof , though it would not be uncommon for one family to have grown children moving out before the mother had finished giving birth . Maternal mortality rates were fairly high ; one birth in thirty resulted in the death of the mother , resulting in one in five women dying in childbirth . However , " the rate of infant mortality in Plymouth seems to have been relatively low . In the case of a few families for which there are unusually complete records , only about one in five children seems to have died before the age of twenty @-@ one . Furthermore , births in the sample [ of about 90 families ] come for the most part with relatively few ' gaps ' which might indicate a baby who did not survive . All things considered , it appears that the rate of infant and child mortality in Plymouth was no more than 25 per cent " . 
 = = = Childhood , adolescence , and education = = = 
 Children generally remained in the direct care of their mothers until the age of about eight years old , after which time it was not uncommon for the child to be placed in the foster care of another family . There were any number of reasons for a child to be " put @-@ out " in this manner . Some children were placed into households to learn a trade , others to be taught to read and write . It seems that there was a theological reason for fostering children , as with almost every decision in the colony . It was assumed that children 's own parents would love them too much and would not properly discipline them . By placing children in the care of another family , there was little danger of them being spoiled . 
 Adolescence was not a recognized phase of life in Plymouth colony , and there was not a single rite of passage that marked transition from youth to adulthood . Several important transitions occurred at various ages , but none marked a single " coming of age " event . As early as eight years old , children were expected to begin learning their adult roles in life by taking on some of the family work or by being placed in foster homes to learn a trade . Most children experienced religious conversion around the age of eight as well , thus becoming church members . Orphaned children were given the right to choose their own guardians at age 14 . At 16 , males became eligible for military duty and were also considered adults for legal purposes , such as standing trial for crimes . Age 21 was the youngest at which a male could become a freeman , though for practical purposes this occurred some time in a man 's mid @-@ twenties . Twenty @-@ one was the assumed age of inheritance , as well , although the law respected the rights of the deceased to name an earlier age in his will . 
 Actual schools were rare in Plymouth colony . The first true school was not founded until 40 years after the foundation of the colony . The General Court first authorized colony @-@ wide funding for formal public schooling in 1673 , but only the town of Plymouth made use of these funds at that time . By 1683 , though , five additional towns had received this funding . 
 Education of the young was never considered to be the primary domain of schools , even after they had become more common . Most education was carried out by a child 's parents or foster parents . Formal apprenticeships were not the norm in Plymouth ; it was expected that a foster family would teach the children whatever trades they themselves practiced . The church also played a central role in a child 's education . As noted above , the primary purpose of teaching children to read was so that they could read the Bible for themselves . 
 = = Government and laws = = 
 = = = Organization = = = 
 Plymouth Colony did not have a royal charter authorizing it to form a government , yet some means of governance was needed . The Mayflower Compact was the colony 's first governing document , signed by the 41 able @-@ bodied Separatists aboard the Mayflower upon their arrival in Provincetown Harbor on November 21 , 1620 . Formal laws were not codified until 1636 . The colony 's laws were based on a hybrid of English common law and religious law as laid out in the Bible . The colonial authorities were deeply influenced by Calvinist theology , and were convinced that democracy was the form of government mandated by God . 
 The colony offered nearly all adult males potential citizenship . Full citizens , or " freemen " , were accorded full rights and privileges in areas such as voting and holding office . To be considered a freeman , adult males had to be sponsored by an existing freeman and accepted by the General Court . Later restrictions established a one @-@ year waiting period between nominating and granting of freeman status , and also placed religious restrictions on the colony 's citizens , specifically preventing Quakers from becoming freemen . Freeman status was also restricted by age ; the official minimum age was 21 , although in practice most men were elevated to freeman status between the ages of 25 and 40 , averaging somewhere in their early thirties . 
 The colony 's most powerful executive was its Governor , who was originally elected by the freemen , but was later appointed by the General Court in an annual election . The General Court also elected seven " Assistants " to form a cabinet to assist the governor . The Governor and Assistants then appointed " Constables " who served as the chief administrators for the towns , and " Messengers " who were the main civil servants of the colony . They were responsible for publishing announcements , performing land surveys , carrying out executions , and a host of other duties . 
 The General Court was both the chief legislative and judicial body of the colony . It was elected by the freemen from among their own number and met regularly in Plymouth , the capital town of the colony . As part of its judicial duties , it would periodically call a Grand <unk> , which was a grand jury of sorts , elected from the freemen , who would hear complaints and swear out indictments for credible accusations . The General Court , and later lesser town and county courts , would preside over trials of accused criminals and over civil matters , but the ultimate decisions were made by a jury of freemen . 
 The General Court , as the legislative and judicial bodies , and the Governor , as the chief executive of the colony , constituted a political system of division of power . It followed a recommendation in John Calvin 's political theory to set up several institutions which complement and control each other in a system of checks and balances in order to avoid , or at least to minimize , the misuse of political power . In 1625 , the settlers had repaid their debts and thus gained complete possession of the colony . The colony was de facto a republic , since neither an English company nor the King and Parliament exerted any influence — a representative democracy governed on the principles of the Mayflower Compact ( " self @-@ rule " ) . 
 = = = Laws = = = 
 As a legislative body , the General Court could make proclamations of law as needed . These laws were not formally compiled anywhere in the early years of the colony ; they were first organized and published in the 1636 Book of Laws . The book was reissued in 1658 , 1672 , and 1685 . These laws included the levying of " rates " or taxes and the distribution of colony lands . The General Court established townships as a means of providing local government over settlements , but reserved for itself the right to control specific distribution of land to individuals within those towns . When new land was granted to a freeman , it was directed that only the person to whom the land was granted was allowed to settle it . It was forbidden for individual settlers to purchase land from Native Americans without formal permission from the General Court . The government recognized the precarious peace that existed with the Wampanoag , and wished to avoid antagonizing them by buying up all of their land . 
 The laws also set out crimes and their associated punishment . There were several crimes that carried the death penalty : treason , murder , witchcraft , arson , sodomy , rape , bestiality , adultery , and cursing or smiting one 's parents . The actual exercise of the death penalty was fairly rare ; only one sex @-@ related crime resulted in execution , a 1642 incidence of bestiality by Thomas Granger . Edward Bumpus was sentenced to death for " striking and abusing his parents " in 1679 , but his sentence was commuted to a severe whipping by reason of insanity . Perhaps the most notable use of the death penalty was in the execution of the Native Americans convicted of the murder of John Sassamon ; this helped lead to King Philip 's War . Though nominally a capital crime , adultery was usually dealt with by public humiliation only . Convicted adulterers were often forced to wear the letters " A.D. " sewn into their garments , much in the manner of Hester Prynne in Nathaniel Hawthorne 's novel The Scarlet Letter . 
 Several laws dealt with indentured servitude , a legal status whereby a person would work off debts or be given training in exchange for a period of <unk> service . The law required that all indentured servants had to be registered by the Governor or one of the Assistants , and that no period of indenture could be less than six months . Further laws forbade a master from shortening the length of time of service required for his servant , and also confirmed that any indentured servants whose period of service began in England would still be required to complete their service while in Plymouth . 
 = = = Official Seal = = = 
 The seal of the Plymouth Colony was designed in 1629 and is still used by the town of Plymouth . It depicts four figures within a shield bearing St George 's Cross , apparently in Native @-@ American style clothing , each carrying the burning heart symbol of John Calvin . The seal was also used by the County of Plymouth until 1931 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Boundaries = = = 
 Without a clear land patent for the area , the settlers settled without a charter to form a government and , as a result , it was often unclear in the early years what land was under the colony 's jurisdiction . In 1644 , " The Old Colony Line " — which had been surveyed in 1639 — was formally accepted as the boundary between Massachusetts Bay and Plymouth . 
 The situation was more complicated along the border with Rhode Island . Roger Williams settled in the area of Rehoboth in 1636 , near modern Pawtucket . He was forcibly evicted in order to maintain Plymouth 's claim to the area . Williams moved to the west side of the Pawtucket River to found the settlement of Providence , the nucleus for the colony of Rhode Island , which was formally established with the " Providence Plantations Patent " of 1644 . Various settlers from both Rhode Island and Plymouth began to settle along the area , and the exact nature of the western boundary of Plymouth became unclear . The issue was not fully resolved until the 1740s , long after the dissolution of Plymouth Colony itself . Rhode Island had received a patent for the area in 1693 , which had been disputed by Massachusetts Bay Colony . Rhode Island successfully defended the patent , and a royal decree in 1746 transferred the land to Rhode Island along the eastern shore of the Narragansett Bay , including the mainland portion of Newport County and all of modern Bristol County , Rhode Island . The border itself continued to be contested by Massachusetts , first as a colony and later as a state , until as late as 1898 , when the boundary was settled and ratified by both states . 
 = = = Counties and towns = = = 
 For most of its history , the town was the primary administrative unit and political division of the colony . Plymouth Colony was not formally divided into counties until June 2 , 1685 , during the reorganization that led to the formation of the Dominion of New England . Three counties were composed of the following towns . 
 Barnstable County on Cape Cod : 
 Barnstable , the shire town ( county seat ) of the county , first settled in 1639 and incorporated 1650 . 
 Eastham , site of the " First Encounter " , first settled 1644 and incorporated as the town of Nauset in 1646 , name changed to Eastham in 1651 . 
 Falmouth , first settled in 1661 and incorporated as <unk> in 1686 . 
 Rochester , settled 1638 , incorporated 1686 . 
 Sandwich , first settled in 1637 and incorporated in 1639 . 
 Yarmouth , incorporated 1639 . 
 Bristol County along the shores of Buzzards Bay and Narragansett Bay ; part of this county was later ceded to Rhode Island : 
 Taunton , the shire town of the county , incorporated 1639 . 
 Bristol , incorporated 1680 and including the former locations of Sowams and <unk> ( Mount Hope ) , which were Massasoit 's and King Philip 's capitals , respectively . Ceded to Rhode Island in 1746 and is now part of Bristol County , Rhode Island . 
 Dartmouth , incorporated 1664 . Dartmouth was the site of a significant massacre by the Indian forces during King Philip 's War . It was also the location of a surrender of a group of some 160 of Philip 's forces who were later sold into slavery . 
 Freetown , incorporated 1683 , originally known as " Freemen 's Land " by its first settlers . 
 Little Compton , incorporated as Sakonnet in 1682 , ceded to Rhode Island in 1746 and is now part of Newport County , Rhode Island . 
 Rehoboth , first settled 1644 and incorporated 1645 . Nearby to , but distinct from the Rehoboth settlement of Roger Williams , which is now the town of Pawtucket , Rhode Island . 
 Swansea , founded as the township of <unk> in 1667 , incorporated as town of Swansea in 1668 . It was here that the first English casualty occurred in King Philip 's War . 
 Plymouth County , located along the western shores of Cape Cod Bay : 
 Plymouth , the shire town of the county and capital of the colony . This was the original 1620 settlement of the Mayflower Pilgrims , and continued as the largest and most significant settlement in the colony until its dissolution in 1691 . 
 Bridgewater , purchased from Massasoit by Myles Standish , and originally named <unk> New Plantation , it was incorporated as Bridgewater in 1656 . 
 Duxbury , founded by Myles Standish , it was incorporated in 1637 . Other notable residents of Duxbury included John Alden , William Brewster , and Governor Thomas <unk> . 
 Marshfield , settled 1632 , incorporated 1640 . Home to Governor Edward Winslow . Also home to Josiah Winslow , who was governor of the colony during King Philip 's War , and to Peregrine White , the first English child born in New England . 
 Middleborough , incorporated 1669 as <unk> . Named for its location as the halfway point on the journey from Plymouth to Mount Hope , the Wampanoag capital . 
 Scituate , settled 1628 and incorporated 1636 . The town was the site of a major attack by King Philip 's forces in 1676 . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 = = = English = = = 
 The English in Plymouth Colony fit broadly into three categories : Pilgrims , Strangers , and Particulars . The Pilgrims were a Protestant group that closely followed the teachings of John Calvin , like the Puritans who later founded Massachusetts Bay Colony to the north . ( The Puritans wished to reform the Anglican church from within , whereas the Pilgrims saw it as a morally defunct organization , and sought to remove themselves from it . ) The name " Pilgrims " was actually not used by the separatists themselves . William Bradford used the term " pilgrims " to describe the group , but he was using the term generically to define the group as travelers on a religious mission . The Pilgrims referred to themselves as the Saints , First Comers , Ancient Brethren , or Ancient Men . They used such terms to indicate their place as God 's elect , as they subscribed to the Calvinist belief in predestination . " The First Comers " was a term more loosely used in their day to refer to any of the Mayflower passengers . 
 There were also a number of indentured servants among the colonists . Indentured servants were mostly poor children whose families were receiving church relief and " many homeless waifs from the streets of London sent as laborers " . 
 In addition to the Pilgrims , the Mayflower carried non @-@ Pilgrim settlers ( " Strangers " ) . This group included the non @-@ Pilgrim settlers placed on the Mayflower by the Merchant Adventurers , and later settlers who came for other reasons throughout the history of the colony and who did not necessarily adhere to the Pilgrim religious ideals . A third group known as the " Particulars " consisted of later settlers who paid their own " particular " way to America , and thus were not obliged to pay the colony 's debts . 
 The presence of outsiders such as the Strangers and the Particulars was a considerable annoyance to the Pilgrims . As early as 1623 , a conflict broke out between the Pilgrims and the Strangers over the celebration of Christmas , a day of no particular significance to the Pilgrims . Furthermore , a group of Strangers founded the nearby settlement of Wessagussett and the Pilgrims were highly strained , both emotionally and in terms of resources , by their lack of discipline . They looked at the eventual failure of the Wessagussett settlement as Divine Providence against a sinful people . 
 The residents of Plymouth used terms to distinguish between the earliest settlers of the colony and those that came later . The first generation of settlers , generally thought to be those that arrived before 1627 , called themselves the Old Comers or Planters . Later generations of Plymouth residents referred to this group as the Forefathers . 
 A fairly comprehensive demographic study was done by historian John Demos for his seminal 1970 work on the Pilgrims A Little Commonwealth . He reports that the colony 's average household grew from 7 @.@ 8 children per family for first @-@ generation families to 8 @.@ 6 children for second @-@ generation families , and to 9 @.@ 3 for third @-@ generation families . Child mortality also decreased over this time , with 7 @.@ 2 children born to first @-@ generation families living until their 21st birthday . That number increased to 7 @.@ 9 children by the third generation . Life expectancy was higher for men than for women . Of the men who survived until the age of 21 , the average life expectancy was 69 @.@ 2 years . Over 55 percent of these men lived past 70 ; less than 15 percent died before the age of 50 . For women , the numbers are much lower , owing to the difficulties inherent in childbearing . The average life expectancy of women at the age of 21 was only 62 @.@ 4 years . Of these women , less than 45 percent lived past 70 , and about 30 percent died before the age of 50 . 
 During King Philip 's War , Plymouth Colony alone lost eight percent of its adult male population . By the end of the war , one @-@ third of New England 's approximately 100 towns had been burned and abandoned . This represented a sizable demographic effect on the English population of New England . 
 = = = Native Americans = = = 
 The Native Americans in New England were organized into loose tribal confederations , sometimes called " nations " . Among these confederations were the <unk> , the Massachusett , the Narragansett , the <unk> , the Mohegan , and the Wampanoag . Several significant events dramatically altered the demographics of the Native American population in the region . The first was " Standish 's raid " on Wessagussett , which frightened Native American leaders to the extent that many abandoned their settlements , resulting in many deaths through starvation and disease . The second , the Pequot War , resulted in the dissolution of the Pequot tribe and a major shift in the local power structure . The third , King Philip 's War , had the most dramatic effect on local populations , resulting in the death or displacement of as much as 80 % of the total number of Native Americans of southern New England and the enslavement and removal of thousands of Native Americans to the Caribbean and other locales . 
 = = = Black slaves = = = 
 Some of the wealthier families in Plymouth Colony owned black slaves which were considered the property of their owners , unlike indentured servants , and passed on to heirs like any other property . Slave ownership was not widespread and very few families possessed the wealth necessary to own slaves . In 1674 , the inventory of Capt. Thomas Willet of Marshfield includes " 8 Negroes " at a value of £ 200 . Other inventories of the time also valued slaves at £ 24 – 25 each ( equivalent to £ 2 @.@ 81 thousand in 2010 , or $ 4 @,@ 300 at PPP ) , well out of the financial ability of most families . A 1689 census of the town of Bristol shows that , of the 70 families that lived there , only one had a black slave . So few were black slaves in the colony that the General Court never saw fit to pass any laws dealing with them . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The largest source of wealth for Plymouth Colony was the fur trade . The disruption of this trade caused by Myles Standish 's raid at Wessagussett created great hardship for the colonists for many years to come , and was directly cited by William Bradford as a contributing factor to the colonists ' economic difficulties in their early years . The colonists attempted to supplement their income by fishing ; the waters in Cape Cod bay were known to be excellent fisheries . However , they lacked any skill in this area , and it did little to relieve their economic hardship . The colony traded throughout the region , establishing trading posts as far away as Penobscot , Maine . They were also frequent trading partners with the Dutch at New Amsterdam . 
 The economic situation improved with the arrival of cattle in the colony . It is unknown when the first cattle arrived , but the division of land for the grazing of cattle in 1627 represented one of the first moves towards private land ownership in the colony . Cattle became an important source of wealth in the colony ; the average cow could sell for £ 28 in 1638 ( £ 3 @,@ 400 in 2010 , or $ 5 @,@ 200 at PPP ) . However , the flood of immigrants during the Great Migration drove the price of cattle down . The same cows sold at £ 28 in 1638 were valued in 1640 at only £ 5 ( £ 700 @.@ 00 in 2010 , or $ 1 @,@ 060 at PPP ) . Besides cattle , there were also pigs , sheep , and goats raised in the colony . 
 Agriculture also made up an important part of the Plymouth economy . The colonists adopted Native American agricultural practices and crops . They planted maize , squash , pumpkins , beans , and potatoes . Besides the crops themselves , the Pilgrims learned productive farming techniques from the Native Americans , such as proper crop rotation and the use of dead fish to fertilize the soil . In addition to these native crops , the colonists also successfully planted Old World crops such as turnips , carrots , peas , wheat , barley , and oats . 
 Overall , there was very little cash in Plymouth Colony , so most wealth was accumulated in the form of possessions . Trade goods such as furs , fish , and livestock were subject to fluctuations in price and were unreliable repositories of wealth . <unk> goods such as fine wares , clothes , and furnishings represented an important source of economic stability for the residents . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The events surrounding the founding and history of Plymouth Colony have had a lasting effect on the art , traditions , mythology , and politics of the United States of America , despite its short history of fewer than 72 years . 
 = = = Art , literature , and film = = = 
 The earliest artistic depiction of the Pilgrims was actually done before their arrival in America ; Dutch painter Adam <unk> painted a portrait of their departure from <unk> in 1620 . The same scene was repainted by Robert Walter Weir in 1844 , and hangs in the Rotunda of the United States Capitol building . Numerous other paintings have been created memorializing various scenes from the life of Plymouth Colony , including their landing and the " First Thanksgiving " , many of which have been collected by Pilgrim Hall , a museum and historical society founded in 1824 to preserve the history of the Colony . 
 Several contemporaneous accounts of life in Plymouth Colony have become both vital primary historical documents and literary classics . Of Plimoth Plantation by William Bradford and <unk> 's Relation by Bradford , Edward Winslow , and others are both accounts written by Mayflower passengers that provide much of the information which we have today regarding the trans @-@ Atlantic voyage and early years of the settlement . 
 Benjamin Church wrote several accounts of King Philip 's War , including Entertaining Passages Relating to Philip 's War , which remained popular throughout the 18th century . An edition of the work was illustrated by Paul Revere in 1772 . The Sovereignty and Goodness of God provides an account of King Philip 's War from the perspective of Mary Rowlandson , an Englishwoman who was captured and spent some time in the company of Native Americans during the war . Later works , such as " The Courtship of Miles Standish " by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , have provided a romantic and partially fictionalized account of life in Plymouth Colony . 
 There are also numerous films about the Pilgrims , including the several film adaptations of " The Courtship of Miles Standish " ; the 1952 film Plymouth Adventure starring Spencer Tracy ; and Desperate Crossings : The True Story of the Mayflower , a 2006 television documentary produced by the History Channel . 
 In 1970 , the United States Postal Service issued a three hundred and fiftieth year commemorative stamp recognizing the English dissenters first landing at the modern day settlement of Provincetown , Massachusetts in 1620 . 
 = = = Thanksgiving = = = 
 Each year , the United States celebrates a holiday known as Thanksgiving on the fourth Thursday of November . It is a federal holiday and frequently involves a family gathering with a large feast , traditionally featuring a turkey . Civic recognitions of the holiday typically include parades and football games . The holiday is meant to honor the First Thanksgiving , which was a harvest feast held in Plymouth in 1621 , as first recorded in the book New England 's Memorial by Nathaniel Morton , secretary of Plymouth Colony and nephew of Governor William Bradford . 
 The annual Thanksgiving holiday is a fairly recent creation . Throughout the early 19th century , the U.S. government had declared a particular day as a national day of Thanksgiving , but these were one @-@ time declarations meant to celebrate a significant event , such as victory in a battle . The northeastern states began adopting an annual day of Thanksgiving in November shortly after the end of the War of 1812 . Sarah Josepha Hale , editor of Boston 's Ladies ' Magazine , wrote editorials beginning in 1827 which called for the nationwide expansion of this annual day of thanksgiving to commemorate the Pilgrim 's first harvest feast . After nearly 40 years , Abraham Lincoln declared the first modern Thanksgiving to fall on the last Thursday in November in 1863 . Franklin Delano Roosevelt and Congress ultimately moved it to the fourth Thursday in November . After some sparring as to the date , the holiday was recognized by Congress as an official federal holiday in 1941 . 
 Some of the modern traditions which have developed alongside the Thanksgiving holiday are the National Football League 's Thanksgiving Day games and the annual Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade in New York City . 
 = = = Plymouth Rock = = = 
 One of the enduring symbols of the landing of the Pilgrims is Plymouth Rock , a large granodiorite boulder that was near their landing site at Plymouth . However , none of the contemporary accounts of the actual landing makes any mention that the Rock was the specific place of landing . The Pilgrims chose the site for their landing , not for the rock , but for a small brook nearby that was a source of fresh water and fish . 
 The first identification of Plymouth Rock as the actual landing site was in 1741 by 90 @-@ year @-@ old Thomas Faunce , whose father had arrived in Plymouth in 1623 , three years after the supposed event . The rock was later covered by a solid @-@ fill pier . In 1774 , an attempt was made to excavate the rock , but it broke in two . The severed piece was placed in the Town Square at the center of Plymouth . In 1880 , the intact half of the rock was excavated from the pier , and the broken piece was reattached to it . Over the years , souvenir hunters have removed chunks from the rock , but the remains are now protected as part of the complex of living museums . These include the Mayflower II , a recreation of the original ship ; Plimoth Plantation , a historical recreation of the original 1620 settlement ; and the Wampanoag Homesite , which recreates a 17th @-@ century Indian village . 
 = = = Political legacy = = = 
 The democratic setup of Plymouth Colony had strong influences on the shaping of democracy in both England and America . William Bradford 's History of Plimoth Plantation was widely read in the motherland . It influenced the political thought of Presbyterian politician and poet John Milton , assistant to Oliver Cromwell , and philosopher John Locke . For example , Locke referred to the Mayflower Compact in his Letters Concerning Toleration . In America , Plymouth Colony initiated a democratic tradition that was soon followed by Massachusetts Bay Colony ( 1628 ) , Connecticut ( 1636 ) , Rhode Island ( 1636 ) , New Jersey , and Pennsylvania ( 1681 ) . In the latter four colonies , founded by Thomas Hooker , Roger Williams , and William Penn , respectively , religious freedom was added to democratic constitutions . These territories became safe havens for persecuted religious minorities . There were strong links between 17th @-@ century Puritanism and the political ideas of the 18th century . On the one hand , there was the congregational democracy practiced now by all Protestant churches , including to a large extent the Anglicans . On the other hand , most of the political concepts of the generation that carried out the Revolution were taken over from the radical Whig party in England ( <unk> ) , which fed on the liberal political theories of Milton , Locke , and other writers . As children the Revolutionaries had experienced the Great Awakening ( c . 1740 ) . In the words of historian Robert <unk> : " The Awakening recalled a generation to the standards of reformed Protestantism , which had prevailed at the time of the founding of America . [ ... ] Radical Whig perceptions of politics attracted widespread support in America because they revived the traditional concerns of a Protestant culture that had always verged on Puritanism . That moral decay threatened free government could not come as a surprise to a people whose fathers had fled England to escape sin . The importance of virtue , frugality , industry , and calling was at the heart of their moral code . [ ... ] Radical <unk> of the eighteenth century convinced Americans because it had been pervasive in their culture since the seventeenth . " 
 = = = The Mayflower Society = = = 
 The General Society of Mayflower Descendants , or The Mayflower Society , is a genealogical organization of individuals who have documented their descents from one or more of the 102 passengers who arrived on the Mayflower in 1620 . The Society , founded at Plymouth in 1897 , claims that tens of millions of Americans descend from these passengers , and it offers research services to people seeking to document such descents . 
 = = = Locations related to Plymouth Colony = = = 
 Alexander Standish House 
 Burial Hill , site of the first fort at New Plymouth , originally known as Fort Hill 
 Cole 's Hill , contained the original cemetery at New Plymouth , later moved to Burial Hill 
 First Parish Church in Plymouth , the modern descendant of the Scrooby congregation that founded Plymouth Colony 
 First Parish Church ( Duxbury , Massachusetts ) , another early congregation founded by the Pilgrims 
 Harlow Old Fort House , a private house built in 1677 in Plymouth , partially out of timbers of the original fort built in 1621 
 Jabez Howland House 
 Jenney Grist Mill 
 John and Priscilla Alden Family Sites 
 Leyden Street , claimed to be the first street in Plymouth Colony 
 Myles Standish Burial Ground contains remains of several important Pilgrims , including Myles Standish 
 Plymouth Village Historic District 
 Town Brook Historic and Archeological District 
 = = = Monuments and other commemorations = = = 
 Myles Standish Monument State Reservation 
 National Monument to the Forefathers 
 Pilgrim Hall Museum 
 Pilgrim Monument 
 Plimoth Plantation 
 Plymouth Antiquarian Society 
 Plymouth Rock 
 = Backbreaker ( video game ) = 
 Backbreaker is an American football video game , developed by British technology developer NaturalMotion , and released on 1 June 2010 in North America and on 25 June 2010 in Europe . One of its highlights is the use of Euphoria , a game animation engine that determines animations dynamically rather than depending on canned animations . Backbreaker does not use teams from the National Football League ( NFL ) because Electronic Arts has an exclusive license to produce NFL games in its Madden series . The game relies on an extensive logo editor and team builder that was called " one of its silver linings " . NaturalMotion announced Backbreaker in August 2007 , with a targeted release date of late 2008 . The game ended up being delayed until mid @-@ 2010 . 
 Backbreaker received mixed reviews . While it was praised for the Euphoria animation system , realistic physical gameplay , and the logo editor , it was also criticized for its weak online play , poor passing game , and lack of depth in single @-@ player modes . After the reviews , the passing game was adjusted by the <unk> patch . The Xbox 360 version of the game received an overall rating of 54 % from review aggregator Metacritic , while the PlayStation 3 version received a 58 % . The iOS and Android version was given a rating of 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars by Touch Arcade . A patch released on August 6 , 2010 , alleviated many of the issues critics had with the game upon release and included upgrades such as : improved AI , new play books and an enhanced replay feature . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Backbreaker is a simulation @-@ style American football game , which allows the player to take control of a team of football players and compete against the CPU or another player in a variety of game modes . The game features 56 built @-@ in teams plus three unlockable teams , and also allows the player to create 32 additional ones for a total of 91 possible teams . It lacks any licensing from the National Football League , due to the fact that they were not able to negotiate a licensing agreement with the NFL or NFLPA Because of this , the developers emphasized the game 's customization tools . 
 Backbreaker relies on the Euphoria engine , a real time animation engine developed by NaturalMotion that has been used in games such as Grand Theft Auto IV , Star Wars : The Force Unleashed , and Red Dead Redemption . This allows animations for tackles and blocking to be created on the spot instead of using a limited set of canned animations . Due to this , developers pushed to advertise that " no two tackles are the same " in an attempt to draw players to what they called a more physically realistic football game than its competitors . The physics system was rated well by the reviewers , who commented that the integration of realistic physics created a very lifelike interaction between the players on the field . 
 Along with the Euphoria engine , Backbreaker also features a create @-@ a @-@ team tool and logo creator similar to the editor found in Forza Motorsport 2 . Players can create their own team or modify an existing team . Players are allowed to take their custom teams online , but are restricted from using the names of existing NFL teams and players . 
 = = = Singleplayer = = = 
 Backbreaker features several game modes , some that players can play quickly and others that may be played over a long period of time . In " Training Camp " , new players can learn the game 's controls and experienced players can practice certain skills and situations . Different tutorials for offense , defense , and special teams are included in the Training Camp . This is helpful to players , as the controls in Backbreaker are different than most current football games . In " Exhibition Mode " , a player can play a single game with custom rules against either another local player or the CPU . Players can use any of the teams in the game , including ones that they have created . 
 Another game mode included in Backbreaker is the mini @-@ game " Tackle Alley " . In this game , the player controls a running back who starts in their own endzone . The player then attempts to score a touchdown by running up the field and evading a wave of defenders to score points . Special moves such as <unk> and spins create a " combo chain " , which multiply the player 's score by an amount depending on the length of the combo chain . After a player scores , they advance to the next wave of defenders and must repeat the process . If a player is tackled before reaching the endzone , they must start over the wave and lose a " life " . The game ends when all of the player 's lives are depleted or the player passes all 100 of the waves , which become harder as the mode progresses . According to NaturalMotion , only 0 @.@ 88 percent of all Backbreaker players have managed to clear all 100 levels of " Tackle Alley " . Game producer Rob Donald states that the mini @-@ game was meant to add an arcade feel to the game . " It was meant to be a complete diversion from the more realistic main game , a complete arcade challenge ... Everything about it was meant to replicate the pressure and the frustration of playing a cabinet that you know is stacked against you , " said Donald in an interview . 
 Backbreaker also features two different franchise @-@ style modes . The first , " Season Mode " , allows a player to create a custom league of either 8 , 16 , or 32 teams and insert custom @-@ made and / or default teams into it . Season mode features a scouting and drafting system , but lacks trades and free agent signings . Players can play for an unlimited number of seasons , building a team through scouting college players and drafting them onto their team . The other franchise mode included is titled " Road to Backbreaker " . This mode allows the player to take a custom or default team into a league structured along the lines of the English Football League including promotion and relegation . The player 's team begins with a low rating in an 8 @-@ team league . By winning games , the player earns credits , which can be used to purchase the contracts of free agents . By finishing high in the 8 @-@ team league , the player 's team advances to a 16 @-@ team league and eventually a 32 @-@ team league . The player improves their team by periodically signing free agents , as the competition is tougher in each league . The player wins the mode after winning a playoff tournament in the 32 @-@ team league . Afterwards , they may continue if they wish . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 Several game modes in Backbreaker can also be played as local or online multi @-@ player over the Internet . In Exhibition mode , a second player can join the game and can play either against or with the first player . Two players may also compete against one another in Tackle Alley for the most points . Games against other players are played in splitscreen format as opposed to the usual single @-@ camera view of other football game series . This is due to Backbreaker 's " on the field " camera angle , set close to the players , making it difficult for a single @-@ camera two @-@ player setup . Although this setup differs from most modern football games , the developers believe it would add realism to the player 's experience . " One of the benefits of having this down @-@ on @-@ the @-@ field camera view is that it really makes playing as the quarterback like the passing mechanic feel really natural , " said producer Rob Donald . 
 Players are also able to play games against other players online through the PlayStation Network and Xbox Live hosting services . Online , players are able play Quick Games and Tackle Alley , but two players can not play on the same team . Players are allowed to use their custom created teams online ; others are not able to see their created logos unless they are on each other 's friends lists . Otherwise , a generic " Home Team " or " Away Team " logo is displayed in place of the helmet , midfield , and endzone logos . In addition , an online leaderboard system for ranking players is included . 
 = = Development = = 
 NaturalMotion officially announced Backbreaker on 22 August 2007 with the release of a short video trailer showcasing some of the aspects of the Euphoria engine . Along with this , a press release from NaturalMotion CEO Torsten <unk> stated " By utilizing our motion synthesis engine , Euphoria , players will never make the same tackle twice , giving them an intensely unique experience every time they play the game . " The targeted release date for the game was late 2008 , according to the aforementioned press release . In mid @-@ 2008 , still without any release date planned , another trailer was released for the game . This trailer revealed the Tackle Alley mini @-@ game mode . At the 2009 Electronic Entertainment Expo , Backbreaker was showcased to the media for the first time . Along with this , a third trailer was released showing actual gameplay footage from an Exhibition game . Again , no release date was revealed . 
 Backbreaker was developed by the British NaturalMotion Games , Ltd. and published by 505 Games . The game 's development heads were Todd Gibbs and Dave Proctor , and the lead producers were Rob Donald and Matt Sherman . Development began in Summer 2007 , and ended in June 2010 . A game demo was released on 21 May 2010 for Xbox LIVE gold players and 28 May 2010 for silver players . When announcing the release date for the PlayStation 3 demo , the developers only commented that it would be released " soon " . However , communication errors with Sony 's PlayStation Network caused the demo to be delayed until 15 June 2010 , two weeks after the North American release . 
 NaturalMotion also released a version of <unk> for iOS and Android mobile platforms . This version of the game , called Backbreaker Football : Tackle Alley , featured the Tackle Alley minigame found in the full game , sans the Euphoria Engine and with toned @-@ down graphics . The iOS version was released on 29 September 2009 , while a version for the iPad named <unk> HD was released on 4 February 2010 . The Android version of the game was released on 5 May 2010 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Backbreaker received mixed reviews from critics . While Backbreaker was praised for its realistic physics , it was also criticized for weak online play , lack of single @-@ player gameplay depth , and poor passing play . Review aggregator Metacritic rated the game at 54 % for the Xbox 360 version and 58 % for the PlayStation 3 version , calling it " a fast @-@ paced , gritty gameplay experience that 's more Burnout than Madden , " . Backbreaker also received an aggregate score of 57 @.@ 31 % on GameRankings , based upon 21 different media reviews . The game 's Euphoria animation system was well liked by reviewers . PlayStation LifeStyle 's Joseph Peterson commented that " Realism is a major plus in Backbreaker . Running with the ball feels lifelike and better than any other football game on the market ... The fact that the game really tries to make you feel what the player is feeling is probably the game ’ s crowning achievement ... literally every tackle is completely different , " while Jay Acevedo of GameFocus added " ... while the game does not scream perfection , it delivers the promise of a realistic and exhilarating experience , " in his review . 
 Although developers billed a realistic atmosphere , reviewers criticized that aspect of the game . " I understand the emphasis for this game is on the gameplay . However , a little more effort could have been made with the visuals and particularly in the audio department . Crowds will applaud your great plays and touchdowns , but the essence of a football game revolves around atmosphere . Here , it ’ s completely lacking , " said Acevedo in his review . The game was also criticized for its lack of play @-@ by @-@ play and poor audio . " There 's no witty banter between a play @-@ by @-@ play announcer and color commentator ( although some would argue that Madden 's audio presentation 's been seriously lacking the past few iterations ) , there 's no stadium music aside from “ Boom ” by P.O.D. being played during kickoffs ( it gets old pretty fast ) , and the stadium crowds are basically an afterthought , " added Doug <unk> of <unk> . After the patch , the song only comes up for the first kick @-@ off and the kick @-@ off of the second half . 
 Backbreaker 's close " on the field " camera was also panned by critics . " Because the camera places you right on the field , all of the hits carry even more weight than if you were zoomed farther back , but the positive aspects are overshadowed by an inability to see the entire field , " said GameSpot 's review of Backbreaker , while GameZone added that " Backbreaker uses a tight third @-@ person view that brings the player closer to the action . The results are visually interesting , but the mechanics are mismanaged . While the game strives to be as simple and as straightforward as possible , the camera often gets in the way . " 
 The game was nominated for Best New IP at the 2010 Develop Awards , but lost to Quantic Dream 's Heavy Rain . 
 Backbreaker 's mobile editions fared well , selling over 1 @.@ 5 million copies of their application . The iOS and Android versions also received positive reviews from critics . " Backbreaker is a fun mini game with cool graphics and animations , " said Eli Hodapp in his review of the application . " There isn 't anything overly technical about the gameplay , but it has a strangely compelling aspect to it , especially as you 're high stepping to the end zone , " he added . 
 = Australia = 
 Australia ( / <unk> / , / <unk> / , / <unk> / ) , officially the Commonwealth of Australia , is a country comprising the mainland of the Australian continent , the island of Tasmania , and numerous smaller islands . It is the world 's sixth @-@ largest country by total area . Neighbouring countries include Papua New Guinea , Indonesia and East Timor to the north ; the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu to the north @-@ east ; and New Zealand to the south @-@ east . 
 For about 50 @,@ 000 years before the first British settlement in the late 18th century , Australia was inhabited by indigenous Australians , who spoke languages grouped into roughly 250 language groups . After the European discovery of the continent by Dutch explorers in 1606 , Australia 's eastern half was claimed by Great Britain in 1770 and initially settled through penal transportation to the colony of New South Wales from 26 January 1788 . The population grew steadily in subsequent decades ; the continent was explored and an additional five self @-@ governing crown colonies were established . On 1 January 1901 , the six colonies federated , forming the Commonwealth of Australia . Since federation , Australia has maintained a stable liberal democratic political system that functions as a federal parliamentary constitutional monarchy comprising six states and several territories . The population of 24 million is highly urbanised and heavily concentrated in the eastern states and on the coast . 
 Australia is a developed country and one of the wealthiest in the world , with the world 's 12th @-@ largest economy . In 2014 Australia had the world 's fifth @-@ highest per capita income . Australia 's military expenditure is the world 's 13th @-@ largest . With the second @-@ highest human development index globally , Australia ranks highly in many international comparisons of national performance , such as quality of life , health , education , economic freedom , and the protection of civil liberties and political rights . Australia is a member of the United Nations , G20 , Commonwealth of Nations , ANZUS , Organisation for Economic Co @-@ operation and Development ( OECD ) , World Trade Organization , Asia @-@ Pacific Economic Cooperation , and the Pacific Islands Forum . 
 = = Name = = 
 The name Australia ( pronounced [ <unk> , <unk> ] in Australian English ) is derived from the Latin Terra Australis ( " southern land " ) a name used for putative lands in the southern hemisphere since ancient times . The earliest recorded use of the word Australia in English was in 1625 in " A note of Australia del Espíritu Santo , written by Sir Richard Hakluyt " , published by Samuel Purchas in <unk> Posthumus , a corruption of the original Spanish name " <unk> del Espíritu Santo " ( Southern Land of the Holy Spirit ) for an island in Vanuatu . The Dutch adjectival form <unk> was used in a Dutch book in Batavia ( Jakarta ) in 1638 , to refer to the newly discovered lands to the south . The first time that the name Australia appears to have been officially used was in a despatch to Lord Bathurst of 4 April 1817 in which Governor Lachlan Macquarie acknowledges the receipt of Matthew Flinders ' charts of Australia . On 12 December 1817 , Macquarie recommended to the Colonial Office that it be formally adopted . In 1824 , the Admiralty agreed that the continent should be known officially as Australia . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prehistory = = = 
 Human habitation of the Australian continent is estimated to have begun between 42 @,@ 000 and 48 @,@ 000 years ago , possibly with the migration of people by land bridges and short sea @-@ crossings from what is now Southeast Asia . These first inhabitants may have been ancestors of modern Indigenous Australians . At the time of European settlement in the late 18th century , most Indigenous Australians were hunter @-@ gatherers , with a complex oral culture and spiritual values based on reverence for the land and a belief in the Dreamtime . The Torres Strait Islanders , ethnically Melanesian , were originally horticulturists and hunter @-@ gatherers . The northern coasts and waters of Australia were visited sporadically by fishermen from Maritime Southeast Asia . 
 = = = European arrival = = = 
 The first recorded European sighting of the Australian mainland , and the first recorded European landfall on the Australian continent , are attributed to the Dutch navigator Willem Janszoon . He sighted the coast of Cape York Peninsula in early 1606 , and made landfall on 26 February at the Pennefather River near the modern town of Weipa on Cape York . The Dutch charted the whole of the western and northern coastlines and named the island continent " New Holland " during the 17th century , but made no attempt at settlement . William Dampier , an English explorer and privateer , landed on the north @-@ west coast of New Holland in 1688 and again in 1699 on a return trip . In 1770 , James Cook sailed along and mapped the east coast , which he named New South Wales and claimed for Great Britain . With the loss of its American colonies in 1783 , the British Government sent a fleet of ships , the " First Fleet " , under the command of Captain Arthur Phillip , to establish a new penal colony in New South Wales . A camp was set up and the flag raised at Sydney Cove , Port Jackson , on 26 January 1788 , a date which became Australia 's national day , Australia Day , although the British Crown Colony of New South Wales was not formally promulgated until 7 February 1788 . The first settlement led to the foundation of Sydney , and the exploration and settlement of other regions . 
 A British settlement was established in Van Diemen 's Land , now known as Tasmania , in 1803 , and it became a separate colony in 1825 . The United Kingdom formally claimed the western part of Western Australia ( the Swan River Colony ) in 1828 . Separate colonies were carved from parts of New South Wales : South Australia in 1836 , Victoria in 1851 , and Queensland in 1859 . The Northern Territory was founded in 1911 when it was excised from South Australia . South Australia was founded as a " free province " — it was never a penal colony . Victoria and Western Australia were also founded " free " , but later accepted transported convicts . A campaign by the settlers of New South Wales led to the end of convict transportation to that colony ; the last convict ship arrived in 1848 . 
 The indigenous population , estimated to have been between 750 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in 1788 , declined for 150 years following settlement , mainly due to infectious disease . Thousands more died as a result of frontier conflict with settlers . A government policy of " assimilation " beginning with the Aboriginal Protection Act 1869 resulted in the removal of many Aboriginal children from their families and communities — often referred to as the Stolen Generations — a practice which may also have contributed to the decline in the indigenous population . The Federal government gained the power to make laws with respect to Aborigines following the 1967 referendum . Traditional ownership of land — aboriginal title — was not recognised until 1992 , when the High Court case Mabo v Queensland ( No 2 ) overturned the legal doctrine that Australia had been terra nullius ( " land belonging to no one " ) before the European occupation . 
 = = = Colonial expansion = = = 
 A gold rush began in Australia in the early 1850s and the Eureka Rebellion against mining licence fees in 1854 was an early expression of civil disobedience . Between 1855 and 1890 , the six colonies individually gained responsible government , managing most of their own affairs while remaining part of the British Empire . The Colonial Office in London retained control of some matters , notably foreign affairs , defence , and international shipping . 
 = = = Nationhood = = = 
 On 1 January 1901 , federation of the colonies was achieved after a decade of planning , consultation and voting . This established the Commonwealth of Australia as a dominion of the British Empire . The Federal Capital Territory ( later renamed the Australian Capital Territory ) was formed in 1911 as the location for the future federal capital of Canberra . Melbourne was the temporary seat of government from 1901 to 1927 while Canberra was being constructed . The Northern Territory was transferred from the control of the South Australian government to the federal parliament in 1911 . In 1914 , Australia joined Britain in fighting World War I , with support from both the outgoing Commonwealth Liberal Party and the incoming Australian Labor Party . Australians took part in many of the major battles fought on the Western Front . Of about 416 @,@ 000 who served , about 60 @,@ 000 were killed and another 152 @,@ 000 were wounded . Many Australians regard the defeat of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps ( ANZACs ) at Gallipoli as the birth of the nation — its first major military action . The Kokoda Track campaign is regarded by many as an analogous nation @-@ defining event during World War II . 
 Britain 's Statute of Westminster 1931 formally ended most of the constitutional links between Australia and the UK . Australia adopted it in 1942 , but it was backdated to 1939 to confirm the validity of legislation passed by the Australian Parliament during World War II . The shock of the United Kingdom 's defeat in Asia in 1942 and the threat of Japanese invasion caused Australia to turn to the United States as a new ally and protector . Since 1951 , Australia has been a formal military ally of the US , under the ANZUS treaty . After World War II Australia encouraged immigration from Europe . Since the 1970s and following the abolition of the White Australia policy , immigration from Asia and elsewhere was also promoted . As a result , Australia 's demography , culture , and self @-@ image were transformed . The final constitutional ties between Australia and the UK were severed with the passing of the Australia Act 1986 , ending any British role in the government of the Australian States , and closing the option of judicial appeals to the Privy Council in London . In a 1999 referendum , 55 % of voters and a majority in every state rejected a proposal to become a republic with a president appointed by a two @-@ thirds vote in both Houses of the Australian Parliament . Since the election of the Whitlam Government in 1972 , there has been an increasing focus in foreign policy on ties with other Pacific Rim nations , while maintaining close ties with Australia 's traditional allies and trading partners . 
 = = Government = = 
 Australia is a federal parliamentary constitutional monarchy with Elizabeth II at its apex as the Queen of Australia , a role that is distinct from her position as monarch of the other Commonwealth realms . The Queen is represented in Australia by the Governor @-@ General at the federal level and by the Governors at the state level , who by convention act on the advice of her ministers . The most notable exercise to date of the Governor @-@ General 's reserve powers outside the Prime Minister 's request was the dismissal of the Whitlam Government in the constitutional crisis of 1975 . 
 The federal government is separated into three branches : 
 The legislature : the bicameral Parliament , defined in section 1 of the constitution as comprising the Queen ( represented by the Governor @-@ General ) , the Senate , and the House of Representatives ; 
 The executive : the Federal Executive Council , which in practice gives legal effect to the decisions of the cabinet , comprising the prime minister and ministers of state who advise the Governor @-@ General ; 
 The judiciary : the High Court of Australia and other federal courts , whose judges are appointed by the Governor @-@ General on advice of the Federal Executive Council . 
 In the Senate ( the upper house ) , there are 76 senators : twelve each from the states and two each from the mainland territories ( the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory ) . The House of Representatives ( the lower house ) has 150 members elected from single @-@ member electoral divisions , commonly known as " electorates " or " seats " , allocated to states on the basis of population , with each original state guaranteed a minimum of five seats . Elections for both chambers are normally held every three years simultaneously ; senators have overlapping six @-@ year terms except for those from the territories , whose terms are not fixed but are tied to the electoral cycle for the lower house ; thus only 40 of the 76 places in the Senate are put to each election unless the cycle is interrupted by a double dissolution . 
 Australia 's electoral system uses preferential voting for all lower house elections with the exception of Tasmania and the ACT which , along with the Senate and most state upper houses , combine it with proportional representation in a system known as the single transferable vote . Voting is compulsory for all enrolled citizens 18 years and over in every jurisdiction , as is enrolment ( with the exception of South Australia ) . The party with majority support in the House of Representatives forms the government and its leader becomes Prime Minister . In cases where no party has majority support , the Governor @-@ General has the constitutional power to appoint the Prime Minister and , if necessary , dismiss one that has lost the confidence of Parliament . 
 There are two major political groups that usually form government , federally and in the states : the Australian Labor Party and the Coalition which is a formal grouping of the Liberal Party and its minor partner , the National Party . Within Australian political culture , the Coalition is considered centre @-@ right and the Labor Party is considered centre @-@ left . Independent members and several minor parties have achieved representation in Australian parliaments , mostly in upper houses . 
 The most recent federal election was held on 7 September 2013 and resulted in a majority government for the Coalition . Liberal Party leader Tony Abbott was sworn into office as Prime Minister by the Governor @-@ General of Australia on 18 September . In September 2015 , Malcolm Turnbull successfully challenged Abbott for leadership of the Coalition , and was sworn in as the 29th Prime Minister of Australia . 
 = = States and territories = = 
 Australia has six states — New South Wales ( NSW ) , Queensland ( <unk> ) , South Australia ( SA ) , Tasmania ( TAS ) , Victoria ( VIC ) and Western Australia ( WA ) — and two major mainland territories — the Australian Capital Territory ( ACT ) and the Northern Territory ( NT ) . In most respects these two territories function as states , but the Commonwealth Parliament can override any legislation of their parliaments . By contrast , federal legislation overrides state legislation only in areas that are set out in Section 51 of the Australian Constitution ; state parliaments retain all residual legislative powers , including those over schools , state police , the state judiciary , roads , public transport and local government , since these do not fall under the provisions listed in Section 51 . 
 Each state and major mainland territory has its own parliament — unicameral in the Northern Territory , the ACT and Queensland , and bicameral in the other states . The states are sovereign entities , although subject to certain powers of the Commonwealth as defined by the Constitution . The lower houses are known as the Legislative Assembly ( the House of Assembly in South Australia and Tasmania ) ; the upper houses are known as the Legislative Council . The head of the government in each state is the Premier and in each territory the Chief Minister . The Queen is represented in each state by a Governor ; and in the Northern Territory , the Administrator . In the Commonwealth , the Queen 's representative is the Governor @-@ General . 
 The federal parliament directly administers the following territories : 
 Ashmore and Cartier Islands 
 Australian Antarctic Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos ( Keeling ) Islands 
 Coral Sea Islands 
 Heard Island and McDonald Islands 
 Jervis Bay Territory , a naval base and sea port for the national capital in land that was formerly part of New South Wales 
 The external territory of Norfolk Island previously exercised considerable autonomy under the Norfolk Island Act 1979 through its own legislative assembly and an Administrator to represent the Queen . In 2015 , the Commonwealth Parliament abolished self @-@ government , integrating Norfolk Island into the Australian tax and welfare systems and replacing its legislative assembly with a council . 
 Macquarie Island is administered by Tasmania , and Lord Howe Island by New South Wales . 
 = = Foreign relations and military = = 
 Over recent decades , Australia 's foreign relations have been driven by a close association with the United States through the ANZUS pact , and by a desire to develop relationships with Asia and the Pacific , particularly through ASEAN and the Pacific Islands Forum . In 2005 Australia secured an inaugural seat at the East Asia Summit following its accession to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia , and in 2011 attended the Sixth East Asia Summit in Indonesia . Australia is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations , in which the Commonwealth Heads of Government meetings provide the main forum for co @-@ operation . 
 Australia has pursued the cause of international trade liberalisation . It led the formation of the Cairns Group and Asia @-@ Pacific Economic Cooperation . Australia is a member of the Organisation for Economic Co @-@ operation and Development and the World Trade Organization , and has pursued several major bilateral free trade agreements , most recently the Australia – United States Free Trade Agreement and Closer Economic Relations with New Zealand , with another free trade agreement being negotiated with China — the Australia – China Free Trade Agreement — and Japan , South Korea in 2011 , Australia – Chile Free Trade Agreement , and as of November 2015 has put the Trans @-@ Pacific Partnership before parliament for ratification . 
 Along with New Zealand , the United Kingdom , Malaysia and Singapore , Australia is party to the Five Power Defence Arrangements , a regional defence agreement . A founding member country of the United Nations , Australia is strongly committed to multilateralism and maintains an international aid program under which some 60 countries receive assistance . The 2005 – 06 budget provides A $ 2 @.@ 5 billion for development assistance . Australia ranks fifteenth overall in the Center for Global Development 's 2012 Commitment to Development Index . 
 Australia 's armed forces — the Australian Defence Force ( ADF ) — comprise the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) , the Australian Army and the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) , in total numbering 81 @,@ 214 personnel ( including 57 @,@ 982 regulars and 23 @,@ 232 reservists ) as of November 2015 . The titular role of Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief is vested in the Governor @-@ General , who appoints a Chief of the Defence Force from one of the armed services on the advice of the government . Day @-@ to @-@ day force operations are under the command of the Chief , while broader administration and the formulation of defence policy is undertaken by the Minister and Department of Defence . 
 In the 2015 – 16 budget , defence spending was A $ 31 @.@ 9 billion or 1 @.@ 92 % of GDP , representing the 13th largest defence budget . Australia has been involved in UN and regional peacekeeping , disaster relief and armed conflict , including the 2003 invasion of Iraq ; it currently has deployed about 2 @,@ 241 personnel in varying capacities to 12 international operations in areas including Iraq and Afghanistan . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Australia 's landmass of 7 @,@ 617 @,@ 930 square kilometres ( 2 @,@ 941 @,@ 300 sq mi ) is on the Indo @-@ Australian Plate . Surrounded by the Indian and Pacific oceans , it is separated from Asia by the Arafura and Timor seas , with the Coral Sea lying off the Queensland coast , and the Tasman Sea lying between Australia and New Zealand . The world 's smallest continent and sixth largest country by total area , Australia — owing to its size and isolation — is often dubbed the " island continent " , and is sometimes considered the world 's largest island . Australia has 34 @,@ 218 kilometres ( 21 @,@ 262 mi ) of coastline ( excluding all offshore islands ) , and claims an extensive Exclusive Economic Zone of 8 @,@ 148 @,@ 250 square kilometres ( 3 @,@ 146 @,@ 060 sq mi ) . This exclusive economic zone does not include the Australian Antarctic Territory . Apart from Macquarie Island , Australia lies between latitudes 9 ° and 44 ° S , and longitudes 112 ° and 154 ° E. 
 The Great Barrier Reef , the world 's largest coral reef , lies a short distance off the north @-@ east coast and extends for over 2 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 240 mi ) . Mount Augustus , claimed to be the world 's largest monolith , is located in Western Australia . At 2 @,@ 228 metres ( 7 @,@ 310 ft ) , Mount Kosciuszko on the Great Dividing Range is the highest mountain on the Australian mainland . Even taller are Mawson Peak ( at 2 @,@ 745 metres or 9 @,@ 006 feet ) , on the remote Australian territory of Heard Island , and , in the Australian Antarctic Territory , Mount McClintock and Mount Menzies , at 3 @,@ 492 metres ( 11 @,@ 457 ft ) and 3 @,@ 355 metres ( 11 @,@ 007 ft ) respectively . 
 Australia 's size gives it a wide variety of landscapes , with tropical rainforests in the north @-@ east , mountain ranges in the south @-@ east , south @-@ west and east , and dry desert in the centre . It is the flattest continent , with the oldest and least fertile soils ; desert or semi @-@ arid land commonly known as the outback makes up by far the largest portion of land . The driest inhabited continent , its annual rainfall averaged over continental area is less than 500 mm . The population density , 2 @.@ 8 inhabitants per square kilometre , is among the lowest in the world , although a large proportion of the population lives along the temperate south @-@ eastern coastline . 
 Eastern Australia is marked by the Great Dividing Range , which runs parallel to the coast of Queensland , New South Wales and much of Victoria . The name is not strictly accurate , because parts of the range consist of low hills , and the highlands are typically no more than 1 @,@ 600 metres ( 5 @,@ 249 ft ) in height . The coastal uplands and a belt of Brigalow grasslands lie between the coast and the mountains , while inland of the dividing range are large areas of grassland . These include the western plains of New South Wales , and the <unk> Uplands , Barkly Tableland , and <unk> Lands of inland Queensland . The northernmost point of the east coast is the tropical @-@ <unk> Cape York Peninsula . 
 The landscapes of the Top End and the Gulf Country — with their tropical climate — include forest , woodland , wetland , grassland , rainforest and desert . At the north @-@ west corner of the continent are the sandstone cliffs and gorges of The Kimberley , and below that the Pilbara . To the south of these and inland , lie more areas of grassland : the Ord Victoria Plain and the Western Australian <unk> shrublands . At the heart of the country are the uplands of central Australia . Prominent features of the centre and south include Uluru ( also known as Ayers Rock ) , the famous sandstone monolith , and the inland Simpson , <unk> and Sturt Stony , Gibson , Great Sandy , Tanami , and Great Victoria deserts , with the famous Nullarbor Plain on the southern coast . 
 The climate of Australia is significantly influenced by ocean currents , including the Indian Ocean <unk> and the El Niño – Southern Oscillation , which is correlated with periodic drought , and the seasonal tropical low @-@ pressure system that produces cyclones in northern Australia . These factors cause rainfall to vary markedly from year to year . Much of the northern part of the country has a tropical , predominantly summer @-@ rainfall ( monsoon ) climate . The south @-@ west corner of the country has a Mediterranean climate . Much of the south @-@ east ( including Tasmania ) is temperate . 
 = = Environment = = 
 Although most of Australia is semi @-@ arid or desert , it includes a diverse range of habitats from alpine heaths to tropical rainforests , and is recognised as a megadiverse country . Fungi typify that diversity ; an estimated 250 @,@ 000 species — of which only 5 % have been described — occur in Australia . Because of the continent 's great age , extremely variable weather patterns , and long @-@ term geographic isolation , much of Australia 's biota is unique . About 85 % of flowering plants , 84 % of mammals , more than 45 % of birds , and 89 % of in @-@ shore , temperate @-@ zone fish are endemic . Australia has the greatest number of reptiles of any country , with 755 species . 
 Australian forests are mostly made up of evergreen species , particularly eucalyptus trees in the less arid regions ; wattles replace them as the dominant species in drier regions and deserts . Among well @-@ known Australian animals are the monotremes ( the platypus and echidna ) ; a host of marsupials , including the kangaroo , koala , and wombat , and birds such as the emu and the kookaburra . Australia is home to many dangerous animals including some of the most venomous snakes in the world . The dingo was introduced by Austronesian people who traded with Indigenous Australians around 3000 BCE . Many animal and plant species became extinct soon after first human settlement , including the Australian megafauna ; others have disappeared since European settlement , among them the thylacine . 
 Many of Australia 's ecoregions , and the species within those regions , are threatened by human activities and introduced animal , <unk> , fungal and plant species . All these factors have led to Australia having the highest mammal extinction rate of any country in the world . The federal Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 is the legal framework for the protection of threatened species . Numerous protected areas have been created under the National Strategy for the Conservation of Australia 's Biological Diversity to protect and preserve unique ecosystems ; 65 wetlands are listed under the Ramsar Convention , and 16 natural World Heritage Sites have been established . Australia was ranked 3rd out of 178 countries in the world on the 2014 Environmental Performance Index . 
 = = = Environmental issues = = = 
 Protection of the environment is a major political issue in Australia . In 2007 , the First Rudd Government signed the instrument of ratification of the Kyoto Protocol . Nevertheless , Australia 's carbon dioxide emissions per capita are among the highest in the world , lower than those of only a few other industrialised nations . Rainfall in southwestern Australia has decreased by 10 – 20 % since the 1970s , while southeastern Australia has also experienced a moderate decline since the 1990s . 
 According to the Bureau of Meteorology 's 2011 Australian Climate Statement , Australia had lower than average temperatures in 2011 as a consequence of a La Niña weather pattern ; however , " the country 's 10 @-@ year average continues to demonstrate the rising trend in temperatures , with 2002 – 2011 likely to rank in the top two warmest 10 @-@ year periods on record for Australia , at 0 @.@ 52 ° C ( 0 @.@ 94 ° F ) above the long @-@ term average " . Furthermore , 2014 was Australia 's third warmest year since national temperature observations commenced in 1910 . Water restrictions are frequently in place in many regions and cities of Australia in response to chronic shortages due to urban population increases and localised drought . Throughout much of the continent , major flooding regularly follows extended periods of drought , flushing out inland river systems , overflowing dams and inundating large inland flood plains , as occurred throughout Eastern Australia in 2010 , 2011 and 2012 after the 2000s Australian drought . 
 A carbon tax was introduced in 2012 and helped to reduce Australia 's emissions but was scrapped in 2014 under the Liberal Government . Since the carbon tax was repealed , emissions have again continued to rise . 
 Australian biota has been severely impacted by changes occurring since European settlement began in 1788 , with more than 10 % of mammal species lost in the past 225 years . There have also been 23 bird species or subspecies , 4 amphibians and more than 60 plant species known to be lost during this period . The Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act of 1999 was designed to minimise further impacts on ecological communities in Australia and its territories . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Australia is a wealthy country ; it generates its income from various sources including mining @-@ related exports , telecommunications , banking and manufacturing . It has a market economy , a relatively high GDP per capita , and a relatively low rate of poverty . In terms of average wealth , Australia ranked second in the world after Switzerland in 2013 , although the nation 's poverty rate increased from 10 @.@ 2 % to 11 @.@ 8 % , from 2000 / 01 to 2013 . It was identified by the Credit Suisse Research Institute as the nation with the highest median wealth in the world and the second @-@ highest average wealth per adult in 2013 . 
 The Australian dollar is the currency for the nation , including Christmas Island , Cocos ( Keeling ) Islands , and Norfolk Island , as well as the independent Pacific Island states of Kiribati , Nauru , and Tuvalu . With the 2006 merger of the Australian Stock Exchange and the Sydney Futures Exchange , the Australian Securities Exchange became the ninth largest in the world . 
 Ranked third in the Index of Economic Freedom ( 2010 ) , Australia is the world 's twelfth largest economy and has the fifth highest per capita GDP ( nominal ) at $ 66 @,@ 984 . The country was ranked second in the United Nations 2011 Human Development Index and first in <unk> 's 2008 Prosperity Index . All of Australia 's major cities fare well in global comparative livability surveys ; Melbourne reached top spot for the fourth year in a row on The Economist 's 2014 list of the world 's most liveable cities , followed by Adelaide , Sydney , and Perth in the fifth , seventh , and ninth places respectively . Total government debt in Australia is about $ 190 billion – 20 % of GDP in 2010 . Australia has among the highest house prices and some of the highest household debt levels in the world . 
 An emphasis on exporting commodities rather than manufactured goods has underpinned a significant increase in Australia 's terms of trade since the start of the 21st century , due to rising commodity prices . Australia has a balance of payments that is more than 7 % of GDP negative , and has had persistently large current account deficits for more than 50 years . Australia has grown at an average annual rate of 3 @.@ 6 % for over 15 years , in comparison to the OECD annual average of 2 @.@ 5 % . Australia was the only advanced economy not to experience a recession due to the global financial downturn in 2008 – 2009 . However , the economies of six of Australia 's major trading partners have been in recession , which in turn has affected Australia , significantly hampering its economic growth in recent years . From 2012 to early 2013 , Australia 's national economy grew , but some non @-@ mining states and Australia 's non @-@ mining economy experienced a recession . 
 The Hawke Government floated the Australian dollar in 1983 and partially deregulated the financial system . The Howard Government followed with a partial deregulation of the labour market and the further privatisation of state @-@ owned businesses , most notably in the telecommunications industry . The indirect tax system was substantially changed in July 2000 with the introduction of a 10 % Goods and Services Tax ( GST ) . In Australia 's tax system , personal and company income tax are the main sources of government revenue . 
 In May 2012 , there were 11 @,@ 537 @,@ 900 people employed ( either full- or part @-@ time ) , with an unemployment rate of 5 @.@ 1 % . Youth unemployment ( 15 – 24 ) stood at 11 @.@ 2 % . Data released in mid @-@ November 2013 showed that the number of welfare recipients had grown by 55 % . In 2007 228 @,@ 621 <unk> unemployment allowance recipients were registered , a total that increased to 646 @,@ 414 in March 2013 . According to the Graduate Careers Survey , full @-@ time employment for newly qualified professionals from various occupations has declined since 2011 but it increases for graduates three years after graduation . 
 Since 2008 , inflation has typically been 2 – 3 % and the base interest rate 5 – 6 % . The service sector of the economy , including tourism , education , and financial services , accounts for about 70 % of GDP . Rich in natural resources , Australia is a major exporter of agricultural products , particularly wheat and wool , minerals such as iron @-@ ore and gold , and energy in the forms of liquified natural gas and coal . Although agriculture and natural resources account for only 3 % and 5 % of GDP respectively , they contribute substantially to export performance . Australia 's largest export markets are Japan , China , the US , South Korea , and New Zealand . Australia is the world 's fourth largest exporter of wine , and the wine industry contributes $ 5 @.@ 5 billion per year to the nation 's economy . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Until the Second World War , the vast majority of settlers and immigrants came from the British Isles , and a majority of Australians have some British or Irish ancestry . In the 2011 Australian census , the most commonly nominated ancestries were English ( 36 @.@ 1 % ) , Australian ( 35 @.@ 4 % ) , Irish ( 10 @.@ 4 % ) , Scottish ( 8 @.@ 9 % ) , Italian ( 4 @.@ 6 % ) , German ( 4 @.@ 5 % ) , Chinese ( 4 @.@ 3 % ) , Indian ( 2 @.@ 0 % ) , Greek ( 1 @.@ 9 % ) , and Dutch ( 1 @.@ 7 % ) . 
 Australia 's population has quadrupled since the end of World War I , much of this increase from immigration . Following World War II and through to 2000 , almost 5 @.@ 9 million of the total population settled in the country as new immigrants , meaning that nearly two out of every seven Australians were born in another country . Most immigrants are skilled , but the immigration quota includes categories for family members and refugees . By 2050 , Australia 's population is currently projected to reach around 42 million . Nevertheless , its population density , 2 @.@ 8 inhabitants per square kilometre , remains among the lowest in the world . As such , Australians have more living space per person than the inhabitants of any other nation . 
 In 2011 , 24 @.@ 6 % of Australians were born elsewhere and 43 @.@ 1 % of people had at least one overseas @-@ born parent ; the five largest immigrant groups were those from the United Kingdom , New Zealand , China , India , and Vietnam . Following the abolition of the White Australia policy in 1973 , numerous government initiatives have been established to encourage and promote racial harmony based on a policy of multiculturalism . In 2005 – 06 , more than 131 @,@ 000 people emigrated to Australia , mainly from Asia and Oceania . The migration target for 2012 – 13 is 190 @,@ 000 , compared to 67 @,@ 900 in 1998 – 99 . 
 The Indigenous population — Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders — was counted at 548 @,@ 370 ( 2 @.@ 5 % of the total population ) in 2011 , a significant increase from 115 @,@ 953 in the 1976 census . The increase is partly due to many people with Indigenous heritage previously having been overlooked by the census due to undercount and cases where their Indigenous status had not been recorded on the form . Indigenous Australians experience higher than average rates of imprisonment and unemployment , lower levels of education , and life expectancies for males and females that are , respectively , 11 and 17 years lower than those of non @-@ indigenous Australians . Some remote Indigenous communities have been described as having " failed state " -like conditions . 
 In common with many other developed countries , Australia is experiencing a demographic shift towards an older population , with more retirees and fewer people of working age . In 2004 , the average age of the civilian population was 38 @.@ 8 years . A large number of Australians ( 759 @,@ 849 for the period 2002 – 03 ; 1 million or 5 % of the total population in 2005 ) live outside their home country . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 Although Australia has no official language , English has always been entrenched as the de facto national language . Australian English is a major variety of the language with a distinctive accent and lexicon , and differs slightly from other varieties of English in grammar and spelling . General Australian serves as the standard dialect . According to the 2011 census , English is the only language spoken in the home for close to 81 % of the population . The next most common languages spoken at home are Mandarin ( 1 @.@ 7 % ) , Italian ( 1 @.@ 5 % ) , Arabic ( 1 @.@ 4 % ) , Cantonese ( 1 @.@ 3 % ) , Greek ( 1 @.@ 3 % ) , and Vietnamese ( 1 @.@ 2 % ) ; a considerable proportion of first- and second @-@ generation migrants are bilingual . A 2010 – 2011 study by the Australia Early Development Index found the most common language spoken by children after English was Arabic , followed by Vietnamese , Greek , Chinese , and Hindi . 
 Over 250 Indigenous Australian languages are thought to have existed at the time of first European contact , of which less than 20 are still in daily use by all age groups . About 110 others are spoken exclusively by older people . At the time of the 2006 census , 52 @,@ 000 Indigenous Australians , representing 12 % of the Indigenous population , reported that they spoke an Indigenous language at home . Australia has a sign language known as Auslan , which is the main language of about 5 @,@ 500 deaf people . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Australia has no state religion ; Section 116 of the Australian Constitution prohibits the federal government from making any law to establish any religion , impose any religious observance , or prohibit the free exercise of any religion . In the 2011 census , 61 @.@ 1 % of Australians were counted as Christian , including 25 @.@ 3 % as Roman Catholic and 17 @.@ 1 % as Anglican ; 22 @.@ 3 % of the population reported having " no religion " ; 7 @.@ 2 % identify with non @-@ Christian religions , the largest of these being Buddhism ( 2 @.@ 5 % ) , followed by Islam ( 2 @.@ 2 % ) , Hinduism ( 1 @.@ 3 % ) and Judaism ( 0 @.@ 5 % ) . The remaining 9 @.@ 4 % of the population did not provide an adequate answer . 
 Before European settlement , the animist beliefs of Australia 's indigenous people had been practised for many thousands of years . Mainland Aboriginal Australians ' spirituality is known as the Dreamtime and it places a heavy emphasis on belonging to the land . The collection of stories that it contains shaped Aboriginal law and customs . Aboriginal art , story and dance continue to draw on these spiritual traditions . The spirituality and customs of Torres Strait Islanders , who inhabit the islands between Australia and New Guinea , reflected their Melanesian origins and dependence on the sea . The 1996 Australian census counted more than 7000 respondents as followers of a traditional Aboriginal religion . 
 Since the arrival of the First Fleet of British ships in 1788 , Christianity has grown to be the major religion practised in Australia . Christian churches have played an integral role in the development of education , health and welfare services in Australia . For much of Australian history the Church of England ( now known as the Anglican Church of Australia ) was the largest religious denomination . However , multicultural immigration has contributed to a decline in its relative position , and the Roman Catholic Church has benefitted from recent immigration to become the largest group . Similarly , Islam , Buddhism , Hinduism and Judaism have all grown in Australia over the past half @-@ century . 
 Australia has one of the lowest levels of religious adherence in the world . In 2001 , only 8 @.@ 8 % of Australians attended church on a weekly basis . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 School attendance , or registration for home schooling , is compulsory throughout Australia . Education is the responsibility of the individual states and territories so the rules vary between states , but in general children are required to attend school from the age of about 5 until about 16 . In some states ( e.g. , Western Australia , the Northern Territory and New South Wales ) , children aged 16 – 17 are required to either attend school or participate in vocational training , such as an apprenticeship . 
 Australia has an adult literacy rate that was estimated to be 99 % in 2003 . However , a 2011 – 12 report for the Australian Bureau of Statistics reported that Tasmania has a literacy and numeracy rate of only 50 % . In the Programme for International Student Assessment , Australia regularly scores among the top five of thirty major developed countries ( member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co @-@ operation and Development ) . Catholic education accounts for the largest non @-@ government sector . 
 Australia has 37 government @-@ funded universities and two private universities , as well as a number of other specialist institutions that provide approved courses at the higher education level . The OECD places Australia among the most expensive nations to attend university . There is a state @-@ based system of vocational training , known as TAFE , and many trades conduct apprenticeships for training new tradespeople . About 58 % of Australians aged from 25 to 64 have vocational or tertiary qualifications , and the tertiary graduation rate of 49 % is the highest among OECD countries . The ratio of international to local students in tertiary education in Australia is the highest in the OECD countries . In addition , 38 percent of Australia 's population has a university or college degree , which is among the highest percentages in the world . 
 = = = Health = = = 
 Australia has the third and seventh highest life expectancy of males and females respectively in the world . Life expectancy in Australia in 2010 was 79 @.@ 5 years for males and 84 @.@ 0 years for females . Australia has the highest rates of skin cancer in the world , while cigarette smoking is the largest preventable cause of death and disease , responsible for 7 @.@ 8 % of the total mortality and disease . Ranked second in preventable causes is hypertension at 7 @.@ 6 % , with obesity third at 7 @.@ 5 % . Australia ranks 35th in the world and near the top of developed nations for its proportion of obese adults and nearly two thirds ( 63 % ) of its adult population is either overweight or obese . 
 Total expenditure on health ( including private sector spending ) is around 9 @.@ 8 % of GDP . Australia introduced universal health care in 1975 . Known as Medicare , it is now nominally funded by an income tax surcharge known as the Medicare levy , currently set at 1 @.@ 5 % . The states manage hospitals and attached outpatient services , while the Commonwealth funds the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme ( subsidising the costs of medicines ) and general practice . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Since 1788 , the primary influence behind Australian culture has been Anglo @-@ Celtic Western culture , with some Indigenous influences . The divergence and evolution that has occurred in the ensuing centuries has resulted in a distinctive Australian culture . Since the mid @-@ 20th century , American popular culture has strongly influenced Australia , particularly through television and cinema . Other cultural influences come from neighbouring Asian countries , and through large @-@ scale immigration from non @-@ English @-@ speaking nations . 
 = = = Arts = = = 
 The rock art of Australia 's Indigenous peoples is the oldest and richest in the world , dating as far back as 60 @,@ 000 years and spread across hundreds of thousands of sites . Traditional designs , patterns and stories infuse contemporary Indigenous Australian art , " the last great art movement of the 20th century " ; its exponents include Emily Kame Kngwarreye . During the first century of European settlement , colonial artists , trained in Europe , showed a fascination with the unfamiliar land . The naturalistic , sun @-@ filled works of Arthur Streeton , Tom Roberts and others associated with the 19th @-@ century Heidelberg School — the first " distinctively Australian " movement in Western art — gave expression to a burgeoning Australian nationalism in the lead @-@ up to Federation . While the school remained influential into the new century , modernists such as Margaret Preston , and , later , Sidney Nolan and Arthur Boyd , explored new artistic trends . The landscape remained a central subject matter for Fred Williams , Brett Whiteley and other post @-@ World War II artists whose works , eclectic in style yet uniquely Australian , moved between the figurative and the abstract . The National Gallery of Australia and state galleries maintain collections of Australian and international art . Australia has one of the world 's highest attendances of art galleries and museums per head of population . 
 Australian literature grew slowly in the decades following European settlement though Indigenous oral traditions , many of which have since been recorded in writing , are much older . 19th @-@ century writers such as Henry Lawson and Banjo Paterson captured the experience of the bush using a distinctive Australian vocabulary . Their works are still very popular ; Paterson 's bush poem " Waltzing Matilda " ( 1895 ) is regarded as Australia 's unofficial national anthem . Miles Franklin is the namesake of Australia 's most prestigious literary prize , awarded annually to the best novel about Australian life . Its first recipient , Patrick White , went on to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1973 . Australian winners of the Booker Prize include Peter Carey , Thomas Keneally and Richard Flanagan . Author David Malouf , playwright David Williamson and poet Les Murray are also renowned literary figures . 
 Many of Australia 's performing arts companies receive funding through the federal government 's Australia Council . There is a symphony orchestra in each state , and a national opera company , Opera Australia , well known for its famous soprano Joan Sutherland . At the beginning of the 20th century , Nellie Melba was one of the world 's leading opera singers . Ballet and dance are represented by The Australian Ballet and various state companies . Each state has a publicly funded theatre company . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 The Story of the Kelly Gang ( 1906 ) , the world 's first feature length film , spurred a boom in Australian cinema during the silent film era . After World War I , Hollywood monopolised the industry , and by the 1960s Australian film production had effectively ceased . With the benefit of government support , the Australian New Wave of the 1970s brought provocative and successful films , many exploring themes of national identity , such as Wake in Fright and Gallipoli , while " Crocodile " Dundee and the Ozploitation movement 's Mad Max series became international blockbusters . In a film market flooded with foreign content , Australian films delivered a 7 @.@ 7 % share of the local box office in 2015 . The <unk> are Australia 's premier film and television awards , and notable Academy Award winners from Australia include Geoffrey Rush , Nicole Kidman , Cate Blanchett and Heath Ledger . 
 Australia has two public broadcasters ( the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and the multicultural Special Broadcasting Service ) , three commercial television networks , several pay @-@ TV services , and numerous public , non @-@ profit television and radio stations . Each major city has at least one daily newspaper , and there are two national daily newspapers , The Australian and The Australian Financial Review . In 2010 , Reporters Without Borders placed Australia 18th on a list of 178 countries ranked by press freedom , behind New Zealand ( 8th ) but ahead of the United Kingdom ( 19th ) and United States ( 20th ) . This relatively low ranking is primarily because of the limited diversity of commercial media ownership in Australia ; most print media are under the control of News Corporation and Fairfax Media . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 Most Indigenous Australian tribal groups subsisted on a simple hunter @-@ gatherer diet of native fauna and flora , otherwise called bush tucker . The first settlers introduced British food to the continent , much of which is now considered typical Australian food , such as the Sunday roast . Multicultural immigration transformed Australian cuisine ; post @-@ World War II European migrants , particularly from the Mediterranean , helped to build a thriving Australian coffee culture , and the influence of Asian cultures has led to Australian variants of their staple foods , such as the Chinese @-@ inspired dim sim and <unk> Roll . Vegemite , <unk> , <unk> and meat pies are regarded as iconic Australian foods . Australian wine is produced mainly in the southern , cooler parts of the country . 
 = = = Sport and recreation = = = 
 About 24 % of Australians over the age of 15 regularly participate in organised sporting activities . At an international level , Australia has excelled at cricket , field hockey , netball , rugby league and rugby union . The majority of Australians live within the coastal zone , making the beach a popular recreation spot and an integral part of the nation 's identity . Australia is a powerhouse in water @-@ based sports , such as swimming and surfing . The surf lifesaving movement originated in Australia , and the volunteer lifesaver is one of the country 's icons . Nationally , other popular sports include Australian rules football , horse racing , basketball , surfing , soccer , and motor racing . The annual Melbourne Cup horse race and the Sydney to Hobart yacht race attract intense interest . 
 Australia is one of five nations to have participated in every Summer Olympics of the modern era , and has hosted the Games twice : 1956 in Melbourne and 2000 in Sydney . Australia has also participated in every Commonwealth Games , hosting the event in 1938 , 1962 , 1982 , 2006 and will host the 2018 Commonwealth Games . Australia made its inaugural appearance at the Pacific Games in 2015 . As well as being a regular FIFA World Cup participant , Australia has won the OFC Nations Cup four times and the AFC Asian Cup once – the only country to have won championships in two different FIFA confederations . The country regularly competes among the world elite basketball teams as it is among the global top three teams in terms of qualifications to the Basketball Tournament at the Summer Olympics . Other major international events held in Australia include the Australian Open tennis grand slam tournament , international cricket matches , and the Australian Formula One Grand Prix . The highest @-@ rating television programs include sports telecasts such as the Summer Olympics , FIFA World Cup , The Ashes , Rugby League State of Origin , and the grand finals of the National Rugby League and Australian Football League . Skiing in Australia began in the 1860s and snow sports take place in the Australian Alps and parts of Tasmania . 
 = Dwight 's Speech = 
 " Dwight 's Speech " is the seventeenth episode of the second season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's twenty @-@ third episode overall . Written by Paul Lieberstein , and directed by Charles McDougall , the episode first aired in the United States on March 2 , 2006 on NBC . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) helps Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) with an important speech that he is going to give . Meanwhile , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) plans a vacation to avoid Pam Beesley 's ( Jenna Fischer ) wedding . 
 The speech scene employed over 500 extras , an unusual occurrence for the series . Much of Dwight 's speech is based upon a real speech by infamous Italian leader Benito Mussolini . The episode received largely positive reviews from television critics . In its original broadcast , " Dwight 's Speech " earned a Nielsen rating of 4 @.@ 4 in the 18 – 49 demographic , being viewed by 8 @.@ 4 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) is named Northeastern Pennsylvania Salesman of the Year and must make a speech at an association meeting at the Radisson Lackawanna Station Hotel , getting some assistance from Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) . Before he leaves , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) , in retaliation for Dwight 's cocky attitude , gives him tips on how to give public speeches . Unknown to Dwight , Jim 's tips are taken from a speech by Italian dictator Benito Mussolini , the fascist dictator of Italy from 1922 to 1943 . When Michael and Dwight make it to the convention , Dwight gets cold feet and Michael goes up and tries to relive his glory days of winning Salesman of the Year two years in a row , but ends up bombing . Dwight finally works up the nerve to give his speech and , using Jim 's advice , wins over the crowd with a passionate yet unorthodox speech ( which Angela videotapes from the back ) . Michael ends up leaving the convention room and later entertains Dwight with his tales at the bar . 
 Meanwhile , back in the office , Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) begins to write invitations for her approaching wedding with help from Ryan and Kelly . Kelly talks about her dreams of getting married someday and is visibly hurt when Ryan responds to her flirtatious question about future weddings by saying he doesn 't think he 'll ever tie the knot ; when Kelly leaves the room , Pam advises Ryan to be considerate of Kelly 's feelings but Ryan curtly notes " I know what I said . " Jim makes plans for a vacation anywhere away from Scranton . While that is going on , the other employees subtly duel over the thermostat . At the end of the episode , Jim tells Pam that he will be going to Australia and unfortunately , he will be missing her wedding because of it . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Dwight 's Speech " was directed by Charles McDougall , making it his second directing credit after the earlier second season episode " Christmas Party " . " Dwight 's Speech " was written by Paul Lieberstein , who plays human resources director Toby Flenderson . Lieberstein later revealed that Jim never went on his trip to Australia , noting " The whole Pam thing took him by surprise , he transferred and then wasn ’ t really up for vacation . Unless , of course , we find a good joke in his vacation . ” 
 During the earlier scenes when Dwight is in Michael 's office , Pam can be seen in the background talking to Meredith . According to actress Jenna Fischer , she and Kate Flannery stayed in character and acted out mundane talking scenes . Although they were not recorded , the dialogue was very detailed . In a guest post written for TV Guide , Fischer described several of the conversations , which ranged from Pam and Meredith discussing " the problems with the new quality @-@ assurance computer @-@ input program " , that the computers don 't " accept both alpha and numeric characters " , " backlog [ of ] receipts dating to 2001 " , and that Dunder Mifflin " changed to all @-@ numeric product codes in 2004 and the computer system does not allow for the earlier records . " 
 The speech scene employed over 500 extras , which was unusual for The Office , and was hectic for the crew to organize . Jim claims that he stole pieces of Dwight 's speech from Mussolini . The first line of Dwight 's speech , " Blood alone moves the wheels of history " , is paraphrased from a speech Mussolini gave in Parma on December 13 , 1914 , advocating Italian entry into World War I. The actual quote is , " It is blood which moves the wheels of history ! " 
 The Season Two DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include Dwight coming to work wearing sunglasses , Michael criticizing Dwight 's speaking skills , Dwight trying to tell another joke to the office , Ryan bringing the wrong type of stamps for Pam 's wedding invitations , and an extended scene of Michael 's unfunny and extremely awkward speech . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In order to practice his public speaking skills , Dwight tries to convince the office that Brad Pitt was in a car accident . Kelly Kapoor ( Mindy Kaling ) then states that it " is karma because of what he did to Jennifer Aniston . " During the meeting in the break room Dwight references Good Morning , Vietnam . Michael later references the movie at the actual convention when he is filling time for Dwight . When Jim asks the office where he should go for vacation , Kevin tells him he should go to <unk> Resorts , describing it as " Club Med , only everything is naked . " Toby tells him he should go to Amsterdam , while Creed informs him that he should go to Hong Kong . Dwight later reveals that he will be going to New Zealand to " walk the Lord of the Rings trail to Mordor and I will hike Mount Doom . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Dwight 's Speech " originally aired on NBC on the March 2 , 2006 . The episode received a 4 @.@ 4 rating / 10 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 4 @.@ 4 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 4 million viewers , and retained 88 percent of its lead @-@ in My Name Is Earl audience . An encore presentation of the episode on August 15 received a 1 @.@ 9 rating / 6 percent share and was viewed by over 4 @.@ 6 million viewers and retained 100 percent of its lead @-@ in audience . 
 " Dwight 's Speech " received mostly positive reviews . Michael Sciannamea of TV Squad wrote that he wonders if the Jim @-@ Pam " will reach some sort of resolution or become a season @-@ ending cliffhanger " . Sciannamea also noted that " you know you 're living in a Bizarro World when Dwight wins Dunder Mifflin 's salesman of the year award . " M. Giant of Television Without Pity graded the episode with an " A – . " Francis Rizzo III of DVD Talk felt that Dwight 's enlarged role was great , but noted that the episode was not as funny as his " strange behavior " in " The Injury . " Betsy <unk> of DVD Journal described " Dwight 's Speech " as an instant classic . Not all reviews were so glowing . Brendan Babish of DVD Verdict felt that " Dwight 's Speech " was " one of the few misfires " of the season , noting that it " certainly has laughs " , but that " its humor is a bit too absurd compared to the show 's usual riffs on office ennui " . He ultimately gave the episode a " B – " , but wrote that " Dwight 's Speech " being the worst episode of the season was a " testament to the show 's excellence . " 
 IGN ranked the scene with Dwight making his speech as its third @-@ best moment in the first two seasons , and called Wilson 's performance a " hilariously spot @-@ on impersonation of Mussolini 's crazed arm movements . " In addition , Rolling Stone named the same scene the eighteenth @-@ funniest scene in the first three seasons of The Office . 
 = Eurovision Song Contest 2014 = 
 The Eurovision Song Contest 2014 was the 59th edition of the annual Eurovision Song Contest . It took place in Copenhagen , Denmark , following Emmelie de Forest 's win at the 2013 contest in Malmö , Sweden with the song " Only Teardrops " . This was the third time that Denmark hosted the contest , the most recent previous occasion being in 2001 . The two semi @-@ finals took place on 6 May and 8 May 2014 , and the final on 10 May 2014 . The shows were presented by Lise Rønne , Nikolaj Koppel and Pilou Asbæk . 
 The show organisers from Copenhagen all in all spent 112 million Danish kroner on the contest ; three times more than what was expected and were furthermore highly accused of cases of nepotism within the organisation . The host broadcaster , DR , chose the B & W Hallerne as the host venue after considering several bids from cities and venues across Denmark . 
 Thirty @-@ seven countries participated ; this includes the return of Poland after a two @-@ year absence and Portugal after a one @-@ year absence . Overall , there were two fewer countries competing compared to the previous year , making thirty @-@ seven participants , the smallest number since 2006 . Bulgaria , Croatia , Cyprus and Serbia announced their withdrawal from the 2014 Contest . San Marino and Montenegro both qualified for the final for the first time . The winner was Conchita Wurst with the song " Rise Like a Phoenix " , written by Charley Mason , Joey Patulka , Ali Zuckowski , and Julian Maas for Austria . This was Austria 's first win in the competition since 1966 . Jokes made about Wurst had sparked controversy , whilst Russia were booed several times during the contest . The Netherlands and Sweden finished second and third respectively with the former achieving their best result since their victory in the 1975 Contest . Armenia finished fourth , which equals their best result to date , while Hungary finished fifth , achieving its best result since its fourth place in 1994 . Of the " Big Five " , only Ruth Lorenzo of Spain achieved a place in the top ten . 
 A new record of 195 million viewers for the Eurovision Song Contest was reported . The official compilation album of the 2014 Contest was released by Universal Music Group on 14 April 2014 , and featured all 37 songs from the contest , including the official # JoinUs theme performed during the interval act of the grand final . The host broadcaster , DR , and the EBU won the International TV Award at the Ondas Awards for their production of the contest . 
 = = Location = = 
 On 2 September 2013 , Danish public broadcaster DR announced that it had chosen Copenhagen as the host city for the 2014 contest . The contest was held at the former shipyard <unk> , in the B & W Hallerne , with the social networking hashtag " # JoinUs " as the motto . The location had been refurbished to accommodate the event , with the surrounding area transformed into " Eurovision Island " — an Olympic Park @-@ inspired complex housing the event venue , press centre , and other amenities . 
 The mayor of Copenhagen , Frank Jensen , declared in late August that the city would contribute to the budget with 40 million ( Danish Kroner ) ( € 5 @.@ 36 million ) . He also announced that the aim was to make the Eurovision 2014 into the greenest contest to date since Copenhagen had been elected European Green Capital for 2014 . 
 = = = Bidding phase = = = 
 Five cities had been considered as host city of the contest , including Herning and Copenhagen , both favourites to be the next host . The Parken Stadium , located in Copenhagen , which hosted the 2001 contest and Jyske Bank <unk> in Herning , which hosted the Dansk Melodi Grand Prix 2013 final , were the first venues to join the bidding phase . Later , Fredericia and Aalborg entered the phase with the Messe C and <unk> venues , respectively . The fifth city to join the phase was Horsens , with the venue being the courtyard of the former Horsens State Prison . In the event that Horsens had been chosen to host the contest , the courtyard would have been covered by a permanent glass roof . The contest was provisionally set to take place on 13 , 15 and 17 May 2014 , however , the dates were later brought forward a week in order to accommodate the candidate cities . 
 On 17 June 2013 , the municipality executive of Aalborg decided not to bid for hosting the contest due to the city 's lack of sufficient hotel capacity . While DR required the host city to have at least 3 @,@ 000 hotel rooms , the city of Aalborg had only 1 @,@ 600 hotel rooms , more than half of which had been booked for other events taking place at the same time as the Eurovision Song Contest . On 18 June 2013 , DR announced that formal bids on hosting the contest had been received by the municipalities of Copenhagen , Herning and Horsens , and that the Municipality of Fredericia had confirmed its intention to place a formal bid , too . 
 On 19 June 2013 , the deadline for placing bids on hosting the contest , it was reported that Wonderful Copenhagen , the official convention , event and visitors bureau of the Greater Copenhagen area , had proposed three different venues in its bid on hosting the contest : The Parken Stadium , a large tent on the grounds of DR <unk> and the B & W Hallerne . On 25 June 2013 , the Municipality of Fredericia announced that the Triangle Region had withdrawn its bid on hosting the contest , due to the lack of a suitable venue . DR required the hosting venue to have no pillars blocking any views and an interior height of at least 16 metres . However , no venues in the region met those requirements and , therefore , Fredericia was no longer in the running for becoming host city of the 2014 Eurovision Song Contest . On 28 June 2013 , Anders <unk> , CEO of Parken Sport & Entertainment , stated that the Parken Stadium was no longer in the running for hosting the contest due to several football matches having already been scheduled to take place at the stadium in the weeks leading up to the contest . 
 Key Host venue 
 = = Format = = 
 The competition consisted of two semi @-@ finals and a final , a format which has been in use since 2008 . The ten countries with the highest scores in each semi @-@ final qualified to the final where they joined the host nation Denmark and the five main sponsoring nations ( known as the Big Five ) : France , Germany , Italy , Spain and the United Kingdom . 
 Each participating country had their own national jury , which consisted of five professional members of the music industry . Each member of a respective nation 's jury was required to rank every song , except that of their own country . The voting results from each member of a particular nation 's jury were combined to produce an overall ranking from first to last place . Likewise , the televoting results were also interpreted as a full ranking , taking into account the full televoting result rather than just the top ten . The combination of the jury 's full ranking and the televote 's full ranking produced an overall ranking of all competing entries . The song which scored the highest overall rank received 12 points , while the tenth @-@ best ranked song received 1 @-@ point . In the event of a televoting ( insufficient amount of votes / technical issues ) or jury failure ( technical issue / breach of rules ) , only a jury / televoting was used by each country 
 On 20 September 2013 , the EBU released the official rules for the 2014 contest , which introduced rule changes regarding the jury voting . The rules aimed at providing more transparency regarding each five member national jury by releasing the names of all jurors on 1 May 2014 prior to the start of the contest and providing each juror 's full ranking results after the conclusion of the contest . In addition , jury members on a particular nation 's jury can only serve as a juror if they have not already participated as such in one of the preceding two contest editions . 
 = = = Semi @-@ final allocation draw = = = 
 The draw that determined the semi @-@ final allocation was held on 20 January 2014 at the Copenhagen City Hall . Prior to the allocation draw , on 24 November 2013 it was announced that Norway and Sweden would perform in different semi @-@ finals in order to maximise the availability of tickets for visitors from both countries . A draw at the EBU headquarters determined that Sweden would perform in the first semi @-@ final , while Norway would perform in the second semi @-@ final . The EBU also allocated Israel to the second semi @-@ final after a request from the delegation in order to avoid complications with a national holiday coinciding with the date of the first semi @-@ final . The remaining participating countries , excluding the automatic finalists ( Denmark , France , Germany , Italy , Spain and the United Kingdom ) , were split into six pots , based on voting patterns from the previous ten years . 
 The pots were calculated by the televoting partner <unk> and were as follows : 
 = = = Running order = = = 
 As in 2013 , the host broadcaster DR and their producers determined the running order for each show with only the starting position of the host nation being determined by draw . A draw which took place during the heads of delegation meeting on 17 March 2014 in Copenhagen determined that Denmark would perform 23rd in the final . On 24 March 2014 , the running order for the two semi @-@ finals was released . Prior to the creation of the running order for the final , an allocation draw was held during the semi @-@ final winners press conferences following the conclusion of each semi @-@ final and during the individual press conferences on 6 May 2014 for the Big Five ( France , Germany , Italy , Spain and the United Kingdom ) . The draw determined whether the country would perform in the first or second half of the final . The producers published the final running order shortly before 0200 CEST on 9 May 2014 . Ukraine were drawn to perform first , whilst the United Kingdom were drawn to perform last . 
 = = = Crimea = = = 
 The contest was held in the immediate aftermath of the 2014 Ukrainian revolution , Russian military intervention in Ukraine , and the crisis in Crimea , in which Crimea was annexed by Russia . Votes cast through Ukrainian telecom providers which service Crimea were counted towards Ukraine 's votes . 
 = = = Graphic design = = = 
 The graphic design of the contest was revealed by the EBU on 18 December 2013 . The theme art comprises a blue and purple diamond , within it the generic Eurovision Song Contest logo featuring the Danish flag as well as the hashtag and slogan " # JoinUs " at the centre of the diamond . 
 The postcards used to introduce a country and their participants were shot in their respective countries and featured the artists using unique ways to create their country 's flag , e.g. the postcard for the United Kingdom features Molly creating the Union Flag from Routemaster buses , Royal Mail vans , and people wearing blue raincoats along with strips of red and white paper , and the postcard for Denmark featuring <unk> and his singers using old furniture and red and white paint to paint the Danish flag . The postcards then ended with the act taking a picture on a camera or phone and a close up of the resulting artwork was shown onscreen . The flag created by the artist ( s ) is then captured into a diamond and it transitions to the official flag . It then swirls round for the before @-@ hand details of the artist / composer . For example , the entry for San Marino features the painting of the flag that Valentina Monetta ( the artist ) created , transitioning into the official flag for San Marino . 
 = = = National host broadcaster = = = 
 <unk> Gaardbo was appointed by DR 's Director General , Maria Rørbye <unk> , as the Executive Producer for the contest , three @-@ days after Denmark 's victory at the 2013 contest . Maria Rørbye <unk> stated in an interview that " By choosing <unk> Gaardbo , we have a person who has all the necessary leadership skills , which are essential in order to run a project of this magnitude , and the technical insight for such a large TV @-@ production , which the Eurovision Song Contest is " . Gaardbo has worked for the host broadcaster for 17 years , 12 of which was in the role of supervisor of the DR <unk> . 
 Danish Royal Family members Crown Prince Frederik and his wife , Crown Princess Mary , attended the final as invited guests of the host broadcaster DR. In March 2014 , the host broadcaster DR invited Jessica Mauboy to perform during the interval act of the second semifinal on 8 May 2014 , part of DR 's recognition of Australia 's loyalty to the Eurovision Song Contest . Mauboy performed the song " Sea of Flags " during the interval act . 
 = = Participating countries = = 
 Thirty @-@ seven countries participated in the 2014 Contest . Bulgarian broadcaster Bulgarian National Television ( BNT ) , Croatian broadcaster Hrvatska <unk> ( HRT ) , Cypriot broadcaster Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation ( <unk> ) and Serbian broadcaster Radio Television of Serbia ( RTS ) withdrew from the 2014 contest . Other absent countries that previously have participated are Andorra , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Czech Republic , Luxembourg , Monaco , Morocco , Slovakia and Turkey . Portugal have also in the past withdrew from the contest . Poland returned after last participating in 2011 . 
 = = = Returning artists = = = 
 Valentina Monetta represented San Marino for a third and final consecutive year , having previously represented the microstate at the 2012 and 2013 contests . This makes Monetta the fourth main singer to compete in three consecutive contests ( and the only one of amongst them never to win in one of these occasions ) , following Lys <unk> and Corry <unk> , who both competed in the 1956 , 1957 and 1958 contests , and Udo Jürgens , who competed in 1964 , 1965 and 1966 . Paula <unk> and Ovi returned as a duo , having previously represented Romania in 2010 . The <unk> Sisters , who represented Russia , previously participated in and won the Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2006 . Macedonian backing vocalist Tamara <unk> previously represented Macedonia in 2008 . Martina Majerle , who represented Slovenia in 2009 and provided backing vocals numerous times for Croatia ( 2003 ) , Montenegro ( 2008 ) and Slovenia ( 2007 , 2011 , 2012 ) , returned as a backing vocalist for Montenegro . 
 = = Results = = 
 Full semi @-@ final results including televoting and results from the individual jury members were released shortly after the final . 
 = = = Semi @-@ final 1 = = = 
 Spain , France , and Denmark also voted in this semi @-@ final . The ten songs that are marked in orange qualified to the final . 
 = = = Semi @-@ final 2 = = = 
 Germany , Italy , and the United Kingdom also voted in this semi @-@ final . The ten songs that are marked in orange qualified to the final . 
 = = = Final = = = 
 As in the 2013 contest , the winner was announced as soon as it was mathematically impossible to catch up . In this case , the winner had been determined by the 34th vote , which came from Ukraine . 
 1 . ^ The song is in French ; however , there is one sentence in English and one sentence in Spanish . 
 2 . ^ The song is completely in Italian ; however the last line was sung in English at the contest . 
 = = Scoreboard = = 
 = = = Semi @-@ final 1 = = = 
 = = = = 12 points = = = = 
 Below is a summary of the maximum 12 points each country awarded to another in the first semifinal : 
 Below is a summary of the split number one selection , by respectively each country 's jury and televoters in the First Semi Final : 
 Albania , Montenegro , San Marino and Moldova used juries due to vote in <unk> 
 = = = Semi @-@ final 2 = = = 
 = = = = 12 points = = = = 
 Below is a summary of the maximum 12 points each country awarded to another in the second semifinal : 
 Below is a summary of the split number one selection , by respectively each country 's jury and televoters in the Second Semi Final : 
 Georgia and Macedonia used juries due to either technical issues with the televoting or an insufficient amount of votes cast during the televote period . 
 = = = Final = = = 
 = = = = 12 points = = = = 
 Below is a summary of the maximum 12 points each country awarded to another in the Grand Final : 
 Below is a summary of the split number one selection , by respectively each country 's jury and televoters in the Grand Final : 
 = = Other countries = = 
 For a country to be eligible for potential participation in the Eurovision Song Contest , it needs to be an active member of the European Broadcasting Union ( EBU ) . The EBU issued an invitation of participation for the 2014 Contest to all 56 active members . Thirty @-@ seven countries confirmed their participation . Lebanon , Tunisia , and five other EBU members , however , did not publish their reasons for declining , whilst the following list of countries declined stating their reasons as shown below . 
 = = = Active EBU members = = = 
 Andorra – The Andorran broadcaster <unk> i <unk> d 'Andorra ( <unk> ) informed a Eurovision news website that due to financial reasons and budget constraints , Andorra would not return to the contest in 2014 . 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina - Despite the Bosnian broadcaster Radio and Television of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( BHRT ) initially stating their intention to participate in the contest , on 18 December 2013 it was announced that they would not be taking part due to a lack of sponsorship . 
 Bulgaria – Despite initial indications that Bulgarian broadcaster Bulgarian National Television ( BNT ) had planned to participate in the 2014 contest , on 22 November 2013 , BNT announced their withdrawal from the competition , citing an expensive participation fee and limited funds due to budget cuts as reasons for this decision . 
 Croatia – Croatian broadcaster Croatian Radiotelevision ( HRT ) announced on 19 September 2013 that they are withdrawing from the 2014 contest , citing the European financial crisis , as well as a string of poor results between 2010 and 2013 influencing their decision to take a year break . The last time Croatia qualified for the grand final before 2016 was in 2009 . 
 Cyprus – On 3 October 2013 , the Cypriot broadcaster Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation ( <unk> ) announced their withdrawal from the 2014 contest , citing public opinion regarding the 2012 – 13 Cypriot financial crisis and budget restrictions as factors that influenced this decision . 
 Czech Republic – The Czech broadcaster Česká televize ( ČT ) confirmed on 30 September 2013 , that they would not return to the contest in 2014 , citing low viewing figures and poor results as their reason . 
 Luxembourg – The chief executive officer of RTL Télé <unk> , Alain Berwick , stated that Luxembourg would not return to the contest , citing the potential financial burden of hosting the contest and a lack of public interest as reasons for this decision . The broadcaster further confirmed on 24 July 2013 , that Luxembourg would not be participating in the 2014 contest . 
 Monaco – The Monegasque broadcaster Télé Monte Carlo ( TMC ) informed a Eurovision news website that Monaco would not be returning to the contest in 2014 . 
 Morocco – On 11 September 2013 , Moroccan broadcaster Société Nationale de Radiodiffusion et de Télévision ( <unk> ) informed and confirmed to a Eurovision news website that they have not ruled out the possibility of making a comeback in the near future , but currently have no plans to make their return at the 2014 contest . 
 Serbia – On 22 November 2013 , Serbian broadcaster Radio Television of Serbia ( RTS ) announced that it would withdraw from the 2014 contest due to financial difficulties and a lack of available sponsorship for a potential Serbian entry . 
 Slovakia – Slovakian broadcaster <unk> a televízia Slovenska ( <unk> ) announced through their the official Twitter feed on 1 September 2013 that Slovakia would not participate in the 2014 contest . The non @-@ participation was further confirmed on 9 September 2013 . 
 Turkey – On 14 September 2013 , the general director of Türkiye Radyo ve <unk> <unk> ( TRT ) , İbrahim Şahin , stated that there are no plans to return to the contest under the current conditions . Dissatisfaction with the introduction of a mixed jury / televote voting system and the current status of the " Big Five " were once again cited as reasons for this decision . The non @-@ participation was further confirmed on 7 November 2013 . 
 = = = Require active EBU membership = = = 
 Kosovo – While Kosovan broadcaster Radio Television of Kosovo ( <unk> ) did not voice any intention regarding the 2014 contest , Kosovo 's Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs <unk> <unk> told the Swedish television programme <unk> that he thought Kosovo , whose status is disputed , would be granted EBU membership and acceptance into the Eurovision in time for the 2014 edition . However , Kosovo has not been recognized as an independent country by the International Telecommunications Union , which is a requirement for full membership in the EBU . 
 Liechtenstein – Broadcaster 1 <unk> Liechtenstein Television ( 1FLTV ) had originally intended to participate in the 2013 contest , pending subsidies being sought from the Liechtenstein government in order to join the EBU . However such financial offerings were never granted . The broadcaster at the time had stated that they would try again with the aim to make their debut in 2014 . On 10 September 2013 , 1FLTV announced that they will not be present at any foreseeable Eurovision Song Contest until such financial support has been granted by the government of Liechtenstein . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 = = = Armenian contestant 's statements = = = 
 On the week of the contest , Armenian contestant Aram Mp3 commented on Conchita Wurst 's image by saying that her lifestyle was " not natural " and that she needed to decide to be either a woman or a man . The statement sparked controversy , following which Aram Mp3 apologised and added that what he said was meant to be a joke . Wurst accepted the apology , by stating , " I have to say that if it 's a joke it 's not funny ... but he apologised and that 's fine for me . " 
 = = = Georgia jury votes = = = 
 Georgia 's jury votes in the Grand Final were all declared invalid , as all the jury members had voted exactly the same from 3 points up to 12 points . According to EBU , this constitutes a statistical impossibility . Therefore , only Georgia 's televoting result was used for the distribution of the Georgian points in the Grand Final . 
 = = = Lithuanian spokesperson 's commentary = = = 
 Lithuanian spokesperson Ignas <unk> , just before announcing that ten points of his country 's vote had been assigned to Conchita Wurst , said referring to Wurst 's beard , " Now it is time to shave " , then pulled out a razor and pretended to shave his own face , before giggling at the joke . Host Nikolaj Koppel replied to that by saying , " Time to shave ? I think not . " BBC commentator Graham Norton also expressed his frustration at the joke and supported Koppel 's reply . 
 = = = Reaction to Russia 's performance = = = 
 Russia 's <unk> Sisters were the subject of booing from the audience , during the semifinal and when they qualified into final . Russia 's act were also booed during the grand final ; and when the Russian spokesperson delivered their top @-@ three votes . The booing was also heard when countries awarded Russia votes , including neighbouring countries such as Armenia and Belarus . 
 = = = Internet activist security breach = = = 
 After Conchita Wurst had won and performed the song again , and shortly before the end of the television broadcast , press photographers crowded around Wurst for pictures . During the photo session , Estonian " Free <unk> " activist <unk> Kaldalu managed to breach security and approach Wurst , giving her flowers and a Danish flag . She accepted the flowers , and Kaldalu knelt before her ; what he said could not be heard . As security personnel realised Kaldalu was not supposed to be there , they began to drag him away , and Kaldalu produced a piece of paper , which he had hidden under his shirt , reading " # free <unk> " . 
 = = Other awards = = 
 The Marcel Bezençon Awards , the OGAE voting poll and the Barbara Dex Awards are awards that were contested by the entries competing at the Eurovision Song Contest 2014 , in addition to the main winner ’ s trophy . In contrast , the Ondas Awards have honoured the production of the Eurovision Song Contest 2014 itself in one of their categories . 
 = = = Marcel Bezençon Awards = = = 
 The Marcel Bezençon Awards were first handed out during the Eurovision Song Contest 2002 in Tallinn , Estonia , honouring the best competing songs in the final . Founded by Christer Björkman ( Sweden 's representative in the 1992 Eurovision Song Contest and the current Head of Delegation for Sweden ) and Richard Herrey ( a member of the Herreys and the Eurovision Song Contest 1984 winner from Sweden ) , the awards are named after the creator of the annual competition , Marcel Bezençon . The awards are divided into three categories : Press Award , Artistic Award , and Composer Award . 
 = = = OGAE = = = 
 Organisation Générale des Amateurs de l 'Eurovision ( more commonly known as OGAE ) is an international organisation that was founded in 1984 in Savonlinna , Finland by Jari @-@ Pekka Koikkalainen . The organisation consists of a network of 40 Eurovision Song Contest fan clubs across Europe and beyond , and is a non @-@ governmental , non @-@ political , and non @-@ profit company . In what has become an annual tradition for the OGAE fan clubs , a voting poll was opened allowing members from forty clubs to vote for their favourite songs of the 2014 contest . Below is the top five overall results , after all the votes had been cast . 
 = = = Barbara Dex Award = = = 
 The Barbara Dex Award has been annually awarded by the fan website House of Eurovision since 1997 , and is a humorous award given to the worst dressed artist each year in the contest . It is named after the Belgian artist , Barbara Dex , who came last in the 1993 contest , in which she wore her own self designed dress . 
 = = = Ondas Awards = = = 
 The Ondas Awards ( Spanish : Premios Ondas ) is an award ceremony organised by Radio Barcelona , a subsidiary of Cadena SER , since 1954 . They are awarded in recognition of professionals in the fields of radio and television broadcasting , the cinema , and the music industry . The 61st Ondas Award recipients were announced on 6 November 2014 , where Danish broadcaster , Danmarks Radio and the European Broadcasting Union received the International Television Award , for their production of the 2014 Eurovision Song Contest . The award will be handed over during the awards ceremony that will take place on 25 November 2014 at the Liceu in Barcelona . 
 = = International broadcasts and voting = = 
 It was reported by the EBU that the 2014 Contest was viewed by a worldwide television audience of a record breaking 195 million viewers . 
 = = = Voting and spokespersons = = = 
 The order in which each country announced their votes was determined in a draw following the jury results from the final dress rehearsal . An algorithm implemented by NRK , based on jury vote , was used to generate as much suspense as possible . The spokespersons are shown alongside each country . 
 = = = Commentators = = = 
 Non @-@ participating countries 
 Australia – Julia Zemiro and Sam Pang ( SBS One , all shows ) 
 Canada – Adam Rollins and Tommy D. ( <unk> , broadcast the three shows between 20 – 22 June 2014 ) 
 Croatia – Aleksandar <unk> ( HRT 1 and <unk> , final ) 
 Cyprus – Melina <unk> ( <unk> 1 , all shows ) 
 Faroe Islands – TBC ( <unk> Føroya , all ) 
 Kazakhstan – Diana <unk> and <unk> <unk> ( <unk> , all shows ) 
 New Zealand – TBC ( BBC UKTV , all shows ) 
 Serbia – Silvana Grujić ( <unk> , RTS SAT and RTS HD , all shows ) , Dragan Ilić ( <unk> , RTS SAT and RTS HD , final ) 
 = = Official album = = 
 Eurovision Song Contest : Copenhagen 2014 was the official compilation album of the 2014 Contest , put together by the European Broadcasting Union and released by Universal Music Group on 14 April 2014 . The album featured all 37 songs that entered in the 2014 contest , including the semi @-@ finalists that failed to qualify into the grand final . It also featured as a bonus track , the official # JoinUs theme , " Rainmaker " , performed by the 2013 contest winner , Emmelie de Forest . 
 = Toy Story = 
 Toy Story is a 1995 American computer @-@ animated adventure buddy comedy film produced by Pixar Animation Studios and released by Walt Disney Pictures . Directed by John Lasseter at his directorial debut , Toy Story was the first feature @-@ length computer @-@ animated film and the first theatrical film produced by Pixar . Toy Story follows a group of anthropomorphic toys who pretend to be lifeless whenever humans are present , and focuses on the relationship between Woody , a <unk> cowboy doll ( voiced by Tom Hanks ) , and Buzz Lightyear , an astronaut action figure ( voiced by Tim Allen ) . The film was written by John Lasseter , Andrew Stanton , Joel Cohen , Alec Sokolow , and Joss Whedon , and featured music by Randy Newman . Its executive producers were Steve Jobs and Edwin Catmull . It was released in theatres November 22 , 1995 . 
 Pixar , which produced short animated films to promote their computers , was approached by Disney to produce a computer @-@ animated feature after the success of the short film , Tin Toy ( 1988 ) , which is told from a small toy 's perspective . Lasseter , Stanton , and Pete Docter wrote early story treatments which were thrown out by Disney , who pushed for a more edgy film . After disastrous story reels , production was halted and the script was re @-@ written , better reflecting the tone and theme Pixar desired : that " toys deeply want children to play with them , and that this desire drives their hopes , fears , and actions . " The studio , then consisting of a relatively small number of employees , produced the film under minor financial constraints . 
 The top @-@ grossing film on its opening weekend , Toy Story went on to earn over $ 361 million worldwide . Reviews were positive , praising both the animation 's technical innovation and the screenplay 's wit and sophistication , and it is now widely considered by many critics to be one of the best animated films ever made . The film received three Academy Award nominations , including Best Original Screenplay , Best Original Score , and Best Original Song for " You 've Got a Friend in Me " , as well as winning a Special Achievement Academy Award . It was inducted into the National Film Registry as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " in 2005 , its first year of eligibility . In addition to home media releases and theatrical re @-@ releases , Toy Story @-@ inspired material has run the gamut from toys , video games , theme park attractions , spin @-@ offs , merchandise , and two sequels — Toy Story 2 ( 1999 ) and Toy Story 3 ( 2010 ) — both of which also garnered massive commercial success and critical acclaim , with a third sequel , Toy Story 4 , slated for a 2018 release . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a world where toys are living things who pretend to be lifeless when their owners are present , a group of toys owned by a six @-@ year @-@ old boy , Andy Davis ( John Morris ) , are caught off @-@ guard when Andy 's birthday party is moved up a week , as Andy , his single mother ( Laurie Metcalf ) and infant sister Molly are preparing to move the following week . The toys ' leader and Andy 's favorite toy , an old fashioned cowboy doll named Sheriff Woody ( Tom Hanks ) organizes the other toys , including Bo Peep the shepherdess ( Annie Potts ) , Mr. Potato Head ( Don Rickles ) , Rex the Dinosaur ( Wallace Shawn ) , Hamm the Piggy Bank ( John Ratzenberger ) and Slinky Dog ( Jim Varney ) , into a scouting mission . Green army men , led by Sarge ( R. Lee Ermey ) , spy on the party and report the results to the others via baby monitors . The toys are relieved when the party appears to end with none of them having been replaced , but then Andy receives a surprise gift – an electronic toy space ranger action figure named Buzz Lightyear ( Tim Allen ) , who believes that he is an actual space ranger . 
 Buzz impresses the other toys with his various features , and Andy begins to favor him , making Woody feel left out . As Andy prepares for a family outing at Pizza Planet , his mother allows him to bring only one toy along . Fearing Andy will choose Buzz , Woody attempts to trap him behind a desk , but ends up knocking him out a window instead , resulting in the other toys accusing Woody of murdering Buzz out of jealousy . Before they can exact punishment , Andy takes Woody instead and leaves for Pizza Planet . When the family stops for gas , Woody finds that Buzz has hitched a ride on the car as well , and the two fight , only to find the family has left without them . They manage to make their way to the restaurant by stowing away on a pizza delivery truck , where Buzz , still believing he is a real space ranger despite Woody 's attempts to convince him otherwise , gets himself stuck in a crane game , where he is picked out by Andy 's destructive neighbor Sid Phillips ( Erik von Detten ) . 
 Buzz attempts to escape from Sid 's house , but fails , and , finally discovering he is a toy , sinks into despondence . Sid plans to launch Buzz on a firework rocket , but his plans are delayed by a thunderstorm . Woody tells Buzz about the joy he can bring to Andy as a toy , restoring his confidence . The next morning , Woody and Sid 's mutant toy creations rescue Buzz just as Sid is about to launch the rocket and scare Sid into no longer abusing toys by coming to life in front of him . Woody and Buzz then leave Sid 's house just as Andy and his family drive away toward their new home . 
 The duo try to make it to the moving truck , but Sid 's dog , Scud , sees them and gives chase . Woody tries rescuing Buzz with Andy 's RC car , but the other toys , thinking Woody eliminated RC as well , attack and toss him off the truck . Having evaded Scud , Buzz and RC pick up Woody and continue after the truck . Upon seeing Woody and Buzz together on RC , the other toys realize their mistake and try to help them get back aboard but RC 's batteries become depleted , stranding them . Woody ignites the rocket on Buzz 's back and manages to throw RC into the truck before they soar into the air . Buzz opens his wings to free himself from the rocket before it explodes , gliding with Woody to land safely into a box in the van , right next to Andy . 
 On Christmas Day , at their new house , Woody and Buzz stage another reconnaissance mission to prepare for the new toy arrivals . As Woody jokingly asks what might be worse than Buzz , they discover Andy 's new gift is a puppy , and the two share a worried smile . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Main cast = = = 
 Tom Hanks as Sheriff Woody , a cowboy pull @-@ string doll . 
 Tim Allen as Buzz Lightyear , a space ranger action figure and Woody 's rival , who later becomes his best friend . 
 Don Rickles as Mr. Potato Head , a potato shaped doll with put together pieces on his body . 
 Jim Varney as Slinky Dog , a dachshund slink toy . 
 Wallace Shawn as Rex , a cowardly green Tyrannosaurus rex . 
 John Ratzenberger as Hamm , a piggy bank 
 Annie Potts as Bo Peep , a shepherdess and Woody 's love interest . 
 John Morris as Andy Davis , Woody and Buzz 's owner . 
 Erik von Detten as Sid Phillips , Andy 's next door neighbor and a ten @-@ year @-@ old bully , who tortures toys for his own amusement . 
 Laurie Metcalf as Mrs. Davis , Andy 's single mother . 
 R. Lee Ermey as Sarge , a green plastic figure soldier , and the leader of the other green soldiers . 
 Sarah Freeman as Hannah Phillips , Sid 's younger sister . 
 = = = Additional voices = = = 
 Penn Jillette as TV announcer 
 Hannah Unkrich as Molly Davis , Andy 's baby sister 
 Jack Angel as Shark / Rocky Gibraltar 
 Greg Berg as Minesweeper Soldier 
 Debi Derryberry as Squeeze toy aliens / Pizza Planet <unk> 
 Mickie McGowan as Ms. Phillips , Sid 's mother 
 Ryan O <unk> as kid in Buzz Lightyear commercial 
 Jeff Pidgeon as Squeeze toy aliens / Mr. Spell / Robot 
 Phil Proctor as Pizza Planet guard / bowling announcer 
 Joe Ranft as Lenny 
 Andrew Stanton as Buzz Lightyear commercial chorus 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Director John Lasseter 's first experience with computer animation was during his work as an animator at Walt Disney Feature Animation , when two of his friends showed him the <unk> scene from Tron . It was an eye @-@ opening experience which awakened Lasseter to the possibilities offered by the new medium of computer @-@ generated animation . Lasseter tried to pitch the idea of a fully computer @-@ animated film to Disney , but the idea was rejected and Lasseter was fired . He then went on to work at Lucasfilm and later as a founding member of Pixar , which was purchased by entrepreneur and Apple Inc. founder Steve Jobs in 1986 . At Pixar , Lasseter created short , computer @-@ animated films to show off the Pixar Image Computer 's capabilities , and Tin Toy ( 1988 ) — a short told from the perspective of a toy , referencing Lasseter 's love of classic toys — would go on to claim the 1988 Academy Award for animated short films , the first computer @-@ generated film to do so . 
 Tin Toy gained Disney 's attention , and the new team at The Walt Disney Company — CEO Michael Eisner and chairman Jeffrey Katzenberg in the film division — began a quest to get Lasseter to come back . Lasseter , grateful for Jobs ' faith in him , felt compelled to stay with Pixar , telling co @-@ founder Ed Catmull , " I can go to Disney and be a director , or I can stay here and make history . " Katzenberg realized he could not lure Lasseter back to Disney and therefore set plans into motion to ink a production deal with Pixar to produce a film . Disney had always made all their movies in @-@ house , and refused to change this . But when Tim Burton , who used to work at Disney , wanted to buy back the rights to The Nightmare Before Christmas , Disney struck a deal allowing him to make it as a Disney movie outside the studio . This opened the door for Pixar to make their movies outside Disney . 
 Both sides were willing . Catmull and fellow Pixar co @-@ founder Alvy Ray Smith had long wanted to produce a computer @-@ animated feature . In addition , Disney had licensed Pixar 's Computer Animation Production System ( CAPS ) , and that made it the largest customer for Pixar 's computers . Jobs made it apparent to Katzenberg that although Disney was happy with Pixar , it was not the other way around : " We want to do a film with you , " said Jobs . " That would make us happy . " At this same time , Peter Schneider , president of Walt Disney Feature Animation , was potentially interested in making a feature film with Pixar . When Catmull , Smith and head of animation Ralph Guggenheim met with Schneider in the summer of 1990 , they found the atmosphere to be puzzling and contentious . They later learned that Katzenberg intended that if Disney were to make a film with Pixar , it would be outside Schneider 's purview , which aggravated Schneider . After that first meeting , the Pixar contingent went home with low expectations and were surprised when Katzenberg called for another conference . Catmull , Smith and Guggenheim were joined by Bill Reeves ( head of animation research and development ) , Jobs , and Lasseter . They brought with them an idea for a half @-@ hour television special called A Tin Toy Christmas . They reasoned that a television program would be a sensible way to gain experience before tackling a feature film . 
 They met with Katzenberg at a conference table in the Team Disney building at the Walt Disney Studios in Burbank . Catmull and Smith considered it would be difficult to keep Katzenberg interested in working with the company over time . They considered it even more difficult to sell Lasseter and the junior animators on the idea of working with Disney , who had a bad reputation for how they treated their animators , and Katzenberg , who had built a reputation as a micromanaging tyrant . Katzenberg asserted this himself in the meeting : " Everybody thinks I 'm a tyrant . I am a tyrant . But I 'm usually right . " He threw out the idea of a half @-@ hour special and eyed Lasseter as the key talent in the room : " John , since you won 't come work for me , I 'm going to make it work this way . " He invited the six visitors to mingle with the animators — " ask them anything at all " — and the men did so , finding they all backed up Katzenberg 's statements . Lasseter felt he would be able to work with Disney and the two companies began negotiations . Pixar at this time was on the verge of bankruptcy and needed a deal with Disney . Katzenberg insisted that Disney be given the rights to Pixar 's proprietary technology for making 3 @-@ D animation , but Jobs refused . In another case , Jobs demanded Pixar would have part ownership of the film and its characters , sharing control of both video rights and sequels , but Katzenberg refused . Disney and Pixar reached accord on contract terms in an agreement dated May 3 , 1991 , and signed on in early July . Eventually the deal specified that Disney would own the picture and its characters outright , have creative control , and pay Pixar about 12 @.@ 5 % of the ticket revenues . It had the option ( but not the obligation ) to do Pixar 's next two films and the right to make ( with or without Pixar ) sequels using the characters in the film . Disney could also kill the film at any time with only a small penalty . These early negotiations would become a point of contention between Jobs and Eisner for many years . 
 An agreement to produce a feature film based on Tin Toy with a working title of Toy Story was finalized and production began soon thereafter . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The original treatment for Toy Story , drafted by Lasseter , Andrew Stanton , and Pete Docter , had little in common with the eventual finished film . It paired Tinny , the one @-@ man band from Tin Toy with a ventriloquist 's dummy and sent them on a sprawling odyssey . Under studio head Jeffrey Katzenberg , Woody was the main villain , abusing the other toys until they rallied against him ; however after Disney executive saw the storyboards they relinquished creative control to Pixar . The core idea of Toy Story was present from the treatment onward , however : that " toys deeply want children to play with them , and that this desire drives their hopes , fears , and actions . " Katzenberg felt the original treatment was problematic and told Lasseter to reshape Toy Story as more of an odd @-@ couple buddy picture , and suggested they watch some classic buddy movies , such as The Defiant Ones and 48 <unk> . , in which two characters with different attitudes are thrown together and have to bond . Lasseter , Stanton , and Docter emerged in early September 1991 with the second treatment , and although the lead characters were still Tinny and the dummy , the outline of the final film was beginning to take shape . 
 The script went through many changes before the final version . Lasseter decided Tinny was " too antiquated " , and the character was changed to a military action figure , and then given a space theme . Tinny 's name changed to Lunar Larry , then Tempus from Morph , and eventually Buzz Lightyear ( after astronaut Buzz Aldrin ) . Lightyear 's design was modeled on the suits worn by Apollo astronauts as well as G.I. Joe action figures . In addition , the green and purple color scheme on Lightyear 's suit was inspired by Lasseter and his wife , Nancy , whose favorite colors were green and purple respectively . Woody , the second character , was inspired by a Casper the Friendly Ghost doll that Lasseter had when he was a child . Originally , Woody was a ventriloquist 's dummy with a pull @-@ string ( hence the name Woody ) . However , character designer Bud Luckey suggested that Woody could be changed to a cowboy ventriloquist dummy . John Lasseter liked the contrast between the Western and the science fiction genres and the character immediately changed . Eventually all the ventriloquist dummy aspects of the character were deleted , because the dummy was designed to look " sneaky and mean . " However they kept the name Woody to pay homage to the Western actor Woody Strode . The story department drew inspiration from films such as Midnight Run and The Odd Couple , and Lasseter screened Hayao Miyazaki 's Castle in the Sky ( 1986 ) for further influence . 
 Toy Story 's script was strongly influenced by the ideas of screenwriter Robert McKee . The members of Pixar 's story team — Lasseter , Stanton , Docter and Joe Ranft — were aware that most of them were beginners at writing for feature films . None of them had any feature story or writing credits to their name besides Ranft , who had taught a story class at CalArts and did some storyboard work prior . Seeking insight , Lasseter and Docter attended a three @-@ day seminar in Los Angeles given by McKee . His principles , grounded in Aristotle 's Poetics , dictated that a character emerges most realistically and compellingly from the choices that the protagonist makes in reaction to his problems . Disney also appointed Joel Cohen , Alec Sokolow and , later , Joss Whedon to help develop the script . Whedon found that the script wasn 't working but had a great structure , and added the character of Rex and sought a pivotal role for Barbie . The story team continued to touch up the script as production was underway . Among the late additions was the encounter between Buzz and the alien squeaky toys at Pizza Planet , which emerged from a brainstorming session with a dozen directors , story artists , and animators from Disney . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Katzenberg gave approval for the script on January 19 , 1993 , at which point voice casting could begin . Lasseter always wanted Tom Hanks to play the character of Woody . Lasseter claimed Hanks " has the ability to take emotions and make them appealing . Even if the character , like the one in A League of Their Own , is down @-@ and @-@ out and despicable . " Paul Newman , who subsequently accepted the role of Doc Hudson in another Pixar success , Cars , was considered for the role of Woody . Billy Crystal was approached to play Buzz , but turned down the role , which he later regretted , and subsequently accepted the role of Mike Wazowski in another Pixar success , Monsters , Inc .. In addition to Crystal , Bill Murray , Chevy Chase and Jim Carrey were also considered for Buzz . Lasseter took the role to Tim Allen , who was appearing in Disney 's Home Improvement , and he accepted . 
 To gauge how an actor 's voice would fit with a character , Lasseter borrowed a common Disney technique : animate a vocal monologue from a well @-@ established actor to meld the actor 's voice with the appearance or actions of the animated character . This early test footage , using Hanks ' voice from Turner & Hooch , convinced Hanks to sign on to the film . Toy Story was both Hanks ' and Allen 's first animated film role . 
 = = = Production shutdown = = = 
 Every couple of weeks , Lasseter and his team would put together their latest set of storyboards or footage to show Disney . In early screen tests , Pixar impressed Disney with the technical innovation but convincing Disney of the plot was more difficult . At each presentation by Pixar , Katzenberg would tear much of it up , giving out detailed comments and notes . Katzenberg 's big push was to add more edginess to the two main characters . Disney wanted the film to appeal to both children and adults , and asked for adult references to be added to the film . After many rounds of notes from Katzenberg and other Disney execs , the general consensus was that Woody had been stripped of almost all charm . Tom Hanks , while recording the dialogue for the story reels , exclaimed at one point that the character was a jerk . Lasseter and his Pixar team had the first half of the movie ready to screen , so they brought it down to Burbank to show to Katzenberg and other Disney executives on November 19 , 1993 , an event they later dubbed " The Black Friday Incident . " The results were disastrous , and Schneider , who was never particularly enamored of Katzenberg 's idea of having outsiders make animation for Disney , declared it a mess and ordered that production be stopped immediately . Katzenberg asked colleague Thomas Schumacher why the reels were bad . Schumacher replied bluntly : " Because it 's not their movie anymore , it 's completely not the movie that John set out to make . " 
 Lasseter was embarrassed with what was on the screen , later recalling , " It was a story filled with the most unhappy , mean characters that I 've ever seen . " He asked Disney for the chance to retreat back to Pixar and rework the script in two weeks , and Katzenberg was supportive . Lasseter , Stanton , Docter and Ranft delivered the news of the production shutdown to the production crew , many of whom had left other jobs to work on the project . In the meantime , the crew would shift to television commercials while the head writers worked out a new script . Although Lasseter kept morale high by remaining outwardly buoyant , the production shutdown was " a very scary time , " recalled story department manager BZ Petroff . Schneider had initially wanted to shutdown production altogether and fire all recently hired animators . Katzenberg put the film under the wing of Walt Disney Feature Animation . The Pixar team was pleased that the move would give them an open door to counsel from Disney 's animation veterans . Schneider , however , continued to take a dim view of the project and would later go over Katzenberg 's head to urge Eisner to cancel it . Stanton retreated into a small , dark , windowless office , emerging periodically with new script pages . He and the other story artists would then draw the shots on storyboards . Whedon came back to Pixar for part of the shutdown to help with revising , and the script was revised in two weeks as promised . When Katzenberg and Schneider halted production on Toy Story , Steve Jobs kept the work going with his own personal funding . Jobs did not insert himself much into the creative process , respecting the artists at Pixar and instead managing the relationship with Disney . 
 The Pixar team came back with a new script three months later , with the character of Woody morphed from being a tyrannical boss of Andy 's other toys to being their wise and caring leader . It also included a more adult @-@ oriented staff meeting amongst the toys rather than a juvenile group discussion that had existed in earlier drafts . Buzz Lightyear 's character was also changed slightly " to make it more clear to the audience that he really doesn 't realize he 's a toy . " Katzenberg and Schneider approved the new approach , and by February 1994 the film was back in production . The voice actors returned in March 1994 to record their new lines . When production was greenlit , the crew quickly grew from its original size of 24 to 110 , including 27 animators , 22 technical directors , and 61 other artists and engineers . In comparison , The Lion King , released in 1994 , required a budget of $ 45 million and a staff of 800 . In the early budgeting process , Jobs was eager to produce the film as efficiently as possible , impressing Katzenberg with his focus on cost @-@ cutting . Despite this , the $ 17 million production budget was proving inadequate , especially given the major revision that was necessary after Katzenberg had pushed them to make Woody too edgy . Jobs demanded more funds to complete the film right , and insisted that Disney was liable for the cost overruns . Katzenberg was not willing , and Ed Catmull , described as " more diplomatic than Jobs , " was able to reach a compromise . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 Recruiting animators for Toy Story was brisk ; the magnet for talent was not the pay , generally mediocre , but rather the allure of taking part in the first computer @-@ animated feature . Lasseter said that on the challenges of the computer animation in the film " We had to make things look more organic . Every leaf and blade of grass had to be created . We had to give the world a sense of history . So the doors are banged up , the floors have scuffs . " The film began with animated storyboards to guide the animators in developing the characters . 27 animators worked on the film , using 400 computer models to animate the characters . Each character was either created out of clay or was first modeled off of a computer @-@ drawn diagram before reaching the computer animated design . Once the animators had a model , articulation and motion controls were coded ; this would allow each character to move in a variety of ways , such as talking , walking , or jumping . Out of all the characters , Woody was the most complex , as he required 723 motion controls , including 212 for his face and 58 for his mouth . The first piece of animation , a 30 @-@ second test , was delivered to Disney in June 1992 , when the company requested a sample of what the film would look like . Lasseter wanted to impress Disney with a number of things in the test that could not be done in traditional , hand @-@ drawn animation , such as Woody 's yellow plaid shirt with red stripes , the reflections in Buzz 's helmet and the decals on his space suit , or venetian blind shadows falling across Andy 's room . 
 Every shot in the film passed through the hands of eight different teams . The art department gave each shot its color scheme and general lighting . Under Craig Good , the layout department then placed the models in the shot , framed it by setting the location of the virtual camera , and programmed any camera movement . To make the medium feel as familiar as possible , they sought to stay within the limits of what might be done in a live @-@ action film with real cameras , dollies , tripods , and cranes . Headed by directing animators Rich Quade and Ash Brannon , each shot went to the animation department from layout . Lasseter opted against Disney 's approach of assigning an animator to work on a character throughout a film , but made certain exceptions in scenes where he thought acting was particularly critical . The animators used the <unk> program to set each character in a desired pose . Once a sequence of hand @-@ built poses ( or " <unk> " ) was created , the software would build poses for the frames in @-@ between . The animators studied videotapes of the actors for inspiration , and Lasseter rejected automatic lip @-@ syncing . To sync the characters ' mouths and facial expressions to the actors ' recorded voices , animators spent a week per 8 seconds of animation . 
 Afterward , the animators would compile the scenes , and develop a new storyboard with the computer @-@ animated characters . They then added shading , lighting , visual effects , and finally used 300 computer processors to render the film to its final design . Under Tom Porter , the shading team used RenderMan 's shader language to create shader programs for each of a model 's surfaces . A few surfaces in Toy Story came from real objects : a shader for the curtain fabric in Andy 's room used a scan of actual cloth . Under <unk> Susman and Sharon Calahan , the lighting team orchestrated the final lighting of the shot after animation and shading . Each completed shot then went into rendering on a " render farm " of 117 Sun Microsystems computers that ran 24 hours a day . Finished animation emerged in a steady drip of around three minutes a week . Depending on its complexity , each frame took from 45 minutes up to 30 hours to render . The film required 800 @,@ 000 machine hours and 114 @,@ 240 frames of animation in total . There are over 77 minutes of animation spread across 1 @,@ 561 shots . A camera team , aided by David DiFrancesco , recorded the frames onto film stock . Toy Story was rendered at a mere 1 @,@ 536 by 922 pixels , with each of them corresponding to roughly a quarter inch of screen area on a typical cinema screen . During post @-@ production , the film was sent to Skywalker Sound , where the sound effects were mixed with the music score . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Disney was concerned with Lasseter 's position on the use of music . Unlike other Disney films of the time , Lasseter did not want the film to be a musical , saying it was a buddy film featuring " real toys . " Joss Whedon agreed saying , " It would have been a really bad musical , because it 's a buddy movie . It 's about people who won 't admit what they want , much less sing about it . ... Buddy movies are about sublimating , punching an arm , ' I hate you . ' It 's not about open emotion . " However , Disney favored the musical format , claiming " Musicals are our orientation . Characters breaking into song is a great shorthand . It takes some of the onus off what they 're asking for . " Disney and Pixar reached a compromise : the characters in Toy Story would not break into song , but the film would use songs over the action , as in The Graduate , to convey and amplify the emotions that Buzz and Woody were feeling . Disney and Lasseter tapped Randy Newman to compose the film . The edited Toy Story was due to Newman and Gary Rydstrom in late September 1995 for their final work on the score and sound design , respectively . 
 Lasseter claimed " His songs are touching , witty , and satirical , and he would deliver the emotional underpinning for every scene . " Newman developed the film 's signature song " You 've Got a Friend in Me " in one day . 
 = = = Editing and pre @-@ release = = = 
 It was difficult for crew members to perceive the film 's quality during much of the production process , when the finished footage was in scattered pieces and lacked elements like music and sound design . Some animators felt the film would be a significant disappointment commercially , but felt animators and animation fans would find it interesting . According to Lee Unkrich , one of the original editors of Toy Story , a scene was cut out of the original final edit . The scene features Sid , after Pizza Planet , torturing Buzz and Woody violently . Unkrich decided to cut right into the scene where Sid is interrogating the toys because the creators of the movie thought the audience would be loving Buzz and Woody at that point . Another scene , where Woody was trying to get Buzz 's attention when he was stuck in the box crate , was shortened because the creators felt it would lose the energy of the movie . Peter Schneider had grown optimistic about the film as it neared completion , and announced a United States release date of November , coinciding with Thanksgiving weekend and the start of the winter holiday season . 
 Sources indicate that executive producer Steve Jobs lacked confidence in the film during its production , and he had been talking to various companies , ranging from Hallmark to Microsoft , about selling Pixar . However , as the film progressed , Jobs became ever more excited about it , feeling that he might be on the verge of transforming the movie industry . As scenes from the movie were finished , he watched them repeatedly and had friends come by his home to share his new passion . Jobs decided that the release of Toy Story that November would be the occasion to take Pixar public . A test audience near Anaheim in late July 1995 indicated the need for last @-@ minute tweaks , which added further pressure to the already frenetic final weeks . Response cards from the audience were encouraging , but were not top of the scale , adding further question as to how audiences would respond . The film ended with a shot of Andy 's house and the sound of a new puppy . Michael Eisner , who attended the screening , told Lasseter afterward that the film needed to end with a shot of Woody and Buzz together , reacting to the news of the puppy . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack for Toy Story was produced by Walt Disney Records and was released on November 22 , 1995 , the week of the film 's release . Scored and written by Randy Newman , the soundtrack has received praise for its " sprightly , stirring score " . Despite the album 's critical success , the soundtrack only peaked at number 94 on the Billboard 200 album chart . A cassette and CD single release of " You 've Got a Friend in Me " was released on April 12 , 1996 , to promote the soundtrack 's release . The soundtrack was remastered in 2006 . After it went out of print , the album was made available for purchase digitally in retailers such as iTunes . The soundtrack , along with Newman 's complete unreleased score for the film was reissued on July 17 , 2015 as part of the Walt Disney Records : The Legacy Collection series . 
 Track listing 
 All songs written and composed by Randy Newman . 
 Charts 
 = = Release = = 
 There were two premieres of Toy Story in November 1995 . Disney organized one at the El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles , and built a fun house , Totally Toy Story , next door featuring the characters . Jobs did not attend and instead rented the Regency , a similar theater in San Francisco , and held his own premiere the next night . Instead of Tom Hanks and Tim Allen , the guests were Silicon Valley celebrities , such as Larry Ellison and Andy Grove . The dueling premieres highlighted a festering issue between the companies : whether Toy Story was a Disney or a Pixar film . " The audience appeared to be captivated by the film , " wrote David Price in his 2008 book The Pixar Touch . " Adult @-@ voiced sobs could be heard during the quiet moments after Buzz Lightyear fell and lay broken on the stairway landing . " Toy Story opened on 2 @,@ 281 screens in the United States on November 22 , 1995 ( before later expanding to 2 @,@ 574 screens ) . It was paired alongside a reissue of a Roger Rabbit short called Rollercoaster Rabbit , while select prints contained The Adventures of André and Wally B .. 
