 = = = Background = = = 
 Jinnah 's given name at birth was <unk> Jinnahbhai , and was born most likely in 1876 , to Jinnahbhai <unk> and his wife Mithibai , in a rented apartment on the second floor of Wazir Mansion , Karachi now in Sind , Pakistan , but then within the Bombay Presidency of British India . Jinnah 's family was from a Gujarati , <unk> ( Shia ) Ismaili background , though Jinnah later followed the Twelver Shi 'a teachings . Jinnah was from a middle @-@ income background , his father was a merchant and was born to a family of weavers in the village of <unk> in the princely state of <unk> ( Kathiawar , Gujarat ) ; his mother was also of that village . They had moved to Karachi in 1875 , having married before their departure . Karachi was then enjoying an economic boom : the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 meant it was 200 nautical miles closer to Europe for shipping than Bombay . Jinnah was the second child ; he had three brothers and three sisters , including his younger sister Fatima Jinnah . The parents were native Gujarati speakers , and the children also came to speak <unk> and English . Except for Fatima , little is known of his siblings , where they settled or if they met with their brother as he advanced in his legal and political careers . 
 As a boy , Jinnah lived for a time in Bombay with an aunt and may have attended the <unk> Das Tej Primary School there , later on studying at the Cathedral and John Connon School . In Karachi , he attended the Sindh @-@ Madrasa @-@ <unk> @-@ Islam and the Christian Missionary Society High School . He gained his matriculation from Bombay University at the high school . In his later years and especially after his death , a large number of stories about the boyhood of Pakistan 's founder were circulated : that he spent all his spare time at the police court , listening to the proceedings , and that he studied his books by the glow of street lights for lack of other illumination . His official biographer , Hector Bolitho , writing in 1954 , interviewed surviving boyhood associates , and obtained a tale that the young Jinnah discouraged other children from playing marbles in the dust , urging them to rise up , keep their hands and clothes clean , and play cricket instead . 
 = = = In England = = = 
 In 1892 , Sir Frederick Leigh Croft , a business associate of Jinnahbhai <unk> , offered young Jinnah a London apprenticeship with his firm , Graham 's Shipping and Trading Company . He accepted the position despite the opposition of his mother , who before he left , had him enter an arranged marriage with a girl two years his junior from the ancestral village of <unk> , <unk> Jinnah . Jinnah 's mother and first wife both died during his absence in England . Although the apprenticeship in London was considered a great opportunity for Jinnah , one reason for sending him overseas was a legal proceeding against his father , which placed the family 's property at risk of being sequestered by the court . In 1893 , the Jinnahbhai family moved to Bombay . 
 Soon after his arrival in London , Jinnah gave up the apprenticeship in order to study law , enraging his father , who had , before his departure , given him enough money to live for three years . The aspiring barrister joined Lincoln 's Inn , later stating that the reason he chose Lincoln 's over the other Inns of Court was that over the main entrance to Lincoln 's Inn were the names of the world 's great lawgivers , including Muhammad . Jinnah 's biographer Stanley Wolpert notes that there is no such inscription , but instead inside is a mural showing Muhammad and other lawgivers , and speculates that Jinnah may have edited the story in his own mind to avoid mentioning a pictorial depiction which would be offensive to many Muslims . Jinnah 's legal education followed the pupillage ( legal apprenticeship ) system , which had been in force there for centuries . To gain knowledge of the law , he followed an established barrister and learned from what he did , as well as from studying <unk> . During this period , he shortened his name to Muhammad Ali Jinnah . 
 During his student years in England , Jinnah was influenced by 19th @-@ century British liberalism , like many other future Indian independence leaders . This political education included exposure to the idea of the democratic nation , and progressive politics . He became an admirer of the Parsi Indian political leaders Dadabhai Naoroji and Sir Pherozeshah Mehta . Naoroji had become the first British Member of Parliament of Indian extraction shortly before Jinnah 's arrival , triumphing with a majority of five votes in Finsbury Central . Jinnah listened to Naoroji 's maiden speech in the House of Commons from the visitor 's gallery . 
 The Western world not only inspired Jinnah in his political life , but also greatly influenced his personal preferences , particularly when it came to dress . Jinnah abandoned Indian garb for Western @-@ style clothing , and throughout his life he was always impeccably dressed in public . He came to own over 200 suits , which he wore with heavily starched shirts with detachable collars , and as a barrister took pride in never wearing the same silk tie twice . Even when he was dying , he insisted on being formally dressed , " I will not travel in my pyjamas . " In his later years he was usually seen wearing a <unk> hat which subsequently came to be known as the " Jinnah cap " . 
 Dissatisfied with the law , Jinnah briefly embarked on a stage career with a Shakespearean company , but resigned after receiving a stern letter from his father . In 1895 , at age 19 , he became the youngest Indian to be called to the bar in England . Although he returned to Karachi , he remained there only a short time before moving to Bombay . 
 = = Legal and early political career = = 
 = = = Barrister = = = 
 At the age of 20 , Jinnah began his practice in Bombay , the only Muslim barrister in the city . English had become his principal language and would remain so throughout his life . His first three years in the law , from 1897 to 1900 , brought him few briefs . His first step towards a brighter career occurred when the acting Advocate General of Bombay , John Molesworth MacPherson , invited Jinnah to work from his chambers . In 1900 , P. H. <unk> , a Bombay presidency magistrate , left the post temporarily and Jinnah succeeded in getting the interim position . After his six @-@ month appointment period , Jinnah was offered a permanent position on a 1 @,@ 500 rupee per month salary . Jinnah politely declined the offer , stating that he planned to earn 1 @,@ 500 rupees a day — a huge sum at that time — which he eventually did . Nevertheless , as Governor @-@ General of Pakistan , he would refuse to accept a large salary , fixing it at 1 rupee per month . 
 As a lawyer , Jinnah gained fame for his skilled handling of the 1907 " Caucus Case " . This controversy arose out of Bombay municipal elections , which Indians alleged were rigged by a " caucus " of Europeans to keep Sir Pherozeshah Mehta out of the council . Jinnah gained great esteem from leading the case for Sir Pherozeshah , himself a noted barrister . Although Jinnah did not win the Caucus Case , he posted a successful record , becoming well known for his advocacy and legal logic . In 1908 , his factional foe in the Indian National Congress , Bal Gangadhar Tilak , was arrested for sedition . Before Tilak unsuccessfully represented himself at trial , he engaged Jinnah in an attempt to secure his release on bail . Jinnah did not succeed , but obtained an acquittal for Tilak when he was charged with sedition again in 1916 . 
 One of Jinnah 's fellow barristers from the Bombay High Court remembered that " Jinnah 's faith in himself was incredible " ; he recalled that on being admonished by a judge with " Mr. Jinnah , remember that you are not addressing a third @-@ class magistrate " , Jinnah shot back , " My Lord , allow me to warn you that you are not addressing a third @-@ class pleader . " Another of his fellow barristers described him , saying : 
 He was what God made him , a great pleader . He had a sixth sense : he could see around corners . That is where his talents lay ... he was a very clear thinker ... But he drove his points home — points chosen with exquisite selection — slow delivery , word by word . 
 = = = Rising leader = = = 
 In 1857 , many Indians had risen in revolt against British rule . In the aftermath of the conflict , some Anglo @-@ Indians , as well as Indians in Britain , called for greater self @-@ government for the subcontinent , resulting in the founding of the Indian National Congress in 1885 . Most founding members had been educated in Britain , and were content with the minimal reform efforts being made by the government . Muslims were not enthusiastic about calls for democratic institutions in British India , as they constituted a quarter to a third of the population , outnumbered by the Hindus . Early meetings of the Congress contained a minority of Muslims , mostly from the elite . 
 Jinnah devoted much of his time to his law practice in the early 1920s , but remained politically involved . Jinnah began political life by attending the Congress 's twentieth annual meeting , in Bombay in December 1904 . He was a member of the moderate group in the Congress , favouring Hindu – Muslim unity in achieving self @-@ government , and following such leaders as Mehta , Naoroji , and Gopal Krishna Gokhale . They were opposed by leaders such as Tilak and Lala Lajpat Rai , who sought quick action towards freedom . In 1906 , a delegation of Muslim leaders headed by the Aga Khan called on the new Viceroy of India , Lord Minto , to assure him of their loyalty and to ask for assurances that in any political reforms they would be protected from the " unsympathetic [ Hindu ] majority " . Dissatisfied with this , Jinnah wrote a letter to the editor of the newspaper Gujarati , asking what right the members of the delegation had to speak for Indian Muslims , as they were unelected and self @-@ appointed . When many of the same leaders met in Dacca in December of that year to form the All @-@ India Muslim League to advocate for their community 's interests , Jinnah was again opposed . The Aga Khan later wrote that it was " freakishly ironic " that Jinnah , who would lead the League to independence , " came out in bitter hostility toward all that I and my friends had done ... He said that our principle of separate electorates was dividing the nation against itself . " In its earliest years , however , the League was not influential ; Minto refused to consider it as the Muslim community 's representative , and it was ineffective in preventing the 1911 repeal of the partition of Bengal , an action seen as a blow to Muslim interests . 
 Although Jinnah initially opposed separate electorates for Muslims , he used this means to gain his first elective office in 1909 , as Bombay 's Muslim representative on the Imperial Legislative Council . He was a compromise candidate when two older , better @-@ known Muslims who were seeking the post deadlocked . The council , which had been expanded to 60 members as part of reforms enacted by Minto , recommended legislation to the Viceroy . Only officials could vote in the council ; non @-@ official members , such as Jinnah , had no vote . Throughout his legal career , Jinnah practised probate law ( with many clients from India 's nobility ) , and in 1911 introduced the Wakf Validation Act to place Muslim religious trusts on a sound legal footing under British Indian law . Two years later , the measure passed , the first act sponsored by non @-@ officials to pass the council and be enacted by the Viceroy . Jinnah was also appointed to a committee which helped to establish the Indian Military Academy in Dehra Dun . 
 In December 1912 , Jinnah addressed the annual meeting of the Muslim League , although he was not yet a member . He joined the following year , although he remained a member of the Congress as well and stressed that League membership took second priority to the " greater national cause " of a free India . In April 1913 , he again went to Britain , with Gokhale , to meet with officials on behalf of the Congress . Gokhale , a Hindu , later stated that Jinnah " has true stuff in him , and that freedom from all sectarian prejudice which will make him the best ambassador of Hindu – Muslim Unity " . Jinnah led another delegation of the Congress to London in 1914 , but due to the start of the First World War found officials little interested in Indian reforms . By coincidence , he was in Britain at the same time as a man who would become a great political rival of his , Mohandas Gandhi , a Hindu lawyer who had become well known for advocating satyagraha , non @-@ violent non @-@ cooperation , while in South Africa . Jinnah attended a reception for Gandhi , and returned home to India in January 1915 . 
 = = = Break from the Congress = = = 
 Jinnah 's moderate faction in the Congress was undermined by the deaths of Mehta and Gokhale in 1915 ; he was further isolated by the fact that Naoroji was in London , where he remained until his death in 1917 . Nevertheless , Jinnah worked to bring the Congress and League together . In 1916 , with Jinnah now president of the Muslim League , the two organisations signed the Lucknow Pact , setting quotas for Muslim and Hindu representation in the various provinces . Although the pact was never fully implemented , its signing ushered in a period of cooperation between the Congress and the League . 
 During the war , Jinnah joined other Indian moderates in supporting the British war effort , hoping that Indians would be rewarded with political freedoms . Jinnah played an important role in the founding of the All India Home Rule League in 1916 . Along with political leaders Annie Besant and Tilak , Jinnah demanded " home rule " for India — the status of a self @-@ governing dominion in the Empire similar to Canada , New Zealand and Australia , although , with the war , Britain 's politicians were not interested in considering Indian constitutional reform . British Cabinet minister Edwin Montagu recalled Jinnah in his memoirs , " young , perfectly mannered , impressive @-@ looking , armed to the teeth with dialectics , and insistent on the whole of his scheme " . 
 In 1918 , Jinnah married his second wife Rattanbai Petit ( " <unk> " ) , 24 years his junior . She was the fashionable young daughter of his friend Sir Dinshaw Petit , of an elite Parsi family of Bombay . There was great opposition to the marriage from Rattanbai 's family and the Parsi community , as well as from some Muslim religious leaders . Rattanbai defied her family and nominally converted to Islam , adopting ( though never using ) the name Maryam Jinnah , resulting in a permanent estrangement from her family and Parsi society . The couple resided in Bombay , and frequently travelled across India and Europe . The couple 's only child , daughter Dina , was born on 15 August 1919 . The couple separated prior to <unk> 's death in 1929 , and subsequently Jinnah 's sister Fatima looked after him and his child . 
 Relations between Indians and British were strained in 1919 when the Imperial Legislative Council extended emergency wartime restrictions on civil liberties ; Jinnah resigned from it when it did . There was unrest across India , which worsened after the Jallianwala Bagh massacre in Amritsar , in which British troops fired upon a protest meeting , killing hundreds . In the wake of Amritsar , Gandhi , who had returned to India and become a widely respected leader and highly influential in the Congress , called for satyagraha against the British . Gandhi 's proposal gained broad Hindu support , and was also attractive to many Muslims of the Khilafat faction . These Muslims , supported by Gandhi , sought retention of the Ottoman caliphate , which supplied spiritual leadership to many Muslims . The caliph was the Ottoman Emperor , who would be deprived of both offices following his nation 's defeat in the First World War . Gandhi had achieved considerable popularity among Muslims because of his work during the war on behalf of killed or imprisoned Muslims . Unlike Jinnah and other leaders of the Congress , Gandhi did not wear western @-@ style clothing , did his best to use an Indian language instead of English , and was deeply rooted in Indian culture . Gandhi 's local style of leadership gained great popularity with the Indian people . Jinnah criticised Gandhi 's Khilafat advocacy , which he saw as an endorsement of religious zealotry . Jinnah regarded Gandhi 's proposed satyagraha campaign as political anarchy , and believed that self @-@ government should be secured through constitutional means . He opposed Gandhi , but the tide of Indian opinion was against him . At the 1920 session of the Congress in Nagpur , Jinnah was shouted down by the delegates , who passed Gandhi 's proposal , pledging satyagraha until India was free . Jinnah did not attend the subsequent League meeting , held in the same city , which passed a similar resolution . Because of the action of the Congress in endorsing Gandhi 's campaign , Jinnah resigned from it , leaving all positions except in the Muslim League . 
 = = Wilderness years ; interlude in England = = 
 The alliance between Gandhi and the Khilafat faction did not last long , and the campaign of resistance proved less effective than hoped , as India 's institutions continued to function . Jinnah sought alternative political ideas , and contemplated organising a new political party as a rival to the Congress . In September 1923 , Jinnah was elected as Muslim member for Bombay in the new Central Legislative Assembly . He showed much skill as a parliamentarian , organising many Indian members to work with the Swaraj Party , and continued to press demands for full responsible government . In 1925 , as recognition for his legislative activities , he was offered a knighthood by Lord Reading , who was retiring from the Viceroyalty . He replied : " I prefer to be plain Mr. Jinnah . " 
 In 1927 , the British Government , under Conservative Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin , undertook a decennial review of Indian policy mandated by the Government of India Act 1919 . The review began two years early as Baldwin feared he would lose the next election ( which he did , in 1929 ) . The Cabinet was influenced by minister Winston Churchill , who strongly opposed self @-@ government for India , and members hoped that by having the commission appointed early , the policies for India which they favoured would survive their government . The resulting commission , led by Liberal MP John Simon , though with a majority of Conservatives , arrived in India in March 1928 . They were met with a boycott by India 's leaders , Muslim and Hindu alike , angered at the British refusal to include their representatives on the commission . A minority of Muslims , though , withdrew from the League , choosing to welcome the Simon Commission and repudiating Jinnah . Most members of the League 's executive council remained loyal to Jinnah , attending the League meeting in December 1927 and January 1928 which confirmed him as the League 's permanent president . At that session , Jinnah told the delegates that " A constitutional war has been declared on Great Britain . Negotiations for a settlement are not to come from our side ... By appointing an exclusively white Commission , [ Secretary of State for India ] Lord Birkenhead has declared our unfitness for self @-@ government . " 
 Birkenhead in 1928 challenged Indians to come up with their own proposal for constitutional change for India ; in response , the Congress convened a committee under the leadership of Motilal Nehru . [ 1 ] The Nehru Report favoured constituencies based on geography on the ground that being dependent on each other for election would bind the communities closer together . Jinnah , though he believed separate electorates , based on religion , necessary to ensure Muslims had a voice in the government , was willing to compromise on this point , but talks between the two parties failed . He put forth proposals that he hoped might satisfy a broad range of Muslims and reunite the League , calling for mandatory representation for Muslims in legislatures and cabinets . These became known as his Fourteen Points . He could not secure adoption of the Fourteen Points , as the League meeting in Delhi at which he hoped to gain a vote instead dissolved into chaotic argument . 
 After Baldwin was defeated at the 1929 British parliamentary election , Ramsay MacDonald of the Labour Party became prime minister . MacDonald desired a conference of Indian and British leaders in London to discuss India 's future , a course of action supported by Jinnah . Three Round Table Conferences followed over as many years , none of which resulted in a settlement . Jinnah was a delegate to the first two conferences , but was not invited to the last . He remained in Britain for most of the period 1930 through 1934 , practising as a barrister before the Privy Council , where he dealt with a number of Indian @-@ related cases . His biographers disagree over why he remained so long in Britain — Wolpert asserts that had Jinnah been made a Law Lord , he would have stayed for life , and that Jinnah alternatively sought a parliamentary seat . Early biographer Hector Bolitho denied that Jinnah sought to enter the British Parliament , while Jaswant Singh deems Jinnah 's time in Britain as a break or sabbatical from the Indian struggle . Bolitho called this period " Jinnah 's years of order and contemplation , wedged in between the time of early struggle , and the final storm of conquest " . 
 In 1931 , Fatima Jinnah joined her brother in England . From then on , Muhammad Jinnah would receive personal care and support from her as he aged and began to suffer from the lung ailments which would kill him . She lived and travelled with him , and became a close advisor . Muhammad Jinnah 's daughter , Dina , was educated in England and India . Jinnah later became estranged from Dina after she decided to marry a Christian , Neville Wadia from a prominent Parsi business family . When Jinnah urged Dina to marry a Muslim , she reminded him that he had married a woman not raised in his faith . Jinnah continued to correspond cordially with his daughter , but their personal relationship was strained , and she did not come to Pakistan in his lifetime , but only for his funeral . 
 = = Jinnah 's conversion by Iqbal = = 
 The well documented influence of Muhammad Iqbal on Jinnah , with regards to taking the lead in creating Pakistan , has been described as " significant " , " powerful " and even " unquestionable " by scholars . He 's also cited as an influential force in convincing Jinnah to end his self @-@ imposed exile in London and re @-@ enter the politics of India . Initially , however , Iqbal and Jinnah were opponents , as Iqbal believed Jinnah was aloof from the crises facing the Muslim community in India . According to Akbar S. Ahmed , this began to change in Iqbal 's last days , before his death in 1938 . Iqbal gradually succeeded in converting Jinnah over to his view , who eventually accepted Iqbal as his " mentor " . Ahmed comments that in his notes to Iqbal 's letters , Jinnah expressed unanimity with Iqbal 's views : That Muslims required a separate homeland . 
 Iqbal 's influence also brought about a deeper appreciation for Muslim identity within Jinnah . Ahmed states that this unanimity Jinnah expressed with Iqbal did not only extend to his politics but his general convictions . The evidence of this influence began to be revealed from 1937 onwards . Jinnah began to echo Iqbal in his speeches , he started using Islamic symbolism and speaking to the underprivileged . According to Ahmed , " something had clearly changed " in Jinnah 's words and deeds . While Jinnah still advocated freedom of religion and protection of the minorities , the model he was now aspiring to was that of the Prophet Muhammad <unk> . Ahmed further claims that those scholars who have painted a secular picture of Jinnah have misread his speeches which , he argues , must be read in the context of Islamic History and culture . As such , the homeland Jinnah asked for following his " conversion " was of an " unequivocal Islamic nature . " This change has been seen to last for the rest of Jinnah 's life , who continued to frequently borrow ideas " directly from <unk> including his thoughts on Muslim unity , on Islamic ideals of liberty , justice and equality , on economics , and even on practices such as prayers . " 
 In a public speech in 1940 following the death of Iqbal , Jinnah expressed his preference for implementing Iqbal 's vision even at the expense of becoming a ruler . He stated : " If I live to see the ideal of a Muslim state being achieved in India , and I was then offered to make a choice between the works of Iqbal and the rulership of the Muslim state , I would prefer the former . " 
 = = Return to politics = = 
 Beginning in 1933 , Indian Muslims , especially from the United Provinces , began to urge Jinnah to return to India and take up again his leadership of the Muslim League , an organisation which had fallen into inactivity . He remained titular president of the League , but declined to travel to India to preside over its 1933 session in April , writing that he could not possibly return there until the end of the year . 
 Among those who met with Jinnah to seek his return was Liaquat Ali Khan , who would be a major political associate of Jinnah in the years to come and the first Prime Minister of Pakistan . At Jinnah 's request , Liaquat discussed the return with a large number of Muslim politicians and confirmed his recommendation to Jinnah . In early 1934 , Jinnah relocated to the subcontinent , though he shuttled between London and India on business for the next few years , selling his house in Hampstead and closing his legal practice in Britain . 
 Muslims of Bombay elected Jinnah , though then absent in London , as their representative to the Central Legislative Assembly in October 1934 . The British Parliament 's Government of India Act 1935 gave considerable power to India 's provinces , with a weak central parliament in New Delhi , which had no authority over such matters as foreign policy , defence , and much of the budget . Full power remained in the hands of the Viceroy , however , who could dissolve legislatures and rule by decree . The League reluctantly accepted the scheme , though expressing reservations about the weak parliament . The Congress was much better prepared for the provincial elections in 1937 , and the League failed to win a majority even of the Muslim seats in any of the provinces where members of that faith held a majority . It did win a majority of the Muslim seats in Delhi , but could not form a government anywhere , though it was part of the ruling coalition in Bengal . The Congress and its allies formed the government even in the North @-@ West Frontier Province ( <unk> ) , where the League won no seats despite the fact that almost all residents were Muslim . 
 According to Singh , " the events of 1937 had a tremendous , almost a traumatic effect upon Jinnah " . Despite his beliefs of twenty years that Muslims could protect their rights in a united India through separate electorates , provincial boundaries drawn to preserve Muslim majorities , and by other protections of minority rights , Muslim voters had failed to unite , with the issues Jinnah hoped to bring forward lost amid factional fighting . Singh notes the effect of the 1937 elections on Muslim political opinion , " when the Congress formed a government with almost all of the Muslim MLAs sitting on the Opposition benches , non @-@ Congress Muslims were suddenly faced with this stark reality of near @-@ total political powerlessness . It was brought home to them , like a bolt of lightning , that even if the Congress did not win a single Muslim seat ... as long as it won an absolute majority in the House , on the strength of the general seats , it could and would form a government entirely on its own ... " 
 In the next two years , Jinnah worked to build support among Muslims for the League . He secured the right to speak for the Muslim @-@ led Bengali and Punjabi provincial governments in the central government in New Delhi ( " the centre " ) . He worked to expand the league , reducing the cost of membership to two annas ( ⅛ of a rupee ) , half of what it cost to join the Congress . He restructured the League along the lines of the Congress , putting most power in a Working Committee , which he appointed . By December 1939 , Liaquat estimated that the League had three million two @-@ anna members . 
 = = Struggle for Pakistan = = 
 = = = Background to independence = = = 
 Until the late 1930s , most Muslims of the British Raj expected , upon independence , to be part of a unitary state encompassing all of British India , as did the Hindus and others who advocated self @-@ government . Despite this , other nationalist proposals were being made . In a speech given at Allahabad to a League session in 1930 , Sir Muhammad Iqbal called for a state for Muslims in India . Choudhary Rahmat Ali published a pamphlet in 1933 advocating a state " Pakistan " in the Indus Valley , with other names given to Muslim @-@ majority areas elsewhere in India . Jinnah and Iqbal corresponded in 1936 and 1937 ; in subsequent years , Jinnah credited Iqbal as his mentor , and used Iqbal 's imagery and rhetoric in his speeches . 
 Although many leaders of the Congress sought a strong central government for an Indian state , some Muslim politicians , including Jinnah , were unwilling to accept this without powerful protections for their community . Other Muslims supported the Congress , which officially advocated a secular state upon independence , though the traditionalist wing ( including politicians such as Madan Mohan Malaviya and Vallabhbhai Patel ) believed that an independent India should enact laws such as banning the killing of cows and making Hindi a national language . The failure of the Congress leadership to disavow Hindu <unk> worried Congress @-@ supporting Muslims . Nevertheless , the Congress enjoyed considerable Muslim support up to about 1937 . 
 Events which separated the communities included the failed attempt to form a coalition government including the Congress and the League in the United Provinces following the 1937 election . According to historian Ian Talbot , " The provincial Congress governments made no effort to understand and respect their Muslim populations ' cultural and religious sensibilities . The Muslim League 's claims that it alone could safeguard Muslim interests thus received a major boost . Significantly it was only after this period of Congress rule that it [ the League ] took up the demand for a Pakistan state ... " 
 <unk> Puri in his journal article about Jinnah suggests that the Muslim League president , after the 1937 vote , turned to the idea of partition in " sheer desperation " . Historian Akbar S. Ahmed suggests that Jinnah abandoned hope of reconciliation with the Congress as he " rediscover [ ed ] his own [ Islamic ] roots , his own sense of identity , of culture and history , which would come increasingly to the fore in the final years of his life " . Jinnah also increasingly adopted Muslim dress in the late 1930s . In the wake of the 1937 balloting , Jinnah demanded that the question of power sharing be settled on an all @-@ India basis , and that he , as president of the League , be accepted as the sole spokesman for the Muslim community . 
 = = = Second World War and Lahore Resolution = = = 
 On 3 September 1939 , British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain announced the commencement of war with Nazi Germany . The following day , the Viceroy , Lord Linlithgow , without consulting Indian political leaders , announced that India had entered the war along with Britain . There were widespread protests in India . After meeting with Jinnah and with Gandhi , Linlithgow announced that negotiations on self @-@ government were suspended for the duration of the war . The Congress on 14 September demanded immediate independence with a constituent assembly to decide a constitution ; when this was refused , its eight provincial governments resigned on 10 November and governors in those provinces thereafter ruled by decree for the remainder of the war . Jinnah , on the other hand , was more willing to accommodate the British , and they in turn increasingly recognised him and the League as the representatives of India 's Muslims . Jinnah later stated , " after the war began , ... I was treated on the same basis as Mr. Gandhi . I was <unk> why I was promoted and given a place side by side with Mr. Gandhi . " Although the League did not actively support the British war effort , neither did they try to obstruct it . 
 With the British and Muslims to some extent cooperating , the Viceroy asked Jinnah for an expression of the Muslim League 's position on self @-@ government , confident that it would differ greatly from that of the Congress . To come up with such a position , the League 's Working Committee met for four days in February 1940 to set out terms of reference to a constitutional sub @-@ committee . The Working Committee asked that the sub @-@ committee return with a proposal that would result in " independent dominions in direct relationship with Great Britain " where Muslims were dominant . On 6 February , Jinnah informed the Viceroy that the Muslim League would be demanding partition instead of the federation contemplated in the 1935 Act . The Lahore Resolution ( sometimes called the " Pakistan Resolution " , although it does not contain that name ) , based on the sub @-@ committee 's work , embraced the Two @-@ Nation Theory and called for a union of the Muslim @-@ majority provinces in the northwest of British India , with complete autonomy . Similar rights were to grant the Muslim @-@ majority areas in the east , and unspecified protections given to Muslim minorities in other provinces . The resolution was passed by the League session in Lahore on 23 March 1940 . 
 Gandhi 's reaction to the Lahore Resolution was muted ; he called it " baffling " , but told his disciples that Muslims , in common with other people of India , had the right to self @-@ determination . Leaders of the Congress were more vocal ; Jawaharlal Nehru referred to Lahore as " Jinnah 's fantastic proposals " while Chakravarti Rajagopalachari deemed Jinnah 's views on partition " a sign of a diseased mentality " . Linlithgow met with Jinnah in June 1940 , soon after Winston Churchill became the British prime minister , and in August offered both the Congress and the League a deal whereby in exchange for full support for the war , Linlithgow would allow Indian representation on his major war councils . The Viceroy promised a representative body after the war to determine India 's future , and that no future settlement would be imposed over the objections of a large part of the population . This was satisfactory to neither the Congress nor the League , though Jinnah was pleased that the British had moved towards recognising Jinnah as the representative of the Muslim community 's interests . Jinnah was reluctant to make specific proposals as to the boundaries of Pakistan , or its relationships with Britain and with the rest of the subcontinent , fearing that any precise plan would divide the League . 
 The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 brought the United States into the war . In the following months , the Japanese advanced in Southeast Asia , and the British Cabinet sent a mission led by Sir Stafford Cripps to try to conciliate the Indians and cause them to fully back the war . Cripps proposed giving some provinces what was dubbed the " local option " to remain outside of an Indian central government either for a period of time or permanently , to become dominions on their own or be part of another confederation . The Muslim League was far from certain of winning the legislative votes that would be required for mixed provinces such as Bengal and Punjab to secede , and Jinnah rejected the proposals as not sufficiently recognising Pakistan 's right to exist . The Congress also rejected the Cripps plan , demanding immediate concessions which Cripps was not prepared to give . Despite the rejection , Jinnah and the League saw the Cripps proposal as recognising Pakistan in principle . 
 The Congress followed the failed Cripps mission by demanding , in August 1942 , that the British immediately " Quit India " , proclaiming a mass campaign of satyagraha until they did . The British promptly arrested most major leaders of the Congress and imprisoned them for the remainder of the war . Gandhi , however , was placed on house arrest in one of the Aga Khan 's palaces prior to his release for health reasons in 1944 . With the Congress leaders absent from the political scene , Jinnah warned against the threat of Hindu domination and maintained his Pakistan demand without going into great detail about what that would entail . Jinnah also worked to increase the League 's political control at the provincial level . He helped to found the newspaper Dawn in the early 1940s in Delhi ; it helped to spread the League 's message and eventually became the major English @-@ language newspaper of Pakistan . 
 In September 1944 , Jinnah and Gandhi , who had by then been released from his palatial prison , met for the very first time at the Muslim leader 's home on Malabar Hill in Bombay . Two weeks of talks followed , which resulted in no agreement . Jinnah insisted on Pakistan being conceded prior to the British departure , and to come into being immediately on their departure , while Gandhi proposed that plebiscites on partition occur sometime after a united India gained its independence . In early 1945 , Liaquat and the Congress leader <unk> Desai met , with Jinnah 's approval and agreed that after the war , the Congress and the League should form an interim government and that the members of the Executive Council of the Viceroy should be nominated by the Congress and the League in equal numbers . When the Congress leadership was released from prison in June 1945 , they repudiated the agreement and censured Desai for acting without proper authority . 
 = = = Postwar = = = 
 Field Marshal Viscount Wavell succeeded Linlithgow as Viceroy in 1943 . In June 1945 , following the release of the Congress leaders , Wavell called for a conference , and invited the leading figures from the various communities to meet with him at Simla . He proposed a temporary government along the lines which Liaquat and Desai had agreed . However , Wavell was unwilling to guarantee that only the League 's candidates would be placed in the seats reserved for Muslims . All other invited groups submitted lists of candidates to the Viceroy . Wavell cut the conference short in mid @-@ July without further seeking an agreement ; with a British general election imminent , Churchill 's government did not feel it could proceed . 
 The British people returned Clement Attlee and his Labour Party later in July . Attlee and his Secretary of State for India , Lord Frederick Pethick @-@ Lawrence , immediately ordered a review of the Indian situation . Jinnah had no comment on the change of government , but called a meeting of his Working Committee and issued a statement calling for new elections in India . The League held influence at the provincial level in the Muslim @-@ majority states mostly by alliance , and Jinnah believed that , given the opportunity , the League would improve its electoral standing and lend added support to his claim to be the sole spokesman for the Muslims . Wavell returned to India in September after consultation with his new masters in London ; elections , both for the centre and for the provinces , were announced soon after . The British indicated that formation of a constitution @-@ making body would follow the votes . 
 The Muslim League declared that they would campaign on a single issue : Pakistan . Speaking in Ahmedabad , Jinnah echoed this , " Pakistan is a matter of life or death for us . " In the December 1945 elections for the Constituent Assembly of India , the League won every seat reserved for Muslims . In the provincial elections in January 1946 , the League took 75 % of the Muslim vote , an increase from 4 @.@ 4 % in 1937 . According to his biographer Bolitho , " This was Jinnah 's glorious hour : his arduous political campaigns , his robust beliefs and claims , were at last justified . " Wolpert wrote that the League election showing " appeared to prove the universal appeal of Pakistan among Muslims of the subcontinent " . The Congress dominated the central assembly nevertheless , though it lost four seats from its previous strength . During this time Muhammad Iqbal introduced Jinnah to Ghulam Ahmed Pervez , whom Jinnah appointed to edit a magazine , <unk> @-@ e @-@ Islam , to propagate the idea of a separate Muslim state . 
 In February 1946 , the British Cabinet resolved to send a delegation to India to negotiate with leaders there . This Cabinet Mission included Cripps and Pethick @-@ Lawrence . The highest @-@ level delegation to try to break the deadlock , it arrived in New Delhi in late March . Little negotiation had been done since the previous October because of the elections in India . The British in May released a plan for a united Indian state comprising substantially autonomous provinces , and called for " groups " of provinces formed on the basis of religion . Matters such as defence , external relations and communications would be handled by a central authority . Provinces would have the option of leaving the union entirely , and there would be an interim government with representation from the Congress and the League . Jinnah and his Working Committee accepted this plan in June , but it fell apart over the question of how many members of the interim government the Congress and the League would have , and over the Congress 's desire to include a Muslim member in its representation . Before leaving India , the British ministers stated that they intended to inaugurate an interim government even if one of the major groups was unwilling to participate . 
 The Congress soon joined the new Indian ministry . The League was slower to do so , not entering until October 1946 . In agreeing to have the League join the government , Jinnah abandoned his demands for parity with the Congress and a veto on matters concerning Muslims . The new ministry met amid a backdrop of rioting , especially in Calcutta . The Congress wanted the Viceroy to immediately summon the constituent assembly and begin the work of writing a constitution and felt that the League ministers should either join in the request or resign from the government . Wavell attempted to save the situation by flying leaders such as Jinnah , Liaquat , and Jawaharlal Nehru to London in December 1946 . At the end of the talks , participants issued a statement that the constitution would not be forced on any unwilling parts of India . On the way back from London , Jinnah and Liaquat stopped in Cairo for several days of pan @-@ Islamic meetings . 
 The Congress endorsed the joint statement from the London conference over the angry dissent from some elements . The League refused to do so , and took no part in the constitutional discussions . Jinnah had been willing to consider some continued links to Hindustan ( as the Hindu @-@ majority state which would be formed on partition was sometimes referred to ) , such as a joint military or communications . However , by December 1946 , he insisted on a fully sovereign Pakistan with dominion status . 
 Following the failure of the London trip , Jinnah was in no hurry to reach an agreement , considering that time would allow him to gain the undivided provinces of Bengal and Punjab for Pakistan , but these wealthy , populous provinces had sizeable non @-@ Muslim minorities , complicating a settlement . The Attlee ministry desired a rapid British departure from India , but had little confidence in Wavell to achieve that end . Beginning in December 1946 , British officials began looking for a viceregal successor to Wavell , and soon fixed on Admiral Lord Mountbatten of Burma , a war leader popular among Conservatives as the great @-@ grandson of Queen Victoria and among Labour for his political views . 
 = = = Mountbatten and independence = = = 
 On 20 February 1947 , Attlee announced Mountbatten 's appointment , and that Britain would transfer power in India not later than June 1948 . Mountbatten took office as Viceroy on 24 March 1947 , two days after his arrival in India . By then , the Congress had come around to the idea of partition . Nehru stated in 1960 , " the truth is that we were tired men and we were getting on in years ... The plan for partition offered a way out and we took it . " Leaders of the Congress decided that having loosely tied Muslim @-@ majority provinces as part of a future India was not worth the loss of the powerful government at the centre which they desired . However , the Congress insisted that if Pakistan were to become independent , Bengal and Punjab would have to be divided . 
 Mountbatten had been warned in his briefing papers that Jinnah would be his " toughest customer " who had proved a chronic nuisance because " no one in this country [ India ] had so far gotten into Jinnah 's mind " . The men met over six days beginning on 5 April . The sessions began lightly when Jinnah , photographed between Louis and Edwina Mountbatten , quipped " A rose between two thorns " which the Viceroy took , perhaps gratuitously , as evidence that the Muslim leader had pre @-@ planned his joke but had expected the <unk> to stand in the middle . Mountbatten was not favourably impressed with Jinnah , repeatedly expressing frustration to his staff about Jinnah 's insistence on Pakistan in the face of all argument . 
 Jinnah feared that at the end of the British presence in India , they would turn control over to the Congress @-@ dominated constituent assembly , putting Muslims at a disadvantage in attempting to win autonomy . He demanded that Mountbatten divide the army prior to independence , which would take at least a year . Mountbatten had hoped that the post @-@ independence arrangements would include a common defence force , but Jinnah saw it as essential that a sovereign state should have its own forces . Mountbatten met with Liaquat the day of his final session with Jinnah , and concluded , as he told Attlee and the Cabinet in May , that " it had become clear that the Muslim League would resort to arms if Pakistan in some form were not conceded . " The Viceroy was also influenced by negative Muslim reaction to the constitutional report of the assembly , which envisioned broad powers for the post @-@ independence central government . 
 On 2 June , the final plan was given by the Viceroy to Indian leaders : on 15 August , the British would turn over power to two dominions . The provinces would vote on whether to continue in the existing constituent assembly or to have a new one , that is , to join Pakistan . Bengal and Punjab would also vote , both on the question of which assembly to join , and on the partition . A boundary commission would determine the final lines in the partitioned provinces . Plebiscites would take place in the North @-@ West Frontier Province ( which did not have a League government despite an overwhelmingly Muslim population ) , and in the majority @-@ Muslim Sylhet district of Assam , adjacent to eastern Bengal . On 3 June , Mountbatten , Nehru , Jinnah and Sikh leader Baldev Singh made the formal announcement by radio . Jinnah concluded his address with " Pakistan <unk> " ( Long live Pakistan ) , which was not in the script . In the weeks which followed Punjab and Bengal cast the votes which resulted in partition . Sylhet and the <unk> voted to cast their lots with Pakistan , a decision joined by the assemblies in Sind and Baluchistan . 
 On 4 July 1947 , Liaquat asked Mountbatten on Jinnah 's behalf to recommend to the British king , George VI , that Jinnah be appointed Pakistan 's first governor @-@ general . This request angered Mountbatten , who had hoped to have that position in both dominions — he would be India 's first post @-@ independence governor @-@ general — but Jinnah felt that Mountbatten would be likely to favour the new Hindu @-@ majority state because of his closeness to Nehru . In addition , the governor @-@ general would initially be a powerful figure , and Jinnah did not trust anyone else to take that office . Although the Boundary Commission , led by British lawyer Sir Cyril Radcliffe , had not yet reported , there were already massive movements of populations between the nations @-@ to @-@ be , as well as sectarian violence . Jinnah arranged to sell his house in Bombay and procured a new one in Karachi . On 7 August , Jinnah , with his sister and close staff , flew from Delhi to Karachi in Mountbatten 's plane , and as the plane taxied , he was heard to murmur , " That 's the end of that . " On 11 August , he presided over the new constituent assembly for Pakistan at Karachi , and addressed them , " You are free ; you are free to go to your temples , you are free to go to your mosques or to any other place of worship in this State of Pakistan ... You may belong to any religion or caste or creed — that has nothing to do with the business of the State ... I think we should keep that in front of us as our ideal and you will find that in course of time Hindus would cease to be Hindus and Muslims would cease to be Muslims , not in the religious sense , because that is the personal faith of each individual , but in the political sense as citizens of the State . " On 14 August , Pakistan became independent ; Jinnah led the celebrations in Karachi . One observer wrote , " here indeed is Pakistan 's King Emperor , Archbishop of Canterbury , Speaker and Prime Minister concentrated into one formidable Quaid @-@ e @-@ Azam . " 
 = = Governor @-@ General = = 
 The Radcliffe Commission , dividing Bengal and Punjab , completed its work and reported to Mountbatten on 12 August ; the last Viceroy held the maps until the 17th , not wanting to spoil the independence celebrations in both nations . There had already been ethnically charged violence and movement of populations ; publication of the Radcliffe Line dividing the new nations sparked mass migration , murder , and ethnic cleansing . Many on the " wrong side " of the lines fled or were murdered , or murdered others , hoping to make facts on the ground which would reverse the commission 's verdict . Radcliffe wrote in his report that he knew that neither side would be happy with his award ; he declined his fee for the work . Christopher Beaumont , Radcliffe 's private secretary , later wrote that Mountbatten " must take the blame — though not the sole blame — for the massacres in the Punjab in which between 500 @,@ 000 to a million men , women and children perished " . As many as 14 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 people relocated between India and Pakistan during and after partition . Jinnah did what he could for the eight million people who migrated to Pakistan ; although by now over 70 and frail from lung ailments , he travelled across West Pakistan and personally supervised the provision of aid . According to Ahmed , " What Pakistan needed desperately in those early months was a symbol of the state , one that would unify people and give them the courage and resolve to succeed . " 
 Jinnah had a troublesome ordeal with NWFP . The referendum of NWFP July 1947 , whether to be a part of Pakistan or India , had been tainted with low electoral turnout as less than 10 % of the total population were allowed to partake in the referendum . On 22 August 1947 , just after a week of becoming governor general Jinnah dissolved the elected government of Dr. Khan Abdul Jabbar Khan . Later on , Abdul <unk> Khan was put in place by Jinnah in the <unk> dominated province despite him being a Kashmiri . On 12 August 1948 the <unk> massacre in <unk> was ordered resulting in the death of 400 people aligned with the Khudai Khidmatgar movement . 
 Along with Liaquat and Abdur Rab <unk> , Jinnah represented Pakistan 's interests in the Division Council to appropriately divide public assets between India and Pakistan . Pakistan was supposed to receive one @-@ sixth of the pre @-@ independence government 's assets , carefully divided by agreement , even specifying how many sheets of paper each side would receive . The new Indian state , however , was slow to deliver , hoping for the collapse of the nascent Pakistani government , and reunion . Few members of the Indian Civil Service and the Indian Police Service had chosen Pakistan , resulting in staff shortages . Crop growers found their markets on the other side of an international border . There were shortages of machinery , not all of which was made in Pakistan . In addition to the massive refugee problem , the new government sought to save abandoned crops , establish security in a chaotic situation , and provide basic services . According to economist Yasmeen Niaz Mohiuddin in her study of Pakistan , " although Pakistan was born in bloodshed and turmoil , it survived in the initial and difficult months after partition only because of the tremendous sacrifices made by its people and the selfless efforts of its great leader . " 
 The Indian Princely States , of which there were several hundred , were advised by the departing British to choose whether to join Pakistan or India . Most did so prior to independence , but the holdouts contributed to what have become lasting divisions between the two nations . Indian leaders were angered at Jinnah 's courting the princes of Jodhpur , Bhopal and Indore to accede to Pakistan — these princely states did not border Pakistan , and each had a Hindu @-@ majority population . The coastal princely state of Junagadh , which had a majority @-@ Hindu population , did accede to Pakistan in September 1947 , with its ruler 's dewan , Sir Shah Nawaz Bhutto , personally delivering the accession papers to Jinnah . The Indian army occupied the principality in November , forcing its former leaders , including Bhutto , to flee to Pakistan , beginning the politically powerful Bhutto family . 
 The most contentious of the disputes was , and continues to be , that over the princely state of Kashmir . It had a Muslim @-@ majority population and a Hindu maharaja , Sir Hari Singh , who stalled his decision on which nation to join . With the population in revolt in October 1947 , aided by Pakistani irregulars , the maharaja acceded to India ; Indian troops were airlifted in . Jinnah objected to this action , and ordered that Pakistani troops move into Kashmir . The Pakistani Army was still commanded by British officers , and the commanding officer , General Sir Douglas Gracey , refused the order , stating that he would not move into what he considered the territory of another nation without approval from higher authority , which was not forthcoming . Jinnah withdrew the order . This did not stop the violence there , which has broken into war between India and Pakistan from time to time since . 
 Some historians allege that Jinnah 's courting the rulers of Hindu @-@ majority states and his gambit with Junagadh are evidence of ill @-@ intent towards India , as Jinnah had promoted separation by religion , yet tried to gain the accession of Hindu @-@ majority states . In his book Patel : A Life , Rajmohan Gandhi asserts that Jinnah hoped for a plebiscite in Junagadh , knowing Pakistan would lose , in the hope the principle would be established for Kashmir . However , when Mountbatten proposed to Jinnah that , in all the princely States where the ruler did not accede to a Dominion corresponding to the majority population ( which would have included Junagadh , Hyderabad as well Kashmir ) , the accession should be decided by an <unk> reference to the will of the people ' , Jinnah rejected the offer . Despite the United Nations Security Council Resolution 47 , issued at India 's request for a plebiscite in Kashmir after the withdrawal of Pakistani forces , this has never occurred . 
 In January 1948 , the Indian government finally agreed to pay Pakistan its share of British India 's assets . They were impelled by Gandhi , who threatened a fast until death . Only days later , Gandhi was assassinated by <unk> Godse , a Hindu nationalist , who believed that Gandhi was pro @-@ Muslim . Jinnah made a brief statement of condolence , calling Gandhi " one of the greatest men produced by the Hindu community " . 
 In a radio talk addressed to the people of USA broadcast in February 1948 , Jinnah said : 
 The Constitution of Pakistan is yet to be framed by the Pakistan Constituent Assembly , I do not know what the ultimate shape of the constitution is going to be , but I am sure that it will be of a democratic type , embodying the essential principles of Islam . Today these are as applicable in actual life as these were 1300 years ago . Islam and its idealism have taught us democracy . It has taught equality of man , justice and fair play to everybody . We are the inheritors of these glorious traditions and are fully alive to our responsibilities and obligations as framers of the future constitution of Pakistan . 
 In March , Jinnah , despite his declining health , made his only post @-@ independence visit to East Pakistan . In a speech before a crowd estimated at 300 @,@ 000 , Jinnah stated ( in English ) that Urdu alone should be the national language , believing a single language was needed for a nation to remain united . The Bengali @-@ speaking people of East Pakistan strongly opposed this policy , and in 1971 the official language issue was a factor in the region 's secession to form Bangladesh . 
 After the establishment of Pakistan , Pakistani currency notes had the image of George V printed on them . These notes were in circulation till 30 June 1949 . But on 1 April 1949 , these notes were stamped with " Government of Pakistan " and were used as legal tenders . On the same day , the then Finance Minister of Pakistan , Malik Ghulam Muhammad , presented a new set of seven coins ( Re . 1 , ₨ . 1 ⁄ 2 , ₨ . 1 ⁄ 4 , A. 2 , A. 1 , A. 1 ⁄ 2 and Pe . 1 ) to Jinnah in the Governor House and were issued as the first coins minted by the Government of Pakistan . 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 From the 1930s , Jinnah suffered from tuberculosis ; only his sister and a few others close to him were aware of his condition . Jinnah believed public knowledge of his lung ailments would hurt him politically . In a 1938 letter , he wrote to a supporter that " you must have read in the papers how during my tours ... I suffered , which was not because there was anything wrong with me , but the irregularities [ of the schedule ] and over @-@ strain told upon my health " . Many years later , Mountbatten stated that if he had known Jinnah was so physically ill , he would have stalled , hoping Jinnah 's death would avert partition . Fatima Jinnah later wrote , " even in his hour of triumph , the Quaid @-@ e @-@ Azam was gravely ill ... He worked in a frenzy to consolidate Pakistan . And , of course , he totally neglected his health ... " Jinnah worked with a tin of Craven " A " cigarettes at his desk , of which he had smoked 50 or more a day for the previous 30 years , as well as a box of Cuban cigars . As his health got worse , he took longer and longer rest breaks in the private wing of Government House in Karachi , where only he , Fatima and the servants were allowed . 
 In June 1948 , he and Fatima flew to Quetta , in the mountains of Baluchistan , where the weather was cooler than in Karachi . He could not completely rest there , addressing the officers at the Command and Staff College saying , " you , along with the other Forces of Pakistan , are the custodians of the life , property and honour of the people of Pakistan . " He returned to Karachi for the 1 July opening ceremony for the State Bank of Pakistan , at which he spoke . A reception by the Canadian trade commissioner that evening in honour of Dominion Day was the last public event he attended . 
 On 6 July 1948 , Jinnah returned to Quetta , but at the advice of doctors , soon journeyed to an even higher retreat at Ziarat . Jinnah had always been reluctant to undergo medical treatment , but realising his condition was getting worse , the Pakistani government sent the best doctors it could find to treat him . Tests confirmed tuberculosis , and also showed evidence of advanced lung cancer . Jinnah was informed and asked for full information on his disease and for care in how his sister was told . He was treated with the new " miracle drug " of streptomycin , but it did not help . Jinnah 's condition continued to deteriorate despite the Eid prayers of his people . He was moved to the lower altitude of Quetta on 13 August , the eve of Independence Day , for which a statement ghost @-@ written for him was released . Despite an increase in appetite ( he then weighed just over 36 kilograms [ 79 lb ] ) , it was clear to his doctors that if he was to return to Karachi in life , he would have to do so very soon . Jinnah , however , was reluctant to go , not wishing his aides to see him as an invalid on a stretcher . 
 By 9 September , Jinnah had also developed pneumonia . Doctors urged him to return to Karachi , where he could receive better care , and with his agreement , he was flown there on 11 September . Dr. <unk> <unk> , his personal physician , believed that Jinnah 's change of mind was caused by foreknowledge of death . The plane landed at Karachi that afternoon , to be met by Jinnah 's limousine , and an ambulance into which Jinnah 's stretcher was placed . The ambulance broke down on the road into town , and the Governor @-@ General and those with him waited for another to arrive ; he could not be placed in the car as he could not sit up . They waited by the roadside in oppressive heat as trucks and buses passed by , unsuitable for transporting the dying man and with their occupants not knowing of Jinnah 's presence . After an hour , the replacement ambulance came , and transported Jinnah to Government House , arriving there over two hours after the landing . Jinnah died at 10 : 20 pm at his home in Karachi on 11 September 1948 at the age of 71 , just over a year after Pakistan 's creation . 
 Indian Prime Minister Jawahar Lal Nehru stated upon Jinnah 's death , " How shall we judge him ? I have been very angry with him often during the past years . But now there is no bitterness in my thought of him , only a great sadness for all that has been ... he succeeded in his quest and gained his objective , but at what a cost and with what a difference from what he had imagined . " Jinnah was buried on 12 September 1948 amid official mourning in both India and Pakistan ; a million people gathered for his funeral . Indian Governor @-@ General Rajagopalachari cancelled an official reception that day in honour of the late leader . Today , Jinnah rests in a large marble mausoleum , Mazar @-@ e @-@ Quaid , in Karachi . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Dina Wadia , Jinnah 's daughter , remained in India after independence before ultimately settling in New York City . In the 1965 presidential election , Fatima Jinnah , by then known as Madar @-@ e @-@ <unk> ( " Mother of the Nation " ) , became the presidential candidate of a coalition of political parties that opposed the rule of President Ayub Khan , but was not successful . 
 The Jinnah House in Malabar Hill , Bombay , is in the possession of the Government of India , but the issue of its ownership has been disputed by the Government of Pakistan . Jinnah had personally requested Prime Minister Nehru to preserve the house , hoping one day he could return to Bombay . There are proposals for the house be offered to the government of Pakistan to establish a consulate in the city as a goodwill gesture , but Dina Wadia has also asked for the property . 
 After Jinnah died , his sister Fatima asked the court to execute Jinnah 's will under Shia Islamic law . This subsequently became the part of the argument in Pakistan about Jinnah 's religious affiliation . Vali Nasr says Jinnah " was an Ismaili by birth and a Twelver Shia by confession , though not a religiously observant man . " In a 1970 legal challenge , Hussain Ali <unk> <unk> claimed Jinnah had converted to Sunni Islam , but the High Court rejected this claim in 1976 , effectively accepting the Jinnah family as Shia . According to the journalist Khaled Ahmed , Jinnah publicly had a non @-@ sectarian stance and " was at pains to gather the Muslims of India under the banner of a general Muslim faith and not under a divisive sectarian identity . " Ahmed reports a 1970 Pakistani court decision stating that Jinnah 's " secular Muslim faith made him neither Shia nor Sunni " , and one from 1984 maintaining that " the Quaid was definitely not a Shia " . Liaquat H. Merchant , Jinnah 's grandnephew , elaborates that " he was also not a Sunni , he was simply a Muslim " . 
 = = Legacy and historical view = = 
 Jinnah 's legacy is Pakistan . According to Mohiuddin , " He was and continues to be as highly honored in Pakistan as [ first US president ] George Washington is in the United States ... Pakistan owes its very existence to his drive , tenacity , and judgment ... Jinnah 's importance in the creation of Pakistan was monumental and immeasurable . " Stanley Wolpert , giving a speech in honour of Jinnah in 1998 , deemed him Pakistan 's greatest leader . His birthday is observed as a national holiday in Pakistan . Jinnah earned the title Quaid @-@ e @-@ Azam ( meaning " Great Leader " ) . His other title is Baba @-@ i @-@ <unk> ( Father of the Nation ) . The former title was reportedly given to Jinnah at first by Mian <unk> Ahmed . It became an official title by effect of a resolution passed on 11 August 1947 by Liaquat Ali Khan in the Pakistan Constituent Assembly . There are some sources which endorse that Gandhi gave him that title . 
 According to Singh , " With Jinnah 's death Pakistan lost its moorings . In India there will not easily arrive another Gandhi , nor in Pakistan another Jinnah . " Malik writes , " As long as Jinnah was alive , he could persuade and even pressure regional leaders toward greater mutual accommodation , but after his death , the lack of consensus on the distribution of political power and economic resources often turned controversial . " According to Mohiuddin , " Jinnah 's death deprived Pakistan of a leader who could have enhanced stability and democratic governance ... The rocky road to democracy in Pakistan and the relatively smooth one in India can in some measure be ascribed to Pakistan 's tragedy of losing an incorruptible and highly revered leader so soon after independence . " 
 Jinnah is depicted on all Pakistani rupee currency , and is the namesake of many Pakistani public institutions . The former Quaid @-@ i @-@ Azam International Airport in Karachi , now called the Jinnah International Airport , is Pakistan 's busiest . One of the largest streets in the Turkish capital Ankara , <unk> Caddesi , is named after him , as is the Mohammad Ali <unk> Expressway in Tehran , Iran . The royalist government of Iran also released a stamp commemorating the centennial of Jinnah 's birth in 1976 . In Chicago , a portion of Devon Avenue was named " Mohammed Ali Jinnah Way " . The Mazar @-@ e @-@ Quaid , Jinnah 's mausoleum , is among Karachi 's landmarks . The " Jinnah Tower " in Guntur , Andhra Pradesh , India , was built to commemorate Jinnah . 
 There is a considerable amount of scholarship on Jinnah which stems from Pakistan ; according to Akbar S. Ahmed , it is not widely read outside the country and usually avoids even the slightest criticism of Jinnah . According to Ahmed , nearly every book about Jinnah outside Pakistan mentions that he drank alcohol , but this is omitted from books inside Pakistan . Ahmed suggests that depicting the Quaid drinking alcohol would weaken Jinnah 's Islamic identity , and by extension , Pakistan 's . Some sources allege he gave up alcohol near the end of his life . 
 According to historian Ayesha Jalal , while there is a tendency towards hagiography in the Pakistani view of Jinnah , in India he is viewed negatively . Ahmed deems Jinnah " the most maligned person in recent Indian history ... In India , many see him as the demon who divided the land . " Even many Indian Muslims see Jinnah negatively , blaming him for their woes as a minority in that state . Some historians such as Jalal and H. M. Seervai assert that Jinnah never wanted the partition of India — it was the outcome of the Congress leaders being unwilling to share power with the Muslim League . They contend that Jinnah only used the Pakistan demand in an attempt to mobilise support to obtain significant political rights for Muslims . Jinnah has gained the admiration of Indian nationalist politicians such as Lal Krishna Advani , whose comments praising Jinnah caused an uproar in his Bharatiya Janata Party . 
 The view of Jinnah in the West has been shaped to some extent by his portrayal in Sir Richard Attenborough 's 1982 film , Gandhi . The film was dedicated to Nehru and Mountbatten and was given considerable support by Nehru 's daughter , the Indian prime minister , Indira Gandhi . It portrays Jinnah ( played by <unk> Padamsee ) in an unflattering light , who seems to act out of jealousy of Gandhi . Padamsee later stated that his portrayal was not historically accurate . 
 In a journal article on Pakistan 's first governor @-@ general , historian R. J. Moore wrote that Jinnah is universally recognised as central to the creation of Pakistan . Wolpert summarises the profound effect that Jinnah had on the world : 
 Few individuals significantly alter the course of history . Fewer still modify the map of the world . Hardly anyone can be credited with creating a nation @-@ state . Mohammad Ali Jinnah did all three . 
 In the research , Yousaf ( 2015 ) indicates Jinnah 's style of leadership that he followed to be a sole leader of Indian Muslims and aftermath of his politics after the independence 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Ahmed , Akbar S. ( 1997 ) . Jinnah , Pakistan , and Islamic Identity : The Search for Saladin . London : Routledge . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 415 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Bolitho , Hector ( 1954 ) . Jinnah : Creator of Pakistan . London : John Murray . 
 Cohen , Stephen Philip ( 2004 ) . The Idea of Pakistan . Washington , D.C. : Brookings Institution Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8157 @-@ 1503 @-@ 0 . 
 Gandhi , Rajmohan ( 1990 ) . Patel : A Life . Ahmedabad : <unk> . ASIN <unk> . 
 Hibbard , Scott ( 1994 ) . Religious Politics and Secular States : Egypt , India , and the United States . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8018 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Jalal , Ayesha ( 1994 ) . The Sole Spokesman : Jinnah , the Muslim League and the Demand for Pakistan ( paperback ed . ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Jinnah , Fatima ( 1987 ) . My Brother . Quaid @-@ i @-@ Azam Academy . ISBN 978 @-@ 969 @-@ 413 @-@ 036 @-@ 1 . 
 Khan , Yasmin ( 2008 ) [ 2007 ] . The Great Partition : The Making of India and Pakistan ( paperback ed . ) . New Haven , Conn . : Yale University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 300 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Malik , <unk> H. ( 2008 ) . The History of Pakistan . The Greenwood Histories of the Modern Nations . Westport , Conn . : Greenwood Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 313 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Mohiuddin , Yasmeen Niaz ( 2007 ) . Pakistan : A Global Studies Handbook . Santa Barbara , Calif . : ABC @-@ CLIO . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 85109 @-@ 801 @-@ 9 . 
 Read , Anthony ( 1997 ) . The <unk> Day : India 's Long Road to Independence . New York , NY : W.W. Norton & Co . ISBN 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Singh , Jaswant ( 2009 ) . Jinnah : India — Partition — Independence . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Wolpert , Stanley ( 1984 ) . Jinnah of Pakistan . New York : Oxford University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 = = = Journals and other media = = = 
 Moore , R. J. ( 1983 ) . " Jinnah and the Pakistan Demand " . Modern Asian Studies ( Cambridge , U.K. : Cambridge University Press ) 17 ( 4 ) : 529 – 561 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1017 / <unk> . JSTOR <unk> . 
 Puri , <unk> ( 1 – 7 March 2008 ) . " Clues to understanding Jinnah " . Economic and Political Weekly ( Bombay : <unk> Trust ) 43 ( 9 ) : 33 – 35 . JSTOR <unk> . 
 = SummerSlam ( 2003 ) = 
 SummerSlam ( 2003 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) and presented by Stacker 2 's YJ Stinger . It took place on August 24 , 2003 , at the America West Arena in Phoenix , Arizona . It was the 16th annual SummerSlam event and starred wrestlers from the Raw and SmackDown ! brands . 
 Nine professional wrestling matches were set on the event 's supercard , a scheduling of multiple high @-@ level matches . The first main event was an Elimination Chamber match , in which World Heavyweight Champion Triple H defeated Chris Jericho , Goldberg , Kevin Nash , Randy Orton , and Shawn Michaels to retain his championship . In the other main event , defending WWE Champion Kurt Angle defeated Brock Lesnar in a standard wrestling match . The undercard included Kane defeating Rob Van Dam in a No Holds Barred match , and Eddie Guerrero defending his United States Championship against Chris Benoit , Rhyno and Tajiri . 
 The event marked the second time the Elimination Chamber format was used by WWE ; the first was at Survivor Series 2002 . SummerSlam ( 2003 ) grossed over $ 715 @,@ 000 ticket sales from an attendance of 16 @,@ 113 and received about 415 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , more than the following year 's event . This event helped WWE increase its pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue by $ 6 @.@ 2 million from the previous year . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 The professional wrestling matches at SummerSlam featured professional wrestlers performing as characters in scripted events pre @-@ determined by the hosting promotion , World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . Storylines between the characters were produced on WWE 's weekly television shows Raw and SmackDown ! with the Raw and SmackDown ! brands — storyline divisions in which WWE assigned its employees to different programs . 
 In the first main event of SummerSlam wrestlers from the Raw brand competed in an Elimination Chamber match , in which the ring is surrounded by a steel structure of chain and girders . The match was contested for the World Heavyweight Championship , in which Triple H defended the title against Chris Jericho , Goldberg , Kevin Nash , Randy Orton , and Shawn Michaels . The buildup to the match began on July 22 , 2003 , when during the SummerSlam press conference , the authority figure Eric Bischoff , announced that Triple H would defend the championship against Goldberg in a standard wrestling match at the event . On August 4 , 2003 during a television episode of Raw , Bischoff changed the stipulations of the match to No disqualification regulations . Later during the episode , another authority figure , Steve Austin , altered Bischoff ’ s announcement , stating that the championship would be contested in an Elimination Chamber match , with Triple H defending his title against Goldberg , Chris Jericho , Kevin Nash , Randy Orton , and Shawn Michaels . Six days before SummerSlam , during an episode of Raw on August 18 , 2003 , the rivalry among the six competitors intensified during a promotional interview segment , in which each participant in the Elimination Chamber discussed the match and taunted the other wrestlers . During the show 's main event , in which Orton wrestled Goldberg , Nash interfered in the match and attacked Goldberg . Michaels then came down to the ring , but as he was about to hit Triple H with the World Heavyweight Championship belt , Jericho ran into the ring and hit Michaels with a chair . 
 The second main event resulted from events on SmackDown ! , WWE 's other main television program . In the match , Kurt Angle defended his WWE Championship against Brock Lesnar . The build @-@ up to the match began on July 31 , 2003 on an episode of SmackDown ! . During an interview promotion in the ring , Lesnar challenged Angle to a rematch of their bout at Vengeance , WWE 's previous pay @-@ per @-@ view event . The WWE Chairman , Vince McMahon , decided that Lesnar would have to earn his rematch by competing in a steel cage match against McMahon himself , and would take place on SmackDown ! the following week , with Angle officiating as a special guest referee . The Steel Cage match resulted in neither wrestler winning the match , after McMahon and Lesnar attacked Angle . On August 14 , 2003 during an episode of SmackDown ! , McMahon announced that Angle would defend the championship against Lesnar at SummerSlam . 
 In a preliminary match involving wrestlers from the Raw brand , Rob Van Dam wrestled Kane under No disqualification regulations . The events leading up to this match began on the June 23 , 2003 edition of Raw , when Kane took his mask off and exposed his face in front of RVD and the crowd after he lost to Triple H during a World Heavyweight Championship match . Then , on July 7 , 2003 , when Kane attacked Van Dam backstage during an episode of Raw . The following week on an episode of Raw , Eric Bischoff granted Van Dam a standard match against Kane , which took place the following week on Raw and ended in neither wrestler winning the match . On August 4 , 2003 , Shane McMahon , the son of Mr. McMahon , scheduled a No Disqualification match between the two wrestlers for SummerSlam . 
 In another <unk> match , wrestlers from the SmackDown ! brand competed in a match between four wrestlers for the WWE United States Championship : Eddie Guerrero defended the title against Chris Benoit , Rhyno , and Tajiri . The buildup to the match began with two different rivalries , one between Guerrero and Tajiri , and the other between Benoit and Rhyno . On August 7 , 2003 during an episode of SmackDown ! , Guerrero and Benoit wrestled in a standard match . However , during the match , Rhyno and Tajiri interfered , resulting in neither wrestler winning the match . Sgt. Slaughter , a WWE official , scheduled a tag team match between the team of Guerrero and Benoit and the team of Rhyno and Tajiri , which Guerrero and Benoit won . The following week on an episode of SmackDown ! , a SummerSlam advertisement announced that Guerrero would defend the WWE United States Championship against Benoit , Rhyno , and Tajiri . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event began and aired live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , an episode of Sunday Night Heat , one of WWE 's secondary television programs , was shown live . The first scheduled match was Matt Hardy versus Zach Gowen . Gowen , however , was unable to participate in the match due to legit injuries he sustained on the August 21 , 2003 episode of SmackDown ! . As a result , Hardy was declared the winner via forfeit . The other scheduled match for Sunday Night Heat was a standard match for the WWE Cruiserweight Championship , in which Rey Mysterio defended the title against Shannon Moore . Mysterio defeated Moore via pinfall to retain the title after he performed a 619 on Moore . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 After Sunday Night Heat , the pay @-@ per @-@ view event began with a tag team match for the World Tag Team Championship . The champions , La Résistance ( René Duprée and Sylvain Grenier ) , defended their titles against The Dudley Boyz ( Bubba Ray and D @-@ Von ) . Throughout the match , both teams performed many offensive maneuvers , though The Dudley Boyz were able to gain the upper hand when they executed a 3D on Duprée . As D @-@ Von covered Duprée , Rob Conway , who was disguised as a cameraman , hit D @-@ Von with a camera while the referee was distracted . Duprée then covered D @-@ Von for a successful pinfall to retain the championship . 
 The following match pitted The Undertaker against A @-@ Train in a standard match . In the early stages both competitors wrestled inconclusively before The Undertaker gained the advantage . He attempted to lift A @-@ Train Tombstone piledriver . A @-@ Train countered it , in the process knocking the referee down . He attempted to take advantage of the situation by trying to hit The Undertaker with a chair . The Undertaker , however , countered the attack with his boot , causing the chair to hit A @-@ Train in the face . The Undertaker then chokeslam A @-@ Train and , since the referee had recuperated , covered his opponent for the pinfall . 
 The third contest had Shane McMahon against Eric Bischoff in a standard match . McMahon and Bischoff began by brawling on the arena ramp , as Jonathan Coachman appeared from the backstage area and hit McMahon with a folding chair . Bischoff grabbed a microphone and announced that the match would be contested under no disqualification , falls count anywhere regulations ; as a result , Bischoff could not be disqualified for Coachman 's interference . Coachman and Bischoff performed double @-@ team attacks on McMahon until Steve Austin interfered by performing a Stone Cold <unk> on Coachman and Bischoff . After Austin 's interference , McMahon positioned Bischoff on the television commentators ' table , performed a Leap of Faith onto Bischoff 's chest , thereby breaking the table and covered Bischoff for the pinfall . 
 The next match involved four wrestlers from the Smackdown ! <unk> in a match for the WWE United States Championship ; Eddie Guerrero defended the title against Chris Benoit , Rhyno , and Tajiri . The match began with Guerrero wrestling with Tajiri , while Benoit wrestled with Rhyno . During the encounter Guerrero applied a Lasso From El Passo on Tajiri , while Benoit employed a Crippler Crossface on Rhyno . Afterwards , Tajiri applied a Tarantula on Benoit . The hold distracted the referee , which allowed Guerrero to hit Rhyno with the United States Championship belt . Tajiri then attempted to hit Benoit with a <unk> Kick , but Benoit countered the maneuver by lifting and sitting Tajiri onto his shoulders . Tajiri , however , countered by tossing both himself and Benoit over the top rope onto the arena floor . Capitalizing on the situation , Guerrero then performed a Frog splash on Rhyno , after which he scored the pinfall , thus retaining the WWE United States Championship . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The fifth match was the main event from the SmackDown brand , a standard match for the WWE Championship , in which Kurt Angle defended the title against Brock Lesnar . At the beginning of the match , Lesnar tried to walk away from the ring , but Angle brought him back . There , Angle performed many offensive maneuvers , including DDT and Angle Slam . He then applied an ankle lock on Lesnar . During this tussle , Lesnar countered the hold but knocked down the referee . Angle applied a guillotine choke on Lesnar , which brought Lesnar down onto his knees and allowed Angle to perform another ankle lock . Mr. McMahon , who had accompanied Lesnar to the ring , came into the ring and hit Angle 's back with a folding chair to break the submission hold . Because the referee was incapacitated , Lesnar was not disqualified for the interference . Afterwards , Lesnar twice attempted to lift Angle onto his F @-@ 5 . During the second attempt , however , Angle countered the throw into another ankle lock , which forced Lesnar to submit . As a result , Angle retained the WWE Championship . 
 In a preliminary match from the Raw brand , Kane faced Rob Van Dam in a No Disqualification match . Both wrestlers used a ladder to their advantage early in the match . After Kane used the ladder on Van Dam , he attempted to hit Van Dam with a flying clothesline . However , Van Dam moved out of the way and Kane landed on the arena barricade . Van Dam performed a variation of a rolling thunder on Kane using a folding chair . Following this , Van Dam attempted to hit Kane with a Van Daminator with a chair , but Kane rolled out of the ring to avoid the attack . Van Dam then attempted an aerial technique from inside the ring towards Kane , but Kane caught Van Dam in mid @-@ air and executed a tombstone piledriver , after which he covered Van <unk> for the pinfall . 
 The main event from the Raw brand was the Elimination Chamber match for the World Heavyweight Championship , in which Triple H defended the title against Chris Jericho , Goldberg , Kevin Nash , Randy Orton , and Shawn Michaels . The match began with Jericho and Michaels in the ring , while Goldberg , Nash , Orton , and Triple H were locked in the chambers . Michaels and Jericho wrestled , with neither of them gaining the advantage over the other . Orton and Nash were the third and fourth entrants into the match , respectively . Nash was the first wrestler eliminated from the match after Michaels executed a superkick and Chris Jericho covered him for a pinfall . Triple H and Goldberg were the fifth and sixth entrants . Michaels performed another superkick on Triple H as soon as he exited his chamber , and as a result , Triple H was knocked back into his chamber . As soon as Goldberg entered the match , he performed a spear for a pinfall to eliminate Orton . Next , Goldberg performed a Jackhammer on Michaels and Jericho , eliminating both via pinfall . This left Goldberg alone with and Triple H , who at the time had remained inside the chamber . Goldberg performed a spear on him through the glass of the chamber , in the process pushing him out of the chamber . Ric Flair , who was managing both Triple H and Orton , then handed Triple H a sledgehammer . Goldberg attempted another spear on Triple H , who countered the maneuver by hitting Goldberg with the sledgehammer and covered him for the pinfall . Triple H therefore retained the World Heavyweight Championship . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 During an episode of Raw after SummerSlam , Goldberg challenged Triple H to another match for the World Heavyweight Championship . This match took place at the Unforgiven pay @-@ per @-@ view on September 21 , 2003 with a stipulation that , should he lose , Goldberg would retire from WWE . Goldberg defeated Triple H to become the new champion . After SummerSlam Kurt Angle focused his attention on The Undertaker , whom he wrestled in a match for the WWE Championship during an episode of SmackDown ! on September 4 , 2003 . During the match , Lesnar attacked both wrestlers with a folding chair , leading to an Iron Man match between Angle and Lesnar . Lesnar won five falls during the match , while Angle won four , and as a result Lesnar won the title . 
 The rivalry between Kane and Rob Van Dam stopped , as Kane engaged in a feud against Shane McMahon . In a scenario on the August 25 , 2003 episode of Raw , Kane attempted to throw McMahon into a dumpster that was set on fire , but McMahon avoided it and threw Kane into the dumpster . On September 8 , 2003 during an episode of Raw , Eric Bischoff scheduled a Last Man Standing match between Kane and McMahon for Unforgiven . In that match , Kane defeated McMahon after McMahon was unable to respond to a ten count . After SummerSlam , Eddie Guerrero began a rivalry with John Cena over the WWE United States Championship . Guerrero retained the championship in two title defenses that took place on SmackDown ! . Guerrero then engaged in a feud with Big Show . At No Mercy , Big Show defeated Guerrero via pinfall to win the WWE United States Championship . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The America West Arena has a maximum capacity of 19 @,@ 000 , but that was reduced for SummerSlam 2003 . The event grossed over $ 715 @,@ 000 in ticket sales from an attendance of 16 @,@ 113 , the maximum allowed . This was later confirmed by Linda McMahon , WWE CEO , in a press release on August 26 , 2003 . The event resulted in 415 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys ( a 0 @.@ 88 pay @-@ per @-@ view buyrate ) . The promotion 's pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue was $ 24 @.@ 7 million . 
 Canadian Online Explorer 's professional wrestling section rated the entire event a 7 out of 10 stars . The rating was higher than the SummerSlam event in 2004 , which was rated a 5 out of 10 stars . The Elimination Chamber main event match from the Raw brand was rated an 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 stars , with an additional rating of 1 out of 10 stars for the process in which the match ended . The SmackDown ! brand 's main event , a standard match for the WWE Championship , was rated a 9 out of 10 stars , a better reception than the Raw brand 's main event . Wade Keller reviewed the event for the Pro Wrestling Torch . He rated the Angle @-@ Lesnar match 4 @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of 5 stars , declaring it an " excellent match " . The Elimination Chamber match received a rating of 3 stars . The event was released on DVD on September 23 , 2003 by Sony Music Entertainment . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Elimination Chamber entrances and eliminations = = = 
 = Kawasaki Heavy Industries C151 = 
 The Kawasaki Heavy Industries C151 is a type of train that is one of the four current types of electric multiple unit on the North South and East West Lines of Singapore 's Mass Rapid Transit ( MRT ) system . These are the oldest trains built for the system ; they were introduced in 1987 and are still in operation . Sixty @-@ six trainsets consisting of six cars each and a single money trainset consisting of four cars were purchased . These trains are operated by SMRT Trains . 
 These trains were manufactured from 1986 to 1989 in batches by a Japanese consortium consisting of Kawasaki Heavy Industries , Nippon Sharyo , Tokyu Car Corp and Kinki Sharyo following a round of intense competitive bidding by rolling stock manufacturers from around the world . No visible differences can be found in any of these batches , which were built to agreed specifications . 
 The trains underwent a two @-@ year mid @-@ life interior refurbishment programme by Hyundai Rotem . After major train disruptions on 15 and 17 December 2011 , further plans to upgrade its mechanical components to increase its reliability were made . The first trainset to receive this upgrade , which included a replacement traction system , entered service in July 2015 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = <unk> process = = = 
 With construction of the Mass Rapid Transit system underway in 1983 , Contract 151 called for the procurement of rolling stock — 150 cars in Phase One and an option for 246 cars in Phase Two . In what Financial Times described as " a time when manufacturers were begging for orders " for the global rolling stock market , competition for the contract was intense . At least eight companies from around the world submitted bids for what they had nicknamed the " Big One " . <unk> included Metro @-@ Cammell with Singapore Automotive Engineering , Kawasaki Heavy Industries with three Japanese manufacturers , MAN AG with AEG , Siemens and Brown , Boveri & Cie , <unk> with Alsthom @-@ <unk> , <unk> and Singapore Shipbuilding and Engineering , ASEA with Sembawang Shipyard , and a Bombardier Transportation @-@ led consortium with Hawker Siddeley Canada and Brown Boveri Canada . 
 Competition for the contract was so fierce that it involved last @-@ minute discounts , offers of free parts and allegations of sabotage . Metro @-@ Cammell , Kawasaki and ASEA were shortlisted for the final round . Metro @-@ Cammell based its design on the Hong Kong MTR M @-@ Train EMU and proposed to use the GEC propulsion system had they won the contract . Metro @-@ Cammell also delivered a concept mock @-@ up and was originally the favourite to win the contract . However , analysts became concerned that a measuring error involving the London Underground 1983 Stock during the evaluation period could jeopardise their bid . 
 In 1984 , the Japanese consortium of Kawasaki Heavy Industries with Nippon Sharyo , Tokyu Car Corp and Kinki Sharyo was awarded Contract 151 at a cost of S $ 581 @.@ 5 million for the construction of 396 passenger cars . Kawasaki won the contract ; its bid — aided by favourable financing from Mitsui and positive economic conditions in Japan — was 12 % lower than those of other bidders . The award was the largest single contract awarded in the initial construction of the system . Kawasaki also promised to supply $ <unk> worth of complimentary spare parts after delivery . The loss of Contract 151 was a massive financial blow to Metro @-@ Cammell , who were forced to reduce their workforce by half later that year . 
 = = = Initial construction = = = 
 A mock @-@ up was manufactured in Japan after Kawasaki won the contract . It was shipped to Singapore and put on public display during the 1984 National Exhibition held in November 1984 at World Trade Centre . The mock @-@ up featured three choices of seating arrangements and colour schemes ; members of the public were invited to give feedback on these options . The finalised interior design of the C151 trains consisted of a fully longitudinal seating arrangement . The bucket seats were made of plastic ; glass partitions separated the seating areas from the passenger doors . Strap lines for standing passengers were installed in the middle of every car . The colour scheme of each adjacent car 's interior is distinct to make car identification in cases of fault reporting easier for passengers . Originally the colour scheme of the driving trailer cars was orange , that of the second and fifth motor cars was blue , and that of the two centre motor cars was green . There were nine seats between two doors ; this was reduced to seven after the first round of refurbishment . 
 While the rolling stock and Mitsubishi Electric propulsion equipment were constructed in Japan , many parts were sourced from Europe . The trains were fitted with Stone Platt air @-@ conditioning , <unk> bogies , Sig gangways , <unk> couplers and Westinghouse brakes . Mitsubishi Electric 's propulsion equipment was estimated to consume 50 % less electricity than Hong Kong 's existing MTR M @-@ Train EMU . Its Automatic Train Control ( ATC ) signalling system was supplied by Westinghouse , capable of running at pre @-@ programmed speeds and activated by the train driver . While theoretically possible to design for a fully driverless operation using this signalling technology , MRT Corporation ( MRTC , now SMRT Corporation ) decided against this option . The trainsets were assembled in Kobe , Japan , and then shipped to Singapore by Neptune Orient Lines . The first trainset was delivered to MRTC on 8 July 1986 at Bishan Depot , officiated by Yeo Ning Hong . 
 = = = First refurbishment = = = 
 On 3 September 2004 , Hyundai Rotem , Mitsui , RM Transit Technology and <unk> <unk> received an order to refurbish all 396 carriages , costing S $ 142 @.@ 7 million in total . The works included the refurbishment of interior fixtures , the addition of wheelchair spaces , the upgrading of onboard communications equipment , enhancement of the public announcement system , and general improvement of the cars ' appearance . SMRT Corporation said the reasons for refurbishment were wear and damage of important components over the past two decades and water leaks from the air @-@ conditioning system on some trains . The company chose this option instead of buying new rolling stock , which would have cost S $ 792 million . The first refurbished train began revenue service on 5 November 2006 , and all remaining trainsets had been refurbished by the end of 2008 . 
 The exteriors of refurbished trains resemble those of the C751B rolling stock . The interior fittings were replaced with white walls and new seats and installed further back to allow more standing space . The colour of seats in the driving trailer was changed from orange to red . Seats of the refurbished cars were lengthened from 43 cm ( 17 in ) to 48 cm ( 19 in ) . Four of seven seats per row were designated as priority seats and were differentiated using a darker colour . 
 The Mitsubishi Electric propulsion system was retained , having performed better than expected . The wheelchair space was made available on the end of two mid @-@ train cars , nearest to the lifts in above @-@ ground stations . LED displays that blink to warn passengers of closing doors were introduced in the upper middle section of the door . Additional loudspeakers and advertisement panels were also introduced . Hand grips were moved to the support bars of the seats on the ceiling and <unk> were located near the doors and at both ends of each carriage . The air @-@ conditioning system was modified to match the system used in the C751B cars , with air @-@ conditioning vents and in @-@ flow fans installed . 
 In November 2008 , SMRT Corporation and Land Transport Authority ( LTA ) announced that the last ten refurbished trainsets would have one @-@ third of their seats replaced with metal rails to create extra standing space . The move was justified on grounds of allowing more standing space onboard during peak @-@ hour services . The reduction of seats per row from nine to seven after refurbishment was already unpopular among commuters ; the decision to further reduce seating capacity drew sharp criticism against the operator and LTA . As of December 2015 , all 66 <unk> from one @-@ third of their seats have been replaced by metal bars to create extra standing space . 
 = = = Second refurbishment = = = 
 Following major train disruptions on 15 and 17 December 2011 , the Committee of Inquiry ( COI ) found that despite the first refurbishment of the C151 rolling stock , " there does not appear to be any upgrade in terms of engineering components " . The COI was particularly critical of the inadequate and ageing emergency battery installed on the C151 and recommended the installation of a Train Integrated Management System ( <unk> ) found on the C751B and C151A trains . 
 In response , SMRT announced it was replacing important engineering components on all C151 trains by 2019 . This included changing the existing Mitsubishi Electric propulsion system for the newer Insulated @-@ gate bipolar transistor ( IGBT ) and Permanent Magnet Synchronous Motor ( <unk> ) propulsion system by Toshiba , technology currently used in the Tokyo Metro 's 1000 series and 16000 series trains as well as Hankyu 1000 series trains . On 30 July 2015 , trainsets 055 / 056 and 131 / 132 began using this new propulsion system , distinguishable from the original fleet by the whining noise when accelerating or decelerating . In tandem with the replacement of the signalling system on the East @-@ West Line and North @-@ South Line with the newer Thales <unk> signalling system , new equipment had to be installed in the passenger compartment of the trailer cars . 
 = = Operational details = = 
 = = = Money train = = = 
 Kawasaki built a four @-@ car unit to serve as a money train . This was decommissioned from service in 2007 and both set 301 and 302 are used by the Singapore Armed Forces ( SAF ) for training purposes . The mock @-@ up C751B is used for the <unk> College West for training purposes . 
 = = = Passenger announcement and information systems = = = 
 These trains originally had no visual passenger information systems ; station announcements had to be made by the train operator . An automatic audio announcement system using voice synthesizers was installed on each train by September 1994 . The first iteration of the door closing buzzer announcements , which replaced the initial door chimes , was fully introduced by April 1997 . 
 SMRT first attempted to install a passenger information system <unk> on trains using LCD displays in 1999 ; these have since been removed . In November 2006 the doors of three cars ( carriage number <unk> , 1006 and 2006 ) were installed with a dynamic , in @-@ train system displaying station information for testing ; these are similar to ones used by Hong Kong 's MTR . An initial prototype of <unk> based upon the existing Automatic Transit Info System was developed in @-@ house ; this was removed before the end of the year without entering service . 
 Two years later , four units of vacuum fluorescent displays ( VFD ) were mounted on the ceiling . Eight units of dynamic route maps were mounted above every door in each car in trainset 053 / 054 for a two @-@ month trial . This new SMRT Active Route Map Information System ( <unk> ) was then progressively introduced to all C151 trainsets , and subsequently to <unk> and C751B trains for a cost of S $ 12 million — S $ 20 @,@ 000 per car . It became standard equipment on all new rolling stocks subsequently introduced on the East @-@ West Line and North @-@ South Line . 
 = = Livery and numbering = = 
 The cars had an aluminium @-@ alloy double @-@ skinned construction , and were delivered unpainted to save time . A red adhesive strip ran through the length of the cars in the middle to match the operator 's visual branding . The unpainted cars had a shiny appearance upon delivery , but as dirt and grime accumulated it became a recurring problem for the operator and attracted several public complaints . In response , MRT Corporation built a wash machine at Bishan Depot in an attempt to clean up the cars ' exterior proper . After refurbishment , the problem was solved by covering the cars ' exterior entirely with giant stickers , creating a livery that is similar to the newer C751B and C151A rolling stocks . 
 = = Train formation = = 
 A complete six @-@ car trainset consists of an identical twin set of one driving trailer ( DT ) and two motor cars ( M1 and M2 ) permanently coupled together . The configuration of a C151 trainset in revenue service is DT – M1 – M2 – M2 – M1 – DT . 
 The car numbers of the trains range from <unk> to <unk> , where x depends on the carriage type . Kawasaki Heavy Industries built sets 001 – 020 , 051 – 062 , and 093 – 102 , Kinki Sharyo co @-@ built sets 021 – 030 , 063 – 072 , and 103 – 112 , Nippon Sharyo co @-@ built sets 031 – 040 , 073 – 082 , and 113 – 122 , and Tokyu Car Corp co @-@ built sets 041 – 050 , 083 – 092 , and 123 – 132 . Individual cars are assigned a four @-@ digit serial number by the rail operator SMRT . A complete six @-@ car trainset consists of an identical twin set of one driving trailer and two motor cars permanently coupled together . For example , set 099 / 100 consists of carriages <unk> , 1099 , 2099 , 2100 , 1100 and 3100 . 
 = = Major incidents = = 
 Since its introduction , C151 rolling stock has been involved in three high @-@ profile incidents : 
 On 5 August 1993 two C151 trains collided at Clementi station because of a 50 @-@ litre ( 11 imp gal ; 13 US gal ) oil spillage on the track by a maintenance locomotive , resulting in 132 injuries . 
 On 17 May 2010 , Oliver Fricker trespassed and vandalised car 1048 ( trainset 047 / 048 ) with graffiti at Changi Depot . The graffiti was initially mistaken for an advertisement and was not spotted until the car was filmed and the video was uploaded to YouTube by a <unk> . Fricker was convicted and sentenced to seven months ' imprisonment and caning . The public perceived this incident to have serious security implications , as the depot was considered a sensitive installation . 
 In the major MRT disruption of 15 December 2011 , one C151 train ( trainset 067 / 068 , <unk> in the COI ) was stalled in the tunnel and its backup battery failed . The passenger compartments in <unk> experienced a blackout and loss of ventilation , leading to one passenger smashing a train door window to avoid suffocation . The battery failure led to criticism by the COI on the condition of the aging emergency batteries installed on all C151 trains . SMRT has since proposed an upgrading plan to address this issue . 
 = = = Minor incidents = = = 
 On 25 May 2012 , a C151 train 's glass window panel was reportedly to be shattered on its own at Admiralty causing no injuries or death . This is unrelated to similar issue as well as other defects found on the C151A trains as acknowledged by the SMRT on 5 July 2016 . 
 = Lisa the Iconoclast = 
 " Lisa the Iconoclast " is the sixteenth episode of The Simpsons ' seventh season . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on February 18 , 1996 . In the episode , Springfield 's bicentennial approaches , and Lisa writes an essay on town founder Jebediah Springfield . While doing research , she finds a confession revealing that Springfield was a murderous pirate named Hans <unk> who never cared about the people of Springfield . Lisa and Homer decide to get the message out but instead anger the town council . 
 The episode was written by Jonathan Collier and directed by Mike B. Anderson . It was Anderson 's first directing role . The story was inspired by the 1991 exhumation of President Zachary Taylor . Donald Sutherland guest starred as the voice of Hollis Hurlbut , a part that was written specifically for him . The episode includes several references to Colonial and Revolutionary America , including Gilbert Stuart 's unfinished 1796 painting of George Washington . The episode features two neologisms , embiggen and cromulent , which were intended to sound like real words but are in fact completely fabricated ( although it was later discovered that C. A. Ward had used " embiggen " in 1884 ) . Embiggen , coined by Dan Greaney , has since been used in several scientific publications , while cromulent , coined by David X. Cohen , appeared in the Dictionary.com 's 21st Century Lexicon . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As Springfield celebrates its bicentennial , Lisa 's class at Springfield Elementary School are assigned essays . Lisa goes to the historical society to research Jebediah Springfield , the founder of Springfield . While trying to play Jebediah Springfield 's fife , she makes the shocking discovery that the town 's founder was actually a villainous pirate and enemy of George Washington who kept his dark past hidden . He had written his confession on the back side of a portrait of Washington and hidden it in his fife . Meanwhile , upon Lisa 's suggestion , Homer is elected the town crier after he demonstrated that he was better suited to the position than Ned Flanders . 
 Lisa conducts further research about Jebediah Springfield , and finds out that he once lost his tongue to a Turk in a <unk> fight and had it replaced with a prosthetic silver tongue . The town , including Marge , does not agree with Lisa 's revelations , resulting in an " F " on a report about Springfield while Ms. Hoover deems her to be a " PC Thug . " Homer believes her , and sympathizes with her story , claiming he 's been called a " greasy thug " too . However , when Lisa attempts to show the town historian Horace Hurlbut the confession , he dismisses it as an obvious forgery , and when she presses him , he bans her and her descendants from the museum for three months . Lisa tries to convince the town her claims are true , but is met with outright hostility everywhere . However , she convinces the municipal government to disinter Mr. Springfield 's body to search for evidence of a legendary silver tongue . Despite Lisa 's suspicions , when they open the coffin , the skeleton possesses no silver tongue . Lisa is forced into admitting she was wrong and Mayor Quimby strips Homer of the role of town crier and <unk> it to Flanders . 
 That night , Lisa has a dream wherein the ghosts of Jebediah Springfield and George Washington appear . After seeing the incomplete portrait of George Washington in her classroom , Lisa soon figures out that the piece of paper upon which the confession is written is the bottom half of the portrait . She confronts Hurlbut with this piece of evidence . Hurlbut confesses that he stole the tongue while the dust cleared seconds after the coffin was opened and hid it in a cowboy maquette in the museum . He explained that he had done so to protect his career and the myth of Jebediah Springfield . After realizing the mistake of celebrating a pirate , the two decide to go public with their discovery . Just as Lisa is about to expose the " real Jebediah " to the parading townspeople , she realizes that Jebediah Springfield 's good image means too much to the town , and decides to keep the truth a secret , knowing they will lose hope and morale if the truth is revealed to the public . At the parade , Homer takes a tricorne and bell from Flanders and replaces him , marching through the parade with Lisa on his shoulder . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Jonathan Collier and directed by Mike B. Anderson . The story was inspired by the real events surrounding the exhumation of President Zachary Taylor . In the late 1980s , college professor and author Clara Rising theorized that Taylor was murdered by poison and was able to convince Taylor 's closest living relative and the Coroner of Jefferson County , Kentucky , to order an exhumation . On June 17 , 1991 , Taylor 's remains were exhumed and transported to the Office of the Kentucky Chief Medical Examiner , who found that the level of arsenic was much smaller than would be expected if Taylor had been thus poisoned . The remains were then returned to the cemetery and received appropriate honors at reinterment . Then @-@ show runner Bill Oakley said " Lisa the Iconoclast " is " essentially the same " story but with Lisa in the role as Rising . At the end of the episode there is an ode to Jebediah Springfield playing over the credits . The music and lyrics for this piece of music were all written by Jeff Martin . 
 Donald Sutherland voiced Hollis Hurlbut in this episode . The script was specifically written with him in mind playing that part . Sutherland wanted to do the voice recordings as one would do a film and start in the middle of the script , so that he could get to know the character , but that idea was abandoned . In the episode , Lisa joked she was getting over her " Chester A. <unk> " , a play on the word " arthritis " and the name of Chester A. Arthur . Sutherland ad @-@ libbed the line " you had arthritis ? " , and the producers liked it so much that they kept it . 
 The episode opens with an old documentary on Jebediah Springfield , starring Troy McClure as Springfield . The writers tried to make this documentary seem as lousy and low @-@ budget as possible . One of these tricks was to have post @-@ production add scratches to the animation . The animators added production errors that would come in a low @-@ budget film . For example , a man in the crowd looks at the camera , some of the people are wearing wristwatches , McClure 's stuntman does not have the same sideburns as he does , and a boom microphone can be seen entering the frame . In the Historical Society , the animators spent a lot of time decorating the walls . Besides numerous historical references , they also decorated the walls with The Simpsons characters set in the 19th century . The first painting shows Otto Mann ( Springfield 's school bus driver ) driving children in a horse @-@ drawn carriage . Another painting shows Marge Simpson in silhouette . The last one shows Professor Frink holding a kite in the manner of Benjamin Franklin . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The Historical Society of Springfield contains references to historical figures and facts . The episode features Gilbert Stuart 's unfinished 1796 painting of George Washington and tells a fictional backstory of how it came to be . In reality , the painting was unfinished and it did not have a part torn off . Hurlbut mentions the American revolutionaries William Dawes and Samuel Allyne Otis as equals to Jebediah Springfield . When Lisa passes out the " Wanted for treason " posters , it is a reference to those featuring John F. Kennedy , which were circulated in Dallas prior to his assassination . Hurlbut claims Springfield 's confessions are " just as fake " as the will of Howard Hughes and the diaries of Adolf Hitler , both of which are proven forgeries . The episode also contains references to popular culture . The opening couch gag shows the Simpson family in blue boxes similar to the style of The Brady Bunch . 
 Chief Wiggum is singing " <unk> Races " from 1850 by Stephen Foster <unk> with the skull of Jebediah Springfield . Lisa 's dream in which Washington and Springfield are fighting is a reference to Lethal Weapon . When Lisa is telling the people at Moe 's Tavern about the real history of Jebediah Springfield , they all sit with their mouths open . This is a reference to a scene in the film The Producers from 1968 . When Homer knocks over Ned Flanders in order to take over his job as town crier , it is a reference to the film National Lampoon 's Animal House from 1978 ( in which Sutherland appeared . ) Lisa 's decision to hide the truth to preserve the myth of Jebediah Springfield is a reference to the film The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance . In addition to these cultural references , at least one author has compared this episode to Friedrich Nietzsche 's short work On the Advantage and <unk> of History for Life . 
 = = Embiggen and cromulent = = 
 The episode features two neologisms : embiggen and cromulent . The show runners asked the writers if they could come up with two words which sounded like real words , and these were what they came up with . The Springfield town motto is " A noble spirit <unk> the smallest man . " <unk> Edna Krabappel comments that she never heard the word <unk> until she moved to Springfield . Miss Hoover , another teacher , replies , " I don 't know why ; it ’ s a perfectly cromulent word . " Later in the episode , while talking about Homer 's audition for the role of town crier , Principal Skinner states " He 's <unk> that role with his cromulent performance . " 
 Embiggen — in the context in which it is used in the episode — is a verb that was coined independently by Dan Greaney in 1996 . The literal meaning is to make something larger , with the morphology ( <unk> + big + -en ) being parallel to that of enlarge ( <unk> + large ) . The verb had in fact previously occurred in an 1884 edition of the British journal Notes and Queries : A Medium of <unk> for Literary Men , General Readers , Etc. by C. A. Ward , in the sentence " but the people magnified them , to make great or embiggen , if we may invent an English parallel as ugly . After all , use is nearly everything . " The word has made its way to common use and was included in Mark Peters ' Yada , Yada , Do 'h ! , 111 Television Words That Made the Leap From the Screen to Society , but as of 2014 it was not included in the authoritative Oxford English Dictionary . In particular , embiggen can be found in string theory . The first occurrence of the word was in the journal High Energy Physics in the article " Gauge / gravity duality and meta @-@ stable dynamical supersymmetry breaking " , which was published on January 23 , 2007 . For example , the article says : " For large P , the three @-@ form fluxes are dilute , and the gradient of the Myers potential encouraging an anti @-@ D3 to embiggen is very mild . " Later this usage was noted in the journal Nature , which explained that in this context , it means to grow or expand . 
 Cromulent is an adjective that was coined by David X. Cohen . Since it was coined , it has appeared in Dictionary.com 's 21st Century Lexicon . The meaning of cromulent is inferred only from its usage , which indicates that it is a positive attribute . Dictionary.com defines it as meaning fine or acceptable . Ben Macintyre has written that it means " valid or acceptable " . The United States government used the word " cromulent " ( and the alternate spelling " <unk> " ) in a U.S. Supreme Court brief about trademark law . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Lisa the Iconoclast " finished 70th in the ratings for the week of February 12 to 18 , 1996 . The episode was the sixth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files , Melrose Place , Beverly Hills , 90210 , Married ... with Children , and Fox Tuesday Night Movie : Cliffhanger . 
 The episode received positive reviews from television critics . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson lauded it for the focus on Lisa , commenting that " Lisa @-@ centered episodes tend to be preachy , but I suppose that ’ s inevitable given her character . I like the fact Lisa takes the high road here , though , as she proves she doesn ’ t always have to be right . Homer ’ s turn as the town crier brings mirth to a solid show . " In addition , John Alberti praised the episode in his book Leaving Springfield as " an especially cromulent example of the narrative <unk> and disruptive disclosure ... Lisa spends the entire episode uncovering the truth about Jebediah and courageously defending her findings against a phalanx of authority figures ... a symbol of honesty , integrity , and courage . All in all , a spectacular episode revealing the truth behind our society . " The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , thought it was a " clever " episode , and highlighted Lisa 's fantasy of the fight between <unk> and George Washington as " fantastic " . Dave Foster of DVD Times thought Sutherland offered a " memorable " guest appearance . Total Film 's Nathan Ditum ranked Sutherland 's performance as the 14th best guest appearance in the show 's history . Michael Moran of The Times ranked the episode as the eighth best in the show 's history . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 The episode was included on April 28 , 1997 on the VHS set The Dark Secrets of the Simpsons , alongside " The Springfield Files " , " Homer the Great " , and " Homer Badman " . On September 8 , 2003 the VHS tape was released on DVD under the name The Simpsons : Dark Secrets in Region 2 and Region 4 , but " Homer the Great " was replaced by " Homer to the Max " . It was released again on DVD on December 13 , 2005 as part of The Simpsons Complete Seventh Season . Bill Oakley , Josh Weinstein , Jonathan Collier , Yeardley Smith , Mike B. Anderson , and David Silverman participated in the DVD 's audio commentary . 
 = Linkin Park = 
 Linkin Park is an American rock band from Agoura Hills , California . Formed in 1996 , the band rose to international fame with their debut album Hybrid Theory ( 2000 ) , which was certified diamond by the RIAA in 2005 and multi @-@ platinum in several other countries . Their following studio album Meteora continued the band 's success , topping the Billboard 200 album chart in 2003 , and was followed by extensive touring and charity work around the world . In 2003 , MTV2 named Linkin Park the sixth @-@ greatest band of the music video era and the third @-@ best of the new millennium . Billboard ranked Linkin Park No. 19 on the Best Artists of the Decade chart . In 2012 , the band was voted as the greatest artist of the 2000s in a Bracket Madness poll on VH1 . In 2014 , the band was declared as the Biggest Rock Band in the World Right Now by Kerrang ! . 
 Having adapted nu metal and rap metal to a radio @-@ friendly yet densely layered style in Hybrid Theory and Meteora , the band explored other genres in their next studio album , Minutes to Midnight ( 2007 ) . The album topped the Billboard charts and had the third @-@ best debut week of any album that year . The band continued to explore a wider variation of musical types in their fourth album , A Thousand Suns ( 2010 ) , layering their music with more electronic sounds and beats . Their fifth album , Living Things ( 2012 ) , combines musical elements from all of their previous records . Their sixth and most recent album , The Hunting Party ( 2014 ) , returned to a heavier rock sound . The band has collaborated with several other artists , most notably with rapper Jay Z in their mashup EP Collision Course , and many others on the remix albums Reanimation and Recharged . Linkin Park has sold over 68 million albums worldwide and has won two Grammy Awards . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1996 – 2000 ) = = = 
 Linkin Park was founded by three high school friends : Mike Shinoda , Rob Bourdon , and Brad Delson . The three attended Agoura High School in Agoura Hills , California , a suburb of Los Angeles . After graduating from high school , the three began to take their musical interests more seriously , recruiting Joe Hahn , Dave " Phoenix " Farrell , and Mark Wakefield to perform in their band , Xero . Though limited in resources , the band began recording and producing songs within Shinoda 's makeshift bedroom studio in 1996 , resulting in a four @-@ track demo tape , entitled Xero . Tensions and frustration within the band grew however after they failed to land a record deal . The lack of success and stalemate in progress prompted Wakefield , at that time the band 's vocalist , to leave the band in search of other projects . Farrell also left to tour with Tasty <unk> , a Christian punk and Ska band . 
 After spending a considerable time searching for Wakefield 's replacement , Xero recruited Arizona vocalist , Chester Bennington , who was recommended by Jeff Blue , the vice president of Zomba Music in March 1999 . Bennington , formerly of a post @-@ grunge band by the name of Grey Daze , became a standout among applicants because of the dynamic in his singing style . The band then agreed on changing its name from Xero to Hybrid Theory ; the newborn vocal chemistry between Shinoda and Bennington helped revive the band , inciting them to work on new material . In 1999 the band released a self @-@ titled extended play , which they circulated across internet chat @-@ rooms and forums with the help of an online ' street team ' . The band 's renaissance culminated with a change in name ; from Hybrid Theory , the band once again changed its name , this time to Linkin Park , a play on and homage to Santa Monica 's Lincoln Park . The band initially wanted to utilize the name " Lincoln Park " , however they changed it to " Linkin " to acquire the internet domain " <unk> " . However , despite these changes , the band still struggled to sign a record deal . After facing numerous rejections from several major record labels , Linkin Park turned to Jeff Blue for additional help . After failing to catch Warner Bros. Records on three previous reviews , Jeff Blue , now the vice president of Warner Bros. Records , helped the band sign a deal with the company in 1999 . The band released its breakthrough album , Hybrid Theory , the following year . 
 = = = Hybrid Theory and Reanimation ( 2000 – 02 ) = = = 
 Linkin Park released Hybrid Theory on October 24 , 2000 . The album , which represented half a decade 's worth of the band 's work , was edited by Don Gilmore . Hybrid Theory was a massive commercial success ; it sold more than 4 @.@ 8 million copies during its debut year , earning it the status of best @-@ selling album of 2001 , while singles such as " Crawling " and " One Step Closer " established themselves as staples among alternative rock radio play lists during the year . Additionally , other singles from the album were featured in films such as Dracula 2000 , Little Nicky , and Valentine . Hybrid Theory won a Grammy Award for Best Hard Rock Performance for the song " Crawling " and was nominated for two other Grammy Awards : Best New Artist and Best Rock Album . MTV awarded the band their Best Rock Video and Best Direction awards for " In the End " . Through the winning of the Grammy for Best Hard Rock Performance , Hybrid Theory 's overall success had catapulted the band into mainstream success . 
 During this time , Linkin Park received many invitations to perform on many high @-@ profile tours and concerts including Ozzfest , Family Values Tour , and KROQ Almost Acoustic Christmas . The band worked with Jessica Sklar to found their official fan club and street team , " Linkin Park Underground " , in November 2001 . Linkin Park also formed its own tour , Projekt Revolution , which featured other notable artists such as Cypress Hill , Adema , and Snoop Dogg . Within a year 's stretch , Linkin Park had performed at over 320 concerts . The experiences and performances of the precocious band were documented in its first DVD , Frat Party at the <unk> Festival , which debuted in November 2001 . Now reunited with former bassist Phoenix , the band began work on a remix album , dubbed Reanimation , which would include works from Hybrid Theory and non @-@ album tracks . Reanimation debuted on July 30 , 2002 , featuring the likes of Black Thought , Jonathan Davis , Aaron Lewis , and many others . Reanimation claimed the second spot on the Billboard 200 , and sold nearly 270 @,@ 000 copies during its debut week . Hybrid Theory is also in the RIAA 's Top 100 Albums . 
 = = = Meteora ( 2002 – 04 ) = = = 
 Following the success of Hybrid Theory and Reanimation , Linkin Park spent a significant amount of time touring around the United States . The band members began to work on new material amidst its saturated schedule , spending a sliver of their free time in their tour bus ' studio . The band officially announced the production of a new studio album in December 2002 , revealing its new work was inspired by the rocky region of Meteora in Greece , where numerous monasteries have been built on top of the rocks . Meteora features a mixture of the band 's nu metal and rap metal style with newer innovative effects , including the induction of a shakuhachi ( a Japanese flute made of bamboo ) and other instruments . Linkin Park 's second album debuted on March 25 , 2003 and instantly earned worldwide recognition , going to No. 1 in the US and UK , and No. 2 in Australia . 
 Meteora sold more than 800 @,@ 000 copies during its first week , and it ranked as the best selling album on the Billboard charts at the time . The album 's singles , including " Somewhere I Belong " , " Breaking the Habit " , " Faint " , and " Numb " , received significant radio attention . By October 2003 , Meteora sold nearly three million copies . The album 's success allowed Linkin Park to form another Projekt Revolution , which featured other bands and artists including Mudvayne , Blindside , and Xzibit . Additionally , Metallica invited Linkin Park to play at the Summer Sanitarium Tour 2003 , which included well @-@ known acts such as Limp Bizkit , Mudvayne and Deftones . The band released an album and DVD , titled Live in Texas , which featured some audio and video tracks from the band 's performances in Texas during the tour . In early 2004 , Linkin Park started a world tour titled the Meteora World Tour . Supporting bands on the tour included Hoobastank , P.O.D. , Story of the Year and Pia . 
 Meteora earned the band multiple awards and honors . The band won the MTV awards for Best Rock Video for " Somewhere I Belong " and the Viewer 's Choice Award for " Breaking the Habit " . Linkin Park also received significant recognition during the 2004 Radio Music Awards , winning the Artist of the Year and Song of the Year ( " Numb " ) awards . Although Meteora was not nearly as successful as Hybrid Theory , it was the third best selling album in the United States during 2003 . The band spent the first few months of 2004 touring around the world , first with the third Projekt Revolution tour , and later several European concerts . At the same time , the band 's relationship with Warner Bros. Records was deteriorating rapidly on account of several trust and financial issues . After months of feuding , the band finally negotiated a deal in December 2005 . 
 = = = Side projects ( 2004 – 06 ) = = = 
 Following Meteora 's success , the band worked on many side projects . Bennington appeared on DJ Lethal 's " State of the Art " and other work with Dead by Sunrise , while Shinoda did work with Depeche Mode . In 2004 , the band began to work with Jay @-@ Z to produce another remix album , titled Collision Course . The album , which featured intermixed lyrics and background tracks from both artists ' previous albums , debuted in November 2004 . Shinoda also formed Fort Minor as a side project . With the aid of Jay @-@ Z , Fort Minor released its debut album , The Rising Tied , to critical acclaim . 
 Linkin Park also participated in numerous charitable events , most notably raised money to benefit victims of Hurricane Charley in 2004 and later Hurricane Katrina in 2005 . The band donated $ 75 @,@ 000 to the Special Operations Warrior Foundation in March 2004 . They also helped relief efforts for the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami victims by staging several charity concerts and setting up an additional fund called Music for Relief . Most notably , however , the band participated at Live 8 , a series of charitable benefit concerts set up to raise global awareness . Alongside Jay @-@ Z , the band performed on Live 8 's stage in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , to a global audience . The band would later be reunited with Jay @-@ Z at the Grammy Award Ceremony 2006 , during which they performed " Numb / Encore " , en route to winning a Grammy for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration . They were joined on stage by Paul McCartney who added verses from the song " Yesterday " . They would later go on to play at the 2006 Summer Sonic music festival , which was hosted by Metallica in Japan . 
 = = = Minutes to Midnight ( 2006 – 08 ) = = = 
 Linkin Park returned to the recording studios in 2006 to work on new material . To produce the album , the band chose producer Rick Rubin . Despite initially stating the album would debut sometime in 2006 , the album was delayed until 2007 . The band had recorded thirty to fifty songs in August 2006 , when Shinoda stated the album was halfway completed . Bennington later added that the new album would stray away from its previous nu metal sound . Warner Bros. Records officially announced that the band 's third studio album , titled Minutes to Midnight , would be released on May 15 , 2007 in the United States . After spending fourteen months working on the album , the band members opted to further refine their album by removing five of the original seventeen tracks . The album 's title , a reference to the Doomsday Clock , foreshadowed the band 's new lyrical themes . Minutes to Midnight sold over 625 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , making it one of the most successful debut week albums in recent years . The album also took the top spot on the Billboard Charts . 
 The album 's first single , " What I 've Done " , was released on April 2 , and premiered on MTV and Fuse within the same week . The single was acclaimed by listeners , becoming the top @-@ ranked song on the Billboard 's Modern Rock Tracks and Mainstream Rock Tracks charts . The song is also used in soundtrack for the 2007 action film , Transformers . Mike Shinoda was also featured on the Styles of Beyond song " Second to None " , which was also included in the film . Later in the year , the band won the " Favorite Alternative Artist " in the American Music Awards . The band also saw success with the rest of the album 's singles , " Bleed It Out " , " Shadow of the Day " , " Given Up " , and " Leave Out All the Rest " , which were released throughout 2007 and early 2008 . The band also collaborated with Busta Rhymes on his single " We Made It " , which was released on April 29 . 
 Linkin Park embarked on a large world tour titled " Minutes to Midnight World Tour " . The band promoted the album 's release by forming their fourth Projekt Revolution tour in the United States which included many musical acts like My Chemical Romance , Taking Back Sunday , HIM , Placebo , and many others . They also played numerous shows in Europe , Asia , and Australia which included a performance at Live Earth Japan on July 7 , 2007 @.@ and headlining Download Festival in Donington Park , England and Edgefest in Downsview Park , Toronto , Canada . The band completed touring on its fourth Projekt Revolution tour before taking up an Arena tour around the United Kingdom , visiting Nottingham , Sheffield and Manchester , before finishing on a double night at the O2 arena in London . Bennington stated that Linkin Park plans to release a follow @-@ up album to Minutes to Midnight . However , he stated the band will first embark on a United States tour to gather inspiration for the album . Linkin Park embarked on another Projekt Revolution tour in 2008 . This was the first time a Projekt Revolution tour was held in Europe with three shows in Germany and one in the United Kingdom . A Projekt Revolution tour was also held in the United States which featured Chris Cornell , The Bravery , Ashes Divide , Street Drum Corps and many others . Linkin Park finished the tour with a final show in Texas . Mike Shinoda announced a live CD / DVD titled Road to Revolution : Live at Milton Keynes , which is a live video recording from the Projekt Revolution gig at the Milton Keynes Bowl on June 29 , 2008 , which was officially released on November 24 , 2008 . 
 = = = A Thousand Suns ( 2008 – 11 ) = = = 
 In May 2009 , Linkin Park announced they were working on a fourth studio album , which was planned to be released in 2010 . Shinoda told IGN that the new album would be ' genre @-@ busting , ' while building off of elements in Minutes to Midnight . He also mentioned that the album would be more experimental and " hopefully more cutting @-@ edge . " Bennington also addressed the media to confirm that Rick Rubin would return to produce the new album . The band later revealed the album would be called A Thousand Suns . While working on the new album , Linkin Park worked with successful film composer Hans Zimmer to produce the score for Transformers : Revenge of the Fallen . The band released a single for the movie , titled " New Divide " . Joe Hahn created a music video for the song , which featured clips from the film . On June 22 , Linkin Park played a short set in Westwood Village after the premier of the movie . After completing work for Transformers : Revenge of the Fallen , the band returned to the studio to finalize their album . 
 On April 26 , the band released an app for the iPhone , iPod Touch , and iPad , a game called 8 @-@ Bit Rebellion ! It featured the band as playable characters , and a new song called " Blackbirds " which was unlockable by beating the game . The song was also later released as an iTunes bonus track on A Thousand Suns . 
 A Thousand Suns was released on September 14 . The album 's first single , " The Catalyst " , was released on August 2 . The band promoted their new album by launching a concert tour , which started in Los Angeles on September 7 . Linkin Park also relied on MySpace to promote their album , releasing two additional songs , " Waiting for the End " and " Blackout " on September 8 . Furthermore , a documentary about the album 's production , titled Meeting of A Thousand Suns , was available for streaming on the band 's MySpace page . On August 31 , 2010 , it was announced that the band would perform the single live for the first time at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards on September 12 , 2010 . The venue of the debut live performance of the single was Griffith Observatory , an iconic location used in Hollywood movies . " Waiting for the End " was released as the second single of A Thousand Suns . 
 Linkin Park reached No.8 in Billboard Social 50 , a chart of the most active artists on the world 's leading social networking sites . In other Billboard Year @-@ End charts , the band reached <unk> in the " Top Artists " chart , as well as A Thousand Suns reaching <unk> in the Year @-@ End chart of the Billboard Top 200 albums and No.7 in the 2010 Year @-@ End Rock Albums , and " The Catalyst " reaching <unk> in the Year @-@ End Rock Songs chart . 
 The band was nominated for six Billboard Awards in 2011 for Top Duo or Group , Best Rock Album for A Thousand Suns , Top Rock Artist , Top Alternative Artist , Top Alternative Song for " Waiting for the End " and Top Alternative Album for A Thousand Suns , but did not win any award . The band charted in numerous Billboard Year @-@ End charts in 2011 . The band was <unk> in the Top Artists Chart , <unk> in the Billboard 200 Artists chart , No.11 in the Social 50 Chart , No.6 in the Top Rock Artists Chart , No.9 in the Rock Songs Artists Chart , No.16 in the Rock Albums Chart , No.4 in the Hard Rock Albums Chart , and No.7 in the Alternative Songs Chart . 
 = = = Living Things and Recharged ( 2011 – 13 ) = = = 
 In July 2011 , Bennington told Rolling Stone that Linkin Park aims to produce a new album every eighteen months , and that he would be shocked if a new album did not come out in 2012 . He later revealed in another interview in September 2011 that the band was still in the beginning phases of the next album , saying " We just kind of began . We like to keep the creative juices flowing , so we try to keep that going all the time ... we like the direction that we 're going in . " Later , on March 28 , 2012 , Shinoda confirmed that the band is filming a music video for " Burn It Down " . Joe Hahn directed the video . Shinoda spoke to <unk> about the album 's art , saying that it will " blow them [ the fans ] away ... the average person is not going to be able to look at it and go , I understand that that 's completely new , like not just the image but the way they made the image is totally new . So there 's going to be that . " 
 On April 15 , 2012 , Shinoda announced that Living Things would be the title of Linkin Park 's fifth album . Shinoda stated that they chose the title Living Things because the album is more about people , personal interactions , and it is far more personal than their previous albums . The band promoted the album on the 2012 edition of the Honda Civic Tour , with co @-@ headliners Incubus . The band performed " Burn It Down " at 2012 Billboard Music Awards . On May 24 , the band released the music video for " Burn It Down " and debuted " Lies Greed Misery " , another song from Living Things , on BBC Radio 1 . " Powerless " , the twelfth and closing track of the album , was featured in the closing credits of the film Abraham Lincoln : Vampire Hunter . 
 Living Things sold over 220 @,@ 000 copies during its debut week , ranking No. 1 on the US Albums Charts . Linkin Park 's single , " Castle of Glass " , was nominated for ' Best Song in a Game ' at the 2012 Spike Video Game Awards . The band also performed at the award ceremony on December 7 , but lost the award to " Cities " by Beck . Linkin Park also played at the Soundwave music festival in Australia , where they shared the stage with Metallica , Paramore , Slayer and Sum 41 . 
 On August 10 , 2013 , the band collaborated with American musician Steve Aoki to record the song " A Light That Never Comes " for Linkin Park 's online puzzle @-@ action game LP Recharge ( short for Linkin Park Recharge ) , which was launched on Facebook and the official LP Recharge website on September 12 , 2013 . On the day of the game 's release , Linkin Park made a post on their Facebook explaining that the song used to promote the game would be included on a new remix album , entitled Recharged , which was released on October 29 , 2013 on CD , vinyl , and digital download . Similar to Reanimation , the album features remixes of ten of the songs from Living Things , with contributions from other artists , such as Ryu of Styles of Beyond , Pusha T , Datsik , <unk> , Bun B , Money Mark , and Rick Rubin . The band also worked on the soundtrack for the film Mall , which was directed by Joe Hahn . 
 = = = The Hunting Party ( 2013 – 15 ) = = = 
 In an interview with Fuse , Shinoda confirmed that Linkin Park had begun recording their sixth studio album in May 2013 . The band released the first single from their upcoming album , titled , " Guilty All the Same " on March 6 , 2014 through Shazam . The single was later released on the following day by Warner Bros. Records and debut at No. 28 on the US Billboard Rock Airplay charts before peaking at No. 1 on the Mainstream Rock charts in the following weeks . Shortly after the single 's release , the band revealed their sixth album would be titled The Hunting Party . The album was produced by Shinoda and Delson , who wanted to explore musical elements from Hybrid Theory and the band 's earlier material . Shinoda commented the album is a " 90s style of rock record . " He elaborated , " It 's a Rock record . It 's loud and it 's Rock , but not in the sense of what you 've heard before , which is more like ' 90s Hardcore @-@ Punk @-@ Thrash . ' The album includes musical contributions from Rakim , Page Hamilton of Helmet , Tom Morello of Rage Against the Machine , and Daron Malakian of System of a Down . The Hunting Party was released on June 13 , 2014 in most countries , and later released in the United States on June 17 . 
 Linkin Park performed at Download Festival on June 14 , 2014 , where they played their debut album , Hybrid Theory , in its entirety . Linkin Park headlined Rock am Ring and Rock im Park in 2014 , along with Metallica , Kings of Leon , and Iron Maiden . They also headlined with Iron Maiden again at the Greenfield Festival in July . On June 22 , Linkin Park made an unscheduled headline appearance at the Vans Warped Tour , where they played with members of Issues , The Devil Wears Prada , A Day To Remember , Yellowcard , Breathe Carolina , Finch , and Machine Gun Kelly . In January 2015 , the band embarked on a tour to promote the release of The Hunting Party , consisting of 17 concerts across the United States and Canada . The tour was canceled after only three concerts when Bennington injured his ankle . On May 9 , Linkin Park performed at the first edition of Rock in Rio USA , in direct support for Metallica . 
 On November 9 , 2014 MTV Europe named Linkin Park the " Best Rock " act of 2014 at their annual music awards ceremony . The band won the ' Best Rock Band ' and ' Best Live Act ' titles of 2014 on Loudwire 's Music Awards . Revolver ranked The Hunting Party as the fourth best album of 2014 . 
 Linkin Park collaborated with Steve Aoki on the song " Darker Than Blood " for Aoki 's album Neon Future II , which was released in May 2015 . The first preview of the song came during Aoki 's performance on February 28 , 2015 at the Aragon Ballroom in Chicago , Illinois . The song was debuted on Twitch.tv on April 13 and released on April 14 . 
 In an interview with AltWire on May 4 , Shinoda reflected on The Hunting Party and commented on Linkin Park 's future , stating ; " I 'm really happy with the reaction from The Hunting Party , and I think we 're ready to move somewhere new on the next album , which will be coming [ in 2016 ] " . 
 Blizzard Entertainment announced on October 20 that Linkin Park will be performing at the closing ceremony of <unk> 2015 , Blizzard 's video game convention . 
 = = = Seventh studio album ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 On November 25 , 2015 , Linkin Park updated their Facebook cover photo with a link to their website stating that they have started work on a new album . 
 = = Charity = = 
 On January 19 , 2010 , Linkin Park released a new song titled " Not Alone " as part of a compilation from Music for Relief called Download to Donate for Haiti in support of the Haiti Earthquake crisis . On February 10 , 2010 , Linkin Park released the official music video for the song on their homepage . The single itself was released on October 21 , 2011 . 
 On January 11 , 2011 , an updated version of Download to Donate for Haiti was launched , called Download to Donate for Haiti <unk> , with more songs to download . For the updated compilation , the band released Keaton Hashimoto 's remix of " The Catalyst " from the " Linkin Park featuring YOU " contest . 
 Shinoda designed two T @-@ shirts , in which the proceeds will go to Music for Relief to help the victims of the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami disasters . Music for Relief released Download to Donate : Tsunami Relief Japan , another compilation of songs , in which the proceeds will go to Save the Children . The band released the song titled as " Issho Ni " , meaning " we 're in this together " , on March 22 , 2011 via Download to Donate : Tsunami Relief Japan . 
 In the wake of Typhoon Haiyan , Linkin Park played at Club Nokia during the " Music for Relief : Concert for the Philippines " in Los Angeles , California , and raised donations for victims . The show was broadcast on AXS TV on February 15 . Other artists during the show included The Offspring , Bad Religion , Heart , and The <unk> . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Linkin Park combines elements of rock music , hip hop and electronica , and have been categorized as alternative metal and rap rock by AllMusic . They are also tagged as rap rock by About.com. Despite also being characterized as nu metal , the band never considered themselves as such . Their <unk> biography lists them as alternative rock , nu metal and rap metal . WatchMojo.com identifies them as alternative rock , electronic rock and industrial rock , while Billboard characterizes them as alternative metal and electronic rock . 
 Both Hybrid Theory and Meteora combine the alternative metal , nu metal , and rap rock sound with influences and elements from hip hop , alternative rock , and electronica , utilizing programming and synthesizers . William Ruhlmann from AllMusic regarded it as " a Johnny @-@ come @-@ lately to an already overdone musical style , " whereas Rolling Stone described their song " Breaking the Habit " as " risky , beautiful art " . 
 In Minutes to Midnight the band experimented with their established sound and drew influences from a wider and more varied range of genres and styles , a process Los Angeles Times compares to a stage in U2 's work . In it , only two of the songs feature rapping , and the majority of the album can be considered alternative rock . NME magazine 's Dan Silver criticized the band 's approach , calling it the " sound of a band trying and failing to forge a new identity " , and referring to the song " Hands Held High " , a song about terrorist attacks and war , as " far and away the funniest thing you will hear all year " . 
 The vocal interplay between Chester Bennington and Mike Shinoda plays as a major part within Linkin Park 's music , with Bennington being the lead vocalist and Shinoda as the rapping vocalist . On Linkin Park 's third album , Minutes to Midnight , Shinoda sings lead vocals on " In Between " , " Hands Held High " , and on the B @-@ side " No Roads Left " . On numerous songs from band 's fourth album , A Thousand Suns , such as the album 's four singles ( " The Catalyst " , " Waiting for the End " , " Burning in the Skies " , " Iridescent " ) , both Shinoda and Bennington sing . On most of the record 's tracks , the band notably used electronic drumbeats along with outro drumbeats . The album has been regarded as a turning point in the band 's musical career , having a stronger emphasis on electronica . James Montgomery , of MTV , compared the record to Radiohead 's Kid A , while Jordy Kasko of Review , Rinse , Repeat likened the album to both Kid A and Pink Floyd 's landmark album The Dark Side of the Moon . Shinoda stated that he and the other band members were deeply influenced by Chuck D and Public Enemy . He elaborated : " Public Enemy were very three @-@ dimensional with their records because although they seemed political , there was a whole lot of other stuff going on in there too . It made me think how three @-@ dimensional I wanted our record to be without imitating them of course , and show where we were at creatively " . One of the record 's political elements is its samples of notable speeches by American political figures . 
 Their fifth album , Living Things , is also an electronic @-@ heavy album , but includes other influences , resulting in a harder sound by comparison . The band returns to a heavier sound , compared to their last three albums , on The Hunting Party , being described as an alternative metal and hard rock album . 
 Linkin Park 's influences include Nine Inch Nails , Deftones , The Roots and Aphex Twin . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Linkin Park has sold more than 68 million records . The group 's first studio album Hybrid Theory is one of the best @-@ selling albums in the US ( 10 million copies shipped ) and worldwide ( 27 million copies sold ) . Billboard estimates that Linkin Park earned US $ 5 million between May 2011 and May 2012 , making them the 40th @-@ highest @-@ paid musical artist . 
 In 2003 , MTV2 named Linkin Park the sixth @-@ greatest band of the music video era and the third @-@ best of the new millennium . Billboard ranked Linkin Park No. 19 on the Best Artists of the Decade chart . The band was recently voted as the greatest artist of the 2000s in a Bracket Madness poll on VH1 . In 2014 , the band was declared as the Biggest Rock Band in the World Right Now by Kerrang . In 2015 " Kerrang ! " , gave " In the End " and " Final Masquerade " the top two positions on Kerrang ! ' s rock 100 list . 
 Linkin Park became the first rock band to achieve more than one billion YouTube hits . Linkin Park also became the fifteenth most liked page on Facebook , tenth most liked artist after Beyoncé and most liked group followed by Black Eyed Peas . Linkin Park 's " Numb " is the third and " In The End " is the sixth " timeless song " on " Spotify " . The two songs making Linkin Park the only artist to have two timeless songs in top ten . 
 Hybrid Theory by the group is listed in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die , It was also ranked at # 11 on Billboard 's Hot 200 Albums of the Decade . In addition the album was included in Best of 2001 by Record Collector , The top 150 Albums of the Generation by Rock Sound and 50 BEST ROCK <unk> OF THE <unk> by Kerrang ! . The album Meteora was included in Top 200 Albums of the Decade by Billboard at # 36 . The album sold 20 million copies worldwide . The collaborated EP Collision Course with Jay @-@ Z , became the second ever EP to top the Billboard 200 , going on to sell over 300 @,@ 000 copies in its first week after Alice in Chains ' Jar of Flies in 1994 . The album Minutes to Midnight in the United States , the album had the biggest first week sales of 2007 at the time , with 625 @,@ 000 albums sold . In Canada , the album sold over 50 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and debuted at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart . Worldwide , the album shipped over 3 @.@ 3 million copies in its first four weeks of release . 
 Several rock and non @-@ rock artists have cited Linkin Park as an influence , including Of Mice & Men , Bishop Nehru , <unk> , Evanescence , From Ashes to New , Josh Devine live drummer of One Direction , Bring Me the Horizon , Red , Girl on Fire , <unk> , <unk> , Tony <unk> , 3OH ! 3 , The Prom Kings , Kevin Rudolf , Tokio Hotel and Emery . Prince William stated the band as his all @-@ time favorite along with Coldplay . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Hybrid Theory ( 2000 ) 
 Meteora ( 2003 ) 
 Minutes to Midnight ( 2007 ) 
 A Thousand Suns ( 2010 ) 
 Living Things ( 2012 ) 
 The Hunting Party ( 2014 ) 
 = = Concert tours = = 
 Headlining 
 Hybrid Theory World Tour ( 2001 ) 
 Projekt Revolution ( 2002 – 2008 , 2011 ) 
 LP Underground Tour ( 2003 ) 
 Meteora World Tour ( 2004 ) 
 Minutes to Midnight World Tour ( 2007 – 08 ) 
 International Tour ( 2009 ) 
 A Thousand Suns World Tour ( 2010 – 11 ) 
 Living Things World Tour ( 2012 – 13 ) 
 The Hunting Party Tour ( 2014 – 15 ) 
 Co @-@ headlining 
 11th Annual Honda Civic Tour ( 2012 ) 
 Carnivores Tour ( 2014 ) 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 = Order of Nine Angles = 
 The Order of Nine Angles ( ONA ; O9A ) is a Satanic and Left @-@ Hand Path occult group based in the United Kingdom , but with affiliated groups in various other parts of the world . Claiming to have been established in the 1960s , it arose to public recognition in the early 1980s , attracting attention for its espousal of Neo @-@ Nazi ideologies and activism . Describing its approach as " Traditional Satanism " , it has been academically identified as also exhibiting Hermetic and Neo @-@ Pagan elements in its beliefs . 
 According to the Order 's own account , it was established in the Welsh Marches of Western England during the late 1960s by a woman who had previously been involved in a secretive pre @-@ Christian tradition surviving in the region . This account also states that in 1973 a man named " Anton Long " was initiated into the group , subsequently becoming its Grand Master . Several academic commentators to have studied the ONA express the view that the name " Anton Long " is probably the pseudonym of the British Neo @-@ Nazi activist David Myatt , although Myatt has denied that this is the case . From the late 1970s onward , Long authored a number of books and articles propagating the Order 's ideas , and in 1988 it began production of its own journal , Fenrir . Through these ventures it established links with other Neo @-@ Nazi Satanist groups around the world , furthering its cause through embracing the internet in the 2000s . 
 The ONA promotes the idea that human history can be divided into a series of Aeons , each of which contain a corresponding human civilization . It expresses the view that the current Aeonic civilization is that of the Western , but claims that the evolution of this society is threatened by the " Magian / Nazarene " influence of Judeo @-@ Christian religion , which the Order seeks to combat in order to establish a militaristic new social order , termed the " Imperium " . According to Order teachings , this is necessary in order for a Galactic civilization to form , in which " Aryan " society will colonise the Milky Way . It advocates a spiritual path in which the practitioner is required to break societal taboos by isolating themselves from society , committing crimes , embracing political extremism and violence , and carrying out an act of human sacrifice . ONA members practice magick , believing that they are able to do so through channeling energies into our own " causal " realm from an " acausal " realm where the laws of physics do not apply , with such magical actions designed to aid in the ultimate establishment of the Imperium . 
 The ONA lacks any central authority or structure , instead operating as a broad network of associates – termed the " <unk> " – who are inspired by the texts originally authored by Long and other members of the " Inner ONA " . The group comprises largely of clandestine cells , termed " nexions " , as well as gangs known as <unk> , artists known as <unk> , and folk mystics known as Rounwytha . With the first nexion based in Shropshire , Western England , the majority of groups have been established in the British Isles and Germany , although others have been formed elsewhere in Europe , Russia , South Africa , Australia , and North America . Academic estimates suggest that the number of individuals broadly associated with the Order falls in the low thousands . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Academics have found it difficult to ascertain " exact and verifiable information " about the ONA 's origins given the secrecy with which the group shields itself . As with many other occult organisations , the Order shrouds its history in " mystery and legend " , creating a " mythical narrative " for its origins and development . The ONA claims to be the descendant of pre @-@ Christian pagan traditions which survived the Christianisation of Britain and which were passed down from the Middle Ages onward in small groups or " temples " based in the Welsh Marches – a border area between England and Wales – which were each led by a Grand Master or Grand Mistress . According to the Order , in the late 1960s a Grand Mistress of one such group united three of these temples – <unk> , the Temple of the Sun , and The <unk> – to form the ONA , before welcoming outsiders into the tradition . 
 According to the Order 's account , one of those whom the Grand Mistress initiated into the group was " Anton Long " , an individual who described himself as a British citizen who had spent much of his youth visiting Africa , Asia , and the Middle East . Long claimed that prior to his involvement in the ONA he had been interested in occultism for several years , having contacted a coven based in Fenland in 1968 , before moving to London and joining groups that practiced ceremonial magic in the style of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn and Aleister Crowley . He also claimed a brief involvement in a Satanic group based in Manchester , the Orthodox Temple of the Prince run by Ray Bogart , during which time he encountered the ONA Grand Mistress . According to the Order 's account , Long joined the ONA in 1973 – the first to have done so in five years – and became the Grand Mistress ' heir . He later recalled that at that time the group held rituals at <unk> and stone circles around the solstices and equinoxes . 
 This account further states that when the Order 's Grand Mistress migrated to Australia , Long took over as the group 's new Grand Master . The group claimed that Long " implemented the next stage of Sinister Strategy – to make the teachings known on a large scale " . From the late 1970s onward , Long encouraged the establishment of new ONA groups , which were known as " temples " , and from 1976 onward he authored an array of texts for the tradition , codifying and extending its teachings , mythos , and structure . These texts are typically written in English , although they include passages of Classical Greek as well as terms from Sanskrit and Arabic , reflecting Long 's fluency in such languages . After examining these texts , the historian Nicholas Goodrick @-@ Clarke stated that in them , Long " evokes a world of witches , outlaw peasant sorcerers , orgies and blood sacrifices at lonely cottages in the woods and valleys of this area [ Shropshire and Herefordshire ] where he has lived since the early 1980s " . 
 The real identity of " Anton Long " remains a mystery to both members of the Order and to academics who have studied it . However , in a 1998 issue of the anti @-@ fascist magazine Searchlight it was claimed that " Anton Long " was a pseudonym of David Myatt , a prominent figure in the British Neo @-@ Nazi movement . Born in the early 1950s , Myatt had been involved in various Neo @-@ Nazi groups , initially serving as a bodyguard for Colin Jordan of the British Movement before joining the Combat 18 militia and becoming a founding member and leader of the National Socialist Movement . His text on A Practical Guide to Aryan Revolution , in which he advocated violent militancy in aid of the Neo @-@ Nazi cause , was cited as an influence on the nail bomber David Copeland . In 1998 Myatt converted to Islam and remained a practicing Muslim for eight years , in which time he encouraged violent jihad against Zionism and Israel 's Western allies . 
 Goodrick @-@ Clarke supported the idea that Myatt was Long , with the religious studies scholar Jacob C. Senholt adding that " the role of David Myatt [ is ] paramount to the whole creation and existence of the ONA " . Senholt presented additional evidence that he believed confirmed Myatt 's identity as Long , writing that Myatt 's embrace of Neo @-@ Nazism and radical Islamism represented " insight roles " which Myatt had adopted as part of the ONA 's " sinister strategy " to undermine Western society , a view endorsed by scholar of Satanism Per <unk> . In 2015 , an ONA member known as R. Parker argued in favour of the idea that Myatt was Long . 
 Myatt , however , has repeatedly denied allegations that he has any involvement with the ONA , and that he has used the pseudonym " Anton Long " , furthermore challenging the arguments used to connect him with Long by claiming that they are based on insufficient evidence . Religious studies scholar George Sieg expressed concern with this association , stating that he found it to be " implausible and untenable based on the extent of variance in writing style , personality , and tone " between Myatt and Long . Jeffrey Kaplan , an academic specialist in the far right , has also suggested that Myatt and Long are separate people , while the religious studies scholar Connell R. Monette posited the possibility that " Anton Long " was not a singular individual but rather a pseudonym used by several different people . 
 = = = Public emergence = = = 
 The ONA arose to public attention in the early 1980s . During the 1980s and 1990s it spread its message through articles in various magazines , such as Stephen <unk> 's Nox , as well as through the publication of such volumes as The Black Book of Satan , and <unk> . In 1988 it began publication of its own in @-@ house journal , titled Fenrir . Among written material that it has publicly issued have been philosophical tracts , ritual instruction , letters , poetry , and gothic fiction . Its core ritual text is titled the Black Book of Satan . It has also issued its own music , painted tarot set known as the Sinister Tarot , and a three @-@ dimensional board game known as the Star Game . The ONA established links with other Neo @-@ Nazi Satanist groups : its international distributor was New Zealander Kerry Bolton , the founder of the Black Order , who is described as an ONA adept in the group 's published letter @-@ correspondence , and it has access to a private library of occult and far right material owned by the Order of the Jarls of <unk> . According to Monette , the group now have associates , and groups , in the United States , Europe , Brazil , Egypt , Australia , and Russia . One of these associate groups is the U.S.-based Tempel ov Blood , which has published a number of texts through <unk> Press , while another is the U.S.-based White Star Acception , which has been designated as the ONA 's " Flagship <unk> " in the country despite diverting from mainstream ONA teachings on a number of issues . 
 During the early 1990s , the Order stated that it was entering the second stage of its development , in which it would leave behind its prior focus on recruitment and public outreach within the occult community and that it would instead focus on refining its teachings ; its resulting quietness led some occultists to erroneously speculate that the ONA had become defunct . In 2000 , the ONA established a presence on the internet , using it as a medium to communicate with others and to distribute its writings . In 2008 , the ONA announced that it was entering the third phase in its history , in which it would once again focus heavily on promotion , utilising such social media as online blogs , forums , Facebook , and YouTube to spread its message . In 2011 , the " Old Guard " , a group of longstanding members of the Order , stated that they would withdraw from active , public work with the group . In March 2012 , Long announced that he would be withdrawing from public activity , although appears to have remained active in the Order . 
 = = Beliefs and structure = = 
 The ONA describes its beliefs as belonging to " a sinisterly @-@ numinous mystic tradition " , adding that " it is not now and never was either strictly <unk> or strictly Left Hand Path , but uses " <unk> " and the LHP as " causal forms " ; that is , as techniques / experiences / ordeals / challenges " to aid the practitioner 's spiritual advancement . Monette described the ONA as " a fascinating blend of both Hermeticism and Traditional Satanism , with some pagan elements " . <unk> described the ONA as " a dangerous and extreme form of Satanism " . Jeffrey Kaplan and Leonard Weinberg characterised it as a " National Socialist @-@ oriented Satanist group " , while Nicholas Goodrick @-@ Clarke similarly deemed it to be a " Satanic Nazi cult " which " combine [ d ] paganism with praise for Hitler " . He added that the ONA " celebrated the dark , destructive side of life through anti @-@ Christian , elitist and Social Darwinist doctrines . " Considering the manner in which the ONA had syncretized both Satanism and Heathenry , the historian of religion Mattias Gardell described its spiritual perspective as " a heathen satanic path " . The scholar George Sieg however argued that the ONA should be categorised as " post @-@ Satanic " because it has " surpassed ( without fully abandoning ) identification with its original satanic paradigm " . 
 = = = Traditional Satanism and Paganism = = = 
 The ONA describe their occultism both as " Traditional Satanism " , and as a " mystical sinisterly @-@ numinous tradition " . According to Jesper Aagaard Petersen , an academic specialist of Satanism , the Order present " a recognizable new interpretation of Satanism and the Left Hand Path " , and for those involved in the group , Satanism is not simply a religion but a way of life . The Order postulates Satanism as an arduous individual achievement of self @-@ mastery and Nietzschean self @-@ overcoming , with an emphasis on individual growth through practical acts of risk , prowess and endurance . Therefore , " [ t ] he goal of the Satanism of the ONA is to create a new individual through direct experience , practice and self @-@ development [ with ] the grades of the ONA system being highly individual , based on the initiates ' own practical and real @-@ life acts , instead of merely performing certain ceremonial rituals " . Thus Satanism , the ONA assert , requires venturing into the realm of the forbidden and illegal in order to shake the practitioner loose of cultural and political conditioning . Intentionally transgressive , the Order has been characterised as providing " an aggressive and elitist spirituality " . Religious studies scholar Graham Harvey claimed that the ONA fit the stereotype of the Satanist " better than other groups " , something which he thought was deliberately achieved by embracing " deeply shocking " and illegal acts . 
 The ONA are strongly critical of larger Satanic groups like the Church of Satan and the Temple of Set , whom they deem to be " sham @-@ Satanic " because they embrace the " glamour associated with Satanism " but are " afraid to experience its realness within and external to them " . In turn , the Church of Satan has criticised what they alleged was the Order 's " <unk> insistence that they are the only upholders of Satanic tradition " , with Kaplan stating that these comments reflect " the intramural tensions " that are common within " the world of Satanism " , and about which criticism Anton Long wrote that the ONA does not " claim to be a peer organization with a claim to some kind of authority ... When in the past we and others like us have said things that others interpret as being against the [ Temple of Set ] or La Vey , we were simply assuming the role of Adversary – challenging what seemed to be becoming accepted dogma . " 
 Although conceiving of itself as having pre @-@ Christian origins and describing Satanism as " militant paganism " , the ONA does not advocate the re @-@ establishment of pre @-@ Christian belief systems , with one ONA tract stating that " all past gods of the various Western Traditions are rendered obsolete by the forces which Satanism alone is unleashing " . However , Goodrick @-@ Clarke noted that the group 's " ideas and rituals " draw upon " a native tradition " , with references to the pre @-@ Christian Anglo @-@ Saxon concept of wyrd , an emphasis on ceremonies performed at equinoxes , and the construction of incense using indigenous trees , thus suggesting the idea of " <unk> in English nature " . Practitioners undergo " black pilgrimages " to prehistoric ceremonial sites in the area around Shropshire and Herefordshire in the English Midlands . Furthermore , Monette writes that " a critical examination of the ONA 's key texts suggests that the satanic overtones could be cosmetic , and that its core mythos and cosmology are genuinely hermetic , with pagan influences . " 
 = = = Aeonic Cosmology and Nazism = = = 
 The ONA states that cosmic evolution is guided by a " sinister dialectics " of alternating Aeonic energies . It divides history into a series of Aeons , believing that each was dominated by a human civilization that emerged , evolved , and then died . It states that each Aeon lasts for approximately 2000 years , with its respective dominating human civilization developing within the latter 1500 years of that period . It holds that after 800 years of growth , each civilization faces problems , resulting in a " Time of Troubles " that lasts from between 398 and 400 years . In each civilization 's final stage is a period that lasts for approximately 390 years , in which it is controlled by a strong military and imperial regime , after which the civilization falls . The ONA claims that humanity has lived through five such Aeons , each with an associated civilization : the Primal , <unk> , Sumerian , Hellenic , and Western . Both Goodrick @-@ Clarke and Senholt have stated that this system of Aeons is inspired by the work of Arnold J. Toynbee , with Senholt suggesting that it might also have been influenced by Crowley 's ideas regarding Thelemic Aeons . However , the ONA has stated that their concept " has nothing to do with Crowley " , but is based on the work of both Toynbee and Spengler . 
 The ONA claim that current Western civilization has a Faustian ethos and that it has recently undergone its Time of Troubles , with its final stage , an " Imperium " of militaristic governance , due to commence at some point in 1990 – 2011 and last until 2390 . This will be followed by a period of chaos from which will be established a sixth Aeon , the Aeon of Fire , which will be represented by the Galactic civilization in which Aryan society shall colonize the Milky Way galaxy . However , the Order holds that unlike previous Aeonic civilizations , the Western has been infected with the " Magian / Nazarene " <unk> , which they associate with Judeo @-@ Christian religion . The group 's writings state that while Western civilization had once been " a pioneering entity , imbued with elitist values and exalting the way of the warrior " , under the impact of the Magian / Nazarene ethos it has become " essentially neurotic , inward @-@ looking and obsessed " , embracing humanism , capitalism , communism , as well as " the sham of democracy " and " the dogma of racial equality " . They believe that these Magian / Nazarene forces represent a counter @-@ evolutionary trend which threaten to prevent the emergence of the Western Imperium and thus the evolution of humanity , opining that this cosmic enemy must be overcome through the force of will . Both Goodrick @-@ Clarke and Sieg note that these ideas regarding the " Magian soul " and " cultural distortion " brought about by Jews were derived from the work of Oswald Spengler and Francis Parker Yockey . 
 The ONA praise Nazi Germany as " a practical expression of Satanic spirit ... a burst of Luciferian light – of zest and power – in an otherwise Nazarene , pacified , and boring world . " Embracing Holocaust denial , they claim that the Holocaust was a myth constructed by the Magian / Nazarene establishment in order to denigrate the Nazi administration following the Second World War and erase its achievements from " the psyche of the West " . The group believe that a Neo @-@ Nazi revolution is necessary to overthrow the Magian @-@ Nazarene domination of Western society and to establish the Imperium , ultimately allowing humanity to enter the Galactic civilization of the future . Accordingly , positive references to Nazism and Neo @-@ Nazism can be found within the group 's written material , and it evokes the Nazi leader Adolf Hitler as a positive force in its text for the performance of a Black Mass , also known as The Mass of Heresy . However , some ONA texts stress that members should embrace Neo @-@ Nazism and racism not out of a genuine belief in Nazi ideology , but rather as part of a " sinister strategy " to advance Aeonic evolution . A version of the Black Mass @-@ produced by an Australian ONA group , The Temple of THEM , replacing praise for Hitler with praise for Islamist militant Osama bin Laden , while the writings of Chloe Ortega and Kayla <unk> , key publicists for the U.S.-based White Star Acception , express what Sieg termed a " left @-@ anarchist " platform which lacked the condemnation of Zionism and endorsement of Aryan racialism found in Long 's writings . The Order is thus far more overtly political extreme in its aims than other Satanic and Left Hand Path organisations , seeking to infiltrate and destabilise modern society through both magical and practical means . 
 = = = Initiation and the Seven Fold Way = = = 
 The ONA 's core system is known as the " Seven Fold Way " or " <unk> " , and is outlined in one of the Order 's primary texts , <unk> . The sevenfold system is reflected in the group 's symbolic cosmology , the " Tree of Wyrd " , on which seven celestial bodies – the Moon , Venus , Mercury , the Sun , Mars , Jupiter , and Saturn – are located . The term wyrd was adopted from Old English , where it referred to fate or destiny . Monette identified this as a " hermetic system " , highlighting that the use of seven planetary bodies had been influenced by the Medieval Arabic texts <unk> al @-@ <unk> and Shams I @-@ <unk> . The Seven Fold Way is also reflected in the group 's initiatory system , which has seven grades through which the member can gradually progress . Theses are : ( 1 ) <unk> , ( 2 ) Initiate , ( 3 ) External Adept , ( 4 ) Internal Adept , ( 5 ) Master / Mistress , ( 6 ) Grand Master / Mousa and ( 7 ) Immortal . The group has revealed that very few of its members raise to the fifth and sixth degrees , and in a 1989 article the ONA stated that at that point there were only four individuals who had reached the stage of Master . 
 The ONA does not initiate members into the group itself , but rather expects an individual to initiate themselves . It requires that initiates be in a good physical condition , and recommends a training regimen for prospective members to follow . Newcomers are expected to take on a magical partner of the opposite sex , or of the same sex if they are lesbian or gay . Thenceforth , the practitioner must undertake personal and increasingly difficult challenges in order to move through the different grades . Most of the ordeals that allow the initiate to proceed to the next stage are publicly revealed by the Order in its introductory material , as it is believed that the true initiatory element lies in the experience itself and can only be attained through performing them . For instance , part of the ritual to become an External Adept involves an ordeal in which the prospective member is to find a lonely spot and to lay there , still , for an entire night without moving or sleeping . The initiatory process for the role of Internal Adept entails the practitioner withdrawing from human society for three months , from an equinox to a solstice , or ( more usually ) for six months , during which time they must live in the wild without modern conveniences or contact with civilisation . The next stage – the Ritual of the Abyss – involves the candidate living alone in a dark isolated cavern for a lunar month . According to Jeffrey Kaplan , an academic specialist of the far right , these physically and mentally challenging initiatory tasks reflect " the ONA 's conception of itself as a vanguard organization composed of a tiny coterie of Nietzschean elites . " 
 Within the initiatory system of the ONA , there is an emphasis on practitioners adopting " insight roles " in which they work undercover among a politically extreme group for a period of six to eighteen months , thus gaining experience in something different from their normal life . Among the ideological trends that the ONA suggests its members adopt " insight roles " within are anarchism , Neo @-@ Nazism , and Islamism , stating that aside from the personal benefits of such an involvement , membership of these groups has the benefit of undermining the Magian @-@ Nazarene socio @-@ political system of the West and thus helping to bring about the instability from which a new order , the Imperium , can emerge . However , Monette noted a potential shift in the insight roles recommended by the group over the decades ; he highlighted that while the ONA recommended criminal or military activities during the 1980s and early 1990s , by the late 1990s and 2000s they were instead recommending Buddhist monasticism as an insight role for practitioners to adopt . Therefore , " through the practice of " insight roles " , the order advocates continuous transgression of established norms , roles , and comfort zones in the development of the initiate ... This extreme application of ideas further amplifies the ambiguity of satanic and Left Hand Path practices of antinomianism , making it almost impossible to penetrate the layers of subversion , play and counter @-@ dichotomy inherent in the sinister dialectics . " Senholt suggested that Myatt 's involvement with both Neo @-@ Nazism and Islamism represent such " insight roles " in his own life . 
 = = = The <unk> Realm , Magick and the Dark Gods = = = 
 The ONA believe that humans live within the causal realm , which obeys the laws of cause and effect . However , they also believe in an acausal realm , in which the laws of physics do not apply , further promoting the idea that numinous energies from the acausal realm can be drawn into the causal , allowing for the performance of magic . Believing in the existence of magic – which the group spell " magick " following the example of Elias Ashmole 's 1652 work Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum – the ONA distinguish between external , internal , and aeonic magick . External magic itself is divided into two categories : ceremonial magick , which is performed by more than two people to achieve a specific goal , and hermetic magick , which is performed either solitarily or in a pair and which is often sexual in nature . Internal magick is designed to produce an altered state of consciousness in the participant , in order to result in a process of " individuation " which bestows <unk> . The most advanced form of magick in the ONA system is aeonic magick , the practice of which is restricted to those who are already perceived to have mastered external and internal magick and attained the grade of master . The purpose of aeonic magick is to influence large numbers of people over a lengthy period of time , thus affecting the development of future aeons . In particular it is employed with the intent of disrupting the current socio @-@ political system of the Western world , which the ONA believe has been corrupted by Judeo @-@ Christian religion . 
 The ONA utilises two methods in its performance of aeonic magick . The first entails rites and chants with the intent of opening a gateway – known as a " nexion " – to the " acausal realm " in order to manifest energies in the " causal realm " that will influence the existing aeon in the practitioner 's desired direction . The second method involves playing an advanced form of a board game known as the Star Game ; the game was devised by the group , with the game pieces representing different aeons . The group believes that when an initiate plays the game they can become a " living nexion " and thus a channel for acausal energies to enter the causal realm and effect aeonic change . An advanced form of the game is used as part of the training for the grade of Internal Adept . According to Myatt , he invented the game in 1975 . 
 The Order promotes the idea that " Dark Gods " exist within the acausal realm , although it is accepted that some members will interpret them not as real entities but as facets of the human subconscious . These entities are perceived as dangerous , with the ONA advising caution when interacting with them . Among those Dark Gods whose identities have been discussed in the Order 's publicly available material are a goddess named Baphomet who is depicted as a mature woman carrying a severed head , with the ONA stating that the name is of ancient Greek origin . In addition , there are entities whose names , according to Monette , are borrowed from or influenced by figures from Classical sources and astronomy , such as <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 Another of these acausal figures is termed Vindex , after the Latin word for " avenger " . The ONA believe that Vindex will eventually incarnate as a human – although the gender and ethnicity of this individual is unknown – through the successful " <unk> " of acausal energies within the causal realm , and that they will act as a messianic figure by overthrowing the Magian forces and leading the ONA to prominence in the establishment of a new society . Sieg drew comparisons between this belief in Vindex and the ideas of Savitri Devi , the prominent Esoteric <unk> , regarding the arrival of Kalki , an avatar of the Hindu god Vishnu , to Earth . The ONA also propagate the idea that it is possible for the practitioner to secure an afterlife within the acausal realm through their spiritual activities . It is for this reason that the final stage of the Seven Fold Way is known as the " Immortal " , constituting those initiates who have been able to advance to the stage of dwelling in the acausal realm . 
 = = = Human sacrifice = = = 
 The ONA 's writings condone and encourage human sacrifice , referring to their victims as <unk> . The ONA outline their views on human sacrifice in a number of documents : " A Gift for the Prince – A Guide to Human Sacrifice " , " Culling – A Guide to Sacrifice II " , " Victims – A Sinister Exposé " , and " Guidelines for the Testing of <unk> " . According to the ONA 's beliefs , the killer must allow their victim to " self @-@ select " themselves ; this is achieved through testing the victim to see if they expose perceived character faults . If this proves to be the case , the victim is believed to have shown that they are worthy of death , and the sacrifice can commence . Those deemed ideal for sacrifice by the group include individuals perceived as being of low character , members of what they deem " sham @-@ Satanic groups " like the Church of Satan and Temple of Set , as well as " zealous , interfering Nazarenes " , and journalists , business figures and political activists who disrupt the group 's operations . The ONA explains that because of the need for such " self @-@ selection " , children must never be victims of sacrifice . Similarly , the ONA " despise animal sacrifice , maintaining that it is much better to sacrifice suitable <unk> given the abundance of human dross " . 
 The sacrifice is then carried out through either physical or magical means , at which point the killer is believed to absorb power from the body and spirit of the victim , thus entering a new level of " sinister " consciousness . As well as strengthening the character of the killer by heightening their connection with the acausal forces of death and destruction , such sacrifices are also viewed as having wider benefits by the ONA , because they remove from society individuals whom the group deems to be worthless human beings . Monette noted that no ONA nexion cells publicly admitted to carrying out a sacrifice in a ritual manner , but that members had joined the police and military groups in order to engage in legal violence and killing . 
 The ONA believe that there are historical precedents to their practice of human sacrifice , expressing belief in a prehistoric tradition in which humans were sacrificed to a goddess named Baphomet at the spring equinox and to the Arcturus star in the autumn . However , the ONA 's advocacy of human sacrifice has drawn strong criticism from other Satanist groups like the Temple of Set , who deem it to be detrimental to their own attempts to make Satanism more socially acceptable within Western nations . 
 = = = The term " nine angles " = = = 
 In its essays and other writings , the ONA offers various differing explanations as to the meaning of the term " Nine Angles " . One explanation is that it pertains to the seven planets of the group 's cosmology ( the seven angles ) , added to the system as a whole ( the eighth angle ) , and the mystic themselves ( the ninth angle ) . A second explanation is that it refers to seven " normal " alchemical stages , with an additional two processes . A third is that it pertains to the nine emanations of the divine , a concept originally found in Medieval texts produced within the Islamic mystical tradition of Sufism . Monette further suggested that it was a reference to a classical Indian tradition which divided the solar system into nine planets . 
 According to the O9A , they use the term " nine angles " in reference to not only the nine emanations , and transformations , of the three basic alchemical substances ( mercury , sulfur , salt ) as occurs in their occult use of the Star Game , but also in reference to their hermetic journey with its seven spheres and its two acausal aspects . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The ONA is a secretive organization . It lacks any central administration , instead operating as a network of allied Satanic practitioners , which it terms the " <unk> " . Thus , Monette stated that the Order " is not a structured lodge or temple , but rather a movement , a subculture or perhaps <unk> that its adherents choose to embody or identify with " . Monette also suggested that this absence of a centralised structure would aid the Order 's survival , because its fate would not be invested solely in one particular leader . The ONA dislikes the term " member " , instead favouring the word " associate " . In 2012 , Long stated that those affiliated with the Order fell into six different categories : associates of traditional nexions , Niners , <unk> , gang and tribe members , followers of the Rounwytha tradition , and those involved with ONA @-@ inspired groups . 
 The group largely consists of autonomous cells known as " nexions " . The original cell , based in Shropshire , is known as " <unk> Zero " , with the majority of subsequent groups having been established in Britain , Ireland , and Germany , however nexions and other associated groups have also been established in the United States , Australia , Brazil , Egypt , Italy , Spain , Portugal , Poland , Serbia , Russia and South Africa . Some of these groups , such as the U.S.-based Tempel ov Blood , describe themselves as being distinct from the ONA while both having been greatly influenced by it and having connections to it . 
 In the ONA 's terminology , the terms <unk> and Niner refer to folk @-@ based or gang @-@ based culture or individuals who support the Order 's aims by practical ( including criminal ) means rather than esoteric ones . One such group is the White Star Acception , who claim to have perpetrated rapes , assaults , and robberies in order to advance the group 's power ; Sieg noted that the reality of these actions has not been verified . A <unk> is an artist or musician who contributes to the group through their production of fine art . The Rounwytha is a tradition of folk @-@ mystics deemed to exhibit gifted psychic powers reflecting their embodiment of the " sinister feminine archetype " . Although a minority are men , most Rounwytha are female , and they often live <unk> as part of small and often lesbian groups . 
 = = = Outer representative = = = 
 Several academic commentators have highlighted the existence of a position within the ONA called an " Outer Representative " , who serves as an official spokesperson for the group to the outer world . The first to publicly claim to be the group 's " Outer Representative " was Richard Moult , an artist and composer from Shropshire who used the pseudonym of " Christos <unk> " . Moult was followed as " Outer Representative " by " Vilnius <unk> " , who held the position from 1996 to 2002 , and who has been identified by ONA insiders as the Left Hand Path ideologue Michael Ford . Subsequently , on the blog of the White Star Acception , the claim was made that the group 's member Chloe Ortega was the ONA 's Outer Representative , also this blog later became defunct by 2013 . In 2013 , a female American Rounwytha using the name of " <unk> " appeared claiming to be the Order 's " Outer Representative " . 
 However , according to Long the " outer representative " was " an interesting and instructive example of [ the O9A 's ] Labyrinthos <unk> , ... a ploy , " and which was designed to " intrigue , select , test , confuse , annoy , mislead " . Long wrote that " the ploy was for a candidate or an initiate to openly disseminate ONA material , and possibly give interviews about the O9A to the Media , under the guise of having been given some sort of ' authority ' to do so even though such an authority – and the necessary hierarchy to gift such authority – was in fact a contradiction of our raison d 'être ; a fact we of course expected those <unk> of our kind to know or sense . " According to Senholt the ONA " does not award titles " , with Monette writing that " there is no central authority within the ONA . " 
 Within the ONA was a group of longstanding initiates known as the " Old Guard " or " Inner ONA " , whose experience with the tradition led to them becoming influential over newer members who often sought their advice . Members of this Old Guard included Christos <unk> , Sinister Moon , Dark Logos , and Pointy Hat , although in 2011 they stated that they would withdraw from the public sphere . 
 = = = Membership = = = 
 While the ONA has stated that it is not an occult organization in the conventional sense but an esoteric philosophy , several academics have written about ONA membership . In a 1995 overview of British Satanist groups , Harvey suggested that the ONA consisted of less than ten members , " and perhaps fewer than five . " In 1998 , Jeffrey Kaplan and Leonard Weinberg stated that the ONA 's membership was " <unk> small " , with the group acting primarily as a " mail @-@ order ministry " . Regarding the question of membership , Anton Long , in a letter to Aquino dated October 1990 , wrote that " once the techniques and the essence [ of the ONA ] are more widely available then membership as such is irrelevant , since everything is available and accessible ... with the individual taking responsibility for their own development , their own experiences . " 
 In 2013 Senholt noted that because the group has no official membership , it is " difficult , if not impossible , to estimate the number of ONA members " . Senholt suggested that a " rough estimate " of the " total number " of individuals involved with the ONA in some capacity from 1980 to 2009 was " a few thousand " ; he had come to this conclusion from an examination of the number of magazines and journals about the subject circulated and the number of members of online discussion groups devoted to the ONA . At the same time he thought that the number of " longtime adherents is much smaller . " Also in 2013 , Monette estimated that there were over two thousand ONA associates , broadly defined . He believed that the gender balance was roughly equal , although with regional variation and differences among particular nexions . 
 According to a recent survey , the ONA has more female supporters than either the Church of Satan or the Temple of Set ; more women with children ; more older supporters ; more supporters who are better established in socio @-@ economic terms ; and more who politically are further to the Right . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 The ONA 's main influence lies not with the group itself , but with its prolific release of written material . According to Senholt " the ONA has produced more material on both the practical and theoretical aspects of magic , as well as more ideological texts on Satanism and the Left Hand Path in general , than larger groups such as the Church of Satan and the Temple of Set has produced in combination [ which ] makes the ONA an important player in the theoretical discussion of what the Left Hand Path and Satanism is and should be according to the practitioners . " 
 These writings were initially distributed to other Satanist and Neo @-@ Nazi groups , although with the development of the internet this was also used as a medium to propagate its writings , with Monette expressing the view that they had attained " a sizable presence in occult cyberspace " , and thus become " one of the most prominent Left Hand Path groups by virtue of its public presence " . Many of these writings were then reproduced by other groups . Kaplan considered the ONA to be " an important source of Satanic ideology / theology " for " the occultist fringe of National Socialism " , namely Neo @-@ Nazi groups like the Black Order . The group gained increased attention following the growth in public interest in Myatt 's impact on terrorist groups during the War on Terror in the 2000s . The historian of esotericism Dave Evans stated that the ONA were " worthy of an entire PhD thesis " , while Senholt expressed the view that it would be " potentially dangerous to ignore these fanatics , however limited their numbers might be . " 
 In the Jack Nightingale series of novels by Stephen Leather , a Satanic " Order of Nine Angles " are the leading antagonists . Similarly , a fictionalised Satanic group named the " Order of Nine Angels " appear in Conrad Jones ' 2013 novel Child for the Devil by Conrad Jones . In another of his novels , Black Angel , Jones included a page titled ' Additional Information ' giving a warning about the Order of Nine Angles . 
 = Slow loris = 
 Slow lorises are a group of several species of nocturnal strepsirrhine primates which make up the genus Nycticebus . Found in Southeast Asia and bordering areas , they range from Bangladesh and Northeast India in the west to the Sulu Archipelago in the Philippines in the east , and from Yunnan province in China in the north to the island of Java in the south . Although many previous classifications recognized as few as a single all @-@ inclusive species , there are now at least eight that are considered valid : the Sunda slow loris ( N. coucang ) , Bengal slow loris ( N. bengalensis ) , pygmy slow loris ( N. pygmaeus ) , Javan slow loris ( N. javanicus ) , Philippine slow loris ( N. menagensis ) , Bangka slow loris ( N. bancanus ) , Bornean slow loris ( N. borneanus ) , and Kayan River slow loris ( N. kayan ) . The group 's closest relatives are the slender lorises of southern India and Sri Lanka . Their next closest relatives are the African lorisids , the pottos , false pottos , and angwantibos . They are less closely related to the remaining lorisoids ( the various types of galago ) , and more distantly to the lemurs of Madagascar . Their evolutionary history is uncertain since their fossil record is patchy and molecular clock studies have given inconsistent results . 
 Slow lorises have a round head , a narrow snout , large eyes , and a variety of distinctive coloration patterns that are species @-@ dependent . Their arms and legs are nearly equal in length , and their trunk is long and flexible , allowing them to twist and extend to nearby branches . The hands and feet of slow lorises have several adaptations that give them a pincer @-@ like grip and enable them to grasp branches for long periods of time . Slow lorises have a toxic bite , a trait rare among mammals and unique to lorisid primates . The toxin is obtained by licking a gland on their arm , and the secretion is activated by mixing with saliva . Their toxic bite is a deterrent to predators , and the toxin is also applied to the fur during grooming as a form of protection for their infants . The secretion from the arm contains a chemical related to cat allergen , but may be augmented by secondary toxins from the diet in wild individuals . Slow lorises move slowly and deliberately , making little or no noise , and when threatened , they stop moving and remain motionless . Their only documented predators — apart from humans — include snakes , changeable hawk @-@ eagles and orangutans , although cats , civets and sun bears are suspected . Little is known about their social structure , but they are known to communicate by scent marking . Males are highly territorial . Slow lorises reproduce slowly , and the infants are initially parked on branches or carried by either parent . They are omnivores , eating small animals , fruit , tree gum , and other vegetation . 
 Each of the slow loris species that had been identified prior to 2012 is listed as either " Vulnerable " or " Endangered " on the IUCN Red List . The three newest species are yet to be evaluated , but they arise from ( and further reduce the ranks of ) what was thought to be a single " vulnerable " species . All four of these are expected to be listed with at least the same , if not a higher @-@ risk , conservation status . All slow lorises are threatened by the wildlife trade and habitat loss . Their habitat is rapidly disappearing and becoming fragmented , making it nearly impossible for slow lorises to disperse between forest fragments ; unsustainable demand from the exotic pet trade and from traditional medicine has been the greatest cause for their decline . Deep @-@ rooted beliefs about the supernatural powers of slow lorises , such as their purported abilities to ward off evil spirits or to cure wounds , have popularized their use in traditional medicine . Despite local laws prohibiting trade in slow lorises and slow loris products , as well as protection from international commercial trade under Appendix I , slow lorises are openly sold in animal markets in Southeast Asia and smuggled to other countries , such as Japan . Due in part to the large eyes that are an adaptation to their nocturnal lifestyle , they have also been popularized as ' cute ' pets in viral videos on YouTube . Slow lorises have their teeth cut or pulled out for the pet trade . They make poor pets that are difficult to care for , and often die from infection , blood loss , improper handling or inadequate nutrition . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 Slow lorises ( genus Nycticebus ) are strepsirrhine primates and are related to other living lorisoids , such as slender lorises ( Loris ) , pottos ( Perodicticus ) , false pottos ( Pseudopotto ) , angwantibos ( <unk> ) , and galagos ( family Galagidae ) , and to the lemurs of Madagascar . They are most closely related to the slender lorises of South Asia , followed by the angwantibos , pottos and false pottos of Central and West Africa . <unk> are thought to have evolved in Africa , where most living species occur ; later , one group may have migrated to Asia and evolved into the slender and slow lorises of today . 
 Lorises first appear in the Asian fossil record in the Miocene , with records in Thailand around 18 million years ago ( mya ) and in Pakistan 16 mya . The Thai record is based on a single tooth that most closely resembles living slow lorises and that is tentatively classified as a species of Nycticebus . The species is named ? Nycticebus linglom , using open nomenclature ( the preceding " ? " indicates the tentative nature of the assignment ) . Several lorises are found in the Siwalik deposits of Pakistan , dating to 16 to 8 mya , including <unk> and <unk> . Most are small , but an unnamed form dating to 15 – 16 mya is comparable in size to the largest living slow lorises . Molecular clock analysis suggests that slow lorises may have started evolving into distinct species about 10 mya . They are thought to have reached the islands of Sundaland when the Sunda Shelf was exposed at times of low sea level , creating a land bridge between the mainland and islands off the coast of Southeast Asia . 
 = = = Discovery and taxonomy = = = 
 The earliest known mention of a slow loris in scientific literature is from 1770 , when Dutchman Arnout Vosmaer ( 1720 – 1799 ) described a specimen of what we know today as N. bengalensis that he had received two years earlier . The French naturalist Georges @-@ Louis Leclerc , Comte de Buffon , later questioned Vosmaer 's decision to affiliate the animal with sloths , arguing that it was more closely aligned with the lorises of Ceylon ( now Sri Lanka ) and Bengal . The word " loris " was first used in 1765 by Buffon as a close equivalent to a Dutch name , <unk> . This etymology was later supported by the physician William Baird in the 1820s , who noted that the Dutch word <unk> signified " a clown " . 
 In 1785 , the Dutch physician and naturalist Pieter Boddaert was the first to officially describe a species of slow loris using the name Tardigradus coucang . This species was based on the " tailless maucauco " described by Thomas Pennant in 1781 , which is thought to have been based on a Sunda slow loris , and on Vosmaer 's description of a Bengal slow loris . Consequently , there has been some disagreement over the identity of Tardigradus coucang ; currently the name is given to the Sunda slow loris . The next slow loris species to be described was Lori bengalensis ( currently Nycticebus bengalensis ) , named by Bernard Germain de Lacépède in 1800 . In 1812 , Étienne Geoffroy Saint @-@ Hilaire named the genus Nycticebus , naming it for its nocturnal behavior . The name derives from the Ancient Greek : <unk> ( <unk> ) , genitive form of <unk> ( <unk> , " night " ) , and <unk> ( <unk> , " monkey " ) . Geoffroy also named Nycticebus javanicus in this work . Later 19th @-@ century authors also called the slow lorises Nycticebus , but most used the species name tardigradus ( given by Linnaeus in 1758 in the 10th edition of Systema Naturæ ) for slow lorises , until mammalogists Witmer Stone and James A. G. Rehn clarified in 1902 that Linnaeus 's name actually referred to a slender loris . 
 Several more species were named around 1900 , including Nycticebus menagensis ( originally Lemur menagensis ) by Richard Lydekker in 1893 and Nycticebus pygmaeus by John James Lewis <unk> in 1907 . However , in 1939 Reginald Innes Pocock consolidated all slow lorises into a single species , N. coucang , and in his influential 1953 book Primates : Comparative Anatomy and Taxonomy , primatologist William Charles Osman Hill also followed this course . In 1971 Colin Groves recognized the pygmy slow loris ( N. pygmaeus ) as a separate species , and divided N. coucang into four subspecies , while in 2001 Groves opined there were three species ( N. coucang , N. pygmaeus , and N. bengalensis ) , and that N. coucang had three subspecies ( Nycticebus coucang coucang , N. c. menagensis , and N. c. javanicus ) . 
 In 2006 , the Bornean slow loris was elevated to the species level ( as Nycticebus menagensis ) based on molecular analysis of DNA sequences of the D @-@ loop and the cytochrome b gene . In 2008 , Groves and Ibnu <unk> confirmed the promotion of the fifth species , the Javan slow loris , to species status , a move that had been suggested in previous studies from 2000 . They based their decision on an analysis of cranial morphology and characteristics of pelage . Species differentiation was based largely on differences in morphology , such as size , fur color , and head markings . 
 To help clarify species and subspecies boundaries , and to establish whether morphology @-@ based classifications were consistent with evolutionary relationships , the phylogenetic relationships within the genus Nycticebus were investigated by Chen and colleagues using DNA sequences derived from the mitochondrial markers D @-@ loop and cytochrome b . Previous molecular analyses using karyotypes , restriction enzymes , and DNA sequences were focused on understanding the relationships between a few species , not the phylogeny of the entire genus . The analyses published in 2006 by Chen and colleagues ' proved inconclusive , although one test suggested that N. coucang and N. bengalensis apparently share a closer evolutionary relationship with each other than with members of their own species , possibly due to introgressive hybridization since the tested individuals of these two taxa originated from a region of sympatry in southern Thailand . This hypothesis was corroborated by a 2007 study that compared the variations in mitochondrial DNA sequences between N. bengalensis and N. coucang , and suggested that there has been gene flow between the two species . 
 In 2012 , two taxonomic synonyms ( formerly recognized as subspecies ) of N. menagensis — N. bancanus and N. borneanus — were elevated to species status , and a new species — N. kayan — was also distinguished from the same . Rachel Munds , Anna Nekaris and Susan Ford based these taxonomic revisions on distinguishable facial markings . With that , the N. menagensis species complex that had been collectively known as the Bornean slow loris became four species : the Philippine slow loris ( N. menagensis ) ) , the Bornean slow loris ( N. borneanus ) , the Bangka slow loris ( N. bancanus ) , and the Kayan River slow loris ( N. kayan ) . 
 = = Anatomy and physiology = = 
 Slow lorises have a round head because their skull is shorter than in other living strepsirrhine . Like other lorisids , its snout does not taper towards the front of the face as it does in lemurs , making the face appear less long and pointed . Compared to the slender lorises , the snout of the slow loris is even less pointed . As with other members of Lorisidae , its interorbital distance is shorter than in lemurs . The skull has prominent crests ( ridges of bone ) . A distinguishing feature of the slow loris skull is that the occipital bone is flattened and faces backward . The foramen magnum ( hole through which the spinal cord enters ) faces directly backward . The brains of slow lorises have more folds ( convolutions ) than the brains of galagos . 
 The ears are small , sparsely covered in hair , and hidden in the fur . Similar to the slender lorises , the fur around and directly above the eyes is dark . Unlike the slender lorises , however , the white stripe that separates the eye rings broadens both on the tip of the nose and on the forehead while also fading out on the forehead . Like other strepsirrhine primates , the nose and lip are covered by a moist skin called the rhinarium ( " wet nose " ) , which is a sense organ . 
 The eyes of slow lorises are forward @-@ facing , which gives stereo vision . Their eyes are large and possess a reflective layer , called the tapetum lucidum , that improves low @-@ light vision . It is possible that this layer blurs the images they see , as the reflected light may interfere with the incoming light . Slow lorises have monochromatic vision , meaning they see in shades of only one color . They lack the opsin gene that would allow them to detect short wavelength light , which includes the colors blue and green . 
 The dental formula of slow lorises is 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 32 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 3 × 2 = 36 , meaning that on each side of the mouth there are two upper ( maxillary ) and lower ( mandibular ) incisors , one upper and lower canine tooth , three upper and lower premolars , and three upper and lower molars , giving a total of 36 permanent teeth . As in all other crown strepsirrhines , their lower incisors and canine are procumbent ( lie down and face outwards ) , forming a toothcomb , which is used for personal and social grooming and feeding . The toothcomb is kept clean by the sublingua or " under @-@ tongue " , a specialized structure that acts like a toothbrush to remove hair and other debris . The sublingua extends below the tip of the tongue and is tipped with keratinized , serrated points that rake between the front teeth . 
 Slow lorises have relatively large maxillary canine teeth , their inner ( mesial ) maxillary incisors are larger than the outer ( distal ) maxillary incisors , and they have a diastema ( gap ) between the canine and the first premolar . The first mandibular premolar is elongated , and the last molar has three cusps on the crown , the shortest of which is near the back . The bony palate ( roof of the mouth ) only goes as far back as the second molar . 
 Slow lorises range in weight from the Bornean slow loris at 265 grams ( 9 @.@ 3 oz ) to as much as 2 @,@ 100 grams ( 74 oz ) for the Bengal slow loris . Slow lorises have stout bodies , and their tails are only stubs and hidden beneath the dense fur . Their combined head and body lengths vary by species , but range from 18 to 38 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 to 15 @.@ 0 in ) between all species . The trunk is longer than in other living strepsirrhines because they have 15 – 16 thoracic vertebrae , compared to 12 – 14 in other living strepsirrhines . This gives them greater mobility when twisting and extending towards nearby branches . Their other vertebrae include seven cervical vertebrae , six or seven lumbar vertebrae , six or seven sacral vertebrae , and seven to eleven caudal vertebrae . 
 Unlike galagos , which have longer legs than arms , slow lorises have arms and legs of nearly equal length . Their intermembral index ( ratio of arm to leg length ) averages 89 , indicating that their forelimbs are slightly shorter than their hind limbs . As with the slender lorises , their arms are slightly longer than their body , but the extremities of slow lorises are more stout . 
 Slow lorises have a powerful grasp with both their hands and feet due to several specializations . They can tightly grasp branches with little effort because of a special muscular arrangement in their hands and feet , where the thumb diverges at nearly 180 ° from the rest of the fingers , while the hallux ( big toe ) ranges between being perpendicular and pointing slightly backwards . The toes have a large flexor muscle that originates on the lower end of the thigh bone , which helps to impart a strong grasping ability to the hind limbs . The second digit of the hand is short compared to the other digits , while on the foot , the fourth toe is the longest . The sturdy thumb helps to act like a clamp when digits three , four , and five grasp the opposite side of a tree branch . This gives their hands and feet a pincer @-@ like appearance . The strong grip can be held for hours without losing sensation due to the presence of a rete mirabile ( network of capillaries ) , a trait shared among all lorises . Both slender and slow lorises have relatively short feet . Like nearly all lemuriforms , they have a grooming claw on the second toe of each foot . 
 Slow lorises have an unusually low basal metabolic rate , about 40 % of the typical value for placental mammals of their size , comparable to that of sloths . Since they consume a relatively high @-@ calorie diet that is available year @-@ round , it has been proposed that this slow metabolism is due primarily to the need to eliminate toxic compounds from their food . For example , slow lorises can feed on <unk> bark , which may be fatal to humans . 
 = = Distribution and diversity = = 
 Slow lorises are found in South and Southeast Asia . Their collective range stretches from Northeast India through Indochina , east to the Sulu Archipelago ( the small , southern islands of the Philippines ) , and south to the island of Java ( including Borneo , Sumatra , and many small nearby islands ) . They are found in India ( Northeastern states ) , China ( Yunnan province ) , Laos , Vietnam , Cambodia , Bangladesh , Burma , Thailand , Malaysia , the Philippines , Indonesia , Brunei , and Singapore . 
 There are currently eight recognized species . The pygmy slow loris ( N. pygmaeus ) occurs east of the Mekong River in Yunnan , Laos , Vietnam , and Cambodia . The Bornean slow loris ( N. menagensis ) , found on Borneo and nearby islands , including the Sulu Archipelago , and in 2012 was split into four distinct species ( adding N. bancanus , N. borneanus , and N. kayan ) . The Javan slow loris ( N. javanicus ) is only found on the island of Java in Indonesia . The Sunda slow loris ( N. coucang ) occurs on Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula , including Singapore and southern Thailand ( the Isthmus of Kra ) . The Bengal slow loris ( N. bengalensis ) has the largest distribution of all the slow lorises and can be found in Bangladesh , Cambodia , southern China , Northeast India , Laos , Burma , Thailand , and Vietnam . 
 Slow lorises range across tropical and subtropical regions and are found in primary and secondary rainforests , as well as bamboo groves and mangrove forests . They prefer forests with high , dense canopies , although some species have also been found in disturbed habitats , such as cacao plantations and mixed @-@ crop home gardens . Due largely to their nocturnal behavior and the subsequent difficulties in accurately quantifying abundance , data about the population size or distribution patterns of slow lorises is limited . In general , encounter rates are low ; a combined analysis of several field studies involving transect surveys conducted in South and Southeast Asia determined encounter rates ranging from as high as 0 @.@ 74 lorises per kilometer for N. coucang to as low as 0 @.@ 05 lorises per kilometer for N. pygmaeus . 
 = = Behavior and ecology = = 
 Little is known about the social structure of slow lorises , but they generally spend most of the night foraging alone . Individuals sleep during the day , usually alone but occasionally with other slow lorises . Home ranges of adults may significantly overlap , and those of males are generally larger than those of females . In the absence of direct studies of the genus , primatologist Simon Bearder speculated that slow loris social behavior is similar to that of the potto , another slow @-@ moving nocturnal primate . Such a social system is distinguished by a lack of matriarchy and by factors that allow the slow loris to remain inconspicuous and minimize energy expenditure . Vocal exchanges and alarm calls are limited ; scent marking with urine is the dominant form of communication . Adult males are highly territorial and are aggressive towards other males . Vocalizations include an affiliative ( friendly ) call krik , and a louder call resembling a crow 's <unk> . When disturbed , slow lorises can also produce a low buzzing hiss or growl . To make contact with other individuals , they emit a single high @-@ pitched rising tone , and females use a high whistle when in estrus . 
 Slow lorises are slow and deliberate climbers , and often hold on to branches with three of their four limbs . To move between trees , they carefully grip the terminal branches of the neighboring tree and pull themselves across the small gap . They will also grip branches with only their hind feet , lift themselves upright , and quickly launch forward with their hands to catch prey . Due to their slow movement , all lorises , including the slow lorises , have a specially adapted mechanism for defense against predation . Their slow , deliberate movement hardly disturbs the vegetation and is almost completely silent . Once disturbed , they immediately stop moving and remain motionless . In Indonesia , slow lorises are called malu malu or " shy one " because they freeze and cover their face when spotted . If cornered , they may adopt a defensive posture by curling up and lunging at the predator . The Acehnese name , <unk> <unk> ( " wind monkey " ) , refers to their ability to " fleetingly but silently escape " . Little is known about the predation of slow lorises . Documented predators include snakes , the changeable hawk @-@ eagle ( <unk> cirrhatus ) , and Sumatran orangutans ( Pongo abelii ) . Other potential predators include cats , sun bears ( Ursus <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> binturong ) , and civets . 
 Slow lorises produce a secretion from their brachial gland ( a scent gland on the upper arm near the axilla ) that is licked and mixed with their saliva . In tests , three predators — <unk> , clouded leopards ( Neofelis nebulosa ) , and sun bears — retreated or showed other signs of displeasure when presented with cotton swabs anointed with a mixture of the toxic secretion and the saliva , whereas the toxic secretion alone generated mild interest . Before stashing their offspring in a secure location , female slow lorises will lick their brachial glands , and then groom their young with their toothcomb , depositing the toxin on their fur . When threatened , slow lorises may also lick their brachial glands and bite their aggressors , delivering the toxin into the wounds . Slow lorises can be reluctant to release their bite , which is likely to maximize the transfer of toxins . This toxic bite is a rare trait among mammals and unique to lorisid primates . It may also be used for defense against other slow lorises and parasites . According to Nekaris , this adaptation — along with vocalizations , movement , and coloration patterns similar to those of true cobras — may have evolved through Müllerian mimicry to protect slow lorises when they need to move across the ground due to breaks in the canopy . 
 According to folklore , brachial gland secretions are generally thought to contain venom because of apparent anaphylactic reactions by humans following their bites . Slow lorises can indeed inflict painful bites . Animal dealers in Southeast Asia keep tanks of water nearby so that in case of a bite , they can submerge both their arm and the slow loris to make the animal let go . The secretion from the brachial gland of captive slow lorises is similar to the allergen in cat dander , hence the secretions may merely elicit an allergic reaction , not toxicosis . Loris bites cause a painful swelling , and the single case of human death reported in the scientific literature was believed to have resulted from anaphylactic shock . However , although the toxin is only produced when the brachial secretion and saliva are mixed , both the secretion and saliva may have unique chemical properties and may act separately . Furthermore , secondary toxins may be introduced from the consumption of wild food , augmenting the toxicity . The combined brachial secretion and saliva of recently captured wild lorises was shown to contain <unk> , which were not found in slow lorises held in captivity for more than a year . 
 Studies suggest that slow lorises are polygynandrous . Infants are either parked on branches while their parents find food or else are carried by one of the parents . Due to their long <unk> ( about six months ) , small litter sizes , low birth weights , long weaning times ( three to six months ) , and long gaps between births , slow loris populations have one of the slowest growth rates among mammals of similar size . Pygmy slow lorises are likely to give birth to twins — from 50 % to 100 % of births , depending on the study ; in contrast , this phenomenon is rare ( 3 % occurrence ) in Bengal slow lorises . A seven @-@ year study of captive @-@ bred pygmy slow lorises showed a skewed sex distribution , with 1 @.@ 68 males born for every 1 female . 
 Breeding may be continuous throughout the year . Copulation often occurs while suspended with the hands and feet clinging to horizontal branches for support . In captive Sunda slow lorises , mating primarily occurs between June and mid @-@ September , with the estrus cycle lasting 29 to 45 days and estrus lasting one to five days . Likewise , gestation lasts 185 to 197 days , and the young weigh between 30 and 60 grams ( 1 @.@ 1 and 2 @.@ 1 oz ) at birth . Females reach sexual maturity at 18 to 24 months , while males are capable of reproducing at 17 months . However , the fathers become hostile towards their male offspring after 12 to 14 months and will chase them away . In captivity , they can live 20 or more years . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Slow lorises are omnivores , eating insects , other arthropods , small birds and reptiles , eggs , fruits , gums , nectar and miscellaneous vegetation . A 1984 study of the Sunda slow loris indicated that its diet consists of 71 % fruit and gums , and 29 % insects and other animal prey . A more detailed study of another Sunda slow loris population in 2002 and 2003 showed different dietary proportions , consisting of 43 @.@ 3 % gum , 31 @.@ 7 % nectar , 22 @.@ 5 % fruit , and just 2 @.@ 5 % arthropods and other animal prey . The most common dietary item was nectar from flowers of the Bertram palm ( <unk> tristis ) . The Sunda slow loris eats insects that other predators avoid due to their repugnant taste or smell . 
 Preliminary results of studies on the pygmy slow loris indicate that its diet consists primarily of gums and nectar ( especially nectar from <unk> dives flowers ) , and that animal prey makes up 30 – 40 % of its diet . However , one 2002 analysis of pygmy slow loris feces indicated that it contained 98 % insect remains and just 2 % plant remains . The pygmy slow loris often returns to the same gum feeding sites and leaves conspicuous gouges on tree trunks when inducing the flow of exudates . Slow lorises have been reported gouging for exudates at heights ranging from 1 m ( 3 ft 3 in ) to as much as 12 m ( 39 ft ) ; the gouging process , whereby the loris repetitively bangs its toothcomb into the hard bark , may be loud enough to be heard up to 10 m ( 33 ft ) away . The marks remaining after gouging can be used by field workers to assess loris presence in an area . Captive pygmy slow lorises also make characteristic gouge marks in wooden substrates , such as branches . It is not known how the sympatric pygmy and Bengal slow lorises partition their feeding niches . The plant gums , obtained typically from species in the family Fabaceae ( peas ) , are high in carbohydrates and lipids , and can serve as a year @-@ around source of food , or an emergency reserve when other preferred food items are scarce . Several anatomical adaptations present in slow lorises may enhance their ability to feed on exudates : a long narrow tongue to make it easier to reach gum stashed in cracks and crevices , a large cecum to help the animal digest complex carbohydrates , and a short duodenum to help quickly pass potentially toxic exudates . Slow lorises can use both hands to eat while hanging upside down from a branch . They spend about 20 % of their nightly activities feeding . 
 = = In culture = = 
 Beliefs about slow lorises and their use in traditional practices are deep @-@ rooted and go back at least 300 years , if not earlier based on oral traditions . In the late 19th and early 20th centuries , it was reported that the people from the interior of Borneo believed that slow lorises were the gatekeepers for the heavens and that each person had a personal slow loris waiting for them in the afterlife . More often , however , slow lorises are used in traditional medicine or to ward off evil . The following passage from an early textbook about primates is indicative of the superstitions associated with slow lorises : 
 Many strange powers are attributed to this animal by the natives of the countries it inhabits ; there is hardly an event in life to man , woman or child , or even domestic animals , that may not be influenced for better or worse by the Slow Loris , alive or dead , or by any separate part of it , and apparently one cannot usually tell at the time , that one is under supernatural power . Thus a Malay may commit a crime he did not <unk> , and then find that an enemy had buried a particular part of a Loris under his threshold , which had , unknown to him , compelled him to act to his own disadvantage . ... [ a slow loris 's ] life is not a happy one , for it is continually seeing ghosts ; that is why it hides its face in its hands . 
 In the Mondulkiri Province of Cambodia , hunters believe that lorises can heal their own broken bones immediately after falling from a branch so that they can climb back up the tree . They also believe that slow lorises have medicinal powers because they require more than one hit with a stick to die . In the province of North Sumatra , the slow loris is thought to bring good luck if it is buried under a house or a road . In the same province , slow loris body parts were used to place curses on enemies . In Java , it was thought that putting a piece of its skull in a water jug would make a husband more docile and submissive , just like a slow loris in the daytime . More recently , researchers have documented the belief that the consumption of loris meat was an aphrodisiac that improves " male power " . The gall bladder of the Bengal slow loris has historically been used to make ink for tattoos by the village elders in Pursat and Koh Kong Provinces of Cambodia . Loris wine is a traditional Cambodian medicine supposed to alleviate the pain of childbirth , made from a mixture of loris bodies and rice wine . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 The two greatest threats to slow lorises are deforestation and the wildlife trade . Slow lorises have lost a significant amount of habitat , with habitat fragmentation isolating small populations and obstructing biological dispersal . However , despite the lost habitat , their decline is most closely associated with unsustainable trade , either as exotic pets or for traditional medicine . 
 Each of the slow loris species that had been identified prior to 2012 are currently listed as either " Vulnerable " or " Endangered " by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) on their Red List . When they were all considered a single species , imprecise population data together with their regular occurrence in Southeast Asian animal markets combined to erroneously suggest that slow lorises were common . This manifested as incorrect Red List assessments of " Least Concern " as recently as 2000 . The three newest species are yet to be evaluated by the IUCN , although each were once thought to be subpopulations of the Bornean slow loris — which was evaluated as " Vulnerable " in 2008 . With this division of its range and population , the Bornean slow loris and the three new species face a higher risk of extinction than before . 
 Since 2007 , all slow loris species have been protected from commercial international trade under Appendix I of CITES . Furthermore , local trade is illegal because every nation in which they occur naturally has laws protecting them . Despite their CITES Appendix I status and local legal protection , slow lorises are still threatened by both local and international trade due to problems with enforcement . Surveys are needed to determine existing population densities and habitat viability for all species of slow loris . Connectivity between protected areas is important for slow lorises because they are not adapted to dispersing across the ground over large distances . 
 Populations of Bengal and Sunda slow lorises are not faring well in zoos . Of the 29 captive specimens in North American zoos in 2008 , several are hybrids that cannot breed , while most are past their reproductive years . The last captive birth for these species in North America was in 2001 in San Diego . Pygmy slow lorises are doing better in North American zoos ; from the late 1980s ( when they were imported ) to 2008 , the population grew to 74 animals , with most of them born at the San Diego Zoo . 
 = = = Wildlife trade = = = 
 Until the 1960s , the hunting of slow lorises was sustainable , but due to growing demand , decreased supply , and the subsequent increased value of the marketed wildlife , slow lorises have been overexploited and are in decline . With the use of modern technology , such as battery @-@ powered search lights , slow lorises have become easier to hunt because of their eye shine . Traditional medicine made from loris parts is thought to cure many diseases , and the demand for this medicine from wealthy urban areas has replaced the subsistence hunting traditionally performed in poor rural areas . A survey by primatologist Anna Nekaris and colleagues ( 2010 ) showed that these belief systems were so strong that the majority of respondents expressed reluctance to consider alternatives to loris @-@ based medicines . 
 Slow lorises are sold locally at street markets , but are also sold internationally over the Internet and in pet stores . They are especially popular or trendy in Japan , particularly among women . The reasons for their popularity , according to the Japan Wildlife Conservation Society , are that " they 're easy to keep , they don 't cry , they 're small , and just very cute . " Because of their " cuteness " , videos of pet slow lorises are some of the most frequently watched animal @-@ related viral videos on YouTube . In March 2011 , a newly posted video of a slow loris holding a cocktail umbrella had been viewed more than two million times , while an older video of a slow loris being tickled had been viewed more than six million times . According to Nekaris , these videos are misunderstood by most people who watch them , since most do not realize that it is illegal in most countries to own them as pets and that the slow lorises in the videos are only docile because that is their passive defensive reaction to threatening situations . Despite frequent advertisements by pet shops in Japan , the World Conservation Monitoring Centre reported that only a few dozen slow lorises were imported in 2006 , suggesting frequent smuggling . Slow lorises are also smuggled to China , Taiwan , Europe , Russia , the United States , and Saudi Arabia for use as pets . 
 Even within their countries of origin , slow lorises are very popular pets , particularly in Indonesia . They are seen as a " living toy " for children by local people or are bought out of pity by Western tourists or expatriates . Neither local nor foreign buyers usually know anything about these primates , their endangered status , or that the trade is illegal . Furthermore , few know about their strong odor or their potentially lethal bite . According to data compiled from monthly surveys and interviews with local traders , nearly a thousand locally sourced slow lorises exchanged hands in the Medan bird market in North Sumatra during the late first decade of the 21st century . 
 International trade usually causes a high mortality rate during transit , between 30 % and 90 % . Slow lorises also experience many health problems due to both local and international trade . In order to give the impression that the primates are tame and appropriate pets for children , to protect people from their potentially toxic bite , or to deceive buyers into thinking the animal is a baby , animal dealers either pull the front teeth with pliers or wire cutters or they cut them off with nail cutters . This results in severe bleeding , which sometimes causes shock or death . Dental infection is common and is fatal in 90 % of cases . Without their teeth , the animals can no longer fend for themselves in the wild , and must remain in captivity for life . The slow lorises found in animal markets are usually underweight and malnourished , and have had their fur dyed , which complicates species identification at rescue centers . As many as 95 % of the slow lorises rescued from the markets die of dental infection or improper care . 
 As part of the trade , infants are pulled prematurely from their parents , leaving them unable to remove their own urine , feces , and oily skin secretions from their fur . Slow lorises have a special network of blood vessels in their hands and feet , which makes them vulnerable to cuts when pulled from the wire cages they are kept in . Slow lorises are also stress @-@ sensitive and do not do well in captivity . Common health problems seen in pet slow lorises include undernourishment , tooth decay , diabetes , obesity , and kidney failure . Infection , stress , pneumonia , and poor nutrition lead to high death rates among pet lorises . Pet owners also fail to provide proper care because they are usually asleep when the nocturnal pet is awake . 
 = Mauricio González @-@ Gordon y Díez = 
 Mauricio González @-@ Gordon y Díez , Marquis of Bonanza ( 18 October 1923 – 27 September 2013 ) was a Spanish sherry maker and a conservationist . Most of his life he worked for the family company , González Byass , where he increased its exports to a worldwide level . His family estate was located in the wetland region called Doñana in southern Spain and was threatened by drainage efforts in the early 1950s . González @-@ Gordon with the help of researchers and international support managed to preserve the site , while at the same time donating some of his family land to the conservation effort . Afterward , González @-@ Gordon became one of the founders of the Spanish Ornithological Society in 1954 . His conservation efforts for Doñana culminated in the creation of the Doñana National Park in 1969 . The area was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1994 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 González @-@ Gordon was born in Hampton Hill , London , United Kingdom , as a son to a Spanish family with Scottish descent rooted in the Clan Gordon . His parents were Manuel María González @-@ Gordon and Emilia Díez Gutiérrez . Mauricio , whose father was known as the ' Pope of Sherry ' , was the second of a total of four children . One of his ancestors , John David Gordon of <unk> , had moved to Jerez de la Frontera in the 18th century and started trading in sherry . At the time of his birth , González @-@ Gordon 's father Manuel was the chairman of González Byass and was actively promoting the brand in the United Kingdom . During his youth González @-@ Gordon was raised as a bilingual , being fluent in both Spanish and English . González @-@ Gordon moved to Jerez de la Frontera at age three to go to school in Spain . He was homeschooled by private tutors and attended La Salle Buen Pastor college . He later attended the Instituto Padre Luis Coloma . His primary studies were followed up by economic studies at the Jerez College of Commerce , where he licensed as a teacher of trade . He passed the final period of the Spanish Civil War in 1939 working in an airplane factory , helping construct Polikarpov planes for the aerial forces of General Francisco Franco . He attended the University of Seville and graduated in Chemical Sciences in 1946 . 
 = = González Byass = = 
 González @-@ Gordon worked most of his life for the family company González Byass , which specializes in making sherry . He was the fifth generation of the family to chair the company . While working for the firm he was involved in the making , tasting and commercialisation of sherry and in later years he also helped the company expand into producing brandy and several sorts of wine . Immediately after he finished his studies in 1946 he joined the business and started at the bottom with the picking and crushing of grapes . During this time he also learned about the <unk> system , which is used to age different type of liquids . His interest in <unk> had only developed after visiting California the year he graduated . He visited California after previously being sent to New York by boat with twelve containers of wine . In 1955 he founded the first research center for viticulture and winemaking in Spain by establishing one at González Byass . For twenty years he was occupied as head of wine selection at the company . González @-@ Gordon also served on the board of González Byass beginning in 1961 , and was president of the company between 1993 and 1999 . During this period González @-@ Gordon managed to expand the business by exporting all over the world , including to the United States , United Kingdom , China and East Asia . After his time as president he continued to serve as an advisor to his son , Mauricio Junior , who took over his position . Apart from his work at González Byass González @-@ Gordon also diverted some of his time towards the regulatory council of the sherry making industry , serving for 24 years . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 González @-@ Gordon was involved with conservationism from an early age ; he was also an avid bird watcher and would become an ornithologist . His family estate was located in the Coto Doñana , a wetland at the mouth of the river Guadalquivir , near Jerez de la Frontera , in southern Spain . Here González @-@ Gordon became interested in the local ecosystem and invited European ornithologists to visit the area . When two Spanish ornithologists , Professor Francisco Bernis and José Antonio Valverde visited , González @-@ Gordon served as their guide . The González @-@ Gordon family saw that the wetlands were threatened by the planting of eucalyptus trees and large @-@ scale drainage plans proposed by the government . Mauricio , together with his father , asked Bernis to try and influence Spanish dictator Francisco Franco into abandoning these proposals . The trio wrote a memorandum which was presented to Franco himself by Mauricio 's father Manuel . By November 1953 , Bernis had finished a report on the value of the Doñana , which showed that the area had exceptional ecological value . The group sought international support for their goals and found it . The efforts of González @-@ Gordon to dissuade Franco exposed him to some danger , but the Franco government conceded and the drainage plans were aborted . 
 By 1963 an international organisation founded with the goal of protecting Doñana had purchased 7 @,@ 000 hectares ( 17 @,@ 000 acres ) in the area . After winning their fight against the construction plans González @-@ Gordon , Bernis and Valverde wished to create a Spanish foundation for ornithology . The idea to start the organisation had already come up in their first meeting . In May 1954 they founded the Spanish Ornithological Society ( SEO ) in Madrid , which currently is the Spanish affiliate of BirdLife International . The trio had written the founding statutes among themselves . The organisation was supported by visits to Doñana of famous ornithologists as Edward Max Nicholson and Julian Huxley , with González @-@ Gordon guiding them around . He would also serve as chair of the board of SEO between 1966 and 1968 . The Doñana area was turned into Doñana National Park in 1969 . The González @-@ Gordon family ceded much of its land between Bonanza and <unk> for the creation of the national park . In 1994 the area was turned into an UNESCO World Heritage Site and currently measures 543 square kilometres ( 210 sq mi ) . The park has a wide range of ecosystems and is especially important for migratory birds . González @-@ Gordon also wrote a translation of Roger Tory Peterson 's A Field Guide to the Birds of Britain and Europe in 1957 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 González @-@ Gordon has been described as being proud of his Scottish heritage , which centred on the town of Huntly and the Clan Gordon . His personal clothing style reflected this ; he was noted for his tweed jackets and British clothes in general . He had been married to Milagro López de <unk> y <unk> for 62 years before she died in July 2013 . The couple had two children , <unk> and Mauricio , with Mauricio being the current president of the family company . During the three final years of his life González @-@ Gordon was in poor health and could hardly leave his home . He died on 27 September 2013 in his hometown of Jerez de la Frontera at the age of 89 . His family claims that the last thing he drank was a <unk> Pepe , the most famous brand of the family business . His death occurred at the <unk> clinic where he had spent his last couple of weeks . The memorial service was held at the San Juan Bautista de La Salle church on 28 September . 
 Apart from his work at González Byass and his conservation efforts at Doñana he was also president of the local Red Cross organisation in Jerez de la Frontera , serving as its president for thirteen years , between 1974 and 1988 . 
 = = Honours and decorations = = 
 Mauricio González @-@ Gordon y Díez was Marquis of Bonanza , obtaining the title after the death of his father in 1980 . During the course of his life he received several honours and decorations : 
 Cross of Naval Merit with White Decoration awarded by the King of Spain for his dedication to sailing . 
 Knight of the Order of the Dannebrog awarded by the Queen of Denmark ( 1985 ) . 
 Member of the Gran Orden de Caballeros del Vino awarded by the British embassy in Spain . 
 Golden medal awarded by the Red Cross ( 1986 ) . 
 Golden medal of <unk> Merit and Grand Cross of Agricultural Merit by Miguel Arias <unk> , Spanish Minister for Agriculture , Food and Environment ( 2011 ) . 
 In 2004 he received the Bernis Award for Ornithology from the Spanish Ornithological Society / BirdLife for his pioneering work and lifetime contribution to conservation , especially of Doñana . He was awarded the Premio Andalucía de Medio Ambiente , the Andalusian Prize of Environment , by the government of Andalusia in 2005 . In 2009 he was made hijo <unk> , favourite son , of the municipality of Jerez de la Frontera . 
 = Loetoeng Kasaroeng = 
 Loetoeng Kasaroeng is a 1926 fantasy film from the Dutch East Indies ( modern @-@ day Indonesia ) which was directed and produced by L. Heuveldorp . An adaptation of the Sundanese folktale Lutung Kasarung ( The Lost Lutung ) , the film tells of a young girl who falls in love with a magical <unk> and stars the children of noblemen . Details on its performance are unavailable , although it is known to have been of poor technical quality and thought to have performed poorly . It was the first film produced in the country and the first to feature a native @-@ Indonesian cast . It is likely a lost film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 <unk> and <unk> are sisters and in competition . <unk> , the elder sister , teases <unk> about the latter 's lover , a <unk> named Guru Minang ; <unk> 's boyfriend , <unk> , is a handsome human . However , the girls discover that Guru Minang is actually a god who is more handsome than <unk> . 
 = = Production = = 
 The first showing of films in the Dutch East Indies was in 1900 , and over the next twenty years foreign productions – generally from the United States – were imported and shown throughout the country . Domestic production of documentaries had begun in 1911 but were unable to compete with imported works . By 1923 a local feature film production spearheaded by the Middle East Film Co. was announced , but the work was not completed . 
 Under pressure from imported works , in 1926 N.V. Java Film , a production house based in Batavia ( modern @-@ day Jakarta ) which had previously produced a single documentary , <unk> op de <unk> ( Native Crocodile Hunters ) , chose to make a feature film based on the Sundanese folktale Lutung Kasarung . The company 's owner , L. Heuveldorp served as director and producer , while its laboratory head G. Krugers handled cinematography and processing . Little biographical information is available regarding the background of both men , although it was reported that Heuveldorp had previous experience from working in the United States . 
 The cast was drawn entirely from the priyayi ( noble ) class , under the coordination of school headmaster <unk> . Among the cast were children of <unk> V , the regent of Bandung ; he had agreed to help fund the film to promote Sundanese culture , and had previously brought the story to the stage . Further subsidies had come from the Ministry of Defence , which donated trucks to ease filming . 
 Filming had begun by August 1926 , when several scenes were shot in a cave that had been excavated for the production on <unk> Hill . Heuveldorp , unable to force the actors to play their roles seriously , shot several scenes with them acting as they wished before showing them the results ; upon realising that their acting had been disappointing , the cast began to listen to stage directions . Afterwards they began rehearsing each scene at least twice , with <unk> standing behind the cameraman and giving directions . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The film was screened on 31 December 1926 at the Oriental and Elita Theatres in Bandung , making it the first domestically @-@ produced feature film and the first with a native cast . The advertisements were in both Dutch- and Malay @-@ language publications . The film was screened for only a week , with live Sundanese gamelan performances providing music , after which Loetoeng Kasaroeng was replaced with Hollywood films . Although its box office performance is not recorded , it is thought to have been poor . 
 A review by " <unk> " in Panorama magazine considered the film of poor technical quality compared to imported films , suggesting that the production was underfunded ; the review states that some actors were not paid for their work . The Indonesian film historian Misbach Yusa Biran wrote that Loetoeng Kasaroeng would have been poorly received outside of East Java , owing to Sundanese culture and dance not being considered interesting to other ethnic groups , particularly the Javanese . William van der Heide , a lecturer on film studies at the University of Newcastle in Australia , notes that the tendency of European filmmakers to depict natives as primitives may also have influenced the poor ticket sales . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although Heuveldorp is not recorded as being involved in any more fiction film productions , Krugers went on to direct several films , including the area 's first talkie , Karnadi Anemer Bangkong ( 1931 ) , before leaving the country in 1936 . At least one of the cast members , <unk> , is recorded as continuing to act . Lutung Kasarung was adapted to film twice further , in 1952 and 1983 . 
 After Loetoeng Kasaroeng was released , numerous domestic films were made . The second domestic production , Eulis Atjih ( 1927 ) , was directed by Krugers and received a wider release . With the release of Lily van Java ( Lily of Java ) in 1928 , ethnic Chinese became involved in the industry ; by 1940 native directors had become common . However , the first truly Indonesian film is considered to be Usmar Ismail 's Darah dan Doa ( The Long March ) in 1950 , released after the Dutch recognised Indonesia 's independence in 1949 . 
 Loetoeng Kasaroeng is likely a lost film . The American visual anthropologist Karl G. Heider wrote that all Indonesian films from before 1950 are lost . However , JB Kristanto 's Katalog Film Indonesia ( Indonesian Film Catalogue ) records several as having survived at Sinematek Indonesia 's archives , and Biran writes that several Japanese propaganda films have survived at the Netherlands Government Information Service . 
 = Unforgiven ( 2004 ) = 
 Unforgiven ( 2004 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) and presented by Clearasil , which took place on September 12 , 2004 , at the Rose Garden in Portland , Oregon . It was the sixth annual ( seventh overall ) Unforgiven event . The show 's seven matches showcased prominent WWE wrestlers , who acted out the franchise 's stories in and out of the ring . The event starred talent from the Raw brand . It is one of only two WWE pay @-@ per @-@ view events to ever be held in the state of Oregon , the other being No Mercy 2008 . 
 The main event was Randy Orton versus Triple H for the World Heavyweight Championship , which Triple H won by pinfall after executing a Pedigree onto a steel chair . One of the predominant matches on the card was Shawn Michaels versus Kane in a No Disqualification match , which Michaels won after performing Sweet Chin Music . Another primary match on the undercard was Chris Jericho versus Christian in a Ladder match for the vacant WWE Intercontinental Championship , which Jericho won by retrieving the suspended belt . 
 = = Background = = 
 Seven professional wrestling matches were scheduled on the event 's card beforehand , which were planned with predetermined outcomes by WWE 's script writers . The buildup to these matches and scenarios that took place before , during and after the event were also planned by the script writers . The event featured wrestlers and other talent from Raw 's brand – a storyline expansion in which WWE assigned its employees . Wrestlers portrayed either a villainous or fan favorite gimmick , as they followed a series of events which generally built tension , leading to a wrestling match . 
 The main feud heading into the event was between Randy Orton and Triple H over the World Heavyweight Championship . At the August pay @-@ per @-@ view event , SummerSlam , WWE 's previous pay @-@ per @-@ view event , Orton defeated Chris Benoit to win the World Heavyweight Championship , thus making Orton the youngest World Heavyweight Champion in WWE history . On the August 16 , 2004 edition of Raw , one of WWE 's primary television programs , Orton successfully retained the title in a rematch with Benoit . After the match , Evolution ( Batista , Ric Flair , and Triple H ) , Orton 's fellow stablemates , threw him a fake celebration , only to reveal that they were not pleased with his new victory . While Batista had Orton propped on his shoulders in elation , Triple H gave him a pleased thumbs up ; Triple H , however , abruptly changed the thumbs up to a thumbs @-@ down and told Batista to drop Orton to the mat . Flair and Batista then began to beat Orton in the ring as Triple H claimed that Orton was nothing without Evolution . Orton 's break @-@ up with Evolution began a new storyline for him as a fan favorite when he continued to feud with his former group members . On the August 23 edition of Raw , after Orton refused to give Triple H the World title , Orton spat in Triple H 's face and hit him with the title belt . General Manager Eric Bischoff then scheduled a match between the two for the World Heavyweight title at Unforgiven . The following week on Raw , Eugene defeated Triple H in a singles match after Orton interfered and performed an RKO on Triple H. On the September 6 edition Raw , Orton defeated Kane in a Steel Cage match , which Orton won by escaping the cage . Shortly after the match ended , Ric Flair and Batista came out and , along with Triple H , began attacking Orton . In an interview with the Daily Star in 2006 , Orton revealed that WWE chairman , Vince McMahon , came up with the idea of having Orton be a fan favorite the day of SummerSlam . According to Orton , transforming into a fan favorite was " tough " because " no one bought it " . 
 The second main feud heading into the event was between Kane and Shawn Michaels . This feud began the night after Bad Blood , when Michaels lost a Hell in a Cell match to Triple H. Raw commentator Jim Ross tried making amends between Michaels and Triple H by making them to shake hands . Michaels and Triple H extended their hands to shake , however , Kane came out and attacked Michaels , which resulted in Kane , in storyline , crushing Michaels ' throat with a wedged chair . Michaels was then taken out in an ambulance for medical attention . On the June 28 , 2004 edition of Raw , Ross interviewed Kane and asked him to explain his actions towards Michaels ; Kane explained that he was robbed of the World Heavyweight Championship at Bad Blood against Chris Benoit , as Michaels got in his way , which angered him . On the August 30 edition of Raw , Kane revealed that Eric Bischoff 's wedding gift to him and Lita , who married the week before , was to name any match he wanted for the September pay @-@ per @-@ view , Unforgiven . Lita then informed Kane that Bischoff 's present was for both of them , where they were able to pick Kane 's opponent for Unforgiven , which resulted in Michaels being picked . 
 The third main feud heading into the event was between Chris Jericho and Christian over the vacant WWE Intercontinental Championship . On the September 6 , 2004 edition of Raw , Eric Bischoff stripped Edge of the Intercontinental Championship , after Edge suffered a legitimate injury . Christian interrupted Bischoff and stated that all his peeps would riot the streets if Bischoff did not award him the vacant championship . Jericho suggested that he and Christian wrestle in a match on Raw over the vacant championship . Bischoff , however , scheduled a Ladder match at Unforgiven between Christian and Jericho . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event aired live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , Maven and Rodney Mack ( with Jazz ) faced off in a match during Sunday Night Heat . Maven pinned Mack with a roll @-@ up after Mack collided with Jazz . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match of the event was the tag team encounter of Chris Benoit and William Regal against the team of Evolution ( Ric Flair and Batista ) . The match started off with Batista and Chris Benoit , who brawled back and forth until Flair was tagged in . Flair and Benoit exchanged knife edge chops . Batista and Regal then spar , but Batista was able to gain control over Regal , until Benoit and Flair tag in to the match . Benoit and Flair spar back and forth , until Flair applied the Figure four lock only for Benoit to reverse it into the Crippler Crossface , in which Flair submitted to , giving the win to Benoit and Regal . 
 The next match was the encounter of Victoria and Trish Stratus ( with Tyson Tomko ) for the WWE Women 's Championship . Victoria gained control over Stratus early into the match , however , Stratus gained control after Tomko interfered on her behalf . After Stratus gained the advantage , she hit a Stratusfaction on Victoria and got a successful pinfall , thus Stratus winning the match and retaining the Women 's Championship . After the match , Tomko tried to attack Victoria , until she was saved by an unknown man in a dress . Tomko then challenged the mystery superstar into a match . 
 The third match was between Tyson Tomko and Stevie Richards , the man dressed in women 's clothing . Tomko quickly gained the advantage after stripping off all of the clothes on Richards , leaving Richards left wearing a pair of woman 's underwear . Tomko continued his attack on Richards by hitting a swinging neckbreaker and winning the match via pinfall . 
 The fourth match was for the vacant WWE Intercontinental Championship between Christian and Chris Jericho in a Ladder match . The two superstars brawled early into the match , but they then retrieved ladders and used them to their advantage . Christian was then able to gain control over the match after he performed a running <unk> onto Jericho . The two superstars then continued in a back and forth match , until Jericho applied the Walls of Jericho on Christian , on the top of the ladder , which caused Christian to fall down . Jericho failed to retrieve the title on the first attempt , but was able to set up another ladder and successfully retrieved the title on the second attempt , thus Jericho winning the match and the WWE Intercontinental Championship . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The next match was a No Disqualification match between Kane , who was accompanied by Lita , and Shawn Michaels . Kane would gain the early advantage as he suplexed Michaels through the announcers table , which resulted in the table breaking . Kane would continue to brawl with Michaels at ringside where he hit Michaels face first onto the ringside steel steps , which resulted in Michaels bleeding from the forehead . As Kane attempted to hit Michaels with a steel chair , Michaels would counter it with Sweet Chin Music , which gained a successful pinfall . 
 The following match was for the World Tag Team Championship , in which champions La Résistance ( Sylvain Grenier and Robért Conway ) defended the title against Tajiri and Rhyno . There was back and forth action between the two teams , as all the superstars were able to participate in the match . Grenier hit Rhyno with a Quebec flag and managed to pin him and La Resistance winning the match and retaining the World Tag Team title . 
 The seventh and final match was between Randy Orton and Triple H for the World Heavyweight Championship . Both Orton and Triple H managed to get the upper hand in the match . During the match , Ric Flair and Batista interfered on behalf of Triple H , as they attacked Orton while the referee was knocked out . Jonathan Coachman also took part in the match as he ran down with a referee shirt and tried to act as a guest referee . Orton managed to get the upper hand over Flair , Batista and Coachman as he hit an RKO on all three of them . Triple H , however , managed to hit Orton with a steel chair , which proceeded with a Pedigree onto the same chair . Batista then rolled the referee into the ring , as Triple H covered Orton for the win via pinfall . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following Unforgiven , Triple H had a celebration thrown in his honor , complete with six women , confetti , streamers and a giant cake . Randy Orton , however , sought revenge , as he lashed out at all three Evolution members , as he came out of the giant cake , which was placed in the center of the ring , and humiliated the group . Orton was however ineligible to face Triple H at Taboo Tuesday for the World Heavyweight Championship , as he was unable to win a match against Batista , which would have given Orton a championship match . On the October 4 , 2004 edition of Raw , three candidates were named as potential contenders for Triple H 's World Heavyweight Championship at Taboo Tuesday ; Chris Benoit and Edge were revealed as two of the candidates . Shawn Michaels , however , competed in a qualifying match , which it saw him defeat Christian , to become the third candidate . On the October 18 edition of Raw , a Triple Threat match was scheduled between Michaels , Benoit and Edge , which Edge won after he pinned Benoit by using the ropes for leverage . During the match , Michaels injured his knee , and it was later revealed that he tore his meniscus . At Taboo Tuesday , Michaels won the fans vote and faced Triple H for the World Heavyweight Championship , however , Michaels was unable to win the match after Edge interfered and speared Michaels , allowing Triple H to pin him . 
 Randy Orton began a feud with Ric Flair , after Flair was the one responsible for making Orton lose the match against Batista . Orton commented on every accomplishment that Flair had made and criticized him for calling Triple H the greatest wrestler of all . Flair retaliated to Orton 's comments , stating that individuals like Shawn Michaels and Mick Foley , who Orton had previously feuded with , were not legends , therefore Orton was not a Legend Killer . Flair also stated that he and Orton would have a match at Taboo Tuesday and the fans would have the opportunity to choose what type of match they face in . At Taboo Tuesday , Orton and Flair met in a Steel Cage match , which was the fans selection . Orton won the match after delivering an RKO to Flair . After the match , Flair shook Orton 's hand . 
 At Taboo Tuesday , Chris Jericho lost the Intercontinental Championship to Shelton Benjamin via pinfall . Benjamin won the vote to face Jericho ; he also was voted over Batista , Jonathan Coachman , Christian , Rhyno , Maven , William Regal , The Hurricane , Tyson Tomko , Tajiri , Steven Richards , Val Venis , Rosey , Chuck Palumbo , and Rodney Mack . 
 On the October 11 , 2004 edition of Raw , La Résistance had to defend the World Tag Team Championship in a match with Eugene and William Regal . Regal hit Sylvain Grenier with a pair of brass knuckles and pinned him to win the World Tag Team title . Eric Bischoff , however , restarted the match . The match resulted in La Résistance retaining the title , after Robért Conway jabbed Regal in the side with a flagpole . Bischoff informed La Résistance that at Taboo Tuesday they were scheduled to defend the World Tag Team title against the two individuals who were not chosen to face Triple H for the World title . Shawn Michaels won the fans choice , which gave Edge and Chris Benoit a World Tag Team title match . Edge , however , abandoned Benoit during the match , which forced Benoit to wrestle both members of La Résistance by himself . Despite this , Benoit managed to force Conway to submit to the Crippler Crossface to win the World Tag Team Championship . 
 = = Results = = 
 = B3 ( classification ) = 
 B3 is a medical based Paralympic classification for blind sport . Competitors in this classification have partial sight , with visual acuity from 2 / 60 to 6 / 60 . It is used by a number of blind sports including para @-@ alpine skiing , para @-@ Nordic skiing , blind cricket , blind golf , five @-@ a @-@ side football , goalball and judo . Some other sports , including adaptive rowing , athletics and swimming , have equivalents to this class . 
 The B3 classification was first created by the IBSA in the 1970s , and has largely remained unchanged since despite an effort by the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) to move towards a more functional and evidence @-@ based classification system . Classification is often handled on the international level by the International Blind Sports Association ( IBSA ) although it is also handled by national sport federations . There are exceptions for sports like athletics and cycling . 
 Equipment utilized by competitors in this class may differ from sport to sport , and may include sighted guides , guide rails , beeping balls and clapsticks . There may be some modifications related to equipment and rules to specifically address needs of competitors in this class to allow them to compete in specific sports . Some sports specifically do not allow a guide , whereas cycling and skiing require one . 
 = = Definition = = 
 B3 is a disability sport classification for people who have partial vision . The International Blind Sports Federation ( IBSA ) defines this classification as " From visual acuity above 2 / 60 to visual acuity of 6 / 60 and / or visual field of more than 5 degrees and less than 20 degrees . " The Canadian Paralympic Committee defined B3 as " No more than 10 % functional vision . " Competitors in this class " can make out shapes with the help of glasses " . 
 This classification is borrowed by some other sports , including blind golf who also define the class as " From visual acuity above 20 / 60 up to visual acuity of 6 / 60 and / or visual field of above 5 degrees and less than 20 degrees . " Para @-@ alpine skiing sport specific versions of this definition include one by the Australian Paralympic Committee which defined this classification as " Athletes with slightly more vision or more than five degrees but less than 20 degrees . " The International Paralympic Committee defined B3 for alpine skiing as " From visual acuity above 20 / 60 up to visual acuity of 6 / 60 and / or visual field of more than 5 degrees and less than 20 degrees . " This classification has parallels in other sports . For adaptive rowing , the comparable classification is LTA @-@ B3 ; for athletics , the class is T13 ; and equivalent for swimming is S13 . 
 IBSA handles classification for a number of sports internationally including five @-@ a @-@ side football , goalball and judo . Part of being classified involves assessing vision for factors including visual acuity , contrast sensitivity , color vision , motion detections and visual field . When being assessed into this class by the IBSA , the process first includes the athlete filling out a consent form , submitting a photograph , and scheduling an appointment with a classifier for evaluation . During the evaluation , the competitor may be accompanied by another person to assist them in communicating with the classifiers . If necessary , the person can also bring a translator . The assessment is then conducted and is medical . There are several status groups used by classifiers that assist in classification . This includes confirmed for competitors who have a visual impairment unlikely to change , Review for competitors who have vision that may fluctuate , New for competitors who have never been classified before , Not Eligible for competitors who have a visual impairment that is not severe enough and not likely to deteriorate in the future to the point where they could be eligible . 
 Classification is also handled on a national and by sport level . Australians seeking classification for blind sports can be classified by an IBSA classifier or an Australian Paralympic Committee vision impairment classifier . In the United Kingdom , blind sport is handled by British Blind Sport , which is recognized nationally by Sport England . In the United States , governance related to this classification is handled by the United States Association for Blind Athletes ( USABA ) . 
 Not all sports use IBSA classifiers . For adaptive rowing , classification assignment may be handled by FISA , as was the case at the 2008 Summer Paralympics . In athletics , classification assignment may be handled by the IPC , as was the case at the 2008 Summer Paralympics . Cycling classification assignment for this class may be handled by the UCI , as was the case at the 2008 Summer Paralympic . Otherwise , the swimmer competes under the normal rules governing Fédération Internationale de Natation ( FINA ) , the sport 's highest authority , swimming competitions . Swimming classification handled by IPC Swimming . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Eligible Paralympic sports for the B3 classification include adaptive rowing , athletics , cycling five @-@ a @-@ side football , goalball , judo , para @-@ alpine skiing , para @-@ Nordic skiing , and swimming . On the Paralympic level , a number of disability sports are not open to this classification or other visually impaired competitors including archery , basketball , boccia , curling , fencing , ice sledge hockey , powerlifting , rugby , shooting , table tennis , tennis , volleyball . Equestrian sport is not open to Paralympic sport in this classification , and the FEI classification system has no parallel classification available for other levels of national and international competition . For non @-@ Paralympic sports or sports removed from the Paralympic programme , the classification is used in blind golf and lawn bowls . 
 Performance can differ for this class compared to other blind classes . In swimming , the B1 class is significantly slower than B2 and B3 classes in 100 meter freestyle . The B3 class is significantly faster than B1 and B2 in the 100 meter backstroke . 
 = = History = = 
 B3 traces its history to the early history of blind sport . There was a belief that those with vision impairment that was less severe had a competitive advantage over competitors who had more severe impairment . Classification was developed by the IBSA to insure more even competition across the different bands of visual acuity . In 1976 , the International Sports Organization for the Disabled ( ISOD ) developed a blind classification system . Parallel to this , IBSA and national blind sport associations were developing their own classification system , with the IBSA one based on visual acuity in place by 1980 . The rise of the IBSA classification system for blind sport meant the ISOD classification system failed to gain traction in blind sports competition . 
 The IBSA classification system has largely remained unchanged since it was put in place , even as the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) attempted to move towards a more functional disability and evidence based system that does not rely on medical based classification . In 2003 , the IPC made an attempt to address " the overall objective to support and co @-@ ordinate the ongoing development of accurate , reliable , consistent and credible sport focused classification systems and their implementation . " The IPC approved a classification system at the IPC General Assembly in 2007 . This classification was part of the overall blind class group , and was still medically based despite changes in other disability types . IBSA was not prepared at the time to move towards a more functional classification system that is utilized other disability groups and sports . 
 In some cases , non @-@ Paralympic , non @-@ IBSA affiliated sports have developed their own classification systems . This is the case with blind golf , where a classification existed by 1990 and was used at the Australian Open Golf Tournament for the Blind and Visually Impaired . At that time , four classifications existed and were the same as the IBSA for this class . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 Equipment utilized by competitors in the B3 class may include sighted guides , guide rails , beeping balls and clap sticks . 
 The use of a sighted guide by people in this class is dependent on the specific requirements of the sport . In athletics , where the parallel classification is T13 , runners do not use guides in competition and generally do not use them in training . In cycling , this classification uses a guide , while utilizing a tandem bicycle with the guide sitting at the front . When a cyclist is looking for a guide , they are encouraged to find one with a pace similar to their own . 
 In para @-@ alpine and para @-@ Nordic skiing , guides for B2 and B3 skiers often position themselves differently as the skiers have some vision , which means the things a guide assists with will be different from what is required of a skier who has almost no sight . The guide may ski in front of the skier and use visual cues to inform the skier of what is ahead of them on the course . 
 For S13 swimmers , a tapper may stand on the pool deck to tap the swimmer as they approach the wall . The swimmer has to bring their own tapper . Having a tapper is optional . 
 In blind archery , B3 archers must use a tactile sighting device , and be unable to use a <unk> . 
 = = Rules = = 
 There are some rule differences for the B3 classification in competition that are sport specific . In adaptive rowing 's <unk> Four boat , <unk> + , the maximum number of rowers from this class allowed in the boat is one . In athletics , T13 runners may get assistance at water stations in longer races . In blind cricket , no more than four players in this class are allowed out of the eleven total players . 
 While this classifications is open to five @-@ a @-@ side blind football , women are not eligible to compete at the Paralympic Games . This classification is eligible to play goalkeeper but in some competitions is not allowed to be a field player . 
 In judo , all three blind sport classes compete against each other , with competitors classified by weight for the purposes of competition . Weight classes use the international standards used in the Olympics . 
 In IBSA sailing competitions , the three person boat can have a maximum of five points , and must include at least one female and one male sailor on the boat . In competitions run by Blind Sailing International , this class sometimes competes only against other boats with where all the sailors are in this class . 
 In swimming , outside the use of a tapper , the swimmer competes under the normal rules governing FINA swimming competitions . 
 = Beetlejuice = 
 Beetlejuice is a 1988 American comedy fantasy film directed by Tim Burton , produced by The Geffen Film Company and distributed by Warner Bros. The plot revolves around a recently deceased young couple ( Alec Baldwin and Geena Davis ) who become ghosts haunting their former home , and an obnoxious , devious ghost named Betelgeuse ( pronounced Beetlejuice , portrayed by Michael Keaton ) from the Netherworld who tries to scare away the new inhabitants ( Catherine O 'Hara , Jeffrey Jones , and Winona Ryder ) permanently . 
 After the success of Pee @-@ wee 's Big Adventure , Burton was sent several scripts and became disheartened by their lack of imagination and originality . When he was sent Michael McDowell 's original script for Beetlejuice , Burton agreed to direct , although Larry Wilson and later Warren Skaaren were hired to rewrite it . Beetlejuice was a critical and commercial success , grossing $ 73 @.@ 7 million from a budget of $ 15 million . It won the Academy Award for Best Makeup and three Saturn Awards : Best Horror Film , Best Makeup and Best Supporting Actress for Sylvia Sidney , her final award before her death in 1999 . 
 The film spawned an animated television series that Burton produced and a planned unproduced sequel , Beetlejuice Goes Hawaiian . In 2012 , new development on a sequel was announced . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Barbara and Adam Maitland decide to spend their vacation decorating their idyllic Connecticut country home . As the two are driving home from a trip to town , Barbara swerves to avoid a dog and the car plunges into a river . After they return home , she and Adam notice that they now lack reflections and they discover a Handbook for the Recently Deceased . They then begin to suspect that they did not survive the car accident ; Adam attempts to leave the house but finds himself in a strange , otherworldly landscape covered in sand and populated by enormous <unk> . 
 The house is old and their new owners , the Deetz family , arrive from New <unk> City . Charles Deetz is a former real estate developer ; his second wife Delia is a self @-@ proclaimed sculptor ; and his goth daughter Lydia , from his first marriage , is an aspiring photographer . Under the guidance of interior designer Otho , the Deetzes transform the house into tasteless pastel @-@ toned modern art . Consulting the Handbook , the Maitlands travel to an otherworldly waiting room populated by other distressed souls , where they discover that the afterlife is structured according to a complex bureaucracy involving vouchers and <unk> . The Maitlands ' own caseworker , Juno , informs them that they must remain in the house for 125 years . If they want the Deetzes out of the house , it is up to them to scare them away . Barbara 's and Adam 's attempts at scaring the family prove ineffective . 
 Although Adam and Barbara remain invisible to Charles and Delia , teenage Lydia can see the ghost couple and befriends them . Against Juno 's advice , the Maitlands contact the miscreant Beetlejuice , Juno 's former assistant and now freelance " bio @-@ exorcist " ghost , to scare away the Deetzes . However , Betelgeuse quickly offends the Maitlands with his crude and morbid demeanor ; and they reconsider hiring him , though too late to stop him from wreaking havoc on the Deetzes . The small town 's charm and the supernatural events inspire Charles to pitch his boss Maxie Dean on transforming the town into a tourist hot spot , but Maxie wants proof of the ghosts . Using the Handbook for the Recently Deceased , Otho conducts what he thinks is a séance and summons Adam and Barbara , but they begin to decay and die , as Otho had unwittingly performed an exorcism instead . Horrified , Lydia summons Betelgeuse for help ; but he agrees to help her only on the condition that she marry him , enabling him to freely cause chaos in the mortal world . Betelgeuse saves the Maitlands and disposes of Maxie , his wife , and Otho . Betelgeuse then prepares a wedding before a ghastly minister . The Maitlands intervene before the ceremony is completed , with Barbara riding a <unk> through the house to devour Betelgeuse . 
 Finally , the Deetzes and Maitlands agree to live in harmony within the house . Betelgeuse , meanwhile , is stuck in the after @-@ life waiting room ; there he antagonizes a witch doctor , who shrinks his head . Being Beetlejuice , however , he remains upbeat : " This could be a good look for me . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 The financial success of Pee @-@ wee 's Big Adventure ( 1985 ) meant that Burton was considered a " bankable " director , and he began working on a script for Batman with Sam Hamm . While Warner Bros. was willing to pay for the script 's development , they were less willing to green @-@ light Batman . Meanwhile , Burton had begun reading the scripts that had been sent his way , and was disheartened by their lack of imagination and originality , one of them being Hot to Trot . David Geffen handed Burton the script for Beetlejuice , written by McDowell ( who wrote the script for " The Jar " , an episode of Alfred Hitchcock Presents directed by Burton ) . 
 Wilson was brought on board to continue rewriting work with McDowell , though Burton replaced McDowell and Wilson with Skaaren due to creative differences . Burton 's original choice for Betelgeuse was Sammy Davis , Jr . , but Geffen suggested Keaton . Burton was unfamiliar with Keaton 's work , but was quickly convinced . Burton cast Ryder upon seeing her in Lucas . O 'Hara quickly signed on , while Burton claimed it took a lot of time to convince other cast members to sign , as " they didn 't know what to think of the weird script . " 
 Beetlejuice 's budget was $ 15 million , with just $ 1 million given over to visual effects work . Considering the scale and scope of the effects , which included stop motion , replacement animation , prosthetic makeup , puppetry and blue screen , it was always Burton 's intention to make the style similar to the B movies he grew up with as a child . " I wanted to make them look cheap and purposely fake @-@ looking , " Burton remarked . Burton had wanted to hire Anton Furst as production designer after being impressed with his work on The Company of Wolves ( 1984 ) and Full Metal Jacket ( 1987 ) , though Furst was committed on High Spirits , a choice he later regretted . He hired Bo Welch , his future collaborator on Edward Scissorhands ( 1990 ) and Batman Returns ( 1992 ) . The test screenings were met with positive feedback and prompted Burton to film an epilogue featuring Betelgeuse foolishly angering a witch doctor . Warner Bros. disliked the title Beetlejuice and wanted to call the film House Ghosts . As a joke , Burton suggested the name Scared <unk> and was horrified when the studio actually considered using it . Exterior shots were filmed in East Corinth , Vermont . 
 = = = Story development = = = 
 McDowell 's original script is far less comedic and much darker ; the Maitlands ' car crash is depicted graphically , with Barbara 's arm being crushed and the couple screaming for help as they slowly drown in the river . A reference to this remained in all versions of the script , as Barbara remarks that her arm feels cold upon returning home as a ghost . Instead of possessing the Deetzes and forcing them to dance during dinner , the Maitlands cause a vine @-@ patterned carpet to come to life and attack the Deetzes by tangling them to their chairs . 
 The character of Betelgeuse — envisioned by McDowell as a winged demon who takes on the form of a short Middle Eastern man — is also intent on killing the Deetzes rather than scaring them , and wants to rape Lydia instead of marry her . In this version of the script , Betelgeuse only needs to be exhumed from his grave to be summoned , after which he is free to wreak havoc ; he cannot be summoned or controlled by saying his name three times , and wanders the world freely , appearing to torment different characters in different manifestations . McDowell 's script also featured a second Deetz child , nine @-@ year @-@ old Cathy , the only person able to see the Maitlands and the subject of Betelgeuse 's homicidal wrath in the film 's climax , during which he mutilates her while in the form of a rabid squirrel before revealing his true form . 
 The film was to have concluded with the Maitlands , Deetzes , and Otho conducting an exorcism ritual that destroys Betelgeuse , and the Maitlands transforming into miniature versions of themselves and moving into Adam 's model of their home , which they refurbish to look like their house before the Deetzes moved in . 
 Co @-@ author and producer Larry Wilson has talked about the negative reaction to McDowell 's original script at Universal where he was employed at the time : 
 I won 't name names here , but I worked at Universal Studios at the time . I was director of development for the director Walter Hill . I had a very good relationship with a very prominent executive at Universal . He liked me , and he liked what I was doing with Walter , and the material I was bringing in . 
 I gave him Beetlejuice to read , and I gave it to him on a Friday , and on Monday his assistant called me and said well , he wants to meet with you . My initial reaction was wow ! He 'd read it . He must have loved it or he wouldn 't have wanted to see me so soon . But I went into his office , and he literally said ' what are you doing with your career ? ' 
 <unk> piece of weirdness , this is what you 're going to go out into the world with ? You 're developing into a very good executive . You 've got great taste in material . Why are you going to squander all that for this piece of shit ' , was basically what he was saying . It goes to show , right ? Shortly after that , we sold it to the Geffen Company [ ... ] 
 Skaaren 's rewrite drastically shifted the film 's tone , indicating the graphic nature of the Maitlands ' deaths while depicting the afterlife as a complex bureaucracy . Skaaren 's rewrite also altered McDowell 's depiction of the limbo that keeps Barbara and Adam trapped inside of their home ; in McDowell 's script , it takes the form of a massive , empty void filled with giant clock gears that shred the fabric of time and space as they move . Skaaren had Barbara and Adam encounter different <unk> every time they leave their home , including the " clock world " , and the <unk> 's world , identified as Saturn 's moon Titan . Skaaren also introduced the leitmotif of music accompanying Barbara and Adam 's ghostly hijinks , although his script specified R & B tunes instead of Harry Belafonte , and was to have concluded with Lydia dancing to " When a Man Loves a Woman " . 
 Skaaren 's first draft retained some of the more sinister characteristics of McDowell 's Betelgeuse , but toned down the character to make him a troublesome pervert rather than blatantly murderous . Betelgeuse 's true form was that of the Middle Eastern man , and much of his dialogue was written in African American Vernacular English . This version concluded with the Deetzes returning to New York and leaving Lydia in the care of the Maitlands , who , with Lydia 's help , transform the exterior of their home into a stereotypical haunted house while returning the interior to its previous state . 
 Retrospectively , McDowell was impressed at how many people made the connection between the film 's title and the star Betelgeuse . He added that the writers and producers had received a suggestion the sequel be named <unk> @-@ 69 202 after the former star of SN 1987A . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The Beetlejuice soundtrack , first released in 1988 on LP , CD and cassette tape , features most of the score ( written and arranged by Danny Elfman ) from the film . The soundtrack features two original recordings performed by Harry Belafonte used in the film : " The Banana Boat Song " and " Jump in the Line ( Shake , <unk> ) " . Two other vintage Belafonte recordings that appeared in the film are absent from the soundtrack : " Man Smart , Woman Smarter " and " Sweetheart from Venezuela " . The soundtrack entered the Billboard 200 albums chart the week ending June 25 , 1988 at # 145 , peaking two weeks later at # 118 and spending a total of six weeks on the chart . This was after the film had already fallen out of the top 10 and before the video release later in October . " Day @-@ O " received a fair amount of airplay at the time in support of the soundtrack . 
 The complete score ( with the Belafonte tracks included ) was released in both the DVD and the Blu @-@ ray as an isolated music track in the audio settings menu ; this version of the audio track consists entirely of ' clean ' musical cues , uninterrupted by dialogue or sound effects . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Beetlejuice opened theatrically in the United States on April 1 , 1988 , earning $ 8 @,@ 030 @,@ 897 in its opening weekend . The film eventually grossed $ 73 @,@ 707 @,@ 461 in North America . Beetlejuice was a financial success , recouping its $ 15 million budget , and was the 10th @-@ highest grossing film of 1988 . Based on 42 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , Beetlejuice received an average 81 % overall approval rating . For comparison , Metacritic received an average score of 67 from the 13 reviews collected . 
 Pauline Kael referred to the film as a " comedy classic " , while Jonathan Rosenbaum of Chicago Reader gave a highly positive review . Rosenbaum felt Beetlejuice carried originality and creativity that did not exist in other films . Vincent Canby of The New York Times called it " a farce for our time " and wished Keaton could have received more screen time . MaryAnn Johanson was impressed with the casting , production design and jokes . Desson Howe of the Washington Post felt Beetlejuice had " the perfect balance of <unk> , comedy and horror " . 
 Janet Maslin of The New York Times gave the film a negative review , stating that the film " tries anything and everything for effect , and only occasionally manages something marginally funny ; " and " is about as funny as a shrunken head . " Roger Ebert gave the film two out of four stars , writing that he " would have been more interested if the screenplay had preserved their [ Alec Baldwin and Geena Davis ] sweet romanticism and cut back on the slapstick . " For Keaton 's character , Ebert called him " unrecognizable behind pounds of makeup " and stated that " his scenes don 't seem to fit with the other action . " 
 = = Accolades = = 
 At the 61st Academy Awards , Beetlejuice won the Academy Award for Best Makeup , ( Steve La Porte , Ve Neill and Robert Short . ) while the British Academy of Film and Television Arts nominated the film with Best Visual Effects and Makeup at the 42nd British Academy Film Awards . 
 Beetlejuice won Best Horror Film and Best Make @-@ up at the 1988 Saturn Awards . Sidney also won the Saturn for Best Supporting Actress for her performance as Juno , and the film received five other nominations : Direction for Burton , Writing for McDowell and Skaaren , Best Supporting Actor for Keaton , Music for Elfman and Special Effects . Beetlejuice was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation . Beetlejuice was 88th in the American Film Institute 's list of Best Comedies . 
 = = = American Film Institute lists = = = 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Laughs – # 88 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : 
 " I 'm the ghost with the most , babe . " – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Songs : 
 " Day @-@ O / The Banana Boat Song " – Nominated 
 = = Animated series = = 
 Due to the film 's financial success , a Beetlejuice animated television series was created for ABC . The show ran for four seasons ( the final season airing on Fox ) , lasting from September 9 , 1989 to December 6 , 1991 . Burton served as executive producer . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In 1990 , Burton hired Jonathan Gems to write a sequel titled Beetlejuice Goes Hawaiian . " Tim thought it would be funny to match the surfing backdrop of a beach movie with some sort of German Expressionism , because they 're totally wrong together , " Gems said . The story followed the Deetz family moving to Hawaii , where Charles is developing a resort . They soon discover that his company is building on the burial ground of an ancient Hawaiian Kahuna . The spirit comes back from the afterlife to cause trouble , and Betelgeuse becomes a hero by winning a surf contest with magic . Keaton and Ryder agreed to do the film , on the condition that Burton directed , but both he and Keaton became distracted with Batman Returns . 
 Burton was still interested in Beetlejuice Goes Hawaiian in early 1991 . Impressed with Daniel Waters ' work on Heathers , Burton approached him for a rewrite . However , he eventually signed Waters to write the script for Batman Returns . By August 1993 , producer David Geffen hired Pamela Norris ( Troop Beverly Hills , Saturday Night Live ) to rewrite . Warner Bros. approached Kevin Smith in 1996 to rewrite the script , though Smith turned down the offer in favor of Superman Lives . Smith responded with , " Didn 't we say all we needed to say in the first Beetlejuice ? Must we go tropical ? " In March 1997 , Gems released a statement saying " The Beetlejuice Goes Hawaiian script is still owned by The Geffen Film Company and it will likely never get made . You really couldn 't do it now anyway . Winona is too old for the role , and the only way they could make it would be to totally recast it . " 
 In September 2011 , Warner Bros. hired Seth Grahame @-@ Smith , who collaborated with Burton on Dark Shadows and Abraham Lincoln : Vampire Hunter , to write and produce a sequel to Beetlejuice . Grahame @-@ Smith signed on with the intention of doing " a story that is worthy of us actually doing this for real , something that is not just about cashing in , is not just about forcing a remake or a reboot down someone 's throat . " He was also adamant that Keaton would return and that Warner Bros. would not recast the role . Burton and Keaton have not officially signed on but will return if the script is good enough . Grahame @-@ Smith met with Keaton in February 2012 , " We talked for a couple of hours and talked about big picture stuff . It 's a priority for Warner Bros. It 's a priority for Tim . [ Michael 's ] been wanting to do it for 20 years and he 'll talk to anybody about it who will listen . " The story will be set in a real time frame from 1988 ; " This will be a true 26 or 27 years later sequel . What 's great is that for Beetlejuice [ sic ] , time means nothing in the afterlife , but the world outside is a different story . " 
 In November 2013 , Ryder hinted at a possible return for the sequel as well by saying , " I 'm kind of sworn to secrecy but it sounds like it might be happening . It 's 27 years later . And I have to say , I love Lydia Deetz so much . She was such a huge part of me . I would be really interested in what she is doing 27 years later . " Ryder confirmed that she would only consider making a sequel if Burton and Keaton were involved . In December 2014 , Burton stated , " It 's a character that I love and I miss and I miss actually working with Michael . There 's only one Betelgeuse . We 're working on a script and I think it 's probably closer than ever and I 'd love to work with him again . " In January 2015 , writer Grahame @-@ Smith told Entertainment Weekly that the script was finished and that he and Burton intended to start filming Beetlejuice 2 by the end of the year , and that both Keaton and Ryder would return in their respective roles . In August 2015 , on Late Night with Seth Meyers , Ryder confirmed she would be reprising her role in the sequel . In May 2016 , Burton stated , " It 's something that I really would like to do in the right circumstances , but it 's one of those films where it has to be right . It 's not a kind of a movie that cries out [ for a sequel ] , it 's not the Beetlejuice trilogy . So it 's something that if the elements are right — because I do love the character and Michael 's amazing as that character , so yeah we 'll see . But there 's nothing concrete yet . " 
 = = Theme park attractions = = 
 Beetlejuice has had several theme park shows at Universal Studios Hollywood , Universal Studios Florida and Universal Studios Japan . Beetlejuice 's Rock and Roll Graveyard Revue ran at the Hollywood park from 1992 until 1999 while the Florida park ran the show from May 1992 until January 2016 . The character of Beetlejuice was also in the now defunct " Extreme Ghostbusters : The Great Fright Way ! " . He was also a featured part of Halloween Horror Nights in the early days of the Orlando park . 
 = Moses Hazen = 
 Moses Hazen ( June 1 , 1733 – February 5 , 1803 ) was a Brigadier General in the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War . Born in the Province of Massachusetts Bay , he saw action in the French and Indian War with Rogers ' Rangers . His service included particularly brutal raids during the Expulsion of the Acadians and the 1759 Siege of Quebec . He was formally commissioned into the British Army shortly before the war ended , and retired on half @-@ pay outside Montreal , Canada , where he and Gabriel Christie , another British officer , made extensive land purchases in partnership . During his lifetime he acquired land in Quebec , New Hampshire , Vermont , and New York , but lost most of his Quebec land due to litigation with Christie and the effects of the revolution . 
 In 1775 he became involved in the American invasion of Quebec early in the American Revolutionary War , and served with the Continental Army in the 1775 Battle of Quebec . He went on to lead his own regiment ( the 2nd Canadian , also known as " Congress ' Own " ) throughout the war , seeing action in the 1777 Philadelphia campaign and at Yorktown in 1781 . He was frequently involved in litigation , both military and civil , and constantly petitioned Congress for compensation of losses and expenses incurred due to the war . He supported similar efforts by men from his regiment who were unable to return to Quebec because of their support for the American war effort . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Moses Hazen was born in Haverhill , a frontier town in the Province of Massachusetts Bay , to an old New England Puritan family . Some histories that mention Hazen sometimes indicate that he was Jewish . A genealogist clearly documents Hazen 's lineage to England , where the family name was <unk> . Contemporaries of Hazen seem to have thought he was Jewish ; for example , Sergeant James Thompson , in his diary The Fraser ’ s Highlanders , describes meeting him during the retreat from the Battle of Sainte @-@ Foy : " On the way , I fell in with a Captain Moses Hazen , a jew " . 
 = = French and Indian War = = 
 Hazen was apprenticed to a tanner when the French and Indian War broke out . In 1756 , he enlisted with the local militia , which included a number of family members . He first served at Fort William Henry near Lake George , where he probably first met , and may have served under , Robert Rogers of Rogers ' Rangers . Rogers eventually recommended him for an officer 's commission in a new company of the Rangers ; in 1758 , after having worked for his brother providing supplies for the British Siege of Louisbourg , he was commissioned as a first lieutenant in John McCurdy 's company of the Rangers at Fort Edward . In McCurdy 's company , he saw action at Louisbourg , including the initial landings , when the action was quite fierce . 
 After Louisbourg , the company was stationed first at Fort Frederick ( Saint John , New Brunswick ) , and then at Fort St. Anne , where the company was part of a campaign against Indians and Acadians that had taken refuge there from the ongoing expulsion of the Acadians . These raids were sometimes quite brutal ; the company was known to scalp Acadian settlers . In one particularly brutal incident , Hazen was responsible for the scalping of six men , and the burning of four others , along with two women and three children , in a house he set on fire . Joseph Bellefontaine , a leader of the local militia and the father of one of the women , claimed that he was forced to witness this event in an attempt to coerce his cooperation with the rangers . ( Bellefontaine escaped into the woods with two of his grandchildren . ) General Jeffrey Amherst , who did not hear of the incident until after he had promoted Hazen to captain , noted , " I am sorry that to say what I have since heard of that affair has sullied his merit with me as I shall always disapprove of killing women and helpless children . " 
 In January 1759 , Captain McCurdy was killed when a tree felled by one of his men fell on him ; Hazen was given command of the company . Later in 1759 , his company was at the siege of Quebec , where the company was primarily engaged in scouting and raiding in the countryside ; he was away on one of those raids during the Battle of the Plains of Abraham . In another notable atrocity that may have involved Hazen 's company , a priest and thirty parishioners in a parish near Quebec were killed and scalped . 
 Hazen also fought at the 1760 Battle of Sainte @-@ Foy , where he was severely wounded in the thigh . In February 1761 , he purchased a commission as a first Lieutenant in the 44th Regiment of Foot in the British Army . He spent the remainder of the war on garrison duty at Montreal , retiring on half @-@ pay in 1763 . General James Murray wrote approvingly of Hazen in 1761 , " He discovered so much still bravery and good conduct as would justly entitle him to every military reward he could ask or demand " . 
 = = Land development = = 
 During the siege of Quebec , Hazen had met Gabriel Christie , then a deputy quartermaster . Christie owned some land in the Richelieu River valley south of Montreal , and wanted to expand his holdings . ( Christie later became one of the largest landowners in Quebec . ) After the war , Christie and Hazen jointly purchased the seigneuries of <unk> and Bleury , located on the east bank of the Richelieu near Fort Saint @-@ Jean . They also leased land on the west side of river from the Baron of Longueuil . These holdings gave them almost exclusive control over the land holdings around Saint @-@ Jean , which is the northernmost navigable point reachable from Lake Champlain . 
 Christie , who was still in military service , was frequently away from the land , so Hazen developed the land while Christie provided the funding . Hazen constructed a manor house at Iberville , and two mills , and set about selling timber and other business endeavours . In 1765 , Hazen was also appointed a deputy land surveyor , and a justice of the peace . As part of his business dealings , he offered General Thomas Gage , then in command of British forces in New York City , facilities and lumber for military use . Gage was uninterested at the time , letting Hazen know that he would keep the offer in mind , if the need for military movements became necessary in the area . 
 Hazen expanded the business of the seigneuries , but his aggressive development also incurred debts , which caused friction with Christie . In 1770 , Christie , unhappy with the debts , eventually demanded an accounting . This ultimately led to a division of the holdings , with Hazen receiving the southern portion of the Bleury <unk> , styled Bleury @-@ Sud . Hazen and Christie were in and out of court for years afterward over control of these lands ; Christie eventually won complete control over those lands after the American Revolution . 
 In 1762 Hazen 's brother John settled Haverhill , New Hampshire , in the far north of that province on the east side of the Connecticut River , and in 1764 Jacob Bayley settled Newbury , in what is now Vermont , across the river from Haverhill . Hazen had shares in both of these settlements ; he also acquired land west of the Connecticut River in what is now Bradford , Vermont . It was at this time that the idea of constructing a road from there to Saint @-@ Jean was first raised ; this idea surfaced again during the American Revolutionary War , when George Washington authorized construction of what became known as the Bayley Hazen Military Road . 
 His land developments continued to grow in 1764 when he joined the Saint John River Society , and organization created by a group of military officers for the purpose of developing land along the Saint John River , then in Nova Scotia ( now New Brunswick ) . His <unk> included Thomas Gage , Frederick Haldimand , William Johnson , and Thomas Hutchinson . 
 In the fall of 1770 Hazen married Charlotte de la <unk> , a woman from a good family in Montreal . They settled down near Saint @-@ Jean , where they built a house and began farming . 
 = = Revolutionary War = = 
 = = = Continental Army arrives = = = 
 At the start of the Revolutionary War in 1775 , Hazen was living on half @-@ pay in Saint @-@ Jean . When Benedict Arnold raided Fort Saint @-@ Jean on May 18 , Hazen reported the news of that raid ( as well as the capture of Fort Ticonderoga ) first to the military authorities in Montreal , and then to Governor Guy Carleton in Quebec , before returning home to consider the consequences the conflict might have on him and his lands . 
 The American invasion of Quebec arrived near his home at Saint @-@ Jean on September 6 . On that day , Hazen met with General Philip Schuyler , explaining to him that Fort Saint @-@ Jean was well @-@ defended and unlikely to be taken by siege , and that the local habitants were unlikely to assist the American effort . This gloomy portrait led Schuyler to consider retreating ; but the arrival of additional American troops , and a more optimistic assessment from James Livingston , a grain merchant living near Chambly , encouraged the Americans to renew the attack . Livingston went on to form the 1st Canadian Regiment in November 1775 . 
 = = = Imprisonment and release = = = 
 On September 17 , Brigadier General Richard Montgomery , now commanding the American forces , began to besiege Fort St. Jean . The next day , a detachment of American forces under the command of John Brown arrested Hazen north of the fort . However , a British sortie from the fort forced Brown 's men to retreat ; Hazen ended up in British hands . Major Charles Preston , the British commander , was mistrustful of Hazen , and sent him to Montreal under the guard of Claude de Lorimier . Brigadier General Richard Prescott , unhappy with Hazen 's explanations of his movements , imprisoned him . 
 He was held in poor conditions for 54 days . Following the fall of Fort St. Jean , the British withdrew from Montreal , transporting prisoners on one of the many ships used in the evacuation . Most of this British fleet was captured by the Americans , who released Hazen and other political prisoners who had supported them . Unhappy with the treatment he received by the British , Hazen joined the American forces , which were on their way to Quebec City . He did this in spite of the fact that the Americans had done significant damage to his estate during the siege , plundering the estate for supplies , and using his house as a barracks . 
 = = = Service in Quebec = = = 
 Hazen served in the Battle of Quebec , and was one of two men ( the other was Edward Antill ) sent to report the devastating loss to the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia . The Congress , in recognition for his efforts , gave Hazen a commission as a colonel , leading the Continental Army 's 2nd Canadian Regiment . ( Antill was commissioned the regiment 's lieutenant colonel . ) The regiment was often referred to as " Hazen 's " or " Congress ' Own " , the latter because the regiment was established by Congress and was not part of any state quotas . Hazen was initially offered a position as brigadier general , but he refused , requesting instead a colonel 's commission , and indemnification against losses caused by the conflict . ( His property had already been significantly damaged by the American action around St. Jean . ) Hazen was fortunate in arriving in Philadelphia before John Duggan , one of Livingston 's captains , to whom Benedict Arnold had earlier promised the commission for the 2nd Canadian . 
 Hazen and Antill returned to Quebec , where Hazen was stationed at Montreal while Antill recruited men for the regiment . Hazen was briefly in command of the defenses of Montreal for the Americans , from late March to mid @-@ April 1776 , when General David Wooster took command of the American forces outside Quebec , and Benedict Arnold assumed command of the Montreal garrison . During the time he was in command , Hazen dispatched Timothy Bedel and 390 men to fortify The Cedars , about 40 miles ( 64 km ) upriver from Montreal ; these forces surrendered to a British @-@ Native force during the Battle of The Cedars in May . 
 = = = Trouble with Arnold = = = 
 Following Arnold 's assumption of command at Montreal , Hazen 's regiment was assigned to garrison duty at Fort Chambly . Hazen ( and likely his men ) were called as reinforcements to assist in the American response to the action at The Cedars . In council , Hazen and Arnold had a heated exchange over what actions to take ; in Arnold 's opinion , Hazen 's behavior bordered on insubordination . Arnold had previously held a high opinion of Hazen , writing that he was " a sensible , judicious officer , and well acquainted with this country " . 
 During the American retreat from Quebec in May and June 1776 , Hazen and Arnold were embroiled in a dispute that led to charges and counter @-@ charges , courts martial and other hearings , lasting into 1779 . At issue were supplies that Arnold had ordered seized from merchants in Montreal and sent to Chambly for eventual shipment south as part of the retreat . Hazen , in charge of the facilities at Chambly , refused to sign for the goods , as he recognized them as the property of friends in Montreal . In the ensuing retreat , most of these goods were plundered and lost . Arnold wanted to immediately court @-@ martial Hazen for failing to follow orders , but the arriving British army delayed any such activity until the army 's return to Fort Ticonderoga . Arnold 's opinion of Hazen clearly changed ; he wrote , " This is not the first or last order Col. Hazen has disobeyed . I think him a man of too much consequence for the post he is in . " 
 Hazen 's court martial was held on July 19 , 1776 ; he was honorably acquitted . However , there were irregularities in the proceedings ( the judge advocate was the same officer who had delivered the goods from Montreal to Chambly , so he did not testify ) , and Arnold continued to attack Hazen afterwards . In December 1776 another inquiry was held , and Hazen was again cleared of any wrongdoing . Hazen then countercharged Arnold with the plundering of the Montreal merchants ; Arnold was not cleared of these charges until a higher @-@ level inquiry in 1777 . 
 = = = Building his regiment = = = 
 Hazen 's regiment , which was significantly reduced in size by the retreat from Quebec , was assigned first to Ticonderoga , and then to Albany , in the summer and fall of 1776 , before being ordered to winter quarters at Fishkill , New York . During this time , Hazen continued recruiting , receiving permission from Congress to recruit anywhere in the United States . In the northern states he ran into difficulties , as those states were having trouble filling their own regimental lines ; he was often outbid by other recruiters . Antill , who recruited in the central states ( primarily New Jersey , Maryland , and Pennsylvania ) , had greater success . By June 1777 , the regiment reached about 700 members , out of an authorized strength of 1 @,@ 000 . The cultural differences between the original Quebec enlistees and the new recruits from the Thirteen Colonies was a regular source of friction within the regiment , and Hazen consequently kept the French @-@ speakers in companies separated from the English @-@ speakers . 
 Hazen also submitted to Congress a claim for damages to his estate in Quebec . The original bill was for $ 11 @,@ 363 ; Congress paid $ 2 @,@ 595 in October 1776 . 
 = = = Philadelphia campaign = = = 
 In May 1777 , Hazen 's regiment was ordered to join the main army at Princeton , where it was active in the Philadelphia campaign as part of John Sullivan 's brigade . Some of Hazen 's companies ( but not Hazen himself ) participated in the Battle of Staten Island ; in this action , Antill was captured . Hazen 's command during the Battle of Brandywine included the northern ( right ) end of the American line ; this position was one of those flanked by the British in their attack . Hazen made an early report indicating the presence of British troops on the American flank that turned out to be the main British thrust . His report was dismissed by General Sullivan , who wrote , after receiving other reports , that " Colo . Hazen 's Information must be wrong . " To Sullivan 's detriment , the other reports were wrong , and Hazen 's was correct ; the British flanking maneuver was instrumental in the American loss of the battle . Hazen 's regiment lost 4 officers and 73 men in the battle . In the Battle of Germantown , Hazen commanded a brigade that included in addition to his own regiment , the 2nd , 4th , and 6th Maryland Regiments . They formed part of Sullivan 's column when it marched on the town ; his regiment lost 3 officers and 19 men in the engagement . 
 = = = Bayley @-@ Hazen Road proposed = = = 
 Hazen , ever since his return to the United States in 1776 , had maintained a constant stream of communications with Congress , primarily on the subject of Canada . In January 1778 , these communications bore some fruit , when , with French assistance , planning for an invasion of Canada began . Hazen was assigned the job of deputy quartermaster for this operation . However , the planning was hampered by supply and staffing difficulties , and never got off the ground . It was ultimately cancelled by Congress in March 1778 . 
 This failure did not deter Hazen from offering a new route for invading Canada . This route went from Newbury , where Hazen owned land and knew the area , to Saint Francis , Quebec . On July 12 , Hazen departed Newbury to scout the route . By July 25 , he had returned to White Plains ; the effort was abandoned for the time being because the manpower was needed in the New York area . Plans for possible attacks against Quebec based on routes departing from the Newbury area were again contemplated in the fall of 1778 , but Washington continued to resist the idea . 
 = = = Construction work on the road = = = 
 In the spring and summer of 1779 , Hazen 's regiment and that of Timothy Bedel worked on construction of the Bayley Hazen Military Road , once again with the eventual goal of launching an invasion . Part of the road , between Newbury and Peacham had been constructed in 1776 by Jacob Bayley . Hazen supervised the development of the road up to what is now called <unk> Notch in northern Vermont . Work was discontinued on the road in August after word was received that the British were preparing a military force at Saint @-@ Jean to attempt capture of the construction crew . General Washington had never intended to send an invasion along this route ; the entire works was a ruse to divert British attention , and deter them from launching an invasion . Washington wrote to Congress that the work " was for the purpose of exciting jealousies at Quebec and at the Enemy 's posts on the St. <unk> , and of making a diversion in favor of the late expedition under general Sullivan ... this very happily succeeded " . 
 = = = Service around New York = = = 
 Hazen and his regiment spent the winter at Washington 's main encampment in Morristown , New Jersey . There Hazen was again involved in litigation ; he was rejected for service on a court martial considering charges against Benedict Arnold due to their previous confrontations , and he also opened complaints of supply mismanagement during the summer 's <unk> activities . A detailed review of the army in the spring of 1780 by Baron von Steuben led to the recommendation that the regiments of Hazen and Livingston be merged , as Livingston 's had shrunk to 103 men . Hazen and Livingston had a political tussle over seniority ; although Hazen lost the claim to seniority , he ended up in command of the combined regiment . 
 In January 1780 the regiment was involved in a failed attack on Staten Island ; word of the operation leaked to the British . Hazen 's regiment was then transferred to the brigade of Enoch Poor . By the time the transfer was effected , Hazen was given command of the entire brigade , although repeated requests he had made for promotion to brigadier general were rejected . During the summer the brigade was relocated to the West Point area . While en route , Hazen allowed his men to stop for water , breaking the army column . Von Steuben ordered Hazen 's arrest for this transgression of military discipline . Hazen was acquitted , and promptly countercharged von Steuben with behavior unbecoming an officer and gentleman ; von Steuben apologized . 
 Hazen 's regiment was garrisoned opposite West Point that fall when British Major John André was captured and General Arnold defected . One hundred of Hazen 's men , including his nephew , Benjamin Mooers , witnessed André 's hanging . 
 = = = Yorktown = = = 
 On June 29 , 1781 , Hazen was finally promoted to Brigadier General and assigned command of a brigade under Lafayette during the Siege of Yorktown . Hazen 's brigade served on the right of the line , and was deeply involved in the October 14 battles for the redoubts . 
 Following the British surrender , Hazen and his unit were given prisoner guard duty at Lancaster , Pennsylvania . While on this duty , a misstep by Hazen caused a minor diplomatic incident , known as the " Asgill Affair " . The British accused an American soldier of spying , and were threatening to hang him . George Washington threatened to hang a British soldier if this happened , and instructed Hazen to choose an officer whose rank was similar to that of the accused American . The man he chose by lot , Charles Asgill , should have been ineligible for selection due to the terms of the Yorktown surrender . The accused American was eventually acquitted , but Asgill 's plight drew the attention of Marie Antoinette ; Washington received a letter from the French foreign minister asking for a pardon . 
 During the winter of 1781 – 2 Hazen also took time off for personal business . Among his dealings was a partnership with Timothy Bedel to acquire land along the military road they had built in Vermont . 
 = = After the war = = 
 After the war , General Hazen , unable to return to Quebec , received a grant of land in northern New York . He was active for many years on behalf of the men who served under him and their families , especially those that originally came from Quebec , in their quest for compensation for their losses . He also continued his litigious ways — he was involved in an ongoing string of legal actions until his death . He died in 1803 in Troy , New York where he was buried . His nephew , Benjamin Mooers , was ultimately responsible for untangling many of Hazen 's affairs . 
 On May 26 , 1828 , Congress authorized a payment of $ 3 @,@ 998 @.@ 81 to Hazen 's heirs in compensation for the half @-@ pay lost to him when he joined the American forces . 
 Hazen was an original member of the Rhode Island Society of the Cincinnati . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 namesake of Bayley Hazen Military Road 
 = Milan C. Miskovsky = 
 Milan Carl Miskovsky ( May 11 , 1926 – October 15 , 2009 ) was an American who served as a member of the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) . He helped negotiate the release of Gary Powers in 1962 and over 1 @,@ 000 prisoners captured during the 1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion . After retiring from the CIA , Miskovsky worked for multiple federal agencies , including the Federal Maritime Commission and the Treasury Department . 
 Following the 1967 Detroit riot , Miskovsky was appointed to lead an investigation into the cause of the unrest and interview civil rights leaders for the Kerner Commission . His report ultimately concluded that America was becoming divided into two separate societies based on skin color , and that the societies were inherently unequal . 
 Miskovsky would later serve as the director of the Lawyers ' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law and the general counsel of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board . He helped to establish the Archdiocesan Legal Network in 1989 and worked in private practice from 1981 until his retirement in 2003 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Miskovsky was born on May 11 , 1926 in Chicago , Illinois , the son of Jaroslav Miskovsky , an immigrant from Czechoslovakia , and Ruth Miskovsky ( nee Patera ) . He grew up during the Great Depression , but his family did not suffer significant economic harm . Miskovsky 's father was heavily involved in Chicago politics , and Miskovsky would frequently help him deliver food and clothes to people unable to afford them . 
 He graduated from the University of Michigan in 1949 and worked for the U.S. Forest Service for the next two years . He was reassigned to Washington , D.C. in 1951 , where he was hired by the CIA to investigate forests of the Eastern Bloc . In 1956 , Miskovsky obtained a law degree from the George Washington University Law School . He joined the legal office of the CIA , and was eventually promoted to the rank of assistant general counsel . 
 = = U @-@ 2 incident = = 
 In 1960 , the Soviet Union shot down a United States U @-@ 2 spy plane . The Soviets captured its pilot , Gary Powers , and tried him for committing espionage against the Soviet Union . At first , the United States believed that Powers could be freed by crafting an argument regarding international principles . To this end , Miskovsky and two other lawyers ( Alexander W. Parker and Frank Rogers ) wrote a brief stating that Power 's U @-@ 2 plane did not violate Soviet airspace any more than Sputnik violated American airspace . However , the Soviet Union refused to allow foreigners to defend Powers . Powers was ultimately defended by a lawyer who acted as a spokesman for the Soviet government . 
 The Soviets ultimately sentenced Powers to a decade in prison . Working with lawyer James B. Donovan , Miskovsky negotiated with Soviet representatives . Eventually , they agreed upon a trade : Gary Powers would be released in exchange for Soviet spy Rudolf Abel held by the United States . Both sides agreed and Powers was released in 1962 . 
 = = Bay of Pigs invasion = = 
 In April 1961 , a 1 @,@ 400 @-@ man force of Cuban exiles invaded Cuba in an attempt to end the regime of Fidel Castro . The invasion was a failure and two @-@ hundred of the exiles were killed while an additional 1 @,@ 200 were captured . Miskovsky , working with lawyer and lead negotiator James Donovan , and Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy , negotiated a release for the prisoners in return for around fifty million dollars in medicine , food and other supplies . The captured Cubans were released days before Christmas . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Miskovsky left the CIA in 1964 , and worked for the Federal Maritime Commission and the Treasury Department for four years . In 1967 , Miskovsky was appointed to lead an investigation concerning the 1967 Detroit riot for the Kerner Commission . During the investigation , Miskovsky interviewed civil rights leaders such as Martin Luther King , Jr . Miskovsky 's report concluded that the United States was transitioning into two separate societies , one black and the other white , and that the societies were inherently unequal . In 1968 , Miskovsky was appointed the director of Lawyers ' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law , an organization which gave legal aid to those whose civil liberties were violated . From 1977 to 1981 , during the administration of President Jimmy Carter , Miskovsky served as general counsel for the Federal Home Loan Bank Board . 
 From 1981 until his retirement in 2003 , Miskovsky worked for Kirkland & Ellis , where he specialized in environmental law . In 1989 , Miskovsky helped establish the Archdiocesan Legal Network , a free legal clinic run by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Washington . The clinic aided people with non @-@ criminal legal issues such as bankruptcy , evictions , suspended licenses or delayed social security checks . Miskovsky was originally tasked with recruiting other lawyers for the clinic , but was eventually promoted to chairmen of the clinic 's board . 
 Miskovsky died of lung cancer on October 15 , 2009 in Washington , D.C. 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Miskovsky married Anne Miskovsky ( nee Grogan ) , a fellow member of the Central Intelligence Agency , in 1952 . The marriage lasted until 2004 , when Anne Miskovsky died of leukemia . 
 Miskovsky was a member of the Holy Trinity Catholic Church in Georgetown . In 1987 , he and his wife served as the chairs of the Holy Trinity Parish bicentennial celebration . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Miskovsky , Milan ; Van Hook , Matthew ( 1976 ) . " Regulation of Forestry Related Nonpoint Source Pollution Under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 " . Natural Resources Lawyer 9 ( 4 ) : 645 – 671 . Retrieved 18 July 2015 . 
 Frank , M. ; Miller , David ; Miskovsky , Milan ; Adams , Charles ( 1979 ) . " Forest Resources Committee " . Natural Resources Lawyer 12 ( 1 ) : 105 – 109 . 
 Miskovsky , Milan ; Griffith , Janice ; Fleming , Joseph ( 1983 ) . " Recent Developments in Urban Environment Law : Committee on Urban Development " . The Urban Lawyer 15 ( 4 ) : 977 – 984 . 
 = Conservation of slow lorises = 
 Slow lorises are nocturnal strepsirrhine primates in the genus Nycticebus that live in the rainforests of South and Southeast Asia . They are threatened by habitat loss and fragmentation from deforestation , selective logging , and slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture , as well as by collection and hunting for the wildlife trade , including the exotic pet trade , and for use in traditional medicine and as bushmeat . Because of these and other threats , all five species of slow loris are listed as either " Vulnerable " or " Endangered " by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . Their conservation status was originally listed as " Least Concern " in 2000 because of imprecise population surveys and the frequency in which these primates were found in animal markets . Because of their rapidly declining populations and local extinctions , their status was updated and in 2007 the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) elevated them to Appendix I , which prohibits international commercial trade . Local laws also protect slow lorises from hunting and trade , but enforcement is lacking in most areas . 
 Traditional beliefs regarding slow lorises have been part of the folklore of Southeast Asia for at least several hundred years . Their remains are buried under houses and roads to bring good luck , and every part of their body is used in traditional medicine to make products ranging from love potions to unproven cures for cancer , leprosy , epilepsy , and sexually transmitted diseases . The primary users of this traditional medicine are urban , middle @-@ aged women who are reluctant to consider alternatives . 
 Despite being poor pets that are difficult to care for , with a dangerous toxic bite and a sleep cycle opposite to that of humans , a large number of slow lorises are traded as pets , both locally and internationally . Although it is illegal to import slow lorises for commercial sale , they are popular exotic pets in Japan , the United States , and Europe . This is mainly because of their " cute " appearance , popularized in highly viewed YouTube videos , which is due in part to their large eyes , adaptations to a nocturnal lifestyle . Hundreds of slow lorises have been confiscated at airports , but because they are easy to hide , these numbers are likely to be only a small fraction of the total number being trafficked . Traders cut or pull the teeth of slow lorises to make them appear to be an appropriate pet for small children , but this practice often leads to extreme blood loss , infection , and death . Slow lorises lacking their teeth would be unable to fend for themselves and therefore are not reintroduced into the wild . Most captive lorises in the pet trade also receive improper care and die from poor nutrition , stress , or infection . Despite this , demand has risen , and slow lorises are no longer captured opportunistically , but are now hunted on a commercial scale using flashlights , from which the animals do not flee . 
 Connected protected areas are important for the conservation of slow lorises because these primates are not adapted to travel long distances on the ground . Training for enforcement officials helps improve identification and the awareness of their legal protection . Sanctuaries and rescue facilities are available to provide both temporary and lifelong care for confiscated slow lorises . Zoo populations of some species have not bred much and have grown too old to reproduce , although the pygmy slow loris is doing well at some facilities , such as the San Diego Zoo . 
 = = Background = = 
 Slow lorises ( genus Nycticebus ) are primates that belong to the suborder Strepsirrhini . They are found throughout South and Southeast Asia and the surrounding islands , and live in the upper canopy of tropical rainforests . They are nocturnal , sleeping during the day curled up in the fork of a tree . Slow lorises are slow and deliberate climbers and rarely come to the ground . They have a round face , woolly fur , a dark stripe down their back , and a tail that is reduced to a stump . Their head and body length ranges from 18 to 38 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 to 15 @.@ 0 in ) . Their hands and feet are strong and good at grasping for long periods of time . Slow lorises are either solitary or live in pairs ; the males are territorial and mark their territories with urine . Their diet consists of mollusks , small vertebrates , and fruit . 
 Slow lorises can produce a secretion on their brachial gland ( a gland on their arm ) which when mixed with their saliva creates a volatile , noxious toxin that can be , if necessary , delivered in a bite to an aggressor . A bite causes a painful swelling and is slow to heal ; the toxin is mild and not typically fatal , although an anaphylactic reaction is possible . 
 Five species are currently recognized . The Javan slow loris ( N. javanicus ) is native to the Indonesian island of Java , whereas the Bornean slow loris ( N. menagensis ) can be found on Borneo and nearby islands , including the Sulu Islands in the Philippines . The Sunda slow loris is found on the Indonesian island of Sumatra as well as Peninsular Malaysia , Singapore , and Thailand . The other two species are found entirely on the mainland , with the Bengal slow loris ( N. bengalensis ) native to Bangladesh , Cambodia , southern China , Northeast India , Laos , Myanmar , Thailand , and Vietnam and the pygmy slow loris ( N. pygmaeus ) found in Cambodia , Laos , Vietnam , and southern China . 
 = = Threats in the wild = = 
 Slow lorises are threatened by deforestation and the wildlife trade , which includes the exotic pet trade , traditional medicine , and bushmeat . Other threats includes road construction , selective logging , and slash and burn agriculture . Habitat fragmentation obstructs biological dispersal for these species that rely on vines and lianas to move from tree to tree . Consequently , slow lorises are found dead on power lines or are victims of roadkill in areas where roads cut between forest patches . 
 All species are listed either as " Vulnerable " or " Endangered " by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . Populations are rapidly declining , and their distribution is becoming patchy because of local extinctions throughout their range . Although all species are protected by law in every country in which they occur , conservation efforts are hindered by a lack of public awareness , since many local villagers and remoter buyers of captive specimens are unaware of their endangered status . Recognition and awareness of slow lorises is even low among national park staff . In places like Vietnam , where these nocturnal primates have commonly been found , most local villagers were not familiar with them when shown photos . Only a few older hunters recognized them , but pointed out that they had not seen them in more than 10 or 15 years . 
 Traditionally , the slow lorises were thought to consist of very few species and were considered to be common across Southeast Asia . These assumptions were due to their nocturnal behavior and their high frequency of occurrence in animal markets throughout the region . Furthermore , researchers from the 20th century and earlier perpetuated the notion that slow lorises were common by reporting them as either present or absent rather than noting low population densities in their field research . As a result , slow lorises were seldom studied , resulting in the initial " Lower Risk / least concern " ( LR / lc ) conservation status assessment on the IUCN Red List ( version 2 @.@ 3 ) in 2000 . Even in the mid @-@ 2000s , population estimates were based only on small surveys . 
 In 2009 , primatologist James Thorn used environmental niche modelling in Indonesia to supplement the poor population data gathered to date to predict the remaining available habitat for slow lorises on the islands of Sumatra , Java , and Borneo . These estimates indicated that the Javan slow loris was the most threatened by habitat loss , followed by the Sunda slow loris from Sumatra . The Bornean slow loris was in a better situation since much of its range consists of low @-@ risk areas . Both the Bengal slow loris and pygmy slow loris are found in more than 20 protected areas , although their populations are either low or insufficiently recorded . 
 In Indonesia , logging and the clearing of land for agriculture have triggered large forest fires , first in between 1982 and 1983 when 27 @,@ 000 km2 ( 10 @,@ 000 sq mi ) burned in Kalimantan , and then again between 1997 and 1998 when 23 @,@ 750 km2 ( 9 @,@ 170 sq mi ) burned in Kalimantan and Sumatra . These fires occurred within the native range of slow loris populations . 
 Although habitat loss has been significant throughout the range of the slow lorises , their decline is most closely associated with unsustainable trade , either for exotic pets or for traditional medicine . Slow lorises are abundant at the markets and are among the most commonly sold primates . Slow lorises are easy to catch because they do not leap from tree to tree , often freezing and covering their face when spotted . ( For this reason , Indonesians call them malu malu or " shy one " . ) They are hunted not only by expert hunters , but are also easily caught by opportunist villagers because of the financial reward they bring at the markets . 
 = = Traditions and beliefs affecting conservation = = 
 Traditional beliefs and uses for slow lorises vary , and many practices appear to have deep roots going back at least 300 years . Oral traditions suggest these practices go back even further . In the late 1800s and early 1900s , it was reported that the people from the interior of the island of Borneo believed that slow lorises were the gatekeepers for the heavens and that each person had a personal slow loris waiting for them in the afterlife . More often , however , slow lorises are used in traditional medicine or to ward off evil . 
 In the Mondulkiri Province of Cambodia , hunters believe that lorises can heal their own broken bones immediately after falling from a branch in order to climb back up the tree , and that slow lorises have medicinal powers because they require more than one hit with a stick to die . The hunters also believe that seeing a slow loris will bring bad luck on a hunting trip . In the province of North Sumatra , the slow loris is thought to bring good luck if it is buried under the foundation of a house . Similarly , villagers concerned about traffic safety might bury a slow loris under a road to prevent accidents . In Java , it is thought that putting a piece of its skull in a water jug would make a husband more docile and submissive , just like a slow loris in the daytime . Also , its body parts were used to place curses on enemies in North Sumatra . More recently , researchers have documented the belief that the consumption of loris meat was an aphrodisiac that improves " male power . " The gall bladder of the Bengal slow loris has historically been used to make ink for tattoos by the village elders in Pursat and Koh Kong Provinces of Cambodia . 
 = = Legal protection = = 
 The trade in slow lorises , whether as pets or for medicine , is illegal because every nation in which they occur naturally has laws protecting them . Cambodia lists them as protected , with penalties of one month in prison and fines of US $ 2 @.@ 50 to US $ 250 in 2010 for anyone who catches , hunts , poisons , or transports them . In Indonesia , the slow loris trade has been illegal since 1973 , when the Agriculture Ministry passed Decree No. 66 . This regulation was clarified in 1999 with Government Regulation No. 7 ( " Protection of Wild Flora and Fauna " ) and Act No. 5 ( " Biodiversity Conservation " ) . Violators are subject to five years in prison and a fine of 100 million rupiah ( ~ US $ 10 @,@ 000 ) . 
 The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) first listed the two known species of slow loris under Appendix II on 7 January 1975 . All newly identified species were covered by Appendix II on 2 April 1977 when all primates were given either Appendix I or Appendix II protection . Appendix II only requires an export permit for international trade , as long as trade will not negatively impact the survival of wild populations . Most of the trade in slow lorises , however , is illegal and usually involves smuggling to Japan . The lack of legal trade reported to the CITES Secretariat is shown in the CITES trade database , where minimal trade by CITES Parties has been reported up until 2007 . Regardless , slow lorises remained vulnerable to international trade under Appendix II , and the rampant Southeast Asian pet trade was another reason for concern . As a result , Cambodia proposed that slow lorises be elevated to Appendix I , which prohibits species from being traded internationally for commercial purposes and requires both import and export permits for certain types of non @-@ commercial trade , such as scientific research . The proposal covered all three species recognized at the time — the Sunda slow loris , Bengal slow loris , and pygmy slow loris — because they have traditionally been managed collectively owing to a lack of knowledge as to how to distinguish them . 
 Before the CITES conference at which a vote would be taken on the proposal , support for the proposed change in status appeared to be limited because of the small amount of reported legal trade . In April 2007 , the non @-@ profit conservation group <unk> Indonesia attracted news coverage with a demonstration held in Malang , Java . The demonstration — an appeal for increased protection for slow lorises — involved organization members suspending themselves from bridges while holding banners that read " Stop <unk> kukang " ( " Stop the slow loris trade " ) and " Jangan <unk> kukang " ( " Don 't buy slow lorises " ) . From early to mid @-@ June , the 14th CITES Conference of the Parties ( CITES COP @-@ 14 ) was held in The Hague , Netherlands . On 8 June , Cambodia presented the proposal along with their rationale . Indonesia followed by announcing their support , along with Japan , India , Laos , Thailand , the United States , the European Union , Qatar , and many non @-@ governmental organizations ( NGOs ) . Although the proposal was adopted by consensus , some conservation groups objected on the grounds that rational analysis was being usurped by sentiment . 
 Despite the added protection of CITES Appendix I status , wild slow lorises still receive poor protection because enforcement of the international trade ban is difficult and the penalties are minor . Slow lorises are still found in large numbers at animal markets , most notably in Cambodia and Indonesia , but the traders show no concern for being caught . During a study by Nekaris et al. published in 2010 , vendors in Medan , Jakarta , and Surabaya spoke freely to researchers about how they obtain slow lorises , their uses in medicine , prices , and sales numbers . The markets were not concealed , but were open daily in a designated area in town . Even law enforcement is involved in the trade , with park rangers and police admitting to the purchase of slow lorises for medicinal purposes . The wife of another law enforcement official from the Mondulkiri Province in Cambodia is one of the most notable sellers of slow loris parts . 
 = = Wildlife trade = = 
 Humans have been hunting mammals in Asia for at least 40 @,@ 000 years , but until recently , slow lorises were only hunted at a sustainable level . However , hunting pressure since the 1960s has become increasingly unsustainable , leading to overexploitation , because of growing demand , decreased supply , and the subsequent increased value of the marketed wildlife . In 1985 , large wildlife markets began to appear in Phnom Penh and Sen <unk> , Cambodia , followed quickly by the development of networks of hunters , traders , and middlemen . Bright flashlights make spotting slow lorises much easier at night because of their eye shine , and in the 1990s , large @-@ scale commercial harvesting of slow lorises began as improved batteries for spotlights became available . 
 The drive to capture wildlife , and particularly slow lorises , is increasingly dominated by demands from wealthy urban areas , replacing the subsistence hunting traditionally performed in poor rural areas . In the case of long @-@ lived primates , such as the slow lorises , populations replenish themselves slowly . Slow lorises are particularly vulnerable because they tend to freeze when spotted . Lastly , increased access to new technologies , such as improved transport , guns , wire snares , and spotlights , have facilitated hunting and pushed extraction levels beyond the point of sustainability . These new factors threaten slow loris survival . 
 Opportunistic hunting of lorises has been a traditional practice , for example , when a tree in which the primate is living is cut down . When forests are cleared to create oil palm ( Elaeis guineensis ) plantations or for housing , the lorises are collected from the trees and then sold to the " loris man " , who in turn sells them in the cities . Timber merchants in Kalimantan and Aceh also sell slow lorises to traders , and since the primates cling to branches instead of fleeing , they are often transported hundreds of miles on the original tree branches to which they clung . 
 Demand from middlemen and specialized animal trade mafias has increased the profitability of slow loris hunting and driven many hunters to catch any they spot by climbing or shaking trees . In the Mondulkiri Province in Cambodia , slow lorises are shaken out of trees and then bludgeoned to death with a stick . In Indonesia , slow lorises are worth more alive , so hunters climb the tree to reach them and place a V @-@ shaped stick around their neck to immobilize them . If the slow loris is found in with an infant , the parent is often killed . 
 <unk> buy as many as 30 slow lorises from rural hunters over a wide area , and then sell them in the major city markets for 300 @,@ 000 to 500 @,@ 000 <unk> ( US $ 32 to US $ 54 ) each . Western tourists and expatriates pay as much as 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 <unk> ( US $ 108 ) . Traders have reported to researchers that they have difficulty keeping pace with demand , and one trader claimed to have sold nearly 1 @,@ 200 pygmy slow lorises during 2001 – 2002 . Hundreds of slow lorises are sold domestically each year in Indonesian at open @-@ air animal markets ( or " bird markets " ) , as well as in shopping malls . Slow lorises are the most commonly sold protected primate at these markets . Live trade is the most common , with only 13 @.@ 6 % of slow lorises traded for parts . In Phnom Penh , Cambodia during the 1990s , observers counted up to 204 slow lorises for sale at a single store ; in 2007 a market in Mondulkiri Province displayed 30 dried specimens . A total of 234 slow lorises were confiscated by the Forestry Administration @-@ Wildlife Alliance between 2002 and 2006 . In Indonesia , nearly 6 @,@ 000 to 7 @,@ 000 slow lorises were traded domestically each year from 2000 to 2006 . For international trade , Laos , Cambodia , and Thailand were the biggest exporters , with exports having declined for all species except the pygmy slow loris from 1998 to 2007 ( compared to 1978 – 1997 ) . 
 = = = Traditional medicine = = = 
 Slow lorises are commonly used in traditional medicine across their geographic range , a practice that has been reported since at least 1900 . Thousands of slow lorises are captured each year for such use . Many human factors drive the trade in slow loris parts , including social customs , economic factors , and traditional belief systems . 
 In Cambodia , the deeply rooted tradition of using the Bengal and pygmy slow lorises in traditional medicine is widespread , and the pygmy slow loris is the most commonly requested animal in traditional medicine shops in Cambodia 's capital , Phnom Penh . Some people in the country believe dried slow loris can cure cancer . Slow lorises are also smoked for other traditional remedies . Traditional Khmer medicine practitioners in that region claim that medicines made from slow lorises can cure 100 diseases , with some practitioners from the National Centre for Traditional Medicine reporting that slow loris are sometimes roasted alive under the assumption that this increases the medicine 's potency . Slow lorises are also burned alive , causing their eyes to burst and release a liquid called <unk> kukang ( or loris oil ) , which is used in black magic and traditional medicine and is supposed to have life @-@ giving qualities and act as a love potion . 
 In the case of the Bengal slow loris , every part — including the brain , urine , and skin — is used in traditional medicine in order to heal wounds and rheumatism . With the Sunda slow loris , people trade the skin , feet , skeletons , and skulls . The fur is reported to heal wounds , the flesh to cure epilepsy , eyes are used in love potions , and the meat is reported to cure asthma and stomach problems . The pygmy slow loris is primarily valued for the medicinal use of its hair , but it is also used to make bone glue of monkey , a medicine used mostly by local people , but sometimes sold to visitors . In general , wearing slow loris bones is considered good luck and the meat is sometimes thought to cure leprosy . 
 The main buyers of medicine made from slow lorises are middle- to upper @-@ class women between the ages of 25 and 45 who primarily use loris rice wine tonic to alleviate the pain of childbirth . One bottle of wine is made by mixing rice wine with the carcasses of three dead animals . Minority groups in Cambodia also use loris @-@ based medicine for treating broken bones , asthma , and sexually transmitted diseases . A survey by primatologist Anna Nekaris et al . ( 2010 ) showed that these belief systems were so strong that the majority of respondents expressed reluctance to consider alternatives to loris @-@ based medicines . 
 In 1993 , 200 dead slow lorises were found cut open and stretched out on sticks in the markets of Phnom Penh . In another shop , 150 dead slow lorises were found in two boxes . This suggests hunting on a commercial scale , which has had dramatic effects on local populations . At the time , these dried slow lorises were sold for US $ 4 @.@ 25 . However , the prices doubled between 1997 and 2007 and continue to rise . Most vendors ( 80 % ) surveyed in 2010 attributed the price increases to a decline in loris numbers and increased enforcement . 
 = = = Pet trade = = = 
 Slow lorises are sold locally at street markets , but are also sold internationally over the Internet and in pet stores . They are especially popular or trendy in Japan , particularly among women . The reasons for their popularity , according to the Japan Wildlife Conservation Society ( JWCS ) , are that " they 're easy to keep , they don 't cry , they 're small , and just very cute . " Along with the common squirrel monkey ( Saimiri sciureus ) , slow lorises are the most popular primate pets in Japan . Pet shops frequently advertise them , even on their websites , with prices ranging between US $ 1 @,@ 500 and more than US $ 5 @,@ 000 , or ¥ 450 @,@ 000 . Despite these frequent advertisements , the World Conservation Monitoring Centre ( <unk> ) reported only a few dozen slow lorises were imported in 2006 , suggesting frequent smuggling . Slow lorises are also smuggled to China , Taiwan , Europe , the United States , and Saudi Arabia for use as pets . Smuggling and trade in Poland and Russia are also common according to Nekaris . 
 Because of their " cuteness " , viral videos of pet slow lorises are some of the mostly frequently watched animal videos on YouTube . In March 2011 , a newly posted video of a slow loris holding a cocktail umbrella had been viewed more than two million times , while an older video of a slow loris being tickled had been viewed more than six million times . Most viewers do not realize that the slow loris pet trade is illegal or that the docile behavior of the animals in the videos is a passive defensive reaction for dealing with stress . For instance , according to Nekaris , the slow loris with the umbrella — who was suffering from a head wound — was disoriented in the video by the bright lights and was grasping the umbrella like it would a piece of bamboo from its native habitat . Nekaris requested that YouTube remove the videos , but the UK @-@ based newspaper , The Independent , reported that YouTube declined to comment on the slow loris videos . While YouTube currently has means for viewers to flag videos involving animal cruelty , pornography , and illegal weapons or drugs , it has no means for flagging videos involving illegally trafficked animals . The ' tickling slow loris ' video was eventually removed in February 2012 , after having received over 9 million views and generating over 12 thousand comments ( although copies of it were later reposted ) . During the lifetime of the video two significant slow loris conservation @-@ associated events occurred , the March 2011 posting of this Wikipedia article and the January 2012 airing of a BBC television production entitled Jungle Gremlins of Java ; both events were associated with a spike in viewership of the video , and were often mentioned in the comments made during those periods ( 3 @.@ 2 % and 13 @.@ 3 % , respectively ) . Celebrity endorsements stimulated viewing of the video without providing any increase in conservation awareness . Over time , the proportion of comments indicating a desire to have a slow loris as a pet remained high but trended downward , while the proportion of comments indicating awareness of slow loris 's legal and conservation status increased after the conservation @-@ related events but did not follow a long term trend . The removal of the video followed shortly after the airing of the BBC documentary , which dramatized the exploitation of slow lorises for the pet trade . 
 Even within their countries of origin , slow lorises are very popular exotic pets . Indonesian species are mostly sold as pets , despite myths about their magical and curative properties . They are seen as a " living toy " for children by local people or are bought out of pity by Western tourists or expatriates . Neither local nor foreign buyers usually know anything about these primates , their endangered status , or that the trade is illegal . During the late 2000s , Sunda slow lorises were regularly sold throughout the Medan bird market in North Sumatra . According to 59 monthly surveys and interviews with local traders , nearly a thousand locally sourced slow lorises exchanged hands in the market . During the surveys , between 15 and 45 slow lorises were seen around the market . 
 International trade usually results in a high mortality rate during transit , between 30 % and 90 % . Slow lorises also experience many health problems as a result of both local and international trade . To give the impression that the primates are tame and appropriate pets for children , to protect people from their potentially toxic bite , or to deceive buyers into thinking the animal is a baby , animal dealers either pull the front teeth with pliers or wire cutters or they cut them off with nail cutters . This results in severe bleeding , which sometimes causes shock or death , and frequently leads to dental infection , which is fatal in 90 % of all cases . Without their teeth , the animals are no longer able to fend for themselves in the wild , and must remain in captivity for life . The slow lorises found in animal markets are usually underweight and malnourished , and have had their fur dyed , which complicates species identification at rescue centers . As many as 95 % of the slow lorises rescued from the markets die of dental infection or improper care . 
 As part of the trade , infants are pulled prematurely from their parents , leaving them unable to remove their own urine , feces , and oily skin secretions from their fur . Slow lorises have a special network of blood vessels in their hands and feet , which makes them vulnerable to cuts when pulled from the wire cages they are kept in . Slow lorises are also very stress @-@ sensitive and do not do well in captivity . Infection , stress , pneumonia , and poor nutrition lead to high death rates among pet lorises . The diets of wild slow lorises are poorly understood . Signs of an inappropriate diet in captivity include tooth decay , diabetes , obesity , and kidney failure . Pet owners also fail to provide proper care because they are often sleeping when the nocturnal pet is normally awake . 
 = = = International trade and smuggling = = = 
