 One of the first cases of slow loris smuggling was documented by the International Primate Protection League ( <unk> ) in November 1974 . The California Department of Fish and Game in San Francisco found 15 slow lorises in a bag labeled " spitting cobras " in a shipment from Thailand that also contained snakes , tortoises , and otters . Because of mistakes and inconsistencies in the order , it was unclear whether the receiving wildlife company was a target of a hoax or whether it had attempted to conceal the shipment . 
 Since the late 1990s , both high demand and resulting high prices have fueled increased smuggling of slow lorises to Japan . Although pet shop employees declare that their slow lorises are captive @-@ bred , the advertisements on the pet store websites indicate that their stocks come from Java , Sumatra , or China . New arrivals to the stores are also variable in size and age , which has further led the JWCS to suspect the slow lorises are imported illegally . Official , legal trade of slow lorises prior to CITES Appendix I coverage ( from 1998 to 2006 ) was limited to just ten Sunda slow lorises from Malaysia and Myanmar . A review of 24 surveys covering wildlife trade between 1990 and 2006 demonstrated 228 slow lorises were known to have been traded unofficially each year and had come from Cambodia , Indonesia , Vietnam , and Laos . The major trade hubs were Jakarta , Medan , Singapore and Bangkok . Numerous illegal trade routes for each species were also documented prior to the 2007 CITES vote over Appendix I coverage in the Notification to Parties publication . 
 A report in 2010 by Nekaris et al. reported that Laos , Cambodia , and Thailand were the primary exporters of slow lorises , with Singapore and Malaysia also involved . China and Indonesia were also known for international trade , although their local trade was more significant . Slow loris parts were typically exported from Thailand and Cambodia , but Malaysia and Singapore primarily exported live animals . The most noteworthy importer was Japan , followed by the United States and then the European Union . More than half of 400 illegal imports were live animals ( 238 ) , while the rest were either body parts ( 122 ) or unspecified ( 40 ) . 
 In Japan alone , 39 confiscations including 363 live animals were made between 1998 and 2006 , with 2006 being the peak year . During the same time period , Thai , Indonesian , and Singaporean officials discovered 358 lorises destined for Japan . Details of several confiscations from smuggling attempts between Thailand and Japan have been reported by the <unk> , including one event on 2 May 2007 , where 40 slow lorises were confiscated at Narita Airport only a month before the CITES conference that elevated the slow loris status to Appendix I. Twelve of those animals died . The deaths are not unusual , with a mortality rate of 76 % for all species of confiscated slow lorises , many dying before they are transferred to zoos . The JWCS suspects that the high mortality rate among smuggled slow lorises causes traders to smuggle more slow lorises than are needed to supply the market . 
 In Japan , enforcement is not considered very strict since only 23 % of smugglers ( 9 out of 39 cases ) were officially charged between 1998 and 2006 . Instead , most only received fines . Based on reports taken from Kyodo News , the JWCS concluded that the primary concern of Customs officials was the prevention of infectious diseases , such as Ebola . Slow lorises are sometimes mixed in with other trade @-@ restricted species , such as reptiles , and since confiscations target high @-@ profile species , it is likely that the international smuggling numbers are " just the tip of the iceberg . " Making detection even more difficult , slow lorises can easily be hidden in suitcases since they tend to instinctively curl up and remain quiet when startled . 
 = = Conservation efforts = = 
 Surveys are needed to determine existing population densities and habitat viability for all species of slow loris . Connectivity between protected areas is important for slow lorises because they are not adapted to dispersing across the ground over large distances . For successful reintroductions , connectivity between sites with low population density is considered ideal . Protected area extensions are also needed in Borneo , Java , and Sumatra . 
 Despite being included in CITES Appendix I protection and covered by local conservation laws , slow lorises are still threatened by both local and international trade because of problems with enforcement . The continued illegal trade in wildlife has seriously jeopardized both the success and the future of a US $ 310 million investment program by the World Bank for East and Southeast Asia biodiversity . In 2008 , training workshops for enforcement officials and rescue center personnel were held in Singapore to help teach slow loris identification , conservation status , and husbandry . Surveys prior to the training showed 87 % of the trainees could not identify slow loris species , but the one @-@ day workshops had a significant impact . 
 Rehabilitation is available to some confiscated slow lorises . Organizations such as the International Animal Rescue ( IAR ) run sanctuaries that offer lifelong care to slow lorises that have had their teeth removed , while also providing education and awareness programs to local people to help end domestic trade . By collaborating with authorities , healthy slow lorises are released back into the wild . However , identification is critical because authorities still manage all slow lorises as if they were from one species , resulting in species being released into the wrong locations and increasing confusion in taxonomy and conservation . 
 Populations of slow loris species , such as the Bengal and Sunda slow loris , are not faring well in zoos . In 2011 , the International Species Information System ( ISIS ) had only 11 and 53 specimens ( respectively ) on file from reporting zoos worldwide . In North American zoos , for instance , several of the 29 captive specimens in 2008 were hybrids that could not breed while most were past their reproductive years , and the last captive birth was in 2001 at the San Diego Zoo . Only three Javan slow lorises were kept in zoos in 2011 according to ISIS . Pygmy slow lorises are doing better , with 100 specimens reported from zoos worldwide in 2011 . In North American zoos , for instance , the population has grown to 74 animals between the time they were imported in the late 1980s and 2008 , with most of them born at the San Diego Zoo . 
 The San Diego Zoo has also written husbandry manuals for slow lorises , promoted public awareness , conducted field surveys , and supported slow loris rescue facilities . The Vietnamese postal service recognized slow lorises on a postage stamp by using a picture of a Bengal slow loris and her infant published by the San Diego Zoo in February 1999 . 
 = Battle of Ollantaytambo = 
 The Battle of Ollantaytambo ( Spanish : <unk> de Ollantaytambo , IPA : [ <unk> ðe <unk> ] ) took place in January 1537 , between the forces of Inca emperor Manco Inca and a Spanish expedition led by Hernando Pizarro during the Spanish conquest of Peru . A former ally of the Spaniards , Manco Inca rebelled in May 1536 , and besieged a Spanish garrison in the city of Cusco . To end the stand @-@ off , the besieged mounted a raid against the emperor 's headquarters in the town of Ollantaytambo . The expedition , commanded by Hernando Pizarro , included 100 Spaniards and some 30 @,@ 000 Indian auxiliaries against an Inca army more than 30 @,@ 000 strong . 
 There is some controversy over the actual location of the battle ; according to John Hemming it took place in the town itself , while Jean @-@ Pierre Protzen argues that the nearby plain of Mascabamba better matches the descriptions of the encounter . In any case , the Inca army managed to hold the Spanish forces from a set of high terraces and flood their position to hinder their cavalry . Severely pressed and unable to advance , the Spaniards withdrew by night to Cusco . Despite this victory , the arrival of Spanish reinforcements to Cusco forced Manco Inca to abandon Ollantaytambo and seek refuge in the heavily forested region of Vilcabamba , where he established the small independent Neo @-@ Inca State which survived until 1572 . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In 1531 , a group of Spaniards led by Francisco Pizarro landed on the shores of the Inca Empire , thus starting the Spanish conquest of Peru . At that time the empire was emerging from a civil war in which Atahualpa had defeated his brother Huascar to claim the title of Sapa Inca . Atahualpa underestimated the strength of the small force of Spaniards and was captured during an ambush at <unk> in November 1532 . Pizarro ordered the execution of the emperor in July 1533 , and occupied the Inca capital of Cusco four months later . To replace Atahualpa , Pizarro installed his brother Túpac <unk> as a puppet ruler , but he died shortly afterwards . Another brother , Manco Inca , was crowned in his place . During this stage , Atahualpa 's generals were the only opposition to the Spanish advance as a sizable part of the empire 's population had fought on Huascar 's side during the civil war and joined Pizarro against their enemies . 
 For a while , Manco Inca and the conquistadors maintained cordial relations , together they defeated Atahualpa 's generals and reestablished Inca rule over most of the empire . However , Manco came to realize that real authority rested in Spanish hands when his house was looted with impunity by a Spaniard mob in 1535 . Following this episode , the Inca emperor was subject to constant harassment as the Spaniards demanded gold , took away his wives , and even imprisoned him . In response , he fled his capital to start an uprising . In May 1536 , an Inca army besieged Cusco , which was garrisoned by a group of Spaniards and native allies . The conquistadors were hard pressed but they managed to resist and counterattack , storming the main Inca stronghold at <unk> . Meanwhile , Manco 's generals occupied the central highlands of Peru and annihilated several expeditions sent to reinforce Cusco but failed in their attempt to take the recently founded Spanish capital of Lima . As a result of these events , neither side was able to break the deadlock at Cusco for several months , so the Spaniard garrison decided to make a direct attack on Manco 's headquarters at the town of Ollantaytambo , 70 kilometers ( 43 mi ) northwest of the city . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 Manco Inca had gathered more than 30 @,@ 000 troops at Ollantaytambo , among them , a large number of recruits from tribes of the Amazon Rainforest . Manco Inca 's forces were a militia army made up mostly of conscripted farmers with only rudimentary weapons training . This was the regular fare in the Inca empire , where military service was a duty for all married men between 25 and 50 years old . In combat , these soldiers were organized according to their ethnic group and led into battle by their native leaders , called <unk> . They used melee weapons such as maces , clubs and spears as well as ranged weapons such as arrows , javelins , and slings ; protective gear included helmets , shields , and quilted cloth armor . Against the conquistadors , wooden clubs and maces with stone or bronze heads were rarely able to penetrate Spanish armor ; slings and other missile throwing weapons were somewhat more effective due to their accuracy and the large size of their projectiles . Even so , Inca soldiers were no match for the Spanish cavalry in open terrain so they resorted to fighting on rough terrain and digging pits in open fields to hinder the mobility of horses . 
 The attack was led by Hernando Pizarro , the senior Spanish commander in Cusco , with a force of 100 Spaniards ( 30 infantry , 70 cavalry ) and an estimated 30 @,@ 000 native allies . One of his main assets against the Inca armies was the Spanish cavalry because horses provided a considerable advantage in hitting power , maneuverability , speed , and stamina over Inca warriors . All Spaniards wore some kind of armor , the most commonly used types were chain mail shirts and padded cloth armor which were lighter and cheaper than full armor suits ; they were complemented by steel helmets and small iron or wooden shields . The main Spanish offensive weapon was the steel sword , which horsemen supplemented with the lance ; both weapons could easily penetrate the padded armor worn by Inca troops . Firearms , such as arquebuses were rarely used during the Spanish conquest of Peru because they were scarce , hard to use , and despised by horsemen as an <unk> weapon . Spaniards relied heavily on Indian auxiliaries because they provided thousands of warriors as well as support personnel and supplies . These native troops had the same sorts of arms and armor as their Inca counterparts . During the Ollantaytambo campaign , the Pizarro expedition included thousands of auxiliaries , mainly <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> as well as several members of the Inca nobility opposed to Manco Inca . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The main access route to Ollantaytambo runs along a narrow valley formed in the mountains by the Urubamba River , which connects the site with Machu Picchu to the west and with <unk> and Cusco to the east . After his uprising , Manco Inca fortified the eastern approaches to fend off attacks from the former Inca capital , now under Spanish occupation . The first line of defense was a steep bank of terraces at <unk> , near the confluence of the Anta and Urubamba rivers . Behind it , the Incas channeled the Urubamba to make it cross the valley from right to left and back thus forming two more lines backed by the fortifications of <unk> on the left bank and ' <unk> on the right bank . Past them , at the plain of Mascabamba , eleven high terraces closed the valley between the mountains and a deep canyon formed by the Urubamba . The only way to continue was through the gate of T <unk> , a thick defensive wall with two narrow doorways . In the event of these fortifications being overrun , the Temple Hill , a religious center surrounded by high terraces overlooking Ollantaytambo , provided a last line of defense . 
 Faced with these constraints , the Spanish expedition had to cross the river several times and fight at each ford against stiff opposition . The bulk of the Inca army confronted the Spaniards from a set of terraces overlooking a plain by the Urubamba River . Several Spanish assaults against the terraces failed against a shower of arrows , slingshots and boulders coming down from the terraces as well as from both flanks . To hinder the efforts of the Spanish cavalry the Incas flooded the plain using previously prepared channels ; water eventually reached the horses ' girths . The defenders then counterattacked ; some of them used Spanish weapons captured in previous encounters such as swords , bucklers , armor and even a horse , ridden by Manco Inca himself . In a severely compromised situation , Hernando Pizarro ordered a retreat ; under the cover of darkness the Spanish force fled through the Urubamba valley with the Incas in pursuit and reached Cusco the next day . 
 = = Battle site = = 
 The actual location of the battle is the subject of some controversy . According to Canadian explorer John Hemming , Spanish forces occupied a plain between Ollantaytambo and the Urubamba River while the main Inca army was located on a citadel ( the Temple Hill ) overlooking the town , protected by seventeen terraces . However , Swiss architect Jean @-@ Pierre Protzen argues that the topography of the town and its surrounding area does not match contemporary descriptions of the battle . An anonymous account attributed to Diego de Silva claims that the Inca army occupied a set of eleven terraces , not seventeen ; while the chronicle of Pedro Pizarro describes a gate flanked by walls as the only way through the terraces . Protzen thinks that these descriptions allude to a set of eleven terraces that close the plain of Mascabamba , near Ollantaytambo , which include the heavily fortified gate of T <unk> . At this location , when the Spaniards faced the terraces they would have had the Urubamba River to their left and the steep hill of Cerro <unk> to their right , matching the three sides from which they were attacked during the battle . If Protzen 's hypothesis is correct , the river diverted to flood the battlefield was the Urubamba , and not its smaller affluent , the <unk> , which runs alongside the town of Ollantaytambo . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The success at Ollantaytambo encouraged Manco Inca to make a renewed attempt against Cusco . However , the Spaniards discovered the Inca army concentrating near the city and mounted a night attack , which inflicted heavy casualties . On April 18 , 1537 , a Spanish army led by Diego de Almagro returned from a long expedition to Chile and occupied Cusco . Almagro imprisoned Hernando Pizarro and his brother Gonzalo because he wanted the city for himself ; most Spanish troops and their auxiliaries joined his side . He had previously tried to negotiate a settlement with Manco Inca but his efforts failed when both armies clashed at <unk> , near Cusco . With the Spaniards ' position consolidated by Almagro 's reinforcements , Manco Inca decided that Ollantaytambo was too close to Cusco to be tenable so he withdrew further west to the town of <unk> . Almagro sent his lieutenant Rodrigo <unk> in pursuit with 300 Spaniards and numerous Indian auxiliaries . In July 1537 , <unk> occupied and sacked <unk> taking many prisoners , but Manco managed to escape . He took refuge at Vilcabamba , a remote location where the Neo @-@ Inca State was established and lasted until the capture and execution of Túpac Amaru , its last emperor , in 1572 . 
 = Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles = 
 Article 231 , often known as the War Guilt Clause , was the opening article of the reparations section of the Treaty of Versailles , which ended the First World War between the German Empire and the Allied and Associated Powers . The article did not use the word " guilt " but it served as a legal basis to compel Germany to pay reparations . 
 Article 231 was one of the most controversial points of the treaty . It specified : 
 " The Allied and Associated Governments affirm and Germany accepts the responsibility of Germany and her allies for causing all the loss and damage to which the Allied and Associated Governments and their nationals have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them by the aggression of Germany and her allies . " 
 Germans viewed this clause as a national humiliation , forcing Germany to accept full responsibility for causing the war . German politicians were vocal in their opposition to the article in an attempt to generate international sympathy , while German historians worked to undermine the article with the objective of subverting the entire treaty . The Allied leaders were surprised at the German reaction ; they saw the article only as a necessary legal basis to extract compensation from Germany . The article , with the signatory 's name changed , was also included in the treaties signed by Germany 's allies who did not view the clause with the same disdain as the Germans did . American diplomat John Foster Dulles — one of the two authors of the article — later regretted the wording used , believing it further aggravated the German people . 
 The historical consensus is that responsibility or guilt for the war was not attached to the article . Rather , the clause was a prerequisite to allow a legal basis to be laid out for the reparation payments that were to be made . Historians have also highlighted the unintended damage created by the clause , which caused anger and resentment amongst the German population . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 28 June 1914 , the heir to the throne of Austria @-@ Hungary , Archduke Franz Ferdinand , was assassinated by the Bosnian @-@ Serb Gavrilo Princip in the name of Serbian nationalism . This caused a diplomatic crisis resulting in Austria @-@ Hungary declaring war on Serbia and sparking the First World War . Due to a variety of reasons , within weeks the major powers of Europe — divided into two alliances known as the Central Powers and the Triple Entente — were at war . As the conflict progressed , additional countries from around the globe were drawn into the conflict on both sides . 
 Fighting would rage across Europe , the Middle East , Africa and Asia for the next four years . On 8 January 1918 , United States President Woodrow Wilson issued a statement that became known as the Fourteen Points . In part , this speech called for Germany to withdraw from the territory it had occupied , for the creation of a Polish state , the redrawing of Europe 's borders along ethnic lines , and the formation of a League of Nations . During the autumn of 1918 , the Central Powers began to collapse . The German military was decisively defeated on the Western Front , while on the Home Front the navy mutinied prompting uprisings in Germany , which became known as the German Revolution . The German Government attempted to obtain a peace settlement based on the Fourteen Points , and maintained it was on this basis that they surrendered . Following negotiations , the Allied Powers and Germany signed an armistice , which came into effect on 11 November while German forces were still positioned in France and Belgium . 
 On 18 January 1919 , the Paris Peace Conference began . The conference aimed to establish peace between the war 's belligerents and establish the post @-@ war world . The Treaty of Versailles formed part of the conference , and dealt solely with Germany . The treaty , along with the others that were signed during the conference , were each named after the suburb of Paris they were signed in . While 70 delegates from 26 nations participated in the negotiations representatives from Germany were barred from attending , nominally over fears that a German delegation would attempt to play one country off against the other and unfairly influence the proceedings . 
 = = Writing of the article = = 
 The Americans , British , and French all differed on the issue of reparations settlement . The Western Front had been fought in France , and that countryside had been heavily scarred in the fighting . France 's most industrialized region in the north @-@ east had been laid to waste during the German retreat . Hundreds of mines and factories were destroyed along with railroads , bridges and villages . Georges Clemenceau , the Prime Minister of France , thought it appropriate that any just peace required Germany to pay reparations for the damage they had caused . He also saw reparations as a means to ensure that Germany could not again threaten France and as well to weaken the German ability to compete with France 's industrialization . Reparations would also go towards the reconstruction costs in other countries , such as Belgium , also directly affected by the war . British Prime Minister David Lloyd George opposed harsh reparations in favour of a less crippling reparations settlement so that the German economy could remain a viable economic power and British trading partner . He furthermore argued that reparations should include war pensions for disabled veterans and allowances to be paid to war widows , which would , reserve a larger share of the reparations for the British Empire . Wilson opposed these positions , and was adamant that there be no indemnity imposed upon Germany . 
 During the peace conference the Commission on the Responsibility of the Authors of the War and on Enforcement of Penalties was established to examine the background of the war . The Commission reasoned that the " war was premeditated by the Central Powers ... and was the result of acts deliberately committed [ by them ] to make it unavoidable " , concluding that Germany and Austria @-@ Hungary had " deliberately worked to defeat all the many conciliatory proposals made by the Entente Powers and their repeated efforts to avoid war . " This conclusion was duly incorporated into the Treaty of Versailles , led by Clemenceau and Lloyd George who were both insistent on the inclusion of an unequivocal statement of Germany 's total liability . This left Wilson at odds with the other leaders of the conference . Instead , he proposed a repetition of a note sent by United States Secretary of State Robert Lansing to the German Government on 5 November 1918 , stating that the " Allied Governments ... understand that compensation will be made by Germany for all damage done to the civilian population of the Allies and their property by the aggression of Germany ... " 
 The actual wording of the article was chosen by American diplomats Norman Davis and John Foster Dulles . Davies and Dulles produced a compromise between the Anglo @-@ French and American positions , wording Article 231 and 232 to reflect that Germany " should , morally , pay for all war costs , but , because it could not possibly afford this , would be asked only to pay for civilian damages . " Article 231 , in which Germany accepted the responsibility of Germany and its allies for the damages resulting from the First World War , therefore served as a legal basis for the articles following it within the reparations chapter , obliging Germany to pay compensation limited to civilian damages . Similar clauses , with slight modification in wording , were present in the peace treaties signed by the other members of the Central Powers . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 = = = German interpretation = = = 
 Foreign Minister Count Ulrich von Brockdorff @-@ Rantzau headed the 180 @-@ strong German peace delegation . They departed Berlin on 18 April 1919 , anticipating that the peace talks would soon start and that they and the Allied Powers would negotiate a settlement . Earlier , in February of that year , Brockdorff @-@ Rantzau had informed the Weimar National Assembly that Germany would have to pay reparations for the devastation caused by the war , but would not pay for actual war costs . The German government had also taken the position that it would be " inadvisable ... to elevate the question of war guilt " . On 5 May , Brockdorff @-@ Rantzau was informed that there would be no negotiations . Once the German delegation received the conditions of peace they would have fifteen days to reply . Following the drafting of the treaty , on 7 May the German and Allied delegations met and the Treaty of Versailles was handed off to be translated and for a response to be issued . At this meeting Brockdorff @-@ Rantzau stated that " We know the intensity of the hatred which meets us , and we have heard the victors ' passionate demand that as the vanquished we shall be made to pay , and as the guilty we shall be punished " . However , he proceeded to deny that Germany was solely responsible for the war . Following the meeting , the German delegation retired to translate the 80 @,@ 000 word document . As soon as the delegation realized the terms of peace , they agreed that they could not accept it without revision . They then proceeded to send their Allied counterparts , message after message attacking each part of the treaty . On 18 June , having disregarded the repeated explicit decisions of the government , Brockdorff @-@ Rantzau declared that Article 231 would have Germany accept full responsibility for the war by force . Max Weber , an advisor with the German delegation , agreed with Brockdorff @-@ Rantzau , also challenging the Allies over the issue of war guilt . He preferred to reject the treaty than submit to what he called a " rotten peace " . 
 On 16 June , the Allied Powers demanded that Germany unconditionally sign the treaty within seven days or face the resumption of hostilities . The German government was divided on whether to sign or reject the peace treaty . On 19 June , Chancellor Philipp <unk> resigned rather than sign the treaty and was followed by Brockdorff @-@ Rantzau and other members of the government , leaving Germany without a cabinet or peace delegation . After being advised by Field Marshal Paul von Hindenburg that Germany was in no condition to resume the war , President Friedrich Ebert and the new Chancellor , Gustav Bauer , recommended that the Weimar National Assembly ratify the treaty . The Assembly did so by a large majority , and Clemenceau was informed nineteen minutes before the deadline expired . Germany unconditionally signed the peace treaty on 22 June . 
 Initially , Article 231 was not correctly translated . Rather than stating " ... Germany accepts responsibility of Germany and her allies causing all the loss and damage ... " , the German Government 's edition read " Germany admits it , that Germany and her allies , as authors of the war , are responsible for all losses and damages ... " . Germans felt that they the country had signed away her honor , and there was a prevailing belief of humiliation as the article was seen , overall , as an injustice . Historian Wolfgang Mommsen commented that despite the public outrage , German government officials were aware " that Germany 's position on this matter was not nearly so favorable as the imperial government had led the German public to believe during the war . " 
 = = = Allied opinion on article = = = 
 The Allied delegation initially thought Article 231 to be a mundane addition to the treaty intended to limit German liability with regard to reparations , and were surprised at the vehemence of the German protests . Georges Clemenceau rebuffed Brockdorff @-@ Rantzau 's allegations , arguing that " the legal interpretation [ of the article ] was the correct one " and not a matter of political question . Lloyd George commented that " the English public , like the French public , thinks the Germans must above all acknowledge their obligation to compensate us for all the consequences of their aggression . When this is done we come to the question of Germany 's capacity to pay ; we all think she will be unable to pay more than this document requires of her . " 
 Prior to the American entry into the war , Woodrow Wilson called for a " peace of reconciliation with Germany " , what he dubbed a " peace without victory " . His wartime speeches , however , rejected these earlier notions and he took an increasingly belligerent stance towards Germany . Following the war , on 4 September 1919 , during his public campaign to rally American support for the Treaty of Versailles , Wilson commented that the treaty " seeks to punish one of the greatest wrongs ever done in history , the wrong which Germany sought to do to the world and to civilization , and there ought to be no weak purpose with regard to the application of the punishment . She attempted an intolerable thing , and she must be made to pay for the attempt . " Regardless of the rhetoric , the American position was to create a balanced treaty that would appease everyone . Gordon Auchincloss , secretary to Edward M. House ( one of Wilson 's advisers ) , sent a copy of the clause to the State Department and stated " you will note that the President 's principles have been protected in this clause " . 
 Historian William Keylor commented that initially both United States diplomats believed that they had " devised a brilliant solution to the reparation dilemma " ; appeasing both the British and French , as well as Allied public opinion irrespective of the fact that Allied leaders were aware of concerns surrounding German willingness to pay reparations and the disappointment that could follow . Vance C. McCormick ( an economic adviser of Wilson ) emphasized this point , and stated : " ... the preamble is useful . We are adopting an unusual method in not fixing a definite sum . The preamble tends to explain this , and further , prepares the public mind for disappointment as to what actually can be secured . " In 1940 , Dulles stated that he was surprised that the article " could plausibly be , and in fact was , considered to be a historical judgement of war guilt " . He further noted that the " profound significance of this article ... came about through accident , rather than design " . Dulles took it personally that the Treaty of Versailles failed in its intentions of creating a lasting peace and believed that the treaty was one of the causes of the Second World War . By 1954 , as United States Secretary of State and in discussion with the Soviet Union in regards to German reunification , he commented that " Efforts to bankrupt and humiliate a nation merely incite a people of vigor and of courage to break the bonds imposed upon them . ... Prohibitions thus incite the very acts that are prohibited . " 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Reparations = = = 
 Compensation demanded from the defeated party was a common feature of peace treaties . The financial burden of the Treaty of Versailles was labelled " reparations " , which distinguished them from punitive settlements usually known as indemnities . The reparations were intended for reconstruction and as compensation for families who had been bereaved by the war . Sally Marks wrote that the article " was designed to lay a legal basis for reparations " to be paid . Article 231 " established an unlimited theoretical liability " for which Germany would have to pay but the following article " in fact narrowed German responsibility to civilian damages " . When the final reparation figure was established in 1921 , it was based on an Allied assessment of [ the ] German capacity to pay , not on the basis of Allied claims . 
 The London Schedule of Payments , of 5 May 1921 , established the full liability of the combined Central Powers at 132 billion gold marks . Of this figure , Germany was only required to pay 50 billion gold marks ( $ 12 @.@ 5 billion ) , a smaller amount than they had previously offered for terms of peace . Reparations were unpopular and strained the German economy but they were payable and from 1919 – 1931 , when reparations ended , Germany paid fewer than 21 billion gold marks . The <unk> Commission and the Bank for International Settlements gave a total German payment of 20 @.@ 598 billon gold marks , whereas historian Niall Ferguson estimated that Germany paid no more than 19 billion gold marks . Ferguson also wrote that this sum was only 2 @.@ 4 per cent of German national income between 1919 and 1932 , while Stephen Schuker places the figure at an average of 2 per cent of national income between 1919 and 1931 , in cash and kind , making a total transfer equal to 5 @.@ 3 per cent of national income for the period . Gerhard Weinberg wrote that reparations were paid , towns were rebuilt , orchards replanted , mines reopened and pensions paid but the burden of repairs was shifted from the German economy to the damaged economies of the victors . 
 = = = Effects on German political opinion and revisionism = = = 
 Domestic German opposition to Article 231 has been held to have created a psychological and political burden on the post @-@ war Weimar Republic . German politicians seeking international sympathy would use the article for its propaganda value , convincing many who had not read the treaties that the article implied full war guilt . German revisionist historians who subsequently attempted to ignore the validity of the clause found a ready audience among ' revisionist ' writers in France , Britain , and the United States . The objective of both the politicians and historians was to prove that Germany was not solely guilty for causing the war ; if that guilt could be disproved the legal requirement to pay reparations would disappear . This subject , the question of Germany 's guilt ( <unk> or war guilt question ) became a major theme of Adolf Hitler 's political career . 
 United States Senator Henrik <unk> argued that the failure to revise the article became a factor in Hitler 's rise to power . A view held by some historians , such as Tony Rea and John Wright who wrote that " the harshness of the War Guilt Clause and the reparations demands made it easier for Hitler to gain power in Germany . " Despite these views , the historical consensus is that the article and the treaty , did not cause the rise of Nazism but that an unconnected rise in extremism and the Great Depression led to the NSDAP gaining greater electoral popularity and then being maneuvered into office . Fritz Klein wrote that while there was a path from Versailles to Hitler , the former did not make " Hitler 's takeover of power inevitable " and that " the Germans had a choice when they decided to take this path . In other words , they did not have to . Hitler 's victory was not an unavoidable result of Versailles . " 
 = = Historical assessment = = 
 In 1926 , Robert C. Binkley and A. C. Mahr of Stanford University , wrote that German accusations of the article assigning war guilt were " ill @-@ founded " and " mistaken " . The article was more " an assumption of liability to pay damages than an admission of war guilt " and compared it with " a man who undertakes to pay all the cost of a motor accident than to the plea of guilty entered by an accused criminal " . They wrote that " it is absurd " to charge the reparation articles of the treaty with any " political meaning " and the legal interpretation " is the only one that can stand " . They concluded that German opposition " is based upon a text which has no legal validity whatsoever , and which Germany never signed at all . " Sidney Fay was the " most outspoken and influential critic " of the article . In 1928 , he concluded that all of Europe shared the blame for the war and that Germany had no intention of launching a general European war in 1914 . 
 In 1937 , E. H. Carr commented that " in the passion of the moment " the Allied Powers had " failed to realize that this extorted admission of guilt could prove nothing , and must excite bitter resentment in German minds . " He concluded " German men of learning set to work to demonstrate the <unk> of their country , fondly believing that , if this could be established , the whole fabric of the treaty would collapse . " René Albrecht @-@ <unk> wrote in May 1940 , that " article 231 gave rise to an unfortunate controversy , unfortunate because it served to raise a false issue . " He wrote that the German inter @-@ war argument " rested on her responsibility for the out @-@ break of the war " and if that guilt could be disproved then the legal requirement to pay reparations would disappear . 
 In 1942 , Luigi Albertini published The Origins of the War of 1914 and concluded that Germany was primarily responsible for the outbreak of the war . Albertini 's work , rather than spurring on new debate , was the culmination of the first research phase into the war guilt question . The issue came back between 1959 and 1969 , when Fritz Fischer in Germany 's Aims in the First World War and War of Illusions " destroyed the consensus about shared responsibility for the First World War " and " placed the blame ... firmly on the shoulders of the Wilhelmine elite . " By the 1970s , his work " had emerged as the new orthodoxy on the origins of the First World War " . In the 1980s , James Joll led a new wave of First World War research concluding " that the origins of the First World War were " complex and varied " although " by December 1912 " Germany had decided to go to war . 
 In 1978 , Marks re @-@ examined the reparation clauses of the treaty and wrote that " the much @-@ criticized ' war guilt clause ' , Article 231 , which was designed to lay a legal basis for reparations , in fact makes no mention of war guilt " but only specified that Germany was to pay for the damages caused by the war they imposed upon the allies and " that Germany committed an act of aggression against Belgium is beyond dispute " . " Technically , Britain entered " the war and French troops entered Belgium " to honor " the " legal obligation " to defend Belgium under the 1839 Treaty of London and that " Germany openly acknowledged her responsibility in regard to Belgium on August 4 , 1914 and May 7 , 1919 . " Marks also wrote that " the same clause , mutatis mutandis " was incorporated " in the treaties with Austria and Hungary , neither of whom interpreted it as declaration of war guilt . " Wolfgang Mommsen wrote that " Austria and Hungary , understandably paid no attention to this aspect of the draft treaty " . 
 In 1986 , Marks wrote that the German foreign office , supported by military and civilian notables , " focused on Article 231 ... hoping that , if one could refute German responsibility for the war , not only reparations but the entire treaty would collapse " . Manfred <unk> , Gerald Feldman , and Elisabeth Glaser wrote that " pragmatic requirements characteristically influenced the shaping of the much misunderstood Article 231 . That paragraph reflected the presumed legal necessity to define German responsibility for the war in order to specify and limit the Reich 's obligations " . <unk> Bell wrote that despite the article not using the term ' guilt ' , and while " it may be that its drafters did not intend to convey a moral judgement of Germany " , the article has " almost universally " became known as the war guilt clause of the treaty . Margaret MacMillan wrote that the German public 's interpretation of Article 231 as unequivocally ascribing the fault for the war to Germany and her allies , " came to be the object of particular loathing in Germany and the cause of uneasy consciences among the Allies . " The Allies never expected such a hostile reaction , for " no one thought there would be any difficulty over the clauses themselves . " 
 Stephen Neff wrote that " the term ' war guilt ' is a slight unfortunate one , since to lawyers , the term ' guilt ' primarily connotes criminal liability " while " the responsibility of Germany envisaged in the Versailles Treaty ... was civil in nature , comparable to the indemnity obligation of classical just @-@ war theory . " Louise Slavicek wrote that while " the article was an honest reflection of the treaty @-@ writers ' beliefs , including such a clause in the peace settlement was undiplomatic , to say the least . " Diane Kunz wrote that " rather than being seen as an American lawyer 's clever attempt to limit actual German financial responsibility by buying off French politicians and their public with the sop of a piece of paper " Article 231 " became an easily exploitable open sore " . Ian Kershaw wrote that the " national disgrace " felt over the article and " defeat , revolution , and the establishment of democracy " , had " fostered a climate in which a counter @-@ revolutionary set of ideas could gain wide currency " and " enhanced the creation of a mood in which " extreme nationalist ideas could gain a wider audience and take hold . 
 Elazar Barkan argues that by " forcing an admission of war guilt at Versailles , rather than healing , the victors instigated resentment that contributed to the rise of Fascism . " Norman Davies wrote that the article invited Germany " to accept sole guilt for the preceding war " . Klaus Schwabe wrote that the article 's influence went far beyond the discussion of war guilt . By " refusing to acknowledge Germany 's ' war guilt ' the new German government implicitly exonerated the old monarchial order " and more importantly failed " to dissociate itself from the old regime . " In doing so " it undermined its claim that post @-@ revolutionary Germany was a historic new democratic beginning deserving credit at the peace conference . " 
 = Æthelberht II of East Anglia = 
 Æthelberht ( Old English : <unk> ) , also called Saint Ethelbert the King , ( died 20 May 794 at Sutton Walls , Herefordshire ) was an eighth @-@ century saint and a king of East Anglia , the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom which today includes the English counties of Norfolk and Suffolk . Little is known of his reign , which may have begun in 779 , according to later sources , and very few of the coins issued during his reign have been discovered . It is known from the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle that he was killed on the orders of Offa of Mercia in 794 . 
 He was subsequently canonised and became the focus of cults in East Anglia and at Hereford , where the shrine of the saintly king once existed . In the absence of historical facts , mediaeval chroniclers provided their own details for Æthelberht 's ancestry , life as king and death at the hands of Offa . His feast day is 20 May . Several Norfolk , Suffolk and West Country parish churches are dedicated to the saint . 
 = = Life and reign = = 
 Little is known of Æthelberht 's life or reign , as very few East Anglian records have survived from this period . Mediaeval chroniclers have provided dubious accounts of his life , in the absence of any real details . According to Richard of Cirencester , writing in the fifteenth century , Æthelberht 's parents were Æthelred I of East Anglia and <unk> of Mercia . Richard narrates in detail a story of Æthelberht 's piety , election as king and wise rule . Urged to marry against his will , he apparently agreed to wed Eadburh , the daughter of Offa of Mercia , and set out to visit her , despite his mother 's forebodings and his experiences of terrifying events ( an earthquake , a solar eclipse and a vision ) . 
 Æthelberht 's reign may have begun in 779 , the date provided for the beginning of his reign on the uncertain authority of a much later saint 's life . The absence of any East Anglian charters prevents it from being known whether he ruled as a king or a sub @-@ king under the power of the ruler of another kingdom . 
 Æthelberht was stopped by Offa of Mercia from minting his own coins , of which only four examples have ever been found . One of these coins , a ' light ' penny , said to have been found in 1908 at Tivoli , near Rome , is similar in type to the coinage of Offa . On one side is the word REX , with an image of Romulus and Remus suckling a wolf : the obverse names both the king and his moneyer , <unk> , who struck coins for both Offa and Coenwulf of Mercia . Andy Hutcheson has suggested that the use of runes on the coin may signify " continuing strong control by local leaders " . According to Marion Archibald , the issuing of " flattering " coins of this type , with the intention to win friends in Rome , probably indicated to Offa that as a sub @-@ king , Æthelberht was assuming " a greater degree of independence than he was prepared to tolerate " . 
 In 793 the vulnerability of the English east coast was exposed when the monastery at Lindisfarne was looted by Vikings and a year later Jarrow was also attacked , events which Steven Plunkett reasons would ensure that the East Anglians were governed firmly . Æthelberht 's claim to be a king descended from the Wuffingas dynasty ( suggested by the use of a Roman she @-@ wolf and the title REX on his coins ) could be because of a need for strong kingship as a result of the Viking attacks . 
 = = Death and canonisation = = 
 Æthelberht was put to death by Offa of Mercia under unclear circumstances ; the site of his murder was apparently the royal vill at Sutton Walls . According to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , he was beheaded . Mediaeval sources tell how he was taken captive whilst visiting his future Mercian bride <unk> and was then murdered and buried . In Richard of Cirencester 's account of the murder , which cannot be substantiated , Offa 's evil queen Cynethryth poisoned her husband 's mind until he agreed to have his guest killed . Æthelberht was then bound and beheaded by a certain <unk> and his body was unceremoniously disposed of . The mediaeval historian John Brompton 's Chronicon describes how the king 's detached head fell off a cart into a ditch where it was found , before it restored a blind man 's sight . According to the Chronicon , <unk> subsequently became a recluse at Crowland and her remorseful father founded monasteries , gave land to the Church and travelled on a pilgrimage to Rome . 
 The execution of an Anglo @-@ Saxon king on the orders of another ruler was very rare , although public hanging and beheading did occur at this time , as has been discovered at the Sutton Hoo site . Æthelberht 's death at the hands of the Mercians made the possibility of any peaceful union between the Anglian peoples ( including Mercia ) less likely than before . It led to Mercia 's domination of East Anglia , whose kings ruled over the kingdom for over three decades after Æthelberht 's death . 
 In 2014 metal @-@ detectorist Darrin Simpson of Eastbourne found a coin minted during the reign of Æthelbert , in a Sussex field . It is believed that the coin may have led to Æthelbert 's beheading by Offa , as it had been struck as a sign of independence . Describing the coin , Christopher Webb , head of coins at auctioneers Dix Noonan Webb , said , " This new discovery is an important and unexpected addition to the numismatic history of 8th Century England . " It sold at auction on June 11 for £ 78 @,@ 000 ( estimate £ 15 @,@ 000 to £ 20 @,@ 000 ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Veneration = = = 
 After his death , Æthelberht was canonised by the Church . He became the subject of a series of vitae that date from the eleventh century and he was venerated in religious cults in both East Anglia and at Hereford . The Anglo @-@ Saxon church of the episcopal estate at Hoxne was one of several dedicated to Æthelberht in Suffolk , a possible indication of the existence of a religious cult devoted to the saintly king . Only three dedications for Æthelberht are near where he died - Marden , Hereford Cathedral and Littledean - the other eleven being in Norfolk or Suffolk . Lawrence Butler has argued that this unusual pattern may be explained by the existence of a royal cult in East Anglia , which represented a " revival of Christianity after the Danish settlement by commemorating a politically ' safe ' and <unk> distant local ruler " . 
 = = = Christian buildings dedicated to Æthelberht = = = 
 The Blessed Virgin Mary and St. Ethelbert are joint patrons the cathedral at Hereford , where the music for the Office of St Ethelbert survives in the thirteenth @-@ century Hereford Breviary . 
 In East Anglia , St. Ethelbert 's Gate is one of the two main entrances to the precinct of Norwich Cathedral . The chapel at <unk> , at a location near an important excavated Anglo @-@ Saxon cemetery at Boss Hall in Ipswich , was dedicated to Æthelberht . In Norfolk , the Church of England parish churches at Alby , East <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Burnham Sutton ( where there are remains of the ruined church ) and the Suffolk churches at <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> are all dedicated to the saint . In neighbouring Essex , the parish church at <unk> Otten is dedicated to St Ethelbert and All Saints , and the church at Stanway , originally an Anglo @-@ Saxon chapel , is dedicated to St Albright , which is believed to be the same saint . In 1937 , St Ethelbert 's name was added to the parish church of St George in East Ham , London , at the behest of Hereford Cathedral which had funded the rebuilding of the church , previously a temporary wooden structure . 
 = Sigtrygg Silkbeard = 
 Sigtrygg II Silkbeard Olafsson ( also Sihtric , Sitric and <unk> in Irish texts ; or <unk> and <unk> in Scandinavian texts ) was a Hiberno @-@ Norse king of Dublin ( possibly AD 989 – 994 ; restored or began 995 – 1000 ; restored 1000 and abdicated 1036 ) of the Uí Ímair dynasty . He was caught up in the abortive Leinster revolt of 999 – 1000 , after which he was forced to submit to the King of Munster , Brian Boru . His family also conducted a double marriage alliance with Boru , although he later realigned himself with the main leaders of the Leinster revolt of 1012 – 1014 . He has a prominent role in the 12th @-@ century Irish Cogadh Gaedhil re Gallaibh and the 13th century Icelandic Njal 's Saga , as the main Norse leader at the Battle of Clontarf in 1014 . 
 Sigtrygg 's long reign spanned 46 years , until his abdication in 1036 . During that period , his armies saw action in four of the five Irish provinces of the time . In particular , he conducted a long series of raids into territories such as Meath , Wicklow , Ulster , and perhaps even the coast of Wales . He also came into conflict with rival Norse kings , especially in Cork and Waterford . 
 He went on pilgrimage to Rome in 1028 and is associated with the foundation of Christ Church Cathedral in Dublin . Although Dublin underwent several reversals of fortune during his reign , on the whole trade in the city flourished . He died in 1042 . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Sigtrygg was of Norse and Irish ancestry . He was a son of Olaf Cuarán ( also called <unk> ) , King of York and of Dublin , and Gormflaith ingen Murchada . Gormflaith was the daughter of the King of Leinster , Murchad mac Finn , and the sister of his successor , King Máel Mórda of Leinster . She had previously been married to the King of Meath and High King of Ireland , Máel Sechnaill — the first of her three husbands . She was a beautiful , powerful and intriguing Irish woman , who according to the 13th @-@ century Icelandic Njál 's saga , was " the fairest of all women , and best gifted in everything that was not in her own power , but it was the talk of men that she did all things ill over which she had any power " . Sigtrygg 's paternal half @-@ brother was Glúniairn , " Iron @-@ knee " , who ruled as King of Dublin from 980 – 989 . 
 An incident involving the ransom of one of Sigtrygg 's sons late in his reign , in which " seven score British horse " were mentioned in the list of demands , suggests that Dublin was one of the main ports for importing horses into 11th century Ireland , and that Sigtrygg and his family may have been personally involved in animal husbandry . 
 = = = King of Dublin = = = 
 Sigtrygg may have succeeded his paternal half @-@ brother Glúniairn as king of Dublin in 989 , but it is just as likely his rival Ivar of Waterford came to power in the city then . The Irish annals record little information about Sigtrygg , his family or Dublin during these first five years of his reign . Benjamin Hudson claims this was because of the arrival of the future King of Norway , Olaf Tryggvason , who took up residence in Dublin for a few years after marrying Sigtrygg 's sister Gytha . Tryggvason had met Gytha while raiding along the coasts of the Irish Sea . The presence of a powerful Viking leader in Dublin was a deterrent to Irish raids , and <unk> may have weakened Sigtrygg 's foes by plundering them . 
 Hudson argues that Tryggvason 's return to Norway in 994 coincided with the temporary expulsion of Sigtrygg from Dublin by his rival Ivar of Waterford , . Ivar may have already ruled there from 989 until forced out by Sigtrygg in 993 . Much depends on the interpretation . Either way , Sigtrygg was back within a year . In 995 , he and his nephew , Muirchertach Ua <unk> , attacked the church at <unk> in County Meath . In retaliation , Máel Sechnaill entered Dublin and took the ring of Thor and the sword of Carlus . Sigtrygg then attacked Kells and Clonard in 997 . In 998 , Máel Sechnaill and the King of Munster , Brian Boru , forced Sigtrygg to recognise their lordship by giving hostages . 
 Sigtrygg realised that Dublin 's wealth made him a target , and that his city needed powerful allies and walls . The Dublin countryside did not provide sufficient resources for competition against powerful Irish princes . Sigtrygg first allied with his maternal uncle , Máel Mórda mac Murchada , King of the Uí <unk> of north Leinster . In 999 , they defeated their cousin the King of Leinster Donnchad mac Domhnaill , and imprisoned him in Dublin . 
 = = = = First Leinster revolt against Brian Boru = = = = 
 Late in 999 , the Leinstermen , historically hostile to domination by either the Uí Néill overkings or the king of Munster , allied themselves with the Norse of Dublin and revolted against Brian Boru . This provided the opportunity for Sigtrygg 's second alliance with Máel Mórda mac Murchada . Brian 's forces inflicted a crushing defeat on the united Leinster @-@ Dublin army at the Battle of Glenmama , and followed the victory with an attack on the city of Dublin . The 12th @-@ century Cogadh Gaedhil re Gallaibh gives two accounts of the occupation : Brian remained in Dublin from Christmas Day until Epiphany ( 6 January ) , or from Christmas Day until St. Brigid 's Day ( 1 February ) . The later Annals of Ulster date the Battle of Glenmama to 30 December 999 , while the Annals of Inisfallen date Brian 's capture of the city to 1 January 1000 . In any case , in 1000 Brian plundered the city , burned the Norse fortress and expelled Sigtrygg . 
 According to the Cogadh Gaedhil re Gallaibh , Sigtrygg 's flight from the city took him north , first to the Ulaid and then to <unk> of Cenél nEógain . Both tribes refused to help him . As Sigtrygg could find no refuge in Ireland , he eventually returned , submitted to Brian , gave hostages and was restored to Dublin three months after Brian ended his occupation in February . In the meantime , Sigtrygg may have temporarily " turned pirate " and been responsible for a raid on St David 's in Wales . 
 Brian 's daughter by his first wife was married to Sigtrygg , and Brian in turn took Sigtrygg 's mother , the now thrice @-@ married Gormflaith , as his second wife . 
 = = = = Years between the revolts = = = = 
 Dublin enjoyed a sustained period of peace while Sigtrygg 's men served in the armies of Brian . Sigtrygg never forgot the Ulaid 's refusal of aid when he fled from Dublin , and in 1002 he had his revenge when his soldiers served in Brian 's campaign against the Ulaid and ravaged their lands . His fleet raided Ulster , and he plundered <unk> and Inis <unk> , taking many prisoners from both . They served under Brian against the Ulaid again in 1005 , and against the Northern Uí Néill in 1006 and 1007 . Cenél Conaill , the last of the Northern Uí Néill Kingdoms , submitted in 1011 , and Brian was formally recognised as High King throughout Ireland . 
 A remembrance of Sigtrygg 's reign during these years is preserved in the late medieval Icelandic Saga of Gunnlaug Serpent 's Tongue . Only fragments survive of the verses in the <unk> , a <unk> composed by the skald Gunnlaug <unk> while visiting Sigtrygg 's court . The verses praise Sigtrygg for his royal ancestry , and describe Dublin as a busy , thriving port . Archaeological excavations of ships , gold , clothing , and pieces for games from around this time seem to confirm the description . According to the prose , Sigtrygg considered rewarding the poet with ships and gold , but instead granted him a new suit of clothes . 
 = = = = Second Leinster revolt against Brian Boru = = = = 
 Some time during the 1010s , Brian Boru divorced Queen Gormflaith , and she began to engineer opposition to the High King . Around 1012 , relations between Brian and Leinster had become so strained that revolt broke out among the Leinstermen . Sigtrygg aligned himself with the forces of Máel Mórda , leader of the revolt , and the chiefs Ua Ruairc , Ua Néill , and others . Together , they defeated Brian 's ally Máel Sechnaill near the town of Swords , and Brian for the moment was unable to render assistance . 
 Sigtrygg sent his son Oleif to lead a fleet south to Munster to burn the Viking settlement of Cork . The fleet also attacked Cape Clear , crippling Brian 's naval power , which was concentrated in Cork . 
 According to Njál 's saga , Gormflaith " egged on her son Sigtrygg very much to kill King Brian " , sending him to win the support of Earl Sigurd of Orkney , and Bróðir and Óspak of Man at any price . Sigtrygg arrived in Orkney for Sigurd 's Yule feast , where he sat in a high seat between the two brothers @-@ in @-@ law , Earl Sigurd of Orkney and Earl Gilli of the Southern Isles . The saga also records that Sigtrygg was very interested in the Burning of <unk> <unk> at <unk> and what had happened since . Afterwards , Sigtrygg bade Sigurd to go to war with him against Brian . Despite Sigurd 's initial hesitance and against the advice of his men , he eventually agreed to arrive in Dublin by Palm Sunday with all his men , on the condition that if Brian was slain , Sigurd would marry Gormflaith and become King of Ireland . 
 Sigtrygg went next to Man , where he also persuaded Bróðir to be in Dublin by Palm Sunday , and he promised Bróðir too that , if successful , he would be allowed marry Gormflaith and become King of Ireland ; the terms of this agreement were kept secret . Óspak was dissatisfied with the arrangement , and refused to " fight against so good a king " . 
 The two forces met at the Battle of Clontarf , on Good Friday in 1014 , a battle that claimed the lives of the main commanders on both sides : Brian and his son Murchad on the Munster side ; and Máel Mórda , Sigurd and Bróðir on the Leinster @-@ Norse side . According to Irish sources , Sigtrygg did not take part in the battle , but held his garrison in reserve in Dublin . The Cogadh Gaedhil re Gallaibh records that Sigtrygg was able to observe the progress of the battle and the movement of the battle standards from the ramparts of his fortress . As the modern Irish medievalist historian Donnchadh Ó Corráin notes , Sigtrygg " wisely kept within the city and lived to tell the tale " . 
 Earlier Scandinavian sources ( the Orkneyinga saga , Njál 's saga and the Darraðarljóð , composed soon after the battle ) contend that he did actually fight valiantly at Clontarf . The Darraðarljóð , showing the persistence of paganism among the Vikings of Dublin , describes the Valkyries as following the " young king " Sigtrygg into battle . Njal 's Saga records that Sigtrygg was on the wing opposite Óspak of Man for the whole battle , and that Óspak eventually put the king to flight . 
 = = = = Reign after Clontarf = = = = 
 Immediately after Clontarf , Sigtrygg 's fortunes appear to have declined , even though he emerged with his kingdom intact . Máel Sechnaill , now again recognised as high king , was undoubtedly the battle 's main beneficiary . In 1015 , plague struck Dublin and Leinster , and Máel Sechnaill seized the opportunity to march south to burn Dublin 's suburbs . While Sigtrygg was able to ally with Leinster for another attack on Meath in 1017 , the alliance was dissolved when Sigtrygg blinded his cousin <unk> , Máel <unk> 's son and heir , in Dublin . 
 In 1018 , Sigtrygg plundered Kells ; he " carried off innumerable spoils and prisoners , and slew many persons in the middle of the church " . These captives would either have been ransomed or sold off into Dublin 's lucrative slave trade . When Sigtrygg raided south in 1021 , he was defeated at <unk> in County Wicklow where the new King of Leinster , Augaire mac <unk> , " made a dreadful slaughter of the foreigners " in the Kingdom of <unk> . In 1022 , the Dublin fleet sailed north against the Ulaid , only to be destroyed in a naval battle against Niall mac Eochaid , after which the Norse crews and ships were taken prisoner . 
 According to the American medievalist historian Benjamin Hudson , " matters went from bad to worse " for Sigtrygg after the death of Máel Sechnaill in 1022 . The great Irish princes began to compete for the High Kingship , and the political situation in Ireland became chaotic as there was no clear choice for supremacy . Accordingly , " Dublin became a prize for those who would rule Ireland and wanted the town 's wealth to finance their ambitions . " 
 Hostages were taken from Sigtrygg by Flaithbertach Ua Néill , King of Cenél nEógain and the Uí Néill , and Donnchad mac Briain of Munster in 1025 and 1026 respectively , in support of their bids for the high kingship . These hostages brought no security , and Dublin was raided in 1026 by Niall mac <unk> of the Ulaid in revenge for the naval attack of 1022 . Sigtrygg formed a new alliance with the men of Brega . In 1027 , Sigtrygg 's son Olaf joined Donnchad of Brega in a raid on <unk> , County Meath . Sigtrygg and Donnchad 's army was defeated by the men of Meath under their king , Roen Ua Mael <unk> . Sigtrygg rallied to the fight again at <unk> where Donnchad and Roen were slain . 
 In 1029 , Sigtrygg 's son Olaf was taken prisoner by the new lord of Brega , <unk> Ua <unk> . Sigtrygg was forced to pay a ransom of 1 @,@ 200 cows , 140 British horses , 60 ounces of gold and of silver , " the sword of Carlus " , the Irish hostages of Leinster and Leath <unk> , " four hostages to Ua <unk> as a security for peace , and the full value of the life of the third hostage . " An additional 80 cows " for word and supplication " were to be paid to the man who entreated for Olaf 's release . The incident illustrates the importance of ransoming noble captives , as a means of political manipulation , increasing one 's own revenues and exhausting the resources of one 's foes . 
 Sigtrygg 's fortunes improved in the 1030s . In 1030 , he allied with the King of England , Cnut , and together their fleets raided Wales . A Dublin colony was established in Gwynedd , and for the following years Sigtrygg was at the height of his power . In 1032 , without allies , Sigtrygg won a victory on the Boyne estuary of a type previously unseen by his dynasty for two decades , against a coalition of three kingdoms : over 300 members of the <unk> , the Ui <unk> , and the Ui <unk> were captured or killed at the Battle of <unk> <unk> . In 1035 , he plundered the celebrated stone church <unk> in Meath , burned 200 men inside , and carried another 200 off into captivity . ( In revenge , the church at Swords was plundered and burned by <unk> Ua <unk> , who took away cattle and captives . ) 
 Meanwhile , in a renewal of ancient feuds that same year , Sigtrygg executed Ragnall King of Waterford , in Dublin Ragnall was the grandson of the Ivar , Sigtrygg 's earliest rival , who had contested for Dublin decades before . Echmarcach mac Ragnaill , King of the Isles forced Sigtrygg to abdicate in 1036 . Sigtrygg died in exile , at an unknown place , in 1042 . 
 = = Issue and legacy = = 
 Sigtrygg married Brian Boru 's daughter , Sláine , and they had one son : Olaf ( d . 1034 ) . According to the Annals of the Four Masters , Olaf " was slain by the Saxons " on his way on a pilgrimage to Rome . He was survived by one Ragnhild , from whom Gruffudd ap Cynan and the Kings of Gwynedd were descended . 
 Separately from Sláine , Sigtrygg had five children : <unk> ( d . 999 ) , Oleif ( d . 1013 ) , Godfrey ( d . 1036 ) , Glúniairn ( d . 1031 ) and Cellach ( d . 1042 ) . The annals record the death of Oleif — " son of the lord of the foreigners " — who was killed in revenge for the burning of Cork . Glúniairn was killed by the people of South Brega in 1031 . Godfrey was killed in Wales in 1036 by one Sitric , " son of Glúniairn " — as factionalism was common among Viking settlers , this could have been the same Glúniairn as Sigtrygg 's half @-@ brother , thus making Godfrey and his killer cousins . Sigtrygg 's daughter Cellach died in the same month as her father . 
 Sigtrygg was also , according to the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , " a patron of the arts , a benefactor of the church , and an economic innovator " . In the 990s , he established Ireland 's first mint , in Dublin . He established a bishopric at Dublin and in 1028 he made a pilgrimage to Rome . It is thus possible to attribute the origins of the establishment of territorial bishoprics in Ireland on the Roman model , one of the most important results of 11th @-@ century Irish Church Reform , to Sigtrygg . He went on to found Christ Church Cathedral in Dublin , which today is the oldest building in Dublin , but relatively young in comparison to the many monastic cathedrals in the rest of Ireland . Like many of the other coastal cathedrals in Ireland , it is of Hiberno @-@ Norse origin . The cathedral , initially a wooden building , was rebuilt in stone in the 1180s following the arrival of the Anglo @-@ Normans to Ireland , led by Richard de Clare , 2nd Earl of Pembroke . 
 = Chuck Versus Santa Claus = 
 " Chuck Versus Santa Claus " is the eleventh episode of the second season of Chuck , and the 24th overall episode of the series . The episode was directed by Robert Duncan McNeill and written by Scott Rosenbaum . It originally aired December 15 , 2008 . 
 The episode revolves around a hostage crisis and is largely presented as an homage to the film Die Hard . On Christmas Eve , an amateur criminal on the run from the police crashes into the Buy More and takes Chuck Bartowski , Ellie Bartowski , Devon Woodcomb , and the Buy More employees hostage . In order to protect Chuck 's cover and the safety of the other hostages , Sarah Walker and John Casey secretly go into the store to remove Chuck , but the mission quickly falls apart when Chuck refuses to leave his friends and family behind . 
 " Chuck Versus Santa Claus " received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , it drew 7 @.@ 661 million viewers , making it the second most @-@ watched episode of the season , after " Chuck Versus the Third Dimension " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The morning before Christmas , a high @-@ speed chase occurs near a Burbank , California shopping center , ultimately ending with the fugitive crashing his car through the Buy More front doors . Nathan " <unk> Ned " <unk> ( Jed Rees ) exits the car and , desperate to buy presents for his children , takes Chuck Bartowski ( Zachary Levi ) , Ellie Bartowski ( Sarah Lancaster ) , Devon Woodcomb ( Ryan McPartlin ) , and all the Buy More employees hostage . Ned communicates with the police via Chuck , and LAPD Lieutenant Frank Mauser ( Michael Rooker ) negotiates the release of Emmett <unk> ( Tony Hale ) as a sign of good faith . 
 Meanwhile , Sarah Walker ( Yvonne Strahovski ) and John Casey ( Adam Baldwin ) watch news coverage of the situation and sneak into the store to rescue Chuck so that the media attention does not compromise his cover , only to be thwarted by Ned . Suddenly , Mauser exchanges himself for two hostages : Chuck 's handlers Casey and Sarah . 
 When Mauser enters , Chuck flashes on his watch , identifying him as a Fulcrum agent . Mauser tells Chuck that he knows that Casey and Sarah are CIA and that they are protecting an unknown asset . He reveals that Ned is a Fulcrum agent who caused the disturbance so Mauser could infiltrate the Buy More . At this point , it is revealed that Ned is far more competent than the hostages were led to believe , having intentionally shot Casey in the foot and separated Chuck from his handlers . Mauser threatens to shoot the hostages if Chuck does not reveal where Bryce Larkin and the government database the Intersect are . Chuck reveals to Mauser that the Intersect has been uploaded to his brain . 
 As Mauser escorts him from the Buy More , Chuck urges Devon to disarm Ned . As Chuck is taken in an ambulance to a Fulcrum facility , Devon , Jeff Barnes ( Scott <unk> ) , Lester Patel ( Vik Sahay ) , Big Mike ( Mark Christopher Lawrence ) , and Morgan Grimes ( Joshua Gomez ) make a plan . Lester unsuccessfully tries to tackle Ned , but Morgan manages to distract Ned long for Big Mike and Devon to tackle him and end the hostage situation . 
 Meanwhile , Sarah and Casey learn that Ned is unmarried and had earlier called Mauser rather than his wife , as the hostages were led to believe . They follow the ambulance containing Chuck and Mauser and shoot its tires , sending the vehicle into a Christmas tree lot and allowing Chuck to escape . After a brief fight , Mauser surrenders , confident that Fulcrum will rescue him . To protect Chuck , Sarah executes Mauser . Unknown to Sarah , Chuck watches the entire confrontation in horror from afar . She lies to Chuck and tells him that Mauser has been arrested . At the Buy More , Ellie and Morgan 's girlfriend Anna Wu ( Julia Ling ) praise Lester for his act of bravery . Morgan watches as Lester grabs Anna and kisses her , turning away before Anna pulls away from Lester in disgust . The episode closes with both Morgan and Chuck heartbroken , Morgan believing Anna to be unfaithful , and Chuck believing Sarah to be a murderer . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Chuck Versus Santa Claus " was one of many episodes to be directed by producer Robert Duncan McNeill , and was written by producer Scott Rosenbaum . It originally aired in the United States on December 15 , 2008 , on NBC as the eleventh episode of Chuck 's second season and the 24th episode overall . 
 The exterior shots of the store where most of the episode takes place are of a former Mervyn 's store in the Fallbrook Mall in Canoga Park . Reginald VelJohnson guest stars , reprising his Die Hard role of Sergeant Al Powell , who is revealed to be Big Mike 's cousin . Michael Rooker also guest stars as long @-@ time hostage negotiator Frank Mauser and Jed Rees as Ned , the hostage taker . Tony Hale and Bonita Friedericy reprise their recurring roles of efficiency expert Emmett <unk> and General Diane Beckman , respectively . 
 = = = Flashes = = = 
 In this episode , the Intersect is activated once . When Mauser walks into the Buy More , Chuck " flashes " on his watch . This flash reveals that Mauser is a Fulcrum agent , and Chuck urges Devon to end the hostage situation . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode is largely presented as an homage to and parody of Die Hard , which was also centered on terrorists instigating a hostage crisis on the day before Christmas . The episode also has music similar to Die Hard , including the song " Ode to Joy " . Reginald VelJohnson reprises his role of LAPD officer Al Powell from Die Hard and Die Hard 2 . While Powell bought several Twinkies for his wife in Die Hard , in this episode he and Big Mike are shown eating Twinkies at the same time . Chuck later parodied Die Hard on a much larger scale in " Chuck Versus the Leftovers " . 
 The episode contains a number of other references . Its title references Santa Claus . In addition to Die Hard , the episode has been described in part as " a light @-@ hearted Dog Day Afternoon parody . " Ned is believed to be named after Stephen Tobolowsky 's character Ned Ryerson from Groundhog Day , and Mauser after Art Metrano 's character from Police Academy 2 : Their First Assignment and Police Academy 3 : Back in Training . Chuck reveals that Christmas at the Bartowski household includes Twilight Zone marathons , while Sarah reveals that Christmas at the Burton household was spent in a Salvation Army scam . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , " Chuck Versus Santa Claus " drew 7 @.@ 661 million viewers , making it the second most @-@ watched episode of the season , after " Chuck Versus the Third Dimension " . 
 The episode received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics . Eric Goldman of IGN gave the episode a score of 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 , a series high alongside " Chuck Versus the Colonel " , Season 3 's " Chuck Versus the Beard " and " Chuck Versus the Subway " , Season 4 's " Chuck Versus the Cliffhanger " , and Season 5 's " Chuck Versus the Kept Man " and " Chuck Versus the Goodbye " . Goldman described the episode as an " especially strong installment , which delivered on a lot of fronts . " Goldman praised the scene depicting Sarah and Mauser 's confrontation , writing , " The entire ambience of the scene was terrific – a rainy night at a Christmas tree lot , with Chuck secretly watching as Sarah shot the unarmed , surrendering Mauser in cold blood - to the tune of ' Silent Night ' , no less . Of course she did this because she loves Chuck and wants to protect him , but all Chuck knows is that he just saw Sarah in a very scary light , and it 's a great new dynamic to their relationship . " HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall wrote , " Chuck vs. Santa Claus " was moving along amusingly enough when it still seemed like Ned <unk> was just a hapless criminal with the bad luck to crash into a store built above a top @-@ secret government intelligence facility , but the surprising left turn it took when Chuck flashed on Lt. Mauser took things to another level . " Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club gave the episode an A- , writing " Santa Claus certainly delivered ( character ) goodies to everyone tonight . Morgan gets to be a hero , even if no one notices , taking down Ned with a fake snow machine . Jeff calls his mother – in prison – then finds the time to break up a mistletoe makeout session . Lester sneaks a smooch from Anna , and isn 't even remotely fazed when it causes her to run for the hills . And Big Mike 's embrace of cousin Big Al is a keeper . " 
 = New Jersey Route 4 = 
 Route 4 is a state highway in Bergen County and Passaic County , New Jersey , United States . The highway stretches 10 @.@ 83 mi ( 17 @.@ 43 km ) from Route 20 ( McLean Boulevard ) in Paterson east to an interchange with Interstate 95 , U.S. Route 1 / 9 , U.S. Route 46 , and U.S. Route 9W at the George Washington Bridge approach in Fort Lee . The route is a four- to six @-@ lane 40 to 50 mph ( 64 to 80 km / h ) divided highway its entire length , with the portion east of the Route 208 interchange in Fair Lawn a partial freeway consisting of interchanges and right @-@ in / right @-@ out intersections with a few businesses along the road , particularly in Paramus , where the route passes through a major shopping area consisting of numerous malls , Hackensack , Englewood , and Fort Lee . West of Route 208 , the route is a surface arterial that runs through commercial areas . Route 4 intersects many important roads , including Route 208 in Fair Lawn and the Garden State Parkway and Route 17 in Paramus . The highway is officially named the Mackay Highway , but is rarely referred to as such . 
 Route 4 was legislated in 1927 to run from Cape May to the George Washington Bridge . This route replaced pre @-@ 1927 Route 14 between Cape May and Seaville , what was planned as pre @-@ 1927 Route 19 between Seaville and Absecon , pre @-@ 1927 Route 4 between Absecon and Lakewood and South Amboy and Rahway , and a spur of pre @-@ 1927 Route 7 between Lakewood and Freehold , with the rest of the route to be built on a new alignment . The present @-@ day routing of U.S. Route 9 between Cape May and South Amboy and Route 35 between South Amboy and Rahway bore the Route 4 designation prior to 1953 , when the route was defined onto its current alignment . Several spurs of Route 4 existed before 1953 and the Garden State Parkway was originally planned as a bypass of Route 4 that was to be designated Route 4 Parkway . Today 's stretch of the route was completed by 1934 , not long after the opening of the George Washington Bridge in 1931 . It was planned to be upgraded to a full freeway , but plans never materialized . Despite this , the route has seen improvements , such as to the interchanges with Route 17 in 1999 and with Route 208 in 2002 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 4 starts in Paterson , Passaic County at the intersection of Broadway and East 43rd Street at an interchange with Route 20 ( McLean Boulevard ) , heading east on Broadway , a four @-@ lane , divided highway with a Jersey barrier and a speed limit of 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) . The route passes over Route 20 and continues east , crossing the Passaic River into Elmwood Park , Bergen County and passing over County Route 507 . Route 4 features a right @-@ in / right @-@ out in the eastbound direction that provides access to County Route 507 . The route continues east on Broadway as a divided highway with a concrete then a grassy median , with businesses lining both sides of the roadway . At the intersection with Cyril Avenue , Route 4 runs along the border of Elmwood Park to the south and Fair Lawn to the north before entirely entering Fair Lawn , where the route passes under New Jersey Transit ’ s Bergen County Line near Broadway Station . It intersects County Route 67 ( Midland Avenue ) and continues east as a divided highway with a Jersey barrier through commercial areas of Fair Lawn . 
 Route 4 comes to an interchange Route 208 , where the route continues east on the Route 208 alignment , becoming a divided highway with four lanes in the eastbound direction and three lanes in the westbound direction . The interchange between Route 4 and Route 208 also features access to County Route 79 ( Saddle River Road ) . The route continues east as a limited access road that is lined with businesses . Route 4 crosses the Saddle River and then enters Paramus . Upon entering Paramus , Route 4 has a cloverleaf interchange with County Route 62 ( Paramus Road / Passaic Street ) . The route features a partial interchange with the Garden State Parkway , with access from westbound Route 4 to the southbound Garden State Parkway and from the northbound Garden State Parkway to eastbound Route 4 . Route 4 has an interchange which provides access to Westfield Garden State Plaza , located on the south side of the road , and a large IKEA store , located on the north side of the road . Past this , Route 4 features a cloverleaf interchange with Route 17 and continues east as a six @-@ lane divided highway with a 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) speed limit . It interchanges with Spring Valley Road and passes by The Outlets at Bergen Town Center located on the south side of the road . Route 4 interchanges with County Route 59 ( Forest Avenue / Maywood Avenue ) . 
 As the road leaves Paramus , it becomes a partial freeway and businesses no longer line the route . Route 4 enters River Edge , where the route crosses Van <unk> Mill Creek , and it heads to the southeast and features ramps that provide access to County Route 51 ( <unk> Road ) , which the route passes over along with New Jersey Transit 's Pascack Valley Line just south of the New Bridge Landing Station . Upon crossing the Pascack Valley Line , Route 4 heads into Hackensack , where it interchanges with County Route 503 ( Hackensack Avenue ) near The Shops at Riverside . The route crosses the Hackensack River into Teaneck and heads through the campus of Fairleigh Dickinson University . Route 4 features ramps that provide access to County Route 41 ( River Road ) , which it later passes over . The road continues southeast through wooded residential areas , intersecting a few roads at right @-@ in / right @-@ out intersections , before interchanging with Queen Anne Road . It interchanges with County Route 39 ( Teaneck Road ) and Webster Avenue / Farragut Drive before crossing into Englewood where the route crosses Overpeck Creek and businesses resume along the road with access to businesses and a few local roads provided by right @-@ in / right @-@ out ramps . In Englewood , Route 4 features a cloverleaf interchange with Route 93 and County Route 501 ( Grand Avenue ) . Past this interchange , businesses stop along the road and it continues east with three lanes in the eastbound direction and two lanes in the westbound direction , coming to an interchange with Jones Road . Past this interchange , the road continues south with businesses along the road , crossing into Fort Lee . In Fort Lee , the lanes split as Route 4 approaches Interstate 95 , with the eastbound lanes passing over Interstate 95 . Route 4 continues south with Interstate 95 in the median , ending at an interchange with Interstate 95 , U.S. Route 1 / 9 , U.S. Route 46 , and U.S. Route 9W , at the George Washington Bridge approach . 
 = = History = = 
 Route 4 was originally legislated in the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering to run from Cape May north to the George Washington Bridge , running through Pleasantville , Toms River , Freehold , Perth Amboy , Rahway , and Paterson . The route replaced portions of the alignments of several pre @-@ 1927 state highways including pre @-@ 1927 Route 14 between Cape May and Seaville , pre @-@ 1927 Route 19 between Seaville and Absecon , pre @-@ 1927 Route 4 between Absecon and Lakewood and between South Amboy and Rahway , a spur of pre @-@ 1927 Route 7 between Lakewood and Freehold . The rest of the proposed route was to be built on a new alignment . Of the pre @-@ 1927 state highways that Route 4 was to follow , pre @-@ 1927 Route 14 was originally legislated in 1917 , pre @-@ 1927 Route 19 was legislated in 1923 but never built , pre @-@ 1927 Route 4 was created in 1916 , and the spur of pre @-@ 1927 Route 7 was created in 1925 . U.S. Route 9 was also designated along Route 4 between Absecon and Lakewood and from South Amboy to Rahway . By the 1940s , U.S. Route 9 was realigned to follow Route 4 between Lakewood and South Amboy , having followed portions of today ’ s Route 88 , Route 35 , and Route 71 and was extended south along Route 4 to Cape May . The section of present @-@ day Route 4 was built between 1930 and 1934 to connect Paterson and the George Washington Bridge in Fort Lee . There were plans made in 1936 to make this portion of Route 4 a limited @-@ access road ; however , World War II delayed plans for the expressway . 
 Route 4 had several former spur routes that existed prior to the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering . Route 4N was designated in 1939 from the portion of pre @-@ 1927 Route 4 between Brielle and Eatontown ; it is now Route 71 . Route S4 was defined in 1927 to run to the Outerbridge Crossing in Perth Amboy from present @-@ day Route 35 ; it was eventually extended to the Garden State Parkway and this route is now Routes 440 and 184 . Route S4A was planned in 1927 to run from Atlantic City across swamps to Tuckerton ; only a small portion of this route was built and it is now Route 87 . Route S4B was planned in 1929 to run Route 4 near Paterson northwest to the New York border , replacing a portion of what was legislated as Route 3 in 1927 . The portion of this route that was built between Fair Lawn and Oakland is now Route 208 . Route <unk> was a never built spur in Teaneck proposed in 1938 ; the proposal was renumbered Route 303 . Route 4A was created by the 1940s following a realignment of Route 4 ( and U.S. Route 9 ) between Freehold and Cheesequake ; it became Route 79 and a portion of Route 34 in 1953 . Route 4 Parkway was planned in 1946 as a north – south parkway running from Cape May north to Route 6 ( now U.S. Route 46 ) in Clifton , bridging the gap that existed along Route 4 between Rahway and Paterson ; this proposal became Route 444 ( Garden State Parkway ) . Route S4C was a planned route running from Route 4 in Bennett south to Cape May ; the general alignment of this route is now Route 162 and Cape May County Route 626 . 
 In the 1953 renumbering , Route 4 was defined to run along its current alignment between Route 20 in Paterson and the George Washington Bridge . Between Cape May and South Amboy , the Route 4 designation was dropped in favor of U.S. Route 9 while the portion of the route between South Amboy and Rahway became a part of Route 35 . In the mid @-@ 1950s , plans resumed for an east – west limited @-@ access road through Bergen County . Three alignments were proposed in 1956 : one along Route 4 , one along U.S. Route 46 , and one in between the two routes . The alignment between the two routes was chosen due to the least disruption it would cause and it was built as Interstate 80 . In the 1960s , recommendations were made to upgrade Route 4 to a full freeway but was cancelled due to feared disruption to residents . 
 Many improvements have been made to the existing Route 4 arterial . The Route 17 interchange in Paramus was rebuilt at a cost of $ 120 million in 1999 , replacing the 1932 cloverleaf interchange by adding several flyover ramps . In 2002 , construction was completed on a $ 32 million project that improved the interchange with Route 208 in Fair Lawn . This interchange saw improvements of the ramps and bridges , including the Route 208 bridge over Saddle River Road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 All exits are unnumbered . 
 = TS @-@ 19 = 
 " TS @-@ 19 " is the sixth episode and season finale of the first season of the post @-@ apocalyptic horror television series , The Walking Dead . It originally aired on AMC in the United States on December 5 , 2010 . The episode was written by Adam Fierro and series creator Frank Darabont and directed by Guy Ferland . In the episode , the group finally finds safe haven in the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention headquarters , although the only scientist there , Dr. Edwin Jenner ( Noah Emmerich ) hides many secrets that leads the group to demand answers about the zombie apocalypse . 
 Themes such as romance , rape , suicide and terror are prevalent throughout " TS @-@ 19 " . Different character developments occur throughout the episode , particularly with Shane Walsh ( Jon Bernthal ) , who writer Robert Kirkman felt that viewers would no longer identify as the show 's main antagonist . Production for " TS @-@ 19 " commenced at the Cobb Energy Performing Arts Centre , as opposed to the actual headquarters for the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention , which was impractical due to the high security of the area . 
 " TS @-@ 19 " received favorable reception from television commentators , who praised the development of various characters as well as the performances of several actors and actresses . Upon airing , it attained 5 @.@ 97 million viewers and a 3 @.@ 4 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to the Nielsen Media Research . " TS @-@ 19 " at one point was the show 's highest @-@ rated episode , and it is the highest @-@ rated telecast in its first season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens with a flashback , which features Shane Walsh ( Jon Bernthal ) attempting to save an unconscious Rick Grimes ( Andrew Lincoln ) . Observing military personnel killing various patients , doctors , and walkers from the premises , Shane tries to carry Rick out of the hospital , to no avail . After an explosion , the hospital machines shut off , and Shane puts his ear to Rick 's chest and begins to think he has died . Distraught , Shane leaves Rick in the room and puts a hospital bed against the door to protect him from walkers . 
 After entering the headquarters of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , the survivors are confronted by Dr. Edwin Jenner ( Noah Emmerich ) , who is armed with an automatic carbine . Jenner allows the group to stay on the condition that they all must undertake a blood test , to which Rick agrees . As the group indulge in various luxuries such as showers and wine , many of them are perplexed with the situation . Jenner reveals that he is the only medical personnel dedicated to eradicating the walker illness ; many of the medical staff have returned to their families or have committed suicide . Meanwhile , a drunk Shane confronts Lori Grimes ( Sarah Wayne Callies ) about her callous attitude towards him . As the argument begins to peak , Shane attempts to rape Lori , but backs off when she scratches him on the neck . 
 The next morning , Jenner shows the group the clinical results of Test Subject 19 , a person ( later announced to be his wife ) who was bitten by a walker and volunteered to be observed as the infection progressed . The time @-@ lapse MRI video demonstrates the disease attacking the brain , similar to meningitis , ultimately killing the victim . Brain activity is restarted a few hours later , simultaneously reanimating the body to mere basic functions . Jenner explains that the brain stem reanimates anywhere from a few minutes to 8 hours after death , and adds that the conscious human traits do not return . 
 Jenner theorizes that medical facilities worldwide may have faced similar predicaments . French doctors came the closest to finding a cure , but communication was lost . The survivors are shocked when they hear that human civilization is ceasing to exist . Later , the group confirms that the last diesel tank is running out of fuel , and a power outage ensues . Since the facility was designed to isolate unimaginably dangerous diseases , if it can 't power itself , it automatically destroys everything inside so that no diseases will get out . As they confront Jenner about their fate , Jenner seals them in the main room underground , and tells them that the decontamination procedure ( a high @-@ impulse thermobaric weapon wired throughout the facility 's air vents ) will mean the destruction of everything inside the facility , offering an instant and painless death to everyone inside . 
 Rick and Lori plead for the doors to be opened , while Daryl Dixon ( Norman Reedus ) and Shane attempt to force Jenner to open the doors . He relents because they know if they kill him they will not get the combination to open the doors then all of them would indeed die . Finally , with less than five minutes remaining , Jenner opens the doors after Rick 's pleading with him to let them at least " try " to overcome this tragedy and not be forced to die . Two of the survivors , Jacqui ( Jeryl Prescott Sales ) and Andrea ( Laurie Holden ) , choose to stay behind , but Dale Horvath ( Jeffrey DeMunn ) refuses to leave without Andrea . Before Rick leaves , Jenner whispers something in his ear which leaves Rick visibly shaken . The rest of the group heads for the exits , using a grenade to blow out one of the front windows , and fight their way to their vehicles through several walkers . Andrea and Dale emerge from the building moments before the building detonates ; Jacqui stays inside with Jenner . As Jacqui and Jenner hold hands and let tears drop from their faces , the explosion begins . As the episode ends , the survivors form a vehicular convoy and leave the area , while a massive column of smoke and flame marks the place where the CDC building had stood . 
 = = Production = = 
 " TS @-@ 19 " was directed by Guy Ferland and written by Frank Darabont and Adam Fierro . Actor Noah Emmerich made a guest appearance on the show , portraying the character of Edwin Jenner , one of the few remaining medical personnel dedicated to eradicating the virus . Emmerich 's appearance was formally announced in November 2010 . Darabont foreshadowed the development of the episode the same month , alongside predecessors " Vatos " and " Wildfire " . " Before it 's all said and done , the opinions and actions of the group are divided . " Producer Gale Anne Hurd added , " Stakes are higher , dissension develops , rivalries intensify . " 
 Principal photography for " TS @-@ 19 " transpired at the Cobb Energy Performing Arts Centre , which was depicted as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Producers of the show were not allowed to photograph the interior of the actual buildings as part of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as a point of reference due to its high security . Although the location was not featured in the comics of the same name , Hurd felt that it was important to add because of its close proximity to the survivor 's camp . As opposed to the previous episode , where filming mostly took place outside of the Cobb Energy Performing Arts Centre , production for " TS @-@ 19 " occurred inside of the building . Darabont conceived the idea of exploring into the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . " When Frank was pitching the idea to me , saying he wanted to bring them to the CDC and telling me all the different things that he felt would come out of that story , the science of it all and the being trapped in the small location , I was very much picturing a lot of Day of the Dead stuff , " stated creator Robert Kirkman . " That 's one of the reasons I was so on board with the idea . " 
 At the episode 's conclusion , Jenner purposely calls for the self @-@ destruction of the building , which ultimately explodes shortly thereafter . A plate was installed on set , which hovered over pyrotechnics . The plate was turned upside down to create an optical effect where the flame travels across the panel . This created an illusion that the explosion was expanding . The sequence was divided into six different cuts ; the first one consisted of the rupture glass of the building , while the last frame concluded with the collapse of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . 
 While his group escapes from the Center of Disease Control and Prevention , Jenner whispers to Rick about the virus that has caused the zombie apocalypse . Initially there was no indication as to what Jenner said to him ; the dialogue was previously inserted into the episode 's script but was later removed . " I 'm so pleased they didn 't reveal it , " said Andrew Lincoln , " because it was scripted , and extremely powerful , and I said to everyone , ' Burn this page : No one should know apart from Rick and Frank . ' It 's brilliant that they left it [ as a mystery ] — it 's perfect , it 's so classy . " Kirkman was content with the idea of teasing Jenner 's revelation in lieu of blatantly revealing anything about the origins of the virus . " I thought it was a great addition . I 'm very much opposed to showing what the actual cause [ for the zombies ] is and explaining how things work , but teasing a little bit is a great thing . If it adds an extra layer to the drama , then I 'm all for it , " he stated . " It also led up to the fantastic mystery of the whisper Jenner gives to Rick at the end of that scene . That 's going to play into Season 2 quite a bit . I know where that 's going and it 's really a cool bit . " It is not until the second season finale , " Beside the Dying Fire " , that Rick reveals Jenner 's message to the group . 
 In a 2014 interview with The Hollywood Reporter , Robert Kirkman revealed that he regrets revealing that everyone in the new world is infected too soon , saying " If I had to do it again , I wouldn 't have done the CDC episode [ at the end of season one ] . It possibly gave away too much information and was such a big change very early on in the series . " 
 = = Themes and cultural references = = 
 Ideas alluding to romance are prevalent throughout the episode . The development between Shane Walsh and Lori Grimes continues in " TS @-@ 19 " , which showcases a flashback featuring Shane being conflicted with the decision to leave an unconscious Rick Grimes in the hospital — who Shane initially presumes to be dead . Kirkman asserted that the sequence added dimension to the storyline , and concluded that by the ending of the episode , the audience will no longer identify Shane as an antagonist . " Up until the sixth episode , you get the sense that Shane actually is a bad guy , that he lied to Lori and made her believe that he was dead in order to facilitate him moving in on her , " said Kirkman . " The flashback does a great job of telling you that that 's not true : He tried to save Rick , he wanted to save Rick . He was kind of up against the wall there and actually did believe that Rick was dead . " Lincoln said of the flashback : " You realize Shane 's loyalty as a friend and as a man — and also his weaknesses . He still can 't make a decision without his partner , and you realize he 's flawed — everybody is under incredible duress , you see the state of the world is so extreme and terrifying that people are making split @-@ second decisions under great duress . Is Shane barricading Rick in , or is he trying to prevent him being taken by the walkers ? There are many different ways to construe what Shane has done and that 's the beauty of the show is that there 's no clear and definite answers , you make your own mind . " Other themes prominent in the episode include suicide and terror . 
 The character progression of Shane is a focal point in " TS @-@ 19 " . After facing constant rejection from Lori through much of the previous three episodes , he has become more agitated and impatient with her . According to Kirkman , it was important to integrate dimension to the character so that viewers " can see later in the episode , when [ Shane ] is losing it and actually getting somewhat violent with Lori , the transition he 's gone through and how this world has changed him from being a loving , easygoing guy into this guy who is slowly devolving into a bit of a maniac . " 
 The Dr. Edwin Jenner character mentions the French continuing to try to find a cure while others were " bolting for the doors " in conjugate reference to the belief by some Americans and British that the French did not fight back in the first part of World War 2 . 
 The show features various references relating to music , media , film , and other pop cultural phenomenon . Character Dr. Edwin Jenner was modeled after the English physician Edward Jenner , a pioneer in the eradication of smallpox . The episode title is an acronym for Test Subject 19 , a patient that was examined by Jenner for clinical research . As " TS @-@ 19 " comes to a close , one can hear the song " Tomorrow Is a Long Time " ( 1971 ) by American singer @-@ songwriter Bob Dylan play in the background . The Washington Post 's Liz Kelly suggested that it could have referred to the seemingly long hiatus that proceeded after the season finale . Jenner later reveals to the group that the symptoms of the walker virus are evocative to that of meningitis . As Rick desperately tries to break out of a nearly incinerating Centers for Disease Control and Prevention building , Carol hands him a grenade , which was the same grenade that Rick had found in a tank in the series premiere , " Days Gone Bye " . The opening and concluding scenes of " TS @-@ 19 " are reminiscent of the American television series Lost . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " TS @-@ 19 " was originally broadcast on December 5 , 2010 in the United States on AMC . Upon initial airing , the episode amassed 5 @.@ 97 million viewers and a 4 @.@ 1 household rating , indicating that 4 @.@ 1 % of households that watched television viewed the episode . Following two encore presentations , total viewership accumulated to 8 @.@ 1 million . At the time of its airing , " TS @-@ 19 " was the highest @-@ rated cable television series of all time demographically ; it attained a 3 @.@ 4 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , denoting 4 million viewers , while simultaneous acquiring 3 @.@ 5 million viewers in the 25 – 54 demographic according to Nielsen Media Research . The accolade was then succeeded by three episodes of The Walking Dead : the episode 's ratings were beaten by second season premiere " What Lies Ahead " , followed by " Nebraska " , and lastly the second season finale " Beside the Dying Fire " , of which the last aforementioned currently holds the record . " TS @-@ 19 " became the most @-@ viewed cable telecast of the day , obtaining significantly higher ratings than installments of Hannah Montana and Shake It Up on Disney Channel . Ratings and total viewership moderately increased from the previous installment , " Wildfire " , which received 5 @.@ 56 million viewers and a 2 @.@ 8 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . In the United Kingdom , " TS @-@ 19 " garnered 492 @,@ 000 viewers , subsequently becoming the most @-@ viewed television series of the week on FX . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " TS @-@ 19 " garnered favorable reviews from most television critics . In his 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 rating review , Eric Goldman of IGN wrote that the episode was an exceptional showing for the series , adding that it told " a compelling , intense story within its hour " albeit averting from the comics . As Michelle Kung of The Wall Street Journal wrote , " The first season of The Walking Dead doesn ’ t exactly end on an optimistic note , but our heroes are left driving into the unknown after escaping certain death at the CDC . " Kurt Christenson of New York Daily News analyzed that " almost and everyone 's still kind of in the dark " , and Kelly stated that " TS @-@ 19 " came to an " abrupt , explosive end " . Salon journalist Simon Abrams concluded that the frenetic pace of The Walking Dead was relatable , while Paste television commentator Josh Jackson was keen of the character development in the episode as well as the varying political themes covered ; " After six episodes , the characters are worth caring about . Despite occasional stilted monologues , quick tempers and unfortunate stereotypes , the few living souls in The Walking Dead are a bigger draw than the undead . The show has spent more time on topics like marriage , parenthood , unfaithfulness , loss , domestic violence , gender roles , small @-@ scale politics , loyalty , kindness than it has with kill shots . By filling the world with zombies , Frank Darabont is able to explore the human condition under extreme circumstances . " Entertainment Weekly writer Dan Snierson was entertained by " TS @-@ 19 " , and asserted that the conclusion " resonated over images of Rick & Co . U @-@ turning into the great unknown , we got the sense that as long as they were alive , at least there was a chance of a tomorrow . " Writing for the same publication , Jeff Jensen was intrigued at how producers approached the themes of the comics , and later noted that it was proof that they were using the comics as a route for thematic inspiration in lieu of a literal interpretation . For Los Angeles Times ' Gina McIntyre , " Tonight 's finale [ ... ] did yield much insight , though , into the nature of the plague itself , in relative terms anyway . " 
 Some commentators were less enthusiastic about the episode than the general consensus . Although Josh Wigler of MTV declared " TS @-@ 19 " a " compelling hour " , he professed that it was lacking for a season finale . " While there was a massive fireball and a decent amount of zombie action , " explained Wigler , " not to mention some concrete information regarding the outbreak , there are still several plot threads that haven 't come close to resolution . " Vanity Fair 's Mike Ryan argued that in contrast to a " great season " , the episode was a mediocre conclusion to The Walking Dead 's first season , writing that " this might have been the silliest hour of television that I 've ever watched " . Leonard Pierce of The A.V. Club issued " TS @-@ 19 " a B – grade : despite proclaiming that " there was some good stuff " in the episode , Pierce opined that it fell below his expectations . He denounced many scenes in the episode — notably the explosion sequence — as he felt it was a waste of cinematography . " The fact that almost all the scenes played out in dark , closed quarters wasted The Walking Dead 's gorgeous cinematography ; the pacing was again off beat , with far too much padded scenes of people looking at one another in shock ; and , though I 'm usually not bothered by plot contrivances , there 's no way anyone in a vehicle that close to such a huge explosion would have lived through it . " Writing for Cinema Blend , Nick Venable said that it was an interesting episode , although it could have been executed in a better manner . 
 The character progression of several characters and the performances of various actors were lauded by critics . Wigler noted that Bernthal , Holden , and DeMunn delivered " brilliant character work " , a view that was echoed by Pierce in regards to Emmerich 's performance ; " He has a nervous intensity that grounded every scene he was in , which this show needs . " Similarly , Alan Sepinwall of HitFix described Emmerich 's acting as " haunting " , and ultimately cited the performances of Lincoln , Holden , and DeMunn as episode highlights . Ryan affirmed that character development remained one of the series ' strongest points . 
 = = Deleted scene = = 
 In a scene deleted from the television series , after Rick 's group flees the CDC they return to the Atlanta nursing home they first visited in " Vatos " , only to find the residents and their protectors have been killed execution @-@ style and their supplies ransacked . 
 = Charles Crombie = 
 Charles Arbuthnot Crombie DSO , DFC ( 16 March 1914 – 26 August 1945 ) was an Australian aviator and flying ace of the Second World War . Born in Brisbane , he was working as a <unk> when he enlisted in the Royal Australian Air Force in May 1940 . Completing flight training in Australia and Canada , he flew in the European , Mediterranean and Middle East Theatre and South @-@ East Asian theatres , amassing a tally of 12 Axis aircraft shot down , with an additional four probables . In a particular attack on 19 January 1943 , Crombie intercepted a formation of four Japanese bombers over India . Despite his aircraft being set alight early in the engagement , he shot down two of the bombers and severely damaged a third before he was forced to bail out . He was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for this action . Returning to Australia late in 1943 , he was promoted to squadron leader and posted as a flight instructor with No. 5 Operational Training Unit . Crombie was killed in a flying accident in August 1945 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Crombie was born in Brisbane , Queensland , on 16 March 1914 to David William Alexander Crombie , a grazing farmer , and his Indian @-@ born British wife Phoebe Janet ( née Arbuthnot ) , the daughter of Lieutenant General Sir Charles Arbuthnot . During his youth , Crombie was educated at the Sydney Church of England Grammar School in North Sydney . Completing his schooling , he was employed as a <unk> on his family 's property near Warwick , Queensland . In 1934 , Crombie enlisted in the Citizens Military Force and was allotted to the 11th Light Horse Regiment . His service with the unit was to last until 1938 , by which time he had obtained the rank of sergeant . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Training , European and Middle Eastern theatres = = = 
 With the ambition of becoming a pilot in the Royal Australian Air Force , Crombie undertook instruction in civil flying . Completing his course , he enlisted in the Air Force on 24 May 1940 . He was initially posted to RAAF Station Richmond , before transferring to No. 2 Initial Training School at RAAF Bradfield Park in June , where he was advanced to leading aircraftman . The following month , Crombie was attached to No. 5 Empire Flight Training School . On finishing his stint with the unit , he was posted to No. 2 <unk> Depot on 18 September . In a ceremony two days later , Crombie married Betty Deane @-@ Butcher ; the couple would later have a son . 
 On 3 October 1940 — two weeks after his wedding — Crombie embarked a ship at Sydney , bound for Canada . He arrived three weeks later , where he completed an additional two months of advanced flight training . Crombie was commissioned as a pilot officer on 17 January 1941 , and set sail for the United Kingdom nine days later . In May , he was attached to the Royal Air Force 's No. 25 Squadron , piloting Bristol Beaufighters . While with the unit , he flew his first operational sortie on 13 June ; he was promoted to flying officer the next month . Crombie continued to serve with the squadron until October , by which time he had flown a total of twelve operational sorties over the European theatre , including two raids ; one over Germany , and the other to Brest , France . 
 Crombie was transferred to the Mediterranean and Middle East Theatre and posted to No. 89 Squadron RAF in October 1941 , operating over Egypt and Malta . Also flying Beaufighters , Crombie piloted his first foray with the unit on 21 October , and by the end of the year had been accredited with the destruction of six Axis aircraft , with an additional two probables . Throughout 1942 , the squadron continued to operate over North Africa and the Middle East , with Crombie adding three more aircraft to his tally . 
 = = = South @-@ East Asia = = = 
 In January 1943 , Crombie was once again transferred , this time to No. 176 Squadron RAF stationed in India , operating in support of operations in the Burma Campaign ; he arrived at his new post on 12 January and was promoted to flight lieutenant five days later . By the time he left the Middle East , Crombie had been accorded an official tally of nine Axis aircraft shot down , with two probables . 
 In the evening of 19 January 1943 , Crombie was airborne over India with his navigator Warrant Officer Raymond Moss . At approximately 20 : 45 , the pair intercepted a formation of four Japanese bombers flying over Budge Budge . Crombie flew his aircraft towards the group but his initial attack drew fire from the bombers , setting the starboard engine ablaze . Despite the damage , he pushed ahead with the assault and shot down one of the bombers . Flames from the burning engine then began to sweep back , and Crombie ordered Moss to bail out . Alone , Crombie continued the assault , shooting down a second bomber , before turning his attention to a third . Due to his efforts , the penultimate aircraft was " so badly damaged ... that it could not have reached its base " . At this time , Crombie sought out the fourth and final machine . However , his petrol tank exploded , and he was forced " to bale out with his clothing alight " . He landed in " the most God awful swamp " , and walked for three or four hours before he reached an army unit in the area , which returned him to his squadron . 
 As a result of their " cool courage " , Crombie was awarded a " well deserved " Distinguished Service Order , with Moss receiving the Distinguished Flying Cross . The notification and accompanying citation for the decorations was promulgated in a supplement to the London Gazette on 19 February 1943 , reading : 
 Air Ministry , 19th February , 1943 . 
 ROYAL AIR FORCE . 
 The KING has been graciously pleased to approve the following awards in recognition of gallantry displayed in flying operations against the enemy : — 
 Distinguished Service Order . 
 Flying Officer Charles Arbuthnot <unk> ( <unk> ) , Royal Australian Air Force , No. 176 Squadron . 
 Distinguished Flying Cross . 
 Warrant Officer Raymond Christopher Moss ( <unk> ) , No. 176 Squadron . 
 As pilot and observer respectively Flying Officer Crombie and Warrant Officer Moss have flown together in many night flying operations in the United Kingdom , the Middle East and in India . They have destroyed 8 enemy aircraft and damaged another . One night in January , 1943 , they destroyed 2 of a formation of 4 Japanese aircraft before being compelled to abandon their own aircraft which was set on fire during the engagement . 
 Flying Officer Crombie and Warrant Officer Moss have displayed great courage , determination and devotion to duty . 
 Crombie completed his final patrol with No. 176 Squadron on 28 April 1943 , before moving to Air Headquarters , Bengal four days later . Later that month , Crombie carried out two raids over Akyab , Burma , the first a strafing attack on Japanese troops in the area , and the second assaulting Japanese shipping . On 25 May , the announcement that Crombie had been awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross was published in a supplement to the London Gazette . The decoration came as a result of his " High standard of courage and keenness whilst flying " with No. 89 Squadron in the Middle East , carrying out " ... Intruder patrols and ... low level attacks on enemy bases " in addition to his personal destruction of Axis aircraft . 
 Crombie piloted his final sortie of the war from Air Headquarters , Bengal on 7 July 1943 . His operational tour now finished , he embarked for Australia in August , arriving in Melbourne on 27 September . By the time Crombie 's tour completed , he had been accorded an official tally of 12 aircraft shot down , with an additional <unk> of four probables . 
 = = = Home duties and death = = = 
 On his return to Australia , Crombie was posted for duties as an instructor with No. 5 Operational Training Unit at RAAF Station Williamtown in December 1943 . In March 1944 , Crombie piloted a Beaufighter from Brisbane to New Guinea , flying the aircraft in the local area for a period of eleven days testing the machine , before returning to Richmond , New South Wales . He was promoted to acting squadron leader on 1 September , and made chief flying instructor of No. 5 Operational Training Unit , heading the group 's two sections of Beaufighter and de Havilland Mosquito aircraft . 
 On 8 May 1945 , to celebrate Victory in Europe Day , 12 aircraft from No. 5 Operational Training Unit were detailed to do a flypast over Newcastle , New South Wales . Crombie headed the group , which comprised six Beaufighters followed by six Mosquitoes ; the final aircraft in the group was piloted by Flight Lieutenant Charles " Bud " Tingwell . The flypast concluded successfully , and the formation returned to base . However , as the group neared the aerodrome , the other pilots disobeyed Crombie 's orders and carried out a feint attack on the installation . He called the men into his office and reprimanded them as a result . 
 On 26 August 1945 , Crombie was flying a Beaufighter on a test flight . He completed the flight and returned to base . Coming in to land , a problem occurred in one of the engines and he fell short of the runway ; Crombie was killed in the resulting collision . Survived by his wife and one @-@ year @-@ old son , his funeral was attended by all the personnel of No. 5 Operational Training Unit . He was subsequently buried in Sandgate War Cemetery . Fellow No. 5 Operational Training Unit instructor Bud Tingwell later described him as " one of the best pilots in the air force " . 
 = Mycenaean Greece = 
 Mycenaean Greece ( or Mycenaean civilization ) was the last phase of the Bronze Age in Ancient Greece ( c . 1600 – 1100 BC ) . It represents the first advanced civilization in mainland Greece , with its palatial states , urban organization , works of art and writing system . Among the centers of power that emerged , the most notable were those of Pylos , Tiryns , Midea in the Peloponnese , Orchomenos , Thebes , Athens in Central Greece and Iolcos in Thessaly . The most prominent site was Mycenae , in Argolid , to which the culture of this era owes its name . Mycenaean and Mycenaean @-@ influenced settlements also appeared in Epirus , Macedonia , on islands in the Aegean Sea , on the coast of Asia Minor , the Levant , Cyprus and Italy . 
 The Mycenaean Greeks introduced several innovations in the fields of engineering , architecture and military infrastructure , while trade over vast areas of the Mediterranean was essential for the Mycenaean economy . Their syllabic script , the Linear B , offers the first written records of the Greek language and their religion already included several deities that can be also found in Olympic Pantheon . Mycenaean Greece was dominated by a warrior elite society and consisted of a network of palace states that developed rigid hierarchical , political , social and economic systems . At the head of this societies was the king , known as wanax . 
 Mycenaean Greece perished with the collapse of Bronze Age culture in the eastern Mediterranean , to be followed by the so @-@ called Greek Dark Ages , a <unk> transitional period leading to Archaic Greece where significant shifts occurred from palace @-@ centralized to de @-@ centralized forms of socio @-@ economic organization ( including the extensive use of iron ) . Various theories have been proposed for the end of this civilization , among them the Dorian invasion or activities connected to the “ Sea Peoples ” . Additional theories such as natural disasters and climatic changes have been also suggested . The Mycenaean period became the historical setting of much ancient Greek literature and mythology , including the Trojan Epic Cycle . 
 = = Chronology = = 
 The Bronze Age in mainland Greece is generally termed as the " Helladic period " by modern archaeologists , after Hellas , the Greek name for Greece . This period is divided into three <unk> : The Early Helladic ( EH ) period ( c . 2900 – 2000 BC ) was a time of prosperity with the use of metals and a growth in technology , economy and social organization . The Middle Helladic ( MH ) period ( ca . 2000 – 1650 BC ) faced a slower pace of development , as well as the evolution of megaron @-@ type cist graves . Finally , the Late Helladic ( LH ) period ( c . 1650 – 1050 BC ) roughly coincides with Mycenaean Greece . 
 The Late Helladic period is further divided into LHI and <unk> , both of which coincide with the early period of Mycenaean Greece ( c . 1650 – 1425 BC ) , and <unk> ( c . 1425 – 1050 BC ) , the period of expansion , decline and collapse of the Mycenaean civilization . The transition period from the Bronze Age to the Iron Age in Greece is known as Sub @-@ Mycenaean ( c . 1050 – 1000 BC ) . 
 = = Identity = = 
 The decipherment of the Mycenaean Linear B script , a writing system adapted for the use of the Greek language of the Late Bronze Age , demonstrated the continuity of Greek speech from the 2nd millennium BC into the 8th century BC when a new script emerged . Moreover , it revealed that the bearers of Mycenaean culture were ethnically connected with the populations that resided in the Greek peninsula after the end of this cultural period . Various collective terms for the inhabitants of Mycenaean Greece were used by Homer in his 8th century BC epic , the Iliad , in reference to the Trojan War . The latter was supposed to have happened in the late 13th – early 12th century BC , when a coalition of small Greek states under the king of Mycenae , besieged the walled city of Troy . Homer used the ethnonyms Achaeans , Danaans and Argives , to refer to the besiegers . These names appear to have passed down from the time they were in use to the time when Homer applied them as collective terms in his Iliad . There is an isolated reference to a @-@ ka @-@ wi @-@ ja @-@ de in the Linear B records in Knossos , Crete dated to c . 1400 BC , which most probably refers to a Mycenaean ( Achaean ) state on the Greek mainland . 
 Egyptian records mention a T ( D ) -n @-@ j or Danaya ( <unk> ) land for the first time in circa 1437 BC , during the reign of Pharaoh <unk> III ( r . 1479 – 1425 BC ) . This land is geographically defined in an inscription from the reign of Amenhotep III ( r. circa 1391 / 1388 – 1353 / 1351 BC ) , where a number of Danaya cities are mentioned , which cover the largest part of southern mainland Greece . Among them , cities such as Mycenae , Nauplion and Thebes , have been identified with certainty . Danaya has been equated with the ethnonym <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) , the name of the mythical dynasty that ruled in the region of Argos , also used as an ethnonym for the Greek people by Homer . 
 In the official records of another Bronze Age empire , that of the Hittites in Anatolia , various references from c . 1400 BC to 1220 BC mention a country named Ahhiyawa . Recent scholarship , based on textual evidence , new interpretations of the Hittite inscriptions , as well as on recent surveys of archaeological evidence about Mycenaean @-@ Anatolian contacts during this period , concludes that the term Ahhiyawa must have been used in reference to the Mycenaean world ( land of the Achaeans ) , or at least to a part of it . This term may have also had broader connotations in some texts , possibly referring to all regions settled by Mycenaeans or regions under direct Mycenaean political control . Another similar ethnonym <unk> in 12th century BC Egyptian inscriptions , has been commonly identified with the <unk> . These <unk> were mentioned as a group of the Sea People . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Shaft Grave era ( c . 1600 – 1450 BC ) = = = 
 Mycenaean civilization originated and evolved from the society and culture of the Early and Middle Helladic period in mainland Greece under influences from Minoan Crete . Towards the end of the Middle Bronze Age ( c . 1600 BC ) a significant increase in the population and the number of settlements occurred . A number of centers of power emerged in southern mainland Greece dominated by a warrior elite society , while the typical dwellings of that era were an early type of megaron buildings . Some more complex structures are classified as forerunners of the later palaces . In a number of sites , defensive walls were also erected . 
 Meanwhile , new types of burials and more imposing ones have been unearthed , which display a great variety of luxurious objects . Among the various burials types , the shaft grave became the most common form of elite burial , a feature that gave the name to the early period of Mycenaean Greece . Among the Mycenaean elite , deceased males were usually laid in gold masks and funerary armor , while females in gold crowns and clothes gleaming with gold ornaments . The royal shaft graves next to the acropolis of Mycenae , in particular the Grave Circles A and B signified the elevation of a native Greek @-@ speaking royal dynasty whose economic power depended on long @-@ distance sea trade . 
 During this period , the Mycenaean centers witnessed increased contacts with the outside world and especially with the Cyclades and the Minoan centers in the island of Crete . Mycenaean presence appears to be also depicted in a fresco at Akrotiri , on Thera island , which possibly displays many warriors in Boar 's tusk helmets , a feature typical of Mycenaean warfare . In the early 15th century , commerce intensified with Mycenaean pottery reaching the western coast of Asia Minor , including Miletus and Troy , Cyprus , Lebanon , Palestine and Egypt . 
 At the end of the Shaft Grave era , a new and more imposing type of elite burial emerged , the <unk> : large circular burial chambers with high vaulted roofs and a straight entry passage lined with stone . 
 = = = Koine era ( c . 1450 BC – 1250 BC ) = = = 
 The eruption of Thera , which according to archaeological data occurred in c . 1500 BC , resulted in the decline of the Minoan civilization of Crete . This turn of events gave the opportunity to the Mycenaeans to spread their influence throughout the Aegean . Around c . 1450 BC , they were in control of Crete itself , including Knossos , and colonized several other Aegean islands , reaching as far as Rhodes . Thus the Mycenaeans became the dominant power of the region , marking the beginning of the Mycenaean ' Koine ' era ( from Greek : <unk> , common ) , a highly uniform culture that spread in mainland Greece and the Aegean . 
 From the early 14th century BC , Mycenaean trade began to take advantage of the new trading opportunities in the Mediterranean after the Minoan collapse . The trade routes were expanded further reaching Cyprus , Amman in the Near East , Apulia in Italy and Spain . At that time ( c . 1400 BC ) , the palace of Knossos yielded the earliest records of the Greek Linear B script , based on the previous Linear A of the Minoans . The use of the new script spread in mainland Greece and offers valuable insight of the administrative network of the palatial centers . However , the unearthed records are too fragmentary for a political reconstruction of Bronze Age Greece . 
 Excavations at Miletus , southwest Asia Minor , indicate the existence of a Mycenaean settlement there already from c . 1450 BC , replacing the previous Minoan installations . This site became a sizable and prosperous Mycenaean center until the 12th century BC . Apart from the archaeological evidence , this is also attested in Hittite records , which indicate that <unk> ( <unk> in Hittite ) was the most important base for Mycenaean activity in Asia Minor . Mycenaean presence also reached the adjacent sites of <unk> and Ephesus . 
 Meanwhile , imposing palaces were built in the main Mycenaean centers of the mainland . The earliest palace structures were megaron @-@ type buildings , such as the <unk> in Sparta , <unk> . Palaces proper are datable from c . 1400 BC , when Cyclopean fortifications were erected at Mycenae and nearby Tiryns . Additional palaces were built in Midea and Pylos in Peloponnese , Athens , Eleusis , Thebes and Orchomenos in Central Greece and Iolcos , in Thessaly , the latter being the northernmost Mycenaean center . Knossos in Crete became also a Mycenaean center , where the former Minoan complex intervened a number of adjustments , including the addition of a throne room . These centers were based on a rigid network of bureaucracy while administrative competences , were classified in various sections and offices , according to specialization of work and trades . At the head of this society was the king , known as wanax ( Linear B : wa @-@ na @-@ ka ) in Mycenaean Greek terms . All powers were centered on him , who was the main landlord , the spiritual and military leader . At the same time he was an entrepreneur and trader and was aided by a network of high officials . 
 = = = = Involvement in Asia Minor = = = = 
 The presence of Ahhiyawa in western Anatolia is mentioned in various Hittite accounts from c . 1400 to c . 1220 BC . Ahhiyawa is generally accepted as a Hittite translation of Mycenaean Greece ( Achaeans in Homeric Greek ) , but a precise geographical definition of the term cannot be drawn from the texts . During this time , the kings of Ahhiyawa were evidently capable of dealing with their Hittite counterparts both on a diplomatic and military level . Moreover , Ahhiyawan activity was to interfere in Anatolian affairs , with the support of anti @-@ Hittite uprisings or through local vassal rulers , which the Ahhiyawan king used as agents for the extension of his influence . 
 In c . 1400 BC , Hittite records mention the military activities of an Ahhiyawan warlord , Attarsiya , a possible Hittite way of writing the Greek name Atreus , who attacked Hittite vassals in western Anatolia . Later , in c . 1315 BC , an anti @-@ Hittite rebellion headed by <unk> , a Hittite vassal state , received support from Ahhiyawa . Meanwhile , Ahhiyawa appears to be in control of a number of islands in the Aegean , an impression also supported by archaeological evidence . During the reign of the Hittite king Hattusili III ( c . 1267 – 1237 BC ) , the king of Ahhiyawa is recognized as a " Great King " and of equal status with the other contemporary great Bronze Age rulers : the kings of Egypt , Babylonia and Assyria . At that time , another anti @-@ Hittite movement , led by <unk> @-@ Radu , broke out and was supported by the king of Ahhiyawa . <unk> @-@ Radu caused major unrest in the region of Wilusa and latter invaded the island of Lesbos , which then passed into Ahhiyawan control . 
 The Hittite @-@ Ahhiyawan confrontation in Wilusa , the Hittite name for Troy , may provide the historical foundation for the Trojan War tradition . As a result of this instability , the Hittite king initiated correspondence in order to convince his Ahhiyawan counterpart to restore peace in the region . The Hittite record mentions a certain <unk> , a possible Hittite translation for Greek Eteocles , as brother of the king of Ahhiyawa . 
 = = = Collapse ( c . 1250 – 1100 BC ) = = = 
 = = = = Initial decline and revival = = = = 
 In c . 1250 BC , the first wave of destruction has been witnessed in various centers of mainland Greece for reasons that cannot be identified by archaeologists . In Boeotia , Thebes was burned to the ground , around that year or slightly later . Nearby Orchomenos shared the same fate , while the Boeotian fortifications of Gla were deserted . In the Peloponnese , a number of buildings surrounding the citadel of Mycenae were attacked and burned . 
 These incidents appear to have prompted the massive strengthening and expansion of the fortifications in various sites . In some cases , arrangements were also made for the creation of subterranean passages which led to underground cisterns . Tiryns , Midea and Athens expanded their defences with new cyclopean @-@ style walls . The extension program in Mycenae almost doubled the fortified area of the citadel . To this phase of extension belongs the impressive Lion Gate , the main entrance into the Mycenaean acropolis . 
 It appears that after this first wave of destruction a short @-@ lived revival of Mycenaean culture followed . Mycenaean Greece continues to be mentioned in international affairs , particularly in Hittite records . In c . 1220 BC , the king of Ahhiyawa is again reported of being involved in an anti @-@ Hittite uprising in western Anatolia . Another contemporary Hittite account reports that Ahhiyawan ships should avoid Assyrian -controlled harbors , as part of a trade embargo imposed on Assyria . In general , in the second half of 13th century BC , trade was in decline in the Eastern Mediterranean , most probably due to the unstable political environment there . 
 = = = = Final collapse = = = = 
 None of the defence measures appear to have prevented the final destruction and collapse of the Mycenaean states . A second destruction struck Mycenae in ca . 1190 BC or shortly thereafter . This event marked the end of Mycenae as a major power . The site was then reoccupied , but on a smaller scale . The palace of Pylos , in the southwestern Peloponnese , faced destruction in c . 1180 BC . The Linear B archives found there , preserved by the heat of the fire that destroyed the palace , mention hasty defence preparations due to an imminent attack without giving any detail about the attacking force . 
 As a result of this turmoil , specific regions in mainland Greece witnessed a dramatic population decrease , especially Boeotia , Argolis and Messenia . Mycenaean refugees migrated to Cyprus and the Levantine coast . Nevertheless , other regions on the edge of the Mycenaean world prospered , such as the Ionian islands , the northwestern Peloponnese , parts of Attica and a number of Aegean islands . The acropolis of Athens paradoxically appears to have avoided destruction . 
 = = = = Hypotheses for the collapse = = = = 
 The reasons that led to the end of the Mycenaean culture have been hotly debated among scholars . At present , there is no satisfactory explanation for the collapse of the Mycenaean palace systems . The two most common theories are population movement and internal conflict . The first attributes the destruction of Mycenaean sites to invaders . 
 The hypothesis of a Dorian invasion , known as such in Ancient Greek tradition , that led to the end of Mycenaean Greece , is supported by sporadic archaeological evidence such as new types of burials , in particular cist graves , and the use of a new dialect of Greek , the Doric one . It appears that the Dorians moved southward gradually over a number of years and devastated the territory , until they managed to establish themselves in the Mycenaean centers . A new type of ceramic also appeared , called " Barbarian Ware " because it was attributed to invaders from the north . On the other hand , the collapse of Mycenaean Greece coincides with the activity of the Sea Peoples in the Eastern Mediterranean . They caused widespread destruction in Anatolia and the Levant and were finally defeated by Pharaoh Ramesses III in c . 1175 BC . One of the ethnic groups that comprised these people were the <unk> , a name that appears to be linked with the Ahhiyawa of the Hittite inscriptions . 
 Alternative scenarios propose that the fall of the Mycenaean Greece was a result of internal disturbances which led to internecine warfare among the Mycenaean states or civil unrest in a number of states , as a result of the strict hierarchical social system and the ideology of the wanax . In general , due to the obscure archaeological picture in 12th @-@ 11th century BC Greece , there is a continuing controversy among scholars over whether the impoverished societies that succeeded the Mycenaean palatial states were newcomers or populations that already resided in Mycenaean Greece . Recent archaeological findings tend to favor the latter scenario . Additional theories , concerning natural factors , such as climate change , droughts or earthquakes have been also proposed . The period following the end of Mycenaean Greece , c . 1100 @-@ 800 BC , is generally termed the " Greek Dark Ages " . 
 = = Political organization = = 
 = = = Palatial states = = = 
 Mycenaean palatial states , or centrally organized palace @-@ operating polities , are recorded in ancient Greek literature and mythology ( i.e. Iliad , Catalogue of Ships ) and confirmed by discoveries made by modern archaeologists such as Heinrich Schliemann . Each Mycenaean kingdom was governed from the palace , which exercised control over most , if not all , industries within its realm . The palatial territory was divided into several sub @-@ regions , each headed by its provincial center . Each province was further divided in smaller districts , the da @-@ mo . A number of palaces and fortifications appear to be part of a wider kingdom . For instance , Gla , located in the region of Boeotia , belonged to the state of nearby Orchomenos . Moreover , the palace of Mycenae appeared to have ruled over a territory two to three times the size of the other palatial states in Bronze Age Greece . Its territory would have also included adjacent centers , including Tiryns and Nauplion , which could plausibly be ruled by a member of Mycenae 's ruling dynasty . 
 The unearthed Linear B texts are too fragmentary for the reconstruction of the political landscape in Mycenaean Greece and they do not support the existence of a larger Mycenaean state . On the other hand , contemporary Hittite and Egyptian records suggest the presence of a single state under a " Great King " . Alternatively , based on archaeological data , some sort of confederation among a number of palatial states appears to be possible . If some kind of united political entity existed , the dominant center was probably located in Thebes or in Mycenae , with the latter state being the most probable center of power . 
 = = = Society and administration = = = 
 The Neolithic agrarian village ( 6000 BC ) constituted the foundation of Bronze Age political culture in Greece . The vast majority of the preserved Linear B records deals with administrative issues and give the impression that Mycenaean palatial administration was highly uniform with the use of the same language , terminology , system of taxation and distribution . Considering this sense of uniformity , the Pylos archive , which is the best preserved one in the Mycenaean world is in general taken as a representative one . 
 The state was ruled by a king , the wanax ( <unk> ) , whose role was religious and perhaps also military and judicial . The wanax covered virtually all aspects of palatial life , from religious feasting and offerings to the distribution of goods , craftsmen and troops . Under him was the <unk> ( " the leader of the people " ) , whose role appears mainly religious . His activities possibly overlap with the wanax and is usually seen as the second @-@ in @-@ command . Both wanax and <unk> were at the head of a military aristocracy known as the <unk> ( " companions " or " followers " ) , The land possessed by the wanax is usually the <unk> ( te @-@ me @-@ no ) . There is also at least one instance of a person , <unk> , at Pylos , who appears <unk> in the written record but whom modern scholars regard as being probably a king . 
 A number of local officials positioned by the wanax , appear to be in charge of the districts , such as ko @-@ re @-@ te ( <unk> , ' " governor " ) , po @-@ ro @-@ ko @-@ re @-@ te ( <unk> , " deputy " ) and the da @-@ mo @-@ ko @-@ ro ( <unk> , " one who takes care of a damos " ) , the latter being appointed probably in charge of the commune . A council of elders was chaired , the ke @-@ ro @-@ si @-@ ja ( cf. <unk> , <unk> ) . The basileus , who in latter Greek society was the name of the king , refers to communal officials . 
 In general , Mycenaean society appears to have been divided into two groups of free men : the king 's entourage , who conducted administrative duties at the palace and the people , da @-@ mo , These last were watched over by royal agents and were obliged to perform duties for and pay taxes to the palace . Among those who evolved in the palace setting could be found well @-@ to @-@ do high officials who probably lived in the vast residences found in proximity to Mycenaean palaces , but also others , tied by their work to the palace and not necessarily better off than the members of the da @-@ mo , such as craftsmen , farmers , and perhaps merchants . On a lower rung of the social ladder were found the slaves , do @-@ e @-@ ro , ( cf. <unk> , <unk> ) . These are recorded in the texts as working either for the palace or for specific deities . 
 = = Economy = = 
 = = = Organization = = = 
 The Mycenaean economy , given its pre @-@ monetary nature , was focused on the redistribution of goods , commodities and labor by a central administration . The preserved Linear B records in Pylos and Knossos indicate that the palaces were closely monitoring a variety of industries and commodities , the organization of land management and the rations given to the dependent personnel . The Mycenaean palaces maintained extensive control of the <unk> areas of production through careful control and acquisition and distribution in the palace industries , and the tallying of produced goods . For instance , the Knossos tablets record c . 80 @,@ 000 @-@ 100 @,@ 000 sheep were grazing in central Crete , the quantity of the expected wool from these sheep and their offspring , as well as how this wool was allocated . The archives of Pylos display a specialized workforce , where each worker belonged to a precise category and was assigned to a specific task in the stages of production , notably in textiles . 
 Nevertheless , palatial control over resources appears to have been highly selective in spatial terms and in terms of how different industries were managed . Thus , sectors like the production of perfumed oil and bronze materials were directly monitored from the palace , but the production of ceramics was only indirectly monitored . Regional transactions between the palaces are also recorded in few occasions . 
 = = = Large @-@ scale infrastructure = = = 
 The palatial centers organized their workforce and resources for the construction of large scale projects in the fields of agriculture and industry . The magnitude of some projects indicates that this was the result of combined efforts from multiple palatial centers . Most notable of them are the drainage system of the <unk> basin in Boeotia , the building of a large dam outside Tiryns , and the drainage of the swamp in the Nemea valley . Moreover , the construction of harbors , capable of accommodating large Bronze Age era vessels , such as the one found at Uluburun , like in the case of the harbor of Pylos , is also noticeable . The Mycenaean economy also featured large @-@ scale manufacturing as testified by the extent of workshop complexes that have been discovered , the largest known to date being the recent ceramic and hydraulic installations found in Euonymeia , next to Athens , that produced tableware , textiles , sails , and ropes for export and shipbuilding . 
 The most famous project of the Mycenaean era was the network of roads in the Peloponnese . This appears to have facilitated the speedy deployment of troops ; for example , the remnants of a Mycenaean road , along with what appears to have been a Mycenaean defensive wall on the Isthmus of Corinth . The Mycenaean era saw the zenith of infrastructure engineering in Greece , and this appears not to have been limited in the Argive plain . 
 = = = Trade = = = 
 Trade over vast areas of the Mediterranean was essential for the economy of Mycenaean Greece . The Mycenaean palaces imported raw materials , such as metals , ivory and glass , and exported processed commodities and objects made from these materials , in addition to local products : oil , perfume , wine , wool and pottery . International trade of that time was not only conducted by palatial emissaries but also by independent merchants . 
 Based on archaeological findings in the Middle East , in particular physical artifacts , textual references , inscriptions and wall paintings , it appears that Mycenaean Greeks achieved strong commercial and cultural interaction with most of the Bronze Age people living in this region : Canaanites , Kassites , Mitanni , Assyrians , and Egyptians . The 14th century Uluburun shipwreck , off the coast of southern Anatolia , displays the established trade routes that supplied the Mycenaeans with all the raw materials and items that the economy of Mycenaean Greece needed , such as copper and tin for the production of bronze products . A chief export of the Mycenaeans was olive oil , which was a multi @-@ purpose product . 
 Cyprus appears to be the principal intermediary station between Mycenaean Greece and the Middle East , based on the considerable greater quantities of Mycenaean goods found there . On the other hand , trade with the Hittite lands in central Anatolia paradoxically appears to have been limited . Trade with Troy is also well attested , while Mycenaean trade routes expanded further to the Bosphorus and the shores of the Black Sea . Mycenaean swords have been found as far away as Georgia in the eastern Black Sea coast . 
 Commercial interaction was also intense with the Italian peninsula and the western Mediterranean . Mycenaean products , especially pottery was exported to southern Italy , Sicily and the Aeolian islands . Mycenaean products also penetrated further into Sardinia , as well as southern Spain . 
 Sporadic objects of Mycenaean manufacture were found in various distant locations , like in Central Europe , such as in Bavaria , Germany , where an amber object inscribed with Linear B symbols has been unearthed . Mycenaean bronze double axes and other objects dating from the 13th century BC have been found in Ireland and in Wessex and Cornwall in England . 
 = = Religion = = 
 Temples and shrines are paradoxically rare in the Mycenaean archaeological sites . Especially , monumental cultic structures are absent at any of the palatial center , with the exception of Mycenae . However , the cultic center of Mycenae seems to have been a later ( 13th century BC ) development . Small shrines have been identified in <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Pylos , while a number of sacred enclosures have been located near Mycenae , Delphi and <unk> . Linear B records mention a number of sanctuaries dedicated to a variety of deities , at least in Pylos and Knossos . They also indicate that there were various religious festivities including offerings . Written Mycenaean records mention various priests and priestesses who were responsible for specific shrines and temples . Especially the latter were prominent figures in society , while the role of Mycenaean women in religious festivities was important , just as in Minoan Crete . 
 The Mycenaean pantheon already included many divinities that can be found in Classical Greece , though it 's difficult to claim whether these deities had the characteristics and responsibilities attributed to them at later periods . In general , the same divinities were worshipped throughout the Mycenaean palatial world . There may be some indications for local deities at various sites , in particular in Crete . The uniformity of Mycenaean religion is also reflected in archaeological evidence with the <unk> and psi @-@ figurines that have been found all over Late Bronze Age Greece . 
 Poseidon ( Linear B : Po @-@ se @-@ da @-@ o ) seems to have occupied a place of privilege . He was a chthonic deity , connected with earthquakes ( E @-@ ne @-@ si @-@ da @-@ o @-@ ne : Earth @-@ shaker ) , but it seems that he also represented the river spirit of the underworld . <unk> ( Pa @-@ ja @-@ wo ) is probably the precursor of the Greek physician of the gods in Homer 's Iliad . He was the personification of the magic @-@ song which was supposed to " heal " the patient . A number of <unk> have been read in the Mycenaean scripts only by their epithets used during later antiquity . For example , Qo @-@ wi @-@ ja ( " cow @-@ eyed " ) is a standard Homeric <unk> of Hera . Ares appeared under the name <unk> ( assuming that <unk> is not a separate god ) . Additional divinities that can be also found in later periods include Hephaestus , <unk> , Artemis ( a @-@ te @-@ mi @-@ to and a @-@ ti @-@ mi @-@ te ) and Dionysos ( Di @-@ wo @-@ nu @-@ so ) . Zeus also appears in the Mycenaean pantheon , but he was certainly not the chief deity . 
 A collection of " ladies " or " mistresses " , Po @-@ ti @-@ ni @-@ ja ( <unk> ) is read in the Mycenaean scripts . As such , Athena ( A @-@ ta @-@ na ) appears in an inscription at Knossos as mistress Athena , similar with a later Homeric expression , but in the Pylos tablets she is mentioned without any accompanying word . Si @-@ to po @-@ ti @-@ ni @-@ ja appears to be an agricultural goddess , possibly related to Demeter of later antiquity , while in Knossos there is the " mistress of the Labyrinth " . The " two queens and the king " ( wa @-@ na @-@ <unk> , wa @-@ na @-@ ka @-@ te ) are mentioned in Pylos . Goddess Pe @-@ re @-@ swa mentioned may be related with Persephone . A number of Mycenaean divinities seem to have no later equivalents , such as <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Palaces = = = 
 The palatial structures at Mycenae , Tiryns and Pylos were erected on the summits of hills or rocky outcrops , dominating the immediate surroundings . The best preserved are found in Pylos and Tiryns , while Mycenae and the <unk> are only partially preserved . In Central Greece , Thebes and Orchomenos have been only partially exposed . On the other hand , the palace built at the acropolis of Athens has been almost completely destroyed . A substantial building at <unk> in Thessaly , possibly ancient Iolcos , may be interpreted by a number of archaeologist as a palace . A Mycenaean palace has been also unearthed in Laconia , near the modern village of <unk> . 
 The palatial structures of mainland Greece share a number of common features . The focal point of the socio @-@ political aspect of a Mycenaean palace was the megaron , the throne room . It was laid out around a circular hearth surrounded by four columns . The throne was generally found on the right @-@ hand side upon entering the room , while the interior of the megaron was lavishly decorated , which flaunted images designed intentionally to demonstrate the political and religious power of the ruler . Access to the megaron was provided through a court , which is reached from a <unk> . The iconography of the palatial chambers is remarkably uniform throughout Greece . For instance , in Pylos and Tiryns the paintings are focused on marine motives , providing depictions of octopi , fish and dolphins . Around the megaron a group of courtyards each opening upon several rooms of different dimensions , such as storerooms and workshops , as well as reception halls and living quarters . In general Mycenaean palaces have yielded a wealth of artifacts and fragmentary frescoes . 
 Additional common features are shared by the palaces of Pylos , Mycenae and Tiryns ; a large court with colonnades lies directly in front of the central megaron , while a second , but smaller , megaron is also found inside these structures . The staircases in the palace of Pylos indicate that the palaces had two stories . The private quarters of the members of the royal family were presumably located on the second floor . 
 = = = Fortifications = = = 
 The construction of defensive structures was closely linked with the establishment of the palaces in mainland Greece . The principal Mycenaean centers were well fortified and usually situated on an elevated terrain , like on the acropolis of Athens , Tiryns and Mycenae or on coastal plains , in the case of Gla . Mycenaean Greeks in general appreciated the symbolism of war as expressed in defensive architecture , thus they aimed also at the visual impressiveness of their fortifications . 
 Cyclopean is the term normally applied to the masonry characteristics of Mycenaean fortification systems and describes walls built of large , unworked boulders more than 8 m ( 26 ft ) thick and weighing several metric tonnes . They were roughly fitted together without the use of mortar or clay to bind them , though smaller hunks of limestone fill the interstices . Their placement formed a polygonal pattern giving the curtain wall an irregular but imposing appearance . At the top it would have been wide enough for a walkway with a narrow protective parapet on the outer edge and with hoop @-@ like crenellations . The term Cyclopean was derived by the latter Greeks of the Classical era who believed that only the mythical giants , the Cyclops , could have constructed such megalithic structures . On the other hand , cut stone masonry is used only in and around gateways . Another typical feature of Mycenaean megalithic construction was the use of a relieving triangle above a lintel block ; an opening , often triangular , designed to reduce the weight over the lintel . The space was filled with some lighter stone . 
 Cyclopean fortifications were typical of Mycenaean walls , especially at the citadels of Mycenae , Tiryns , Argos , <unk> and Athens , while smaller boulders are found in Midea and large limestone slabs are found at Gla . In the Mycenaean settlements found in Epirus and Cyprus , Cyclopean style walls are also present , as well as in western Anatolia . Besides the citadels , isolated forts were also erected on various strategic locations . The fortification systems also incorporated technical refinements such as secret cisterns , galleries , sally ports and projecting bastions for the protection of gateways . On the other hand , the palace of Pylos , although a major center of power , paradoxically appears to have been left without any defensive walls . 
 = = = Other architectural features = = = 
 Mycenaean domestic architecture originates mainly from earlier Middle Helladic traditions ( c . 2000 – 1650 BC ) both in shape , as well as in location of settlement . The uniformity in domestic architecture came probably as a result of a shared past among the communities of Greek mainland rather than as a consequence of cultural expansion of the Mycenaean Koine . Moreover , varying sizes of <unk> were used in the construction of the building structures . 
 Contrary to a popular belief , some Mycenaean representative buildings already featured roofs made of fired tiles , as in Gla and Midea . 
 = = Warfare = = 
 The military nature of the Mycenaean Greeks is evident by the numerous weapons unearthed , warrior and combat representations in contemporary art , as well as by the preserved Greek Linear B records . The Mycenaeans invested in the development of military infrastructure , with military production and logistics being supervised directly from the palatial centers . According to the Linear B records in the palace of Pylos , every rural community ( the damos ) was obliged to supply a certain number of men who had to serve in the army . Similar service was also performed by the aristocracy . 
 Mycenaean armies were initially based on heavy infantry , equipped with spears , large shields and in some occasion armor . Later in the 13th century BC , Mycenaean warfare underwent major changes both in tactics and weaponry and armed units became more uniform and flexible , while weapons became smaller and lighter . The spear remained the main weapon among Mycenaean warriors , while the sword played a secondary role in combat . Other offensive weapons used were bows , maces , axes , slings and javelins . The precise role and contribution of chariots on the battlefield is a matter of dispute due to the lack of sufficient evidence . It appears that chariots were initially used as a fighting vehicle during the 16th to 14th century BC while later in the 13th century BC their role was limited to a battlefield transport . 
 The boar 's tusk helmet was the most identifiable piece of Mycenaean armor being in use from the beginning to the collapse of Mycenaean culture . It is also known from several depictions in contemporary art in Greece and the Mediterranean . A representative piece of Mycenaean armor is the Dendra panoply ( c . 1450 – 1400 BC ) which consisted of a cuirass of a complete set of armor made up of several elements of bronze . In general , most features of the later hoplite panoply of classical Greek antiquity , were already known to Mycenaean Greece . " Figure @-@ of @-@ eight " shields were the most common type of Mycenaean shields . During the Late Mycenaean period , smaller types of shields were adopted , either of completely circular shape , or almost circular with a cut out part from their lower edge . 
 = = Art and craftwork = = 
 = = = Vessels = = = 
 During the Late Mycenaean period ( 1400 – 1200 BC ) , Mycenaean vessels / pottery exhibited similarities spanning a significant area of the Eastern Mediterranean ( i.e. from the Levant to Sicily ) and possibly reflecting a form of economic and political union centered at Mycenae . However , the pottery of Crete during this time remained distinct indicating a degree of autonomy on the island . The Mycenaean Greeks produced in large quantities a variety of diversely @-@ styled vessels such as stirrup jars , large bowls , <unk> , krater and stemmed cups ( or <unk> ) resembling champagne glasses . 
 Stirrup jars ( Linear B : ka @-@ ra @-@ re @-@ u , <unk> ; " oil vessel " ) , specifically , were first invented on the island of Crete during the 16th century BC and used widely by the Mycenaeans from 1400 BC onward for transporting and storing wine and oil ; the jars were usually pear @-@ shaped or globular . As for stemmed cups ( or <unk> ) , they evolved from <unk> goblets and a large quantity was discovered at a site called the " Potter 's Shop " located in <unk> . Mycenaean drinking vessels such as the stemmed cups contained single decorative motifs such as a shell , an octopus or a flower painted on the side facing away from the drinker . The Mycenaean Greeks also painted entire scenes ( called " Pictorial Style " ) on their vessels depicting warriors , chariots , horses and deities reminiscent of events described in Homer 's Iliad . Other items developed by the Mycenaeans include clay lamps , as well as metallic vessels such as bronze tripod cauldrons ( or basins ) . A few examples of vessels in faience and ivory are also known . 
 = = = Figures and figurines = = = 
 The Mycenaean period has not yielded sculpture of any great size . The statuary of the period consists for the most part of small terracotta figurines found at almost every Mycenaean site in mainland Greece , in tombs , in settlement debris , and occasionally in cult contexts ( Tiryns , Agios Konstantinos on Methana ) . The majority of these figurines are female and anthropomorphic or zoomorphic . The female figurines can be subdivided into three groups which were popular at different periods : the earliest are the Phi @-@ type , which look like the Greek letter phi and their arms give the upper body of the figurine a rounded shape . The Psi @-@ type looks like the letter Greek psi : these have outstretched upraised arms . The latest ( 12th century BC ) are the Tau @-@ type : these figurines look like the Greek letter tau with folded ( ? ) arms at right angles to the body . Most figurines wear a large ' <unk> ' hat . They are painted with stripes or zigzags in the same manner as the contemporary pottery and presumably made by the same potters . Their purpose is uncertain , but they may have served as both votive objects and toys : some are found in children 's graves but the vast majority of fragments are from domestic rubbish deposits . The presence of many of these figurines on sites where worship took place in the Archaic and Classical periods ( circa 200 below the sanctuary of Athena at Delphi , others at the temple of <unk> on Aegina , at the sanctuary of Apollo <unk> above <unk> and at <unk> near Sparta ) , suggests both that many were indeed religious in nature , perhaps as votives , but also that later places of worship may well have first been used in the Mycenaean period . 
 Larger male , female or bovine terracotta <unk> figures are much rarer . An important group was found in the Temple at Mycenae together with coiled clay snakes , while others have been found at Tiryns and in the East and West Shrines at <unk> on the island of Melos . 
 = = = Frescoes = = = 
 The painting of the Mycenaean age was much influenced by that of the Minoan age . Fragments of wall paintings have been found in or around the palaces ( Pylos , Mycenae , Tiryns ) and in domestic contexts ( <unk> ) . The largest complete wall painting depicting three female figures , probably goddesses , was found in the so @-@ called " cult center " at Mycenae . Various themes are represented : hunting , bull leaping ( <unk> ) , battle scenes , processions , etc . Some scenes may be part of mythological narratives , but if so their meaning eludes us . Other frescoes include geometric or stylised motifs , also used on painted pottery ( see above ) . 
 = = Burial practices = = 
 The usual form of burial during this period was inhumation . The earliest Mycenaean burials were mostly in individual graves in the form of a pit or a stone lined cist and offerings were limited to pottery and occasional items of jewellery . Groups of pit or cist graves containing elite members of the community were sometimes covered by a tumulus ( mound ) in the manner established since the Middle Helladic . It has been argued that this form dates back to the <unk> culture ; however , Mycenaean burials are in actuality an indigenous development of mainland Greece with the Shaft Graves housing native rulers . Pit and cist graves remained in use for single burials throughout the Mycenaean period alongside more elaborate family graves . The shaft graves at Mycenae within Grave Circles A and B belong to the same period represent an alternative manner of grouping elite burials . Next to the deceased were found full sets of weapons , ornate staffs as well as gold and silver cups and other valuable objects which point to their social rank . 
 Beginning also in the Late Helladic period are to be seen communal tombs of rectangular form . Nevertheless , it is difficult to establish whether the different forms of burial represent a social <unk> , as was formerly thought , with the " tholos " being the tombs of the elite rulers , the individual tombs those of the leisure class , and the communal tombs those of the people . <unk> increased in number over the course of the period , becoming quite numerous in last phase of the Mycenaean era . The tholos was introduced during the early 15th century as the new and more imposing form of elite . The most impressive tombs of the Mycenaean era are the monumental royal tombs of Mycenae , undoubtedly intended for the royal family of the city . The most famous is the Treasury of Atreus , a tholos . A total of nine of such tholos tombs are found in the region of Mycenae , while six of them belong to a single period ( Late Helladic IIa , c . 1400 @-@ 1300 BC ) . It has been argued that different dynasties or factions may have competed through conspicuous burial . 
 = = Writing = = 
 In circa 1600 BC , the Mycenaean Greeks borrowed from the Minoan civilization its syllabic writing system ( i.e. Linear A ) and developed their own syllabic script known as Linear B. The Linear B script was utilized by the Mycenaean palaces in Greece for administrative purposes where economic transactions were recorded on clay tablets and some pottery in the Mycenaean dialect of the Greek language . The Linear B tablets were first discovered in Crete by English archaeologist Sir Arthur Evans in circa 1900 and later deciphered by English architect and cryptographer Michael Ventris in 1952 . Ventris 's discovery of an archaic Greek dialect in the Linear B tablets demonstrated that Mycenaean Greek was " the oldest known Greek dialect , elements of which survived in Homer ’ s language as a result of a long oral tradition of epic poetry . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In the 8th century BC , after the end of the so @-@ called Greek Dark Ages , Greece emerged with a network of myths and legends , the greatest of all being that of the Trojan Epic Cycle . In general , the Greeks of classical antiquity idealized the Mycenaean period as a glorious period of heroes , closeness of the gods and material wealth . The legends of Homer 's Epics were especially and generally accepted as part of the Greek past and it was not until the 19th century that scholars began to question Homer 's historicity . At this time , German archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann undertook the first modern archaeological excavations in Greece at the site of Mycenae in 1876 . Thus , Schliemann set out to prove the historical accuracy of the Iliad by identifying the places described by Homer . 
 As part of the Mycenaean heritage that survived , the names of the gods and goddesses of Mycenaean Greece became major figures of the Olympian Pantheon of later antiquity . Moreover , the language of the Mycenaeans offers the first written evidence of Greek , while a significant part of the Mycenaean vocabulary can also be found in modern English . 
 The Mycenaean Greeks were also pioneers in the field of engineering , launching large @-@ scale projects unmatched in Europe until the Roman period , such as fortifications , bridges , culverts , aqueducts , dams and roads suitable for wheeled traffic . They also made several architectural innovations , such as the relieving triangle . They were also responsible for transmitting a wide range of arts and crafts , especially of Minoan origin . The Mycenaean civilization was in general more advanced compared to the Late Bronze Age cultures of the rest of Europe . Several Mycenaean attributes and achievements were borrowed or held in high regard in later periods that it would be no exaggeration to consider Mycenaean Greece as a cradle of civilization . 
 = Raynald of Châtillon = 
 Raynald of Châtillon , also known as Reynald or Reginald of Châtillon ( French : Renaud de Châtillon ; c . 1125 – 4 July 1187 ) , was Prince of Antioch from 1153 to 1160 or 1161 , and Lord of Oultrejordain from 1175 until his death . He was born as his father 's second son into a French noble family . After losing a part of his patrimony , he joined the Second Crusade in 1147 . He settled in the Kingdom of Jerusalem and served in the royal army as a mercenary . 
 Raynald married Constance , the reigning Princess of Antioch , in 1153 , in spite of her subjects ' opposition . He was always in need of funds . He captured and tortured Aimery of Limoges , Latin Patriarch of Antioch , because Aimery had refused to pay a subsidy to him . Raynald launched a plundering raid in Cyprus in 1155 , causing great destruction . Four years later , the Byzantine Emperor , Manuel I Komnenos , came to Antioch at the head of a large army , forcing Raynald to beg for his mercy . Raynald made a raid in the valley of the river Euphrates at Marash to seize booty from the local peasants in 1160 or 1161 , but he was captured by the governor of Aleppo . 
 Raynald was held in prison until 1176 . After his release for a large ransom , he did not return to Antioch , because his wife had meanwhile died . He married Stephanie of Milly , the wealthy heiress of Oultrejordain . Since Baldwin IV of Jerusalem also granted Hebron to him , Raynald was one of the wealthiest barons of the realm . He controlled the caravan routes between Egypt and Syria . Baldwin , who suffered from leprosy , made him regent in 1177 . Raynald led the crusader army that defeated Saladin at the Battle of Montgisard . He was the only Christian leader to pursue an offensive policy against Saladin , making plundering raids against the caravans travelling near his domains . He built a fleet of five ships which plundered the coast of the Red Sea , threatening the route of the Muslim pilgrims towards Mecca in early 1183 . Saladin pledged that he would never forgive Raynald . 
 Raynald was a firm supporter of Baldwin IV 's sister , Sybilla , and her husband , Guy of Lusignan , during conflicts regarding the succession of the king . Sibylla and Guy were able to seize the throne in 1186 due to Raynald 's co @-@ operation with her uncle , Joscelin III of Courtenay . Raynald attacked a caravan travelling from Egypt to Syria in late 1186 or early 1187 , claiming that the truce between Saladin and the Kingdom of Jerusalem did not bind him . After Raynald refused to pay a compensation , Saladin invaded the kingdom and annihilated the crusader army in the Battle of Hattin . Raynald was captured in the battlefield . Saladin personally beheaded him after he refused to convert to Islam . Most historians have regarded Raynald as an irresponsible adventurer whose lust for booty caused the fall of the Kingdom of Jerusalem . On the other hand , Bernard Hamilton says that he was the only crusader leader who tried to prevent Saladin from unifying the nearby Muslim states . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Raynald was the younger son of Hervé II , Lord of <unk> . In older historiography , Raynald was described as the son of Geoffrey , Count of <unk> , but in 1989 Jean Richard demonstrated Raynald 's kinship with the Lords of <unk> . They were influential noblemen in the Duchy of Burgundy , claiming the <unk> ( a family of Roman senators ) as their ancestors . 
 Raynald was born around 1123 . He received Châtillon @-@ sur @-@ Loire , but a part of his patrimony was " violently and unjustly confiscated " , according to one of his letters . He came to the Kingdom of Jerusalem before 1153 when he was mentioned as a mercenary fighting in the army of Baldwin III of Jerusalem . According to modern historians , he had joined the crusade of Louis VII of France . Louis departed from France in June 1147 . The 12th @-@ century historian William of Tyre , who was Raynald 's opponent , claimed that Raynald was " almost a common soldier " . Louis VII left the Holy Land for France in the summer of 1149 , but Raynald stayed behind in Palestine . 
 Raymond , Prince of Antioch , and thousands of his soldiers fell in the Battle of Inab on 28 June 1148 , leaving the principality almost undefended . Baldwin III of Jerusalem ( who was the cousin of Raymond 's widow , Constance , the ruling Princess of Antioch ) came to Antioch at the head of his army at least three times during the following years . To secure the defence of the principality , Baldwin tried to persuade her to remarry , but she did not accept his candidates . She also refused John Roger , whom the Byzantine Emperor , Manuel I Komnenos , proposed for her husband . 
 Raynald accompanied Baldwin to Antioch in 1151 and settled in the principality , according to Steven Runciman . It is certain that Raynald fought in Baldwin 's army during the Siege of Ascalon in early 1153 . He may have already been engaged to Constance of Antioch ( as Runciman suggests ) , or their betrothal took place during Raynald 's visit to the principality before the end of the siege ( as Malcolm Barber proposes ) . They kept their betrothal a secret until Baldwin gave his permission to their marriage . 
 = = Prince of Antioch = = 
 After Baldwin granted his consent , Constance married Raynald . He was installed prince in or shortly before May 1153 . In that month , he confirmed the privileges of the Venetian merchants . William of Tyre recorded that his subjects were astonished that their " famous , powerful and well @-@ born " princess condescended to " marry a kind of mercenary knight " . The wealthy Latin Patriarch of Antioch , Aimery of Limoges , was Raynald 's principal opponent . He even refused to pay a subsidy to him . In retaliation , Raynald captured and tortured Aimery , forcing him to sit naked and covered with honey in the sun , before imprisoning him . Aimery was only released on Baldwin III 's demand , but he soon left his see for Jerusalem . 
 Emperor Manuel sent his envoys to Antioch , proposing to recognize Raynald as the new prince if he launched a campaign against the Armenians of Cilicia , who had risen up against Byzantine rule . Manuel also promised that he would compensate Raynald for the expenses of the campaign . After Raynald defeated the Armenians at <unk> in 1155 , the Knights Templar seized the region of the Syrian Gates that the Armenians had recently captured . Although the sources are unclear , Runciman and Barber agree that it was Raynald who granted the territory to them . 
 Always in need of funds , Raynald urged Manuel to send the promised subsidy to him , but Manuel failed to pay the money . Raynald made an alliance with Thoros II of Cilicia . They attacked Cyprus , subjecting the Byzantine island to a three @-@ week orgy of violence in early 1156 . They only left Cyprus on the rumour of an imperial fleet approaching the island , but only after they had forced all Cypriots to ransom themselves , with the exception of the wealthiest individuals ( including Emperor Manuel 's nephew , John Doukas Komnenos ) , whom they carried off to Antioch . Cyprus would never entirely recover from the devastation that Raynald 's and Thoros 's marauding raid caused . 
 Taking advantage of the presence of Thierry , Count of Flanders , and his army in the Holy Land and an earthquake that destroyed most towns of Northern Syria , Baldwin III of Jerusalem invaded the Muslim territories in the valley of the Orontes River in the autumn of 1157 . Raynald joined the royal army , and they laid siege to Shaizar . Shaizar was held by a band of Assassins , but it had been ruled by the <unk> who paid an annual tribute to Raynald . Before the capitulation of the garrison , Baldwin decided to grant the fortress to Thierry of Flanders , but Raynald demanded that the count should pay homage to him for the town . After Thierry sharply refused to swear fealty to an upstart , the crusaders abandoned the siege . They marched on <unk> ( present @-@ day Harem , Syria ) , which had been an Antiochene fortress before Nur ad @-@ Din , atabeg of Aleppo , captured it in 1150 . After the crusaders captured <unk> in February 1158 , Raynald granted it to the Flemish Raynald of Saint @-@ Valery . 
 Emperor Manuel unexpectedly invaded Cilicia , forcing Thoros II to seek refuge in the mountains in December 1158 . Raynald hurried to <unk> to voluntarily make his submission to the emperor . On Manuel 's demand , he and his retainers walked barefoot and bareheaded through the streets of the town to the imperial tent where he prostrated himself , begging for mercy . William of Tyre stated that " the glory of the Latin world was put to shame " on this occasion , because envoys from the nearby Muslim and Christian rulers were also present at Raynald 's humiliation . Manuel only forgave him after Raynald agreed to accept a Greek Patriarch in Antioch . Raynald also had to promise that he would allow a Byzantine garrison to stay in the citadel whenever it was required and would send a troop to fight in the Byzantine army . Before long , Baldwin III of Jerusalem persuaded Manuel to consent to the return of the Latin patriarch , Aimery , to Antioch , instead of installing a Greek patriarch . When the emperor entered Antioch with much pomp and ceremony on 12 April 1159 , Reginald held the bridle of Manuel 's horse . Manuel left the town eight days later . 
 Raynald made a plundering raid in the valley of the river Euphrates at Marash to seize cattle , horses and camels from the local peasants in November 1160 or 1161 . Majd al @-@ Din , governor of Aleppo , attacked Raynald and his retinue on the way back to Antioch . Raynald fought bravely , but the Muslim warriors unhorsed and captured him . He was sent to Aleppo where he was put in jail . 
 = = Captivity and release = = 
 Almost nothing is known about Raynald 's life while he was kept in jail for fifteen years . He shared his prison with Joscelin III of Courtenay , who had been captured a couple of months before . In Raynald 's absence , Constance wanted to rule alone , but Baldwin III of Jerusalem made Patriarch Aimery regent for her fifteen @-@ year @-@ old son ( Raynald 's stepson ) , Bohemond III of Antioch . Constance died around 1163 , shortly after her son reached the age of majority . Her death deprived Raynald of his claim to Antioch . However , he had become an important personality , with prominent family connections . His stepdaughter , Maria of Antioch , married Manuel I Komnenos in 1161 . Raynald 's own daughter , Agnes , became the wife of Béla III of Hungary . 
 When <unk> , governor of Aleppo , one of the last independent Muslim rulers in Syria after Saladin , had conquered almost all neighboring states , he released Raynald , along with Joscelin of Courtenay and all other Christians prisoners in 1176 . Raynald 's ransom , fixed at 120 @,@ 000 gold dinars , reflected his prestige . It was most probably paid by Manuel I Komnenos , according to Barber and Bernard Hamilton . 
 Raynald came to Jerusalem with Joscelin before 1 September 1176 where he became a close ally of Joscelin 's sister , Agnes of Courtenay . She was the mother of the young Baldwin IV of Jerusalem , who suffered from leprosy . Hugo <unk> , who lived in Constantinople after around 1165 , mentioned in the preface of his About the Procession of the Holy Spirit that he had asked " Prince Raynald " to deliver a copy of the work to Aimery of Limoges . According to historian Bernard Hamilton , these words suggest that Raynald led the embassy that Baldwin IV sent to Constantinople to confirm an alliance between Jerusalem and the Byzantine Empire against Egypt . 
 = = Lord of Oultrejordain = = 
 = = = First years = = = 
 Raynald married Stephanie of Milly , the lady of Oultrejordain , and Baldwin IV also granted him Hebron . The first extant charter styling Raynald as " Lord of Hebron and Montréal " was issued in November 1177 . He owed service of 60 knights to the Crown , showing that he had become one of the wealthiest barons of the realm . From his castles at Kerak and Montréal , he controlled the routes between the two main parts of Saladin 's empire , Syria and Egypt . Raynald and Baldwin IV 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , William of Montferrat , jointly granted large estates to Rodrigo Álvarez , the founder of the Order of Mountjoy , to strengthen the defence of the southern and eastern frontier of the kingdom . After William of Montferrat died in June 1177 , the king made Raynald regent . 
 Baldwin IV 's cousin , Philip I , Count of Flanders , came to the Holy Land at the head of a crusader army in early August 1177 . The king offered him the regency , but Philip refused the offer , saying that he did not want to stay in the kingdom . Philip declared that he was " willing to take orders " from anybody , but he protested when Baldwin confirmed Raynald 's position as " regent of the kingdom and of the armies " . Philip left the kingdom a month after his arrival . 
 Saladin invaded the region of Ascalon , but the royal army launched an attack on him in the Battle of Montgisard on 25 November , leading to his defeat . William of Tyre and Ernoul attributed the victory to the king , but Baha ad @-@ Din ibn Shaddad and other Muslim authors recorded that Raynald was the supreme commander . Saladin himself referred to the battle as a " major defeat which God mended with the famous battle of Hattin " , according to Baha ad @-@ Din . 
 Raynald was the first among the witnesses to sign most royal charters between 1177 and 1180 , showing that he was the king 's most influential official during this period . Raynald became one of the principal supporters of Guy of Lusignan , who married the king 's elder sister , Sybilla , in early 1180 , although many barons of the realm had opposed the marriage . The king 's half sister , Isabella ( whose stepfather , Balian of Ibelin was Guy of Lusignan 's opponent ) was engaged to Raynald 's stepson , Humphrey IV of Toron , in autumn 1180 . Baldwin IV dispatched Raynald , along with Heraclius , Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem , to mediate a reconciliation between Bohemond III of Antioch and Patriarch Aimery in early 1181 . Roupen III , Lord of Cilician Armenia , married Raynald 's stepdaughter , Isabella of Toron . 
 = = = Fights against Saladin = = = 
 Raynald was the only Christian leader who fought against Saladin in the 1180s . The contemporaneous Ernoul mentioned two raids that Raynald made against caravans travelling between Egypt and Syria , breaking the truce . Modern historians debate whether Raynald 's desire for booty inspired these military actions , or were deliberate maneuvers to prevent Saladin from annexing new territories . Saladin tried to seize Aleppo after As @-@ Salih Ismail al @-@ Malik , the Zengid emir of the town , died on 18 November 1181 . Raynald stormed into Saladin 's territory , reaching as far as Tabuk on the route between Damascus and Mecca in late 1181 . Saladin 's nephew , Farrukh Shah , invaded Oultrejourdain instead of attacking Aleppo to compel Raynald to return from the Arabian desert . Before long , Raynald seized a caravan and imprisoned its members . On Saladin 's protest , Baldwin IV ordered Raynald to free them , but Raynald did not obey him . His defiance annoyed the king , enabling Raymond III of Tripoli 's partisans to reconcile him with the monarch . Raymond 's return to the royal court put an end to his paramount position . He accepted the new situation and cooperated with the king and Raymond during the fights against Saladin in summer 1182 . 
 Saladin revived the Egyptian naval force and tried to capture Beirut , but his ships were forced to retreat . Raynald ordered the building of five ships which were carried to the Gulf of Aqaba at the northern end of the Red Sea in February 1183 . Raynald laid siege to the Egyptian fortress on Ile de Graye . Part of his fleet made a plundering raid along the coasts , threatening the security of the holy cities of Mecca and Medina . Raynald left Ile de Graye , but his fleet continued the siege . Saladin 's brother , Al @-@ Adil , the governor of Egypt , dispatched a fleet to the Red Sea . The Egyptians relieved Ile de Graye and destroyed the Christian fleet . Raynald 's soldiers were executed , and Saladin took an oath that he would never forgive him . Though Raynald 's naval expedition " showed a remarkable degree of initiative " , according to historian Bernard Hamilton , most modern historians agree that it contributed to the unification of Syria and Egypt under Saladin 's rule . Saladin captured Aleppo in June 1183 , completing the encirclement of the crusader states . 
 Baldwin IV , who had become seriously ill , made Guy of Lusignan bailli ( or regent ) in October 1183 . Within a month , Baldwin dismissed Guy , and had Guy 's five @-@ year @-@ old stepson , Baldwin V , crowned king . Raynald was not present at the child 's coronation , because he attended the wedding of his stepson , Humphrey , and Baldwin IV 's sister , Isabella , in Kerak . Saladin unexpectedly invaded Oultrejordain , forcing the local inhabitants to seek refuge in Kerak . After Saladin broke into the town , Raynald only managed to escape to the fortress because one of his retainers had hindered the attackers from seizing the bridge between the town and the castle . Saladin laid siege to Kerak . According to Ernoul , Raynald 's wife sent dishes from the wedding to Saladin , persuading him to stop bombarding the tower where her son and his wife stayed . After envoys from Kerak informed Baldwin IV of the siege , the royal army left Jerusalem for Kerak under the command of the king and Raymond III of Tripoli . Saladin abandoned the siege before their arrival on 4 December . On Saladin 's order , Izz al @-@ Din Usama had a fortress built at <unk> , near the northern border of Raynald 's domains . 
 = = = Kingmaker = = = 
 Baldwin IV died in early 1185 . His successor , the child Baldwin V died in late summer 1186 . The High Court of Jerusalem had ruled that neither Baldwin V 's mother , Sybilla ( who was Guy of Lusignan 's wife ) , nor her sister , Isabella ( who was the wife of Raynald 's stepson ) , could be crowned without the decision of the pope , the Holy Roman Emperor , and the kings of France and England about Baldwin V 's lawful successor . However , Sybilla 's uncle , Joscelin III of Courtenay , took control of Jerusalem with the support of Raynald and other influential prelates and royal officials . Raynald urged the townspeople to accept Sybilla as the lawful monarch , according to the Estoire de Eracles . The bailli , Raymond III of Tripoli , and his supporters tried to prevent her coronation and reminded her partisans of the decision of the High Court . Ignoring their protest , Raynald and Gerard of Ridefort , Grand Master of the Knights Templar , accompanied Sybilla to the Holy Sepulchre , where she was crowned . She also arranged the coronation of her husband , although he was unpopular even among her supporters . Her opponents tried to persuade Raynald 's stepson , Humphrey , to claim the crown on his wife 's behalf , but Humphrey deserted them and swore fealty to Sybilla and Guy . Raynald headed the list of secular witnesses in four royal charters issued between 21 October 1186 and 7 March 1187 , showing that he had become a principal figure in the new king 's court . 
 Ali ibn al @-@ Athir and other Muslim historians recorded that Raynald made a truce with Saladin in 1186 . This " seems unlikely to be true " , according to historian Bernard Hamilton , because the truce between the Kingdom of Jerusalem and Saladin covered Raynald 's domains . In late 1186 or early 1187 , a rich caravan travelled through Oultrejordain from Egypt to Syria . Ali ibn al @-@ Athir mentioned that a group of armed men accompanied the caravan . Raynald seized the caravan , possibly because he regarded the presence of soldiers as a breach of the truce , according to Hamilton . He took all the merchants and their families prisoner , seized a large amount of booty , and refused to receive envoys from Saladin demanding compensation . Saladin sent his envoys to Guy of Lusignan , who accepted his demands . However , Raynald refused to obey the king , stating that " he was lord of his land , just as Guy was lord of his , and he had no truces with the Saracens " . Saladin proclaimed a jihad ( or holy war ) against the kingdom , taking an oath that he would personally kill Raynald for breaking the truce . 
 Prince Reynald , lord of Kerak , was one of the greatest and wickedest of the Franks , the most hostile to the Muslims and the most dangerous to them . Aware of this , Saladin targeted him with blockades time after time and raided his territory occasion after occasion . As a result he was <unk> and humbled and asked Saladin for a truce , which was granted . The truce was made and duly sworn to . Caravans then went back and forth between Syria and Egypt . [ In the year 582 AH ] , a large caravan , rich in goods and with many men , accompanied by a good number of soldiers , passed by him . The accursed one <unk> seized every last man and made their goods , animals and weapons his booty . Those he made captive he consigned to his prisons . Saladin sent blaming him , deploring his treacherous action and threatening him if he did not release the captives and the goods , but he would not agree to do that and persisted in his refusal . Saladin vowed that , if ever had him in his power , he would kill him . 
 = = Capture and execution = = 
 The Estoire de Eracles wrongly claimed that Saladin 's sister was also among the prisoners taken by Raynald when he seized the caravan . Actually , she returned from Mecca to Damascus in a subsequent pilgrim @-@ caravan in March 1187 . To protect her against an attack by Raynald , Saladin escorted the pilgrims while they were travelling near Oultrejordain . Saladin stormed into Oultrejordain on 26 April and pillaged Raynald 's domains for a month . Thereafter , Saladin marched to <unk> , where the troops coming from all parts of his realm assembled . 
 The Christian forces assembled at <unk> . Raynald and Gerard of Ridefort convinced Guy of Lusignan to take the initiative and attack Saladin 's army , although Raymond III of Tripoli had tried to persuade the king to avoid a direct fight with it . During the debate , Raynald accused Raymond of Tripoli of co @-@ operating with the enemy . Saladin inflicted a crushing defeat on the crusaders in the Battle of Hattin on 4 July . Most commanders of the Christian army were captured in the battlefield . 
 Guy of Lusignan and Raynald were among the prisoners who were brought before Saladin . Saladin handed a cup of iced rose water to Guy . After drinking from the cup , the king handed it to Raynald . Imad ad @-@ Din al @-@ Isfahani ( who was present ) recorded that Raynald drank from the cup . Since customary law prescribed that a man who gave food or drink to a prisoner could not murder him , Saladin stated that it was Guy who had given the cup to Raynald . Saladin called Raynald to his tent . He accused him of many crimes ( including brigandage and blasphemy ) , offering him to choose between conversion to Islam or death , according to Imad ad @-@ Din and Ibn al @-@ Athir . After Raynald flatly refused to convert , Saladin took a sword and struck Raynald with it . Raynald fell to the ground and Saladin beheaded him for the honour of Islam . The reliability of the reports of Saladin 's offer to Raynald is subject to a scholarly debate , because the Muslim authors who recorded them may have only wanted to improve Saladin 's image . Ernoul 's chronicle and the Estoire de Eracles recounted the events ending with Raynald 's execution in almost the same language as the Muslim authors . However , according to Ernoul 's chronicle , Raynald refused to drink from the cup that Guy of Lusignan handed to him . He was murdered after he enraged Saladin , saying that he would behead Saladin if he had captured him in the battle . According to Ernoul , Raynald 's head was struck off by Saladin 's mamluks and it was brought to Damascus to be " dragged along the ground to show the Saracens , whom the prince had wronged , that vengeance had been exacted " . 
 = = Family = = 
 Raynald 's first wife , Constance of Antioch ( born in 1128 ) , was the only daughter of Bohemond II of Antioch and Alice of Jerusalem . Constance succeeded her father in Antioch in 1130 . She was given in marriage to Raymond of Poitiers in 1136 . Years after his death , Raynald married the widowed Constance and seized Antioch . 
 Their daughter , Agnes , moved to Constantinople in early 1170 to marry Kaisar Alexios @-@ Béla , the younger brother of Stephen III of Hungary , who lived in the Byzantine Empire . Agnes was renamed Anna in Constantinople . Her husband succeeded his brother as Béla III of Hungary in 1172 . She followed her husband to Hungary , where she gave birth to seven children before she died around 1184 . Raynald and Constance 's second daughter , Alice , became the third wife of <unk> VI of Este in 1204 . Raynald also had a son , Baldwin , from Constance , according to historian Bernard Hamilton , but Runciman says that Baldwin was Constance 's son from her first husband . Baldwin moved to Constantinople in the early 1160s . He died fighting at the head of a Byzantine cavalry regiment in the Battle of Myriokephalon on 17 September 1176 . 
 Raynald 's second wife , Stephanie of Milly , was the younger daughter of Philip of Milly , Lord of Nablus , and Isabella of Oultrejourdain . She was born around 1145 . Her first husband , Humphrey III of Toron , died around 1173 . She inherited Oultrejourdain from her niece , Beatrice <unk> , shortly before she married Miles of Plancy in early 1174 . Miles of Plancy was murdered in October 1174 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Most information on Raynald 's life was recorded by Muslim authors who were hostile to him . Baha ad @-@ Din ibn Shaddad described him as a " monstrous infidel and terrible oppressor " in his biography of Saladin . Saladin compared Raynald with the king of Ethiopia , who had tried to destroy Mecca in 570 and was mentioned as the " Elephant " in the Surah CV of the Quran . 
 Most Christian authors who wrote of Raynald in the 12th and 13th centuries were influenced by Raynald 's political opponent , William of Tyre . The author of the Estoire of Eracles stated that Raynald 's attack against a caravan at the turn of 1186 and 1187 was the " reason of the loss of the Kingdom of Jerusalem " . Modern historians have usually also treated Raynald as a " maverick who did more harm to the Christian than to the [ Muslim ] cause " . Runciman describes him as a marauder who could not resist the temptation presented by the rich caravans passing through Oultrejordain . Runciman argues that Raynald attacked a caravan during the 1180 truce because he " could not understand a policy that ran counter to his wishes " . According to Barber , Raynald 's behavior during the reign of Guy of Lusignan shows that the kingdom had broken up into " a collection of semi @-@ autonomous fiefdoms " by that time . 
 Some Christian authors regarded Raynald as a martyr for the faith . Peter of Blois dedicated a book ( entitled Passion of Prince Raynald of Antioch ) to him shortly after his death . Among modern historians , Bernard Hamilton describes Raynald as " an experienced and responsible crusader leader " who made several attempts to prevent Saladin from uniting the Muslim realms along the borders of the crusader states . 
 = = In fiction = = 
 Raynald is depicted in the 2005 film Kingdom of Heaven , played by Brendan Gleeson . 
 = Helen Shiller = 
 Helen Shiller ( born 1947 ) is a former Alderman of the 46th ward in Chicago , Illinois . She served in the Chicago City Council for six four @-@ year terms , from 1987 to 2011 . Shiller was elected to the City Council on her third attempt , as Harold Washington , Chicago 's first black Mayor , was re @-@ elected to his second term , and her election as alderman helped close the Council Wars era in Chicago government . Shiller has been described as " committed to liberal causes " appropriate for the lakefront district she represents . Among her most significant impacts on Chicago were her advocacy for diverse , inclusive , affordable housing and helping craft Chicago 's response to the HIV / AIDS crisis . Her commitment to fostering community development without displacement often brought Shiller into contention with some constituencies , real estate developers , and editorial boards . Shiller 's oral history was collected by Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning author and Uptown resident , the late Studs Terkel , in his 2003 book , Hope Dies Last . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Shiller was born in 1947 and raised on Long Island in New York , growing up in a middle @-@ class family . Her parents were home owners . Her father , Morris Shiller , was a self @-@ employed chemist who according to Shiller " perfected fake suede . " Morris emigrated to the United States from Latvia . Some members of his family were Holocaust victims . Shiller 's mother was Sara ( née Trop ) , Sara was born and raised in Belarus , where she lived through various occupations , including by the Germans , Polish , Russians , and Soviet Union . Sara came to America through Ellis Island at the age of six . She became a nurse and married Morris , in 1936 . She died at the age of 96 in the summer of 2011 . 
 Helen Shiller earned her high school diploma in 1965 from Woodstock County School in Vermont , the same progressive boarding school that Pete Seeger 's children attended . Shiller graduated with a degree in history from the University of Wisconsin – Madison , where she was active in the anti @-@ Vietnam war movement and in the Students for a Democratic Society ( SDS ) . In 2005 , Shiller graduated from DePaul University 's School for New Learning Master 's Program , where her focus was public policy . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Shiller moved to Chicago 's Uptown neighborhood in 1972 with her husband Marc Zalkin and her infant son , Brendan , and lived on N Malden Street in Uptown . Shiller drove a cab , worked as a waitress and free lance photographer , and got involved in radical politics . With one of Chicago 's most controversial political organizers , Walter " Slim " Coleman , Shiller helped organize the <unk> Survival Committee , a sort of white support arm of the Black Panther Party . The committee evolved into the Heart of Uptown Coalition , a political and social service organization steeped in the rhetoric of Marxism ; " comrades " were expected to organize " cadres . " " We must have the frame of mind that as revolutionaries we have ( to ) be able to solve any problem that comes our way ... " Shiller said . The Coalition provided an array of programs geared toward providing essential services for the poor , including medical clinics for pregnant women , mothers and young children ; a legal aid clinic , food pantries and distributing clothes and meals to the poor . For decades Shiller and her allies worked to preserve Uptown as the last North Side lakefront neighborhood south of Rogers Park that is home to a significant population of low income households . 
 Shiller supported Michael <unk> in his 1978 primary challenge to Illinois Governor James R. Thompson , attacking Thompson for " making deals with the Chicago machine " and for being unsympathetic to the urban poor . Shiller helped open an extension of Shimer College at 4833 N Broadway in the Fall of 1978 . Shiller took on Illinois ' dentists when in 1978 the Uptown Peoples Community Services Center joined consumers groups in a federal lawsuit which attempted to break up dentists ' monopoly on fitting dentures . From 1981 to 1987 , Shiller was President and CEO of Justice Graphics , Inc. a print shop , a small business of which Shiller and Coleman were two of five owners . 
 In 2003 Shiller recalled the period : 
 I was as student in the sixties , engaged in the civil rights movement , anti @-@ Vietnam War protests . I 'd come from New York to attend the University of Wisconsin . It was an exciting time . A lot of active students wound up in different cities and communities as organizers . I chose Racine , Wisconsin . I spent three years there . We had developed a legal clinic and we had a whole health program , but the city was too small . I had , of course , heard about Uptown in Chicago , and the challenges . So I wound up here in 1976 . I waited tables . I did photography , took pictures for attorneys . Ultimately we started our own print shop in order to print our own newspapers and magazines . 
 = = Campaigns for alderman = = 
 = = = First campaign for alderman ( 1978 ) = = = 
 A special election was called for May 16 , 1978 in the 46th Ward when Alderman Chris Cohen , first elected in 1971 , was re @-@ elected in 1975 but retired in mid @-@ term to head the Chicago regional office of the United States Department of Health , Education , and Welfare . On March 6 , 1978 Ralph Axelrod , chief administrative assistant to Cook County Sheriff Richard Elrod , and ward committeeman since 1973 , slated himself for alderman . 
 At the time , Shiller was 30 years old and the editor of Keep Strong , a leftist magazine . Shiller 's first attempt at elected office was to join a multi @-@ way challenge to Axelrod . " I ran for alderman of this [ 46th ] ward in 1978 . I was terrified . I was very shy , afraid to speak to more than five people at a time , " Shiller recalled in 2003 . Shiller picked up much of the support that Young Lords founder and leader Jose Cha Cha Jimenez had in Jimenez ' unsuccessful challenge to Cohen in the 1975 elections . He was running primarily to expose the displacement of Latino and lower income areas from the lakefront and near downtown by the Richard J. Daley machine and still received 39 % of the vote coming in second in a three way race . Shiller 's base of support was the same geographic center of the ward , an area of high density , low @-@ income families between Broadway and Clark Street . Shiller campaigned pledging to work to keep the disadvantaged of Uptown from being displaced by gentrification . 
 Independents including Aldermen Dick Simpson ( 44th ) , Martin J. Oberman ( 43rd ) , and Ross Lathrop ( 5th ) , and former alderman and mayoral candidate William Singer ( 43rd ) , endorsed Angela Turley , founder of the Organization of the Northeast ( ONE ) , a community group . Turley was also unanimously endorsed by the 46th Ward Citizens Search Committee , a group of 50 ward residents who interviewed 10 candidates . Turley and another candidate Carl Lezak , a former priest and former director of the American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) , were challenged and stricken from the ballot by the Chicago Board of Elections Commissioners , leaving a three @-@ way race for alderman between Axelrod , Shiller , and former television news reporter Michael Horowitz . Shiller charged that the regular Democratic organization used unfair campaign practices against her , challenging about 100 of the 400 new voters she helped register , stealing her campaign posters , and pressuring store owners to remove her signs . The Chicago Tribune endorsed Axelrod , noting Shiller " runs primarily as a champion of the poor . " Axelrod prevailed , receiving 5 @,@ 575 votes , or 54 @.@ 5 % , to Shiller 's 3 @,@ 475 votes . 
 = = = Second campaign for alderman ( 1979 ) = = = 
 Shiller and Turley challenged Axelrod in 1979 . An extra alarm fire early on Friday , February 9 , 1979 , weeks before the election , caused extensive damage to the building containing Shiller 's campaign headquarters and left 15 homeless . The Chicago Tribune endorsed Axelrod . Shiller ( 6 @,@ 852 votes ; 46 % ) bested Axelrod ( 6 @,@ 088 votes ; 40 % ) , but , as no candidate received a majority of the vote in the three @-@ way race , a run @-@ off was forced . The Chicago Tribune and Turley endorsed Axelrod in the run @-@ off . The Chicago Tribune wrote that " Ms. Shiller 's program shares many elements with that of the Black Panthers and appears to be based on hopes of an eventual " revolution " [ not defined ] . " Turley described Axelrod as " the lesser of two evils in the race now . " Axelrod enlisted 40 volunteer attorneys and 200 off @-@ duty policemen to challenge ghost voting in a project he called " Operation Safeguard . " Axelrod challenged 1 @,@ 060 voter registrations on the ward 's rolls , 931 of which were upheld by the Chicago Board of Elections Commissioners . Axelrod defeated Shiller in the run @-@ off by 247 votes . Shiller later recalled the campaign : 
 I won the primary , but not with fifty @-@ one percent of the vote . We had a runoff and I lost by two hundred votes – to a machine candidate . We were bringing fresh ideas , but we were not experienced in fighting the machine on election day . I swore I 'd never run for alderman again . There was so much racial baiting that it was terrifying . I was called names . ... My posters had black paint all over them with racial epithets . It was very disturbing . 
 = = = Third campaign for alderman ( 1987 ) = = = 
 In Harold Washington 's successful first campaign for Mayor of Chicago in the 1983 municipal elections , Shiller was employed as the campaign organizer for the 46th Ward . Shiller owned and operated a print shop , Justice Graphics , that printed the campaign literature for Washington 's first mayoral campaign . Justice Graphics published the All @-@ Chicago City News , a 40 @,@ 000 circulation pro @-@ Washington , left @-@ wing , bilingual , biweekly newspaper edited by Shiller and Walter " Slim " Coleman . Coleman formed a plan to register 100 @,@ 000 new voters for Washington by canvassing public aid offices and became a close advisor to candidate and , later , Mayor Harold Washington . Just before the 1983 elections , Alderman Axelrod resigned from City Council to take a job in the Cook County Sheriff 's office . Community activist Charlotte Newfeld and Jerome Orbach ran for alderman and went to a run @-@ off , which Orbach won by 66 votes . Orbach allied with Edward Vrdolyak and the Vrdolyak 29 during Council Wars . 
 " Harold was mayor , and he was harping on me to run for alderman , " Shiller recalled in 2003 . In 1987 , Shiller , Nancy Kaszak , and Gerald Pechenuk challenged Orbach . Kaszak was a lawyer , a former vice president of the Chicago Council of Lawyers , a Mayor Harold Washington appointee to the Commission on Chicago Landmarks , a leader of the Lakeview Citizens ' Council , and president of Citizens United for Baseball in Sunshine ( <unk> ) , which opposed night baseball at Wrigley Field . Newfeld co @-@ chaired Kaszak 's campaign . Pechenuk was a consultant for Lyndon LaRouche Jr. for 12 years , and was treasurer of LaRouche @-@ supported Sheila Jones 's mayoral campaign . Shiller challenged Pechenuk 's nominating petitions . 
 Mayor Washington endorsed 18 incumbent aldermen and 5 challengers , including Shiller . Washington appeared at a joint rally with Shiller at which she announced her candidacy . Kaszak was endorsed by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , the Independent Voters of Illinois @-@ Independent Precinct Organization ( <unk> @-@ IPO ) , the National Organization for Women ( NOW ) , the American Federation of State , County and Municipal Employees ( <unk> ) , and former aldermen William Singer and Dick Simpson . The Chicago Tribune endorsed Orbach . Shiller charged that Orbach catered to developers , displacing people in the wake of rehabilitation that priced housing out of the reach of many , and said she wanted community zoning boards , with their decisions binding on the alderman . Shiller charged that most of Orbach 's campaign war chest was from developers and regular Democrats outside the ward . 
 In the four @-@ way race , Orbach took 40 % of the vote and Shiller 38 % , but , no candidate received a majority , resulting in a run @-@ off . Kaszak endorsed Shiller , although many of Kaszak 's followers supported Orbach . Orbach tried to position himself on both sides of the pro- / anti @-@ Washington political fence , and late in the campaign attempted to stage a public conversion to pro @-@ Washington positions . Some prominent independents , such as Alderman Marion <unk> ( 48th ) , state Representative Ellis Levin and state Senator William A. <unk> , endorsed Orbach , as did the Chicago Sun @-@ Times and Chicago Tribune . " His [ Orbach 's ] relationship to large real estate developers is very important . He 's become more of an advocate for people outside of the ward than for people here , " Shiller charged . Some of Orbach 's allies spread a rumor , aimed at lakefront Jewish voters , that as alderman Shiller would support a Palestinian state . Shiller 's forces called Orbach a racist , although a large number of blacks backed Orbach in his early campaigns . Shiller later said , 
 The machine alderman who won in 1983 [ Orbach ] had a chief of staff who was engaging in racial organizing . There were white gangs up here . One of them he helped organize into a consciously racially white @-@ power gang . They hooked up with both the Klan and the Nazi Party . 
 In the months leading up to the election , the Heart of Uptown Coalition and a Shiller supporter who was director of the Center for Street People , 4455 N. Broadway , organized a voter registration drive that registered 80 homeless people using the Center 's address , and on election day fed them a meal at a local church hall and helped them vote . Jesus People USA , a 500 @-@ member commune / business / charity / religious group with many members living in the ward , had supported Orbach throughout his career , but switched to Shiller before the run @-@ off . Jesus People 's spokesman explained " We think Jerry Orbach is a lovely man , but he doesn 't have what it takes to stand up to the development ... If things keep going there will be massive displacement . People will be thrown out of their homes . We decided that Helen Shiller would do the most to prevent displacement . " Orbach supporters charged that a City official had offered City contracts to the Jesus People 's construction firm if Shiller were elected . On Tuesday , April 7 , 1987 Shiller defeated Orbach by 498 votes , 9 @,@ 751 to 9 @,@ 253 , and contributed to a narrow , pro @-@ Washington , reform @-@ minded majority in the City Council which helped draw the Council Wars era to close . 
 = = Aldermanic career = = 
 In her six terms as alderman , Shiller served on eight committees : Budget and Government Operations ; Buildings ; Committees , Rules and Ethics ; Finance ; Health ; Housing and Real Estate ; Human Relations ; and License and Consumer Protection . 
 = = = First term ( 1987 – 1991 ) = = = 
 On December 16 , 1987 , Shiller was among the supporters of the 1988 City budget , proposed by Washington in late 1987 and passed 29 @-@ 19 under Mayor Eugene Sawyer after Washington 's death in office . Shiller was among opponents of Sawyer 's 1989 budget , approved 34 @-@ 13 on December 7 , 1988 . In January , 1988 , Shiller was named one of " 88 People to Watch " by Chicago Tribune staff . Shiller was Mayor Richard M. Daley 's staunchest opponent in City Council votes in the last three months of 1989 , in Daley 's first year of his first term . 
 In 1989 , Shiller sponsored a resolution creating a sub @-@ committee on Domestic Violence . Shiller backed a group of 50 to 75 people including more than 40 homeless people and six children who erected a " tent city " from doors and wood on a vacant lot at 4425 N. Malden to illustrate the plight of the homeless . On Friday , October 14 , 1989 Shiller was among five arrested when police , called by the owner , evicted about 100 protesters from the lot . Shiller was charged with trespassing and spent " about two minutes " in jail before charges were dropped . 
 = = = = Uptown Chicago Commission funding = = = = 
 In November , 1987 , Shiller 's first budget cycle , she recommended to the Budget Committee that the City cancel a federal grant for the Uptown Chicago Commission ( UCC ) , a 32 @-@ year @-@ old community group in Uptown that often contended on issues with the Heart of Uptown Coalition , of which Shiller was co @-@ chairman with Walter " Slim " Coleman . The recommendation came during Budget Committee hearings on the distribution of $ 95 @.@ 1 million in federal Community Development Block Grants . Mayor Washington 's budget recommendation included a $ 20 @,@ 000 grant to UCC to facilitate residents applying for home improvement loans . The UCC 's service area included the adjoining 48th Ward , whose Alderman Kathy Osterman also supported the funding . Shiller requested that the committee deny the UCC its grant . Shiller accused the UCC of helping developers displace low @-@ income Uptown residents . After heated debate , the Budget Committee voted 9 – 5 in favor of Shiller 's amendment to remove the grant for the UCC . 
 Upon the death of Mayor Washington in office , Shiller supported Alderman Timothy C. Evans for mayor , but supporters of Alderman Eugene Sawyer prevailed . Weeks later , at the first City Council meeting under Mayor Sawyer , the UCC funding was restored . Shiller said restoring the grant to the UCC would affect only the 48th Ward , not her ward . " I was not going to have them operating in the 46th , " Shiller said , claiming she had reached an agreement to keep UCC services out of her ward several days before Washington 's death . " Mayor Sawyer had nothing to do with this , " Shiller claimed . " He had recommended no changes . " 
 = = = = Low @-@ income housing consent decree = = = = 
 As early as 1966 Uptown was among the possible sites proposed for a northeast @-@ side commuter campus in the City Colleges of Chicago community college district . The Uptown site west of the Wilson Chicago Transit Authority ( CTA ) station was opposed by those concerned for the displacement of low income residents , largely blacks , southern whites and American Indians . The project was mired in heated controversy for decades . Avery v Pierce , a federal lawsuit filed in 1975 , alleged that the razing of about 3 @,@ 000 low @-@ income housing units for the development of Harry S Truman College constituted misspending of funds by the City and Chicago Housing Authority . Plaintiffs were represented by Shiller 's former campaign manager , attorney James P. Chapman of the Uptown Peoples Law Center . 
 In 1985 Randall H. Langer , a young real estate developer active in apartment rehabilitation in the neighborhood , aided the creation of a local historic district , the Sheridan Park Historic District , which critics charged was of dubious historical value and created to facilitate gentrification . Nineteen tax delinquent properties in Uptown were offered for sale by auction by Cook County in Fall , 1987 . Since 1983 Cook County had a program to afford local governments the opportunity to acquire tax delinquent properties for almost nothing , prior to the county 's scavenger sale to the public , if the local government had a specific development plan . On October 28 , 1987 , Shiller urged the Tax Delinquency Subcommittee of the Cook County Board to accept a no @-@ cash bid from the City for the 19 tax @-@ delinquent parcels in Uptown . A decision was deferred when Commissioner Rosemarie Love requested a delay on grounds that the Washington administration had not provided a development plan . Subcommittee chairman Commissioner Richard Siebel said the County 's no @-@ cash sales program was " designed to place property back on the tax rolls as quickly as possible – not for land @-@ banking . It 's not appropriate for us to pass this until the city tells us , parcel by parcel , what they intend to do and how they plan to pay for it . " Another commissioner noted that the City already owned 7 @,@ 000 tax @-@ delinquent properties , and another added , " Properties we gave to the city 12 years ago are still war zones . I don 't want the same thing to happen here . " 
 As a bench ruling in Avery v Pierce neared , Shiller proposed an ordinance that directed the city to settle and accept a consent decree . The consent decree would have put most vacant parcels in Uptown into a land bank for future affordable housing , administered by a community development corporation , funded by the City with $ 100 @,@ 000 over two years . The consent decree also would have made a " desirable " goal of 3 @,@ 000 low @-@ income housing units in Uptown . On November 16 , 1987 , the Committee on Finance of the Chicago City Council , chaired at the time by Shiller ally Alderman Timothy Evans , voted 21 to 2 to recommend the consent decree . Shiller gloated during committee hearings that , with Mayor Harold Washington 's backing , the decree could not be stopped . Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning commentator Mike Royko wrote in the Chicago Tribune : 
 One of the most depressing sections of Chicago is the Uptown area on the North Side . <unk> apartment buildings , vacant stores , wino bars , littered vacant lots , junkies , muggers , and career down @-@ and @-@ <unk> . It also has a new alderman , Helen Shiller , and she has a vision of what that seedy old neighborhood should be in the future . And apparently her vision is that Uptown should remain a seedy old neighborhood . 
 In 1988 Royko wrote of Shiller , " her main motive was that she was building a political power base , which included as many winos as she and Coleman could drag to the voting booth . " Shiller 's proposal was criticized in a series of editorials . The Chicago Tribune called the proposal " silly , " editorializing : 
 It would have enabled her [ Shiller ] to strangle commercial development in her Uptown ward and keep it poor . ... It was a flagrantly bad idea and deserved its defeat . It would have put Helen Shiller and her sidekick , Slim Coleman , in charge of a " community development corporation " whose avowed purpose would be to block private investment in the 46th Ward and use all available space for low @-@ cost housing . This would consolidate their own power by ensuring a constituency of poor and dependent voters . 
 In 2003 Shiller explained the editorials : 
 When I first became alderman , there was a developer up here who felt very threatened by me . He hired a publicist to really go after me . Any time I talked about development without displacement , they would <unk> me . They went to the press and got some of the most vicious editorials published . 
 On December 3 , 1987 16 of the parcels were sold to private bidders at Cook County 's annual scavenger sale , and Langer and partnerships Langer controlled bought 13 of the parcels . On December 9 , 1987 , at the first regular business meeting of the City Council after the death of Mayor Washington in office , Washington foes brought the proposal out of committee . Alderman Bernard Stone joined Alderman Osterman in blocking the agreement , saying Shiller 's " arrogance prevailed and that arrogance has to be answered on this floor . " The Council rejected the consent decree 29 @-@ 17 . 
 = = = Second term ( 1991 – 1995 ) = = = 
 In 1991 , Shiller supported Danny K. Davis in Davis ' unsuccessful primary challenge to Daley . Daley endorsed Shiller 's challenger , Michael Quigley , campaigned with Quigley and sent letters in support of Quigley . Shiller finished seven votes ahead of Quigley , but a third candidate got 3 @.@ 4 % of the vote , which forced a runoff , the third straight run @-@ off for Shiller and the fourth straight for the 46th ward . In the run @-@ off , Shiller won with 53 % of the vote , amid charges that Quigley was a carpetbagger . 
 Shiller added a budget amendment to triple the city 's AIDS budget in 1992 . Shiller was one of nine alderman voting against Daley 's 1993 budget , which included a $ 28 @.@ 7 million property tax increase . Shiller was absent for the 1994 budget vote , and was one of four aldermen dissenting on Daley 's 1995 budget . 
 = = = Third term ( 1995 – 1999 ) = = = 
 The Chicago Tribune was among newspapers that endorsed Shiller for re @-@ election in 1995 , and she won with 57 % of the vote , without a run @-@ off . Shiller supported U.S. Representative Bobby Rush in his unsuccessful challenge to Daley in 1999 . 
 " Arguably , the single most important legislative responsibility that aldermen have is voting on the city budget each year , " Shiller said . She was the lone dissenting vote on Daley 's 1996 , 1997 and 1998 budgets . During hearings on Daley 's 1996 budget , which included a $ 19 @.@ 5 million property @-@ tax increase , she submitted 123 questions on the budget in writing to department heads , but only 35 were answered . She objected to the tax increase in a period of several years of budget surpluses . She attended every hearing on Daley 's 1997 budget armed with policy questions that she said went unanswered . She was often the only alderman present at budget hearings . 
 = = = Fourth term ( 1999 – 2003 ) = = = 
 In 1999 , Sandra Reed , a black high school English teacher , and two other women opposed Shiller , the first all @-@ female field in an aldermanic race in Chicago history . The Chicago Tribune again endorsed Shiller . Shiller prevailed with 55 % of the vote in a runoff . Shiller was inducted into the Chicago Gay and Lesbian Hall of Fame as a Friend of the Community in 2000 . 
 On November 17 , 1999 , Shiller joined in unanimous support for Daley 's 2000 budget , her first affirmative vote on a Daley budget and only her second affirmative vote on a City budget . Aldermen applauded . Shiller again joined in unanimous support for Daley 's 2001 , 2002 , and 2003 budgets . In the 2001 redistricting of Chicago wards , Daley tried to deprive Shiller of her most committed supporters , but failed when none of the aldermen in adjacent wards wanted to contend with Shiller 's supporters . Shiller and Daley , however , reached an understanding : the mayor supported her in the 2003 elections and also pushed forward development of Wilson Yard , a Chicago Transit Authority facility destroyed by fire , into affordable housing and a Target store , using the Wilson Yard Tax Increment Financing District and the $ 26 @.@ 5 million it generated . Subsequently , Shiller consistently voted in support of the mayor 's agenda . 
 = = = Fifth term ( 2003 @-@ 2007 ) = = = 
 Shiller and Daley supported each other for re @-@ election in 2003 . Shiller cited Daley 's commitment to affordable housing , and in particular his Planning Department 's work on the Wilson Yard project . Columnist Mark Brown wrote in the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , 
 The last squeaky wheel in the City Council had been greased . The last independent voice had joined the chorus ... Shiller 's endorsement of Daley is all the more amazing when you look at where she started , about as close to a Marxist as you 'd ever find at City Hall . 
 Shiller defeated Reed again in 2003 , this time with 58 % of the vote . Shiller again joined in unanimous support for Daley 's 2004 budget . Shiller was the only alderman who did not cast a vote on the passage of the Big Box Ordinance , which required large retailers to pay a living wage . Target sent a letter to Mayor Daley and alderman indicating that if the ordinance were not overturned , they would not proceed on projects in Chicago . Shiller voted to sustain Daley 's veto . 
 = = = Sixth term ( 2007 – 2011 ) = = = 
 Criticism of Shiller in the 2007 election largely focused on the lack of communication with ward residents , failure to obtain input from residents for zoning changes in the ward , her lack of involvement in community policing meetings , and the many years of blighted retail in the ward . Some critics charged that Shiller was frustrating developers while using the Wilson Yard project to maintain her political base . In 2007 , Shiller defeated social worker James Cappleman with 53 % of the vote . In October , 2007 , Shiller became chair of the City Council 's Human Relations Committee . In 2009 , Shiller was criticized by Uptown residents for her perceived lack of engagement in address crime in the neighborhood , including a string of violent robberies in nearby Lakeview that attracted the attention of the Chicago Tribune , Chicago Sun @-@ Times , and local TV news . Police interviewed said interventions from Shiller and her staff facilitated the protection of gang members from policing <unk> ty , allegedly for gaining voter base , according to a report in Chicago Magazine . 
 Mayor Daley was among supporters of the Wilson Yard redevelopment project celebrating the completion of construction on July 20 , 2010 . The project included 98 units of subsidized housing for low @-@ income residents in two buildings , one for seniors , and another for other families . The Target store opened on Sunday , July 22 , 2010 . On August 2 , 2010 Shiller announced she would not run for re @-@ election in 2011 . Shiller reflected , 
 ... we should be able to make sure that everyone has a place in the city , and when we do development ... we should make sure that the people who are here today will be here when that is complete ... my most singular perspective was to prove that that is possible . ... we have to have a city that is not just inclusive about our diversity but is serious and honest about making sure that everyone has a place here ... 
 On closing her ward office , Shiller wrote : 
 I am most proud of my achievements in tripling the City 's funding budget for HIV / AIDS victims and for developing the toughest stance on Apartheid that was ever written in the 90 's , for my work on domestic violence issues and establishing 24 @-@ hour daycare for children , the Ruth Shriman House for senior living , the Wilson Yards Development and for welcoming Target as a neighbor and partner , and of course setting the bar for affordable housing in Chicago . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Shiller separated from her husband Mark Zalkin , one of the Mayor Harold Washington 's assistant press secretaries , and with Shiller a leader of the 46th Ward Community Service Center ( later the Uptown Community Service Center ) and an editor of Keep Strong magazine , and with Shiller and Coleman an editor of All @-@ Chicago City News . Zalkin passed on February 23 , 1998 at age 49 due to complications from multiple sclerosis . 
 Shiller and Zalkin have one son , Brendan Shiller . Brendan attended Joseph Stockton Elementary School , a Chicago Public School , and Whitney Young Magnet High School , a selective @-@ enrollment public magnet high school in Chicago 's Near West Side . While attending Truman College , Brendan was managing editor of All @-@ Chicago City News . After Truman , Brendan went to Howard University in Washington , D.C. For two years starting in February , 1997 Brendan edited StreetWise , a street newspaper sold by people without homes or those at @-@ risk for homelessness in Chicago . In 2003 , Brendan graduated first in his class from John Marshall Law School and currently works as a lawyer representing criminal defendants and police misconduct plaintiffs . 
 Helen Shiller and her long @-@ time staff member Maggie <unk> were interviewed in separate chapters in Hope Dies Last , a collection of oral histories by Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning author and Uptown resident Studs Terkel . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Shiller , Helen ( 1988 @-@ 04 @-@ 11 ) . " Chicago Housing : ' Let The Market Decide ' <unk> Worked " . Chicago Tribune . Retrieved 2012 @-@ 11 @-@ 24 . 
 = Jurassic Park ( film ) = 
 Jurassic Park is a 1993 American science fiction adventure film directed by Steven Spielberg . The first installment of the Jurassic Park franchise , it is based on the 1990 novel of the same name by Michael Crichton , with a screenplay written by Crichton and David Koepp . The film is set on the fictional Isla Nublar , an islet located off Central America 's Pacific Coast , near Costa Rica , where a billionaire philanthropist and a small team of genetic scientists have created a wildlife park of cloned dinosaurs . 
 Before Crichton 's novel was published , four studios put in bids for the film rights . With the backing of Universal Studios , Spielberg acquired the rights for $ 1 @.@ 5 million before publication in 1990 ; Crichton was hired for an additional $ 500 @,@ 000 to adapt the novel for the screen . Koepp wrote the final draft , which left out much of the novel 's exposition and violence and made numerous changes to the characters . Filming took place in California and Hawaii between August and November 1992 , and post @-@ production rolled until May 1993 , supervised by Spielberg in Poland as he filmed Schindler 's List . The dinosaurs were created with groundbreaking computer @-@ generated imagery by Industrial Light & Magic and with life @-@ sized animatronic dinosaurs built by Stan Winston 's team . To showcase the film 's sound design , which included a mixture of various animal noises for the dinosaur roars , Spielberg invested in the creation of DTS , a company specializing in digital surround sound formats . 
 Following an extensive $ 65 million marketing campaign , which included licensing deals with 100 companies , Jurassic Park grossed over $ 900 million worldwide in its original theatrical run , becoming the highest @-@ grossing film ever at the time , a record held until the 1997 release of Titanic . It was well received by critics , who praised its special effects , John Williams ' musical score , and Spielberg 's direction . Following a 3D re @-@ release in 2013 to celebrate its 20th anniversary , Jurassic Park became the 17th film to surpass $ 1 billion in ticket sales , and the film ranks among the 20 highest @-@ grossing films ever . The film won more than 20 awards ( including 3 Academy Awards ) , mostly for its technical achievements . Jurassic Park is considered a landmark in the development of computer @-@ generated imagery and animatronic visual effects , and was followed by three commercially successful sequels , The Lost World : Jurassic Park ( 1997 ) , Jurassic Park III ( 2001 ) , and Jurassic World ( 2015 ) . A fifth installment is scheduled for a 2018 release . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Industrialist John Hammond and his bioengineering company , InGen , have created a theme park called Jurassic Park on Isla Nublar , a tropical Costa Rican island populated with cloned dinosaurs . After one of the park workers is killed by a Velociraptor , the park 's investors , represented by lawyer Donald Gennaro , insist that experts visit the park and certify it as safe . Gennaro invites mathematician Ian Malcolm , while Hammond invites paleontologist Dr. Alan Grant and paleobotanist Dr. Ellie Sattler . Upon arrival , the group is stunned to see a live Brachiosaurus . 
 At the visitor center , the group learns that the cloning was accomplished by extracting dinosaur DNA from mosquitoes that had been preserved in amber . DNA from frogs was used to fill in gaps in the dinosaur genomes . To prevent breeding , all the dinosaurs were made female . Malcolm scoffs at the idea of such controlled breeding , declaring it impossible . The crew witness the birth of a baby raptor and visit the raptor enclosure . Grant , Sattler , and Malcolm have reservations about the idea of resurrecting dinosaurs , but Hammond and Gennaro dismiss their fears . 
 The group is then joined by Hammond 's grandchildren , Lex and Tim Murphy , for a tour of the park , while Hammond oversees the trip from the park 's control room . The tour does not go as planned , with the dinosaurs failing to appear . The group later encounters a sick Triceratops . The tour is cut short as a tropical storm approaches Isla Nublar . Most of the park employees depart on a boat for the mainland and the visitors return to their electric tour vehicles , except Ellie , who stays with the park 's veterinarian to study the Triceratops . 
 Jurassic Park 's computer programmer , Dennis Nedry , has been bribed by Dodgson , a man involved with a corporate rival , to steal dinosaur embryos . Nedry deactivates the park 's security system to gain access to the embryo storage room . Nedry stores the embryos inside a canister disguised as <unk> shaving cream , supplied by Dodgson . Because of Nedry , the power goes out and the tour vehicles become stuck . Most of the park 's electric fences are deactivated as well , allowing the Tyrannosaurus to escape and attack the tour group . Grant , Lex , and Tim escape while the Tyrannosaurus injures Malcolm and devours Gennaro . On his way to deliver the embryos to the island 's docks , Nedry becomes lost in the rain , crashes his Jeep , and is killed by a Dilophosaurus . 
 Sattler assists the park 's game warden , Robert Muldoon , in a search for survivors , but they only find an injured Malcolm before the Tyrannosaurus returns . Grant , Tim , and Lex spend the night in a tree , and befriend a Brachiosaurus . Later , they discover the broken shells of dinosaur eggs . Grant concludes that the dinosaurs have been breeding , which occurred because of their frog DNA — West African bullfrogs can change their sex in a single @-@ sex environment , allowing the dinosaurs to do so as well , proving Malcolm right . 
 Unable to decipher Nedry 's code to reactivate the security system , Hammond and the park 's chief engineer Ray Arnold opt to reboot the entire park 's system . The group shuts down the park 's grid and retreats to an emergency bunker , while Arnold heads to a maintenance shed to complete the rebooting process . When Arnold fails to return , Sattler and Muldoon head to the shed . They discover the shutdown has deactivated the remaining fences and released the raptors . Muldoon distracts the raptors while Sattler goes to turn the power back on before being attacked by a raptor and discovering Arnold 's severed arm . Meanwhile , Muldoon is caught off @-@ guard and killed by the other two raptors . 
 Grant , Tim and Lex reach the visitor center . Grant heads out to look for Sattler . Tim and Lex are pursued by the raptors in an industrial kitchen , but they escape and join Grant and Sattler . Lex restores full power from the control room , allowing the group to call for help . The group is cornered by the raptors , but escape when the Tyrannosaurus suddenly appears and attacks the raptors . Hammond arrives in a Jeep with Malcolm , and the entire group boards a helicopter to leave the island . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Sam Neill as Dr. Alan Grant , a leading paleontologist . 
 Laura Dern as Dr. Ellie Sattler , a paleobotanist . 
 Jeff Goldblum as Dr. Ian Malcolm , a mathematician and chaos theorist . 
 Richard Attenborough as John Hammond , InGen 's billionaire CEO and the park 's creator . 
 Joseph Mazzello as Timothy " Tim " Murphy , Lex 's younger brother and Dr. Hammond 's grandson . 
 Ariana Richards as Alexis " Lex " Murphy , Tim 's older sister and Dr. Hammond 's granddaughter . 
 Martin Ferrero as Donald Gennaro , a lawyer who represents Hammond 's concerned investors . 
 Bob Peck as Robert Muldoon , the park 's game warden . 
 Wayne Knight as Dennis Nedry , the disgruntled and corrupt programmer of the park 's computer systems . 
 Samuel L. Jackson as Ray Arnold , the park 's chain @-@ smoking chief engineer . 
 Cameron Thor as Dr. Lewis Dodgson , a man involved with a corporate rival of InGen . 
 Miguel Sandoval as Juanito <unk> , the Mano de Dios amber mine 's proprietor . 
 Jerry Molen as Dr. Harding , the park 's veterinarian . 
 B. D. Wong as Dr. Henry Wu , the park 's chief geneticist . 
 Richard Kiley as himself , providing audio narration for the park 's main tour . 
 Greg Burson as the voice of Mr. DNA , the animated DNA strand that explains the miracle of cloning . 
 = = = Dinosaurs on screen = = = 
 Despite the title of the film referencing the Jurassic period , Brachiosaurus and Dilophosaurus are the only dinosaurs featured that actually lived during that time ; the other species featured did not exist until the Cretaceous period . This is acknowledged in the film during a scene where Dr. Grant describes the ferocity of the Velociraptor to a young boy , saying " Try to imagine yourself in the Cretaceous period ... " 
 Tyrannosaurus was acknowledged by Spielberg as " the star of the movie " , even leading him to rewrite the ending to feature the T. rex for fear of disappointing the audience . Winston 's animatronic T. rex stood 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) , weighed 17 @,@ 500 pounds ( 7 @,@ 900 kg ) , and was 40 feet ( 12 m ) long . Jack Horner called it " the closest I 've ever been to a live dinosaur " . While the consulting paleontologists did not have a consensus on the dinosaur 's movement , particularly regarding its running capabilities , animator Steve Williams decided to " throw physics out the window and create a T. rex that moved at sixty miles per hour even though its hollow bones would have busted if it ran that fast " . The major reason was the T. rex chasing a Jeep , a scene that took two months to finish . The dinosaur is depicted with a vision system based on movement , though later studies indicated the T. rex had binocular vision comparable to a bird of prey . Its roar is a baby elephant mixed with a tiger and an alligator , and its breath is a whale 's blow . A dog attacking a rope toy was used for the sounds of the T. rex tearing a Gallimimus apart , while cut sequoias crashing to the ground became the sound of the dinosaur 's footsteps . 
 Velociraptor plays a major role in the film . The creature 's depiction is not based on the actual dinosaur genus in question , which itself was significantly smaller . Shortly before Jurassic Park 's theatre release , the similar Utahraptor was discovered , though was proven bigger in appearance than the film 's raptors ; this prompted Stan Winston to joke , " We made it , then they discovered it . " For the attack on character Robert Muldoon and some parts of the kitchen scene , the raptors were played by men in suits . Dolphin screams , walruses bellowing , geese hissing , an African crane 's mating call , tortoises mating , and human rasps were mixed to formulate various raptor sounds . Following discoveries made after the film 's release , most paleontologists theorize that dromaeosaurs like Velociraptor and Deinonychus were fully covered with feathers like modern birds . This feature is only included in Jurassic Park III for the male raptors , who are shown with a row of small quills on their heads . 
 Dilophosaurus was also very different from its real @-@ life counterpart , made significantly smaller to make sure audiences did not confuse it with the raptors . Its neck frill and its ability to spit venom are fictitious . Its vocal sounds were made by combining a swan , a hawk , a howler monkey , and a rattlesnake . The animatronic model , nicknamed " <unk> " by Stan Winston 's team , was animated by the puppeteers sitting on a trench in the set floor , and used a paintball mechanism to spit the mixture of methacyl and K @-@ Y Jelly that served as venom . 
 Brachiosaurus is the first dinosaur seen by the park 's visitors . It is inaccurately depicted as chewing its food , and standing up on its hind legs to browse among the high tree branches . According to artist Andy <unk> , the chewing was done to make the animal seem docile , in a way it resembled a cow chewing its cud . The dinosaur 's head and upper neck was the largest puppet without hydraulics built for the film . Despite scientific evidence of their having limited vocal capabilities , sound designer Gary Rydstrom decided to represent them with whale songs and donkey calls to give them a melodic sense of wonder . Penguins were also recorded to be used in the noises of the dinosaurs . 
 Triceratops has an extended cameo , being sick with an unidentified disease . Its appearance was a particular logistical nightmare for Stan Winston when Spielberg asked to shoot the animatronic of the sick creature earlier than expected . The model , operated by eight puppeteers in the Kaua 'i set , wound up being the first dinosaur filmed during production . Winston also created a baby Triceratops for Ariana Richards to ride on , a scene cut from the film for pacing reasons . Gary Rydstrom combined the sound of himself breathing into a cardboard tube with the cows near his workplace at Skywalker Ranch to create the Triceratops vocals . 
 Gallimimus are featured in a stampede scene where one of them is devoured by the Tyrannosaurus . The Gallimimus was the first dinosaur to receive a digital version , being featured in two ILM tests , first as a herd of skeletons and then fully skinned while pursued by the T. rex . Its design was based on ostriches , and to emphasize the birdlike qualities , the animation focused mostly on the herd rather than individual animals . As reference for the dinosaurs ' run , the animators were filmed running at the ILM parking lot , with plastic pipes standing in as the tree that the Gallimimus jump over . The footage even inspired to incorporate an animal falling in its leap as one of the artists crashed making the jump . Horse squeals became the Gallimimus sounds . 
 Parasaurolophus appear in the background during the first encounter with the Brachiosaurus . 
 Alamosaurus appears as a skeleton in the Jurassic Park visitor center . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Michael Crichton originally conceived a screenplay about a graduate student who recreates a dinosaur ; he continued to wrestle with his fascination with dinosaurs and cloning until he began writing the novel Jurassic Park . Even before publication , Steven Spielberg learned of the novel in October 1989 while he and Crichton were discussing a screenplay that would become the television series ER . Spielberg considered that what really fascinated him was that Jurassic Park was " a really credible look at how dinosaurs might someday be brought back alongside modern mankind " , going beyond a simple monster movie . 
 Before the book was published , Crichton demanded a non @-@ negotiable fee of $ 1 @.@ 5 million as well as a substantial percentage of the gross . Warner Bros. and Tim Burton , Columbia Pictures and Richard Donner , and 20th Century Fox and Joe Dante bid for the rights , but Universal Studios eventually acquired them in May 1990 for Spielberg . After completing Hook , Spielberg wanted to film Schindler 's List . Music Corporation of America ( then Universal Pictures 's parent company ) president Sid Sheinberg gave a green light to the film on the condition that Spielberg made Jurassic Park first . The director later declared that by choosing a creature @-@ driven thriller , " I was really just trying to make a good sequel to Jaws , on land . " 
 To create the dinosaurs , Spielberg at first thought of hiring Bob Gurr , who designed a giant mechanical King Kong for Universal Studios Hollywood 's King Kong Encounter . Upon considering that the life @-@ sized dinosaurs would be too expensive and not all convincing , Spielberg instead sought the best effects supervisors in Hollywood . Brought in were Stan Winston to create the animatronic dinosaurs , Phil Tippett to create go motion dinosaurs for long shots credited as Dinosaur Supervisor , Michael Lantieri to supervise the on @-@ set effects , and Dennis Muren of Industrial Light & Magic to do the digital compositing . Paleontologist Jack Horner supervised the designs , to help fulfill Spielberg 's desire to portray the dinosaurs as animals rather than monsters . This led to the entry of certain concepts about dinosaurs , such as the theory that dinosaurs evolved into birds and had very little in common with lizards . One of the first consequences was the removal of the raptors ' flicking tongues in Tippett 's early animatics , as Horner complained it was implausible . Winston 's department created fully detailed models of the dinosaurs before molding latex skins , which were fitted over complex robotics . Tippett created stop @-@ motion animatics of both the raptors in the kitchen and the Tyrannosaurus attacking the car . But despite go motion 's attempts at motion blurs , Spielberg still found the end results unsatisfactory in terms of working in a live @-@ action feature film . Muren declared to Spielberg that he thought the dinosaurs could be built through computer @-@ generated imagery , and the director asked him to prove it . ILM animators Mark <unk> and Steve Williams developed a computer @-@ generated walk cycle for the T. rex skeleton , and were approved to do more . When Spielberg and Tippett saw an animatic of the T. rex chasing a herd of Gallimimus , Spielberg said , " You 're out of a job , " to which Tippett replied , " Don 't you mean extinct ? " Spielberg later wrote both the animatic and his dialogue between him and Tippett into the script , as a conversation between Malcolm and Grant . Although no go motion was used , Tippett and his animators were still used by the production to supervise dinosaur movement . Tippett acted as a consultant regarding dinosaur anatomy , and his stop motion animators were re @-@ trained as computer animators . The animatics made by Tippett 's team were also used along with the storyboards as a reference for what would be shot during the action sequences . ILM 's artists were sent to private tours to the local animal park so they could study large animals — rhinos , elephants , alligators , and giraffes — up close , and also received mime classes for understanding movements . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Universal paid Crichton a further $ 500 @,@ 000 to adapt his own novel , which he had finished by the time Spielberg was filming Hook . Crichton noted that because the book was " fairly long " his script only had about 10 to 20 percent of the novel 's content ; scenes were dropped for budgetary and practical reasons , and despite the gory descriptions , the violence was toned down . Malia Scotch Marmo began a script rewrite in October 1991 over a five @-@ month period , merging Ian Malcolm with Alan Grant . 
 As Spielberg wanted another writer to rework the script , Universal president Casey Silver recommended him David Koepp , co @-@ writer of Death Becomes Her . Koepp started afresh from Marmo 's draft , and used Spielberg 's idea of a cartoon shown to the visitors to remove much of the exposition that fills Crichton 's novel . While Koepp tried to avoid excessive character detail " because whenever they started talking about their personal lives , you couldn 't care less " , he tried to flesh out the characters and make for a more colorful cast , with moments such as Malcolm flirting with Sattler leading to Grant 's jealousy . Some characterizations were changed from the novel . Hammond went from a ruthless businessman to a kindly old man , because Spielberg identified with Hammond 's obsession with showmanship . He also switched the characters of Tim and Lex ; in the book , Tim is aged eleven and interested in computers , and Lex is only seven or eight and interested in sports . Spielberg did this because he wanted to work with the younger Joseph Mazzello , and it also allowed him to introduce the sub @-@ plot of Lex 's adolescent crush on Grant . Koepp changed Grant 's relationship with the children , making him hostile to them initially to allow for more character development . 
 Two scenes from the book were excised , with Spielberg removing the opening sequence with <unk> attacking a young child as he found it too horrific , and Koepp cutting for budgetary reasons the T. rex chasing Grant and the children down a river before being tranquilized by Muldoon . Both parts eventually saw inclusion in the film sequels . Spielberg suggested the addition of the scene where the T. rex pursues a jeep , which at first would only have the characters driving away after listening to the dinosaur 's footsteps . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 William Hurt was initially offered the role of Alan Grant , but turned it down without reading the script . Harrison Ford was also offered the role of Grant . Sam Neill was ultimately cast as Grant three or four weeks before filming began . Neill said that " it all happened real quick . I hadn 't read the book , knew nothing about it , hadn 't heard anything about it , and in a matter of weeks I 'm working with Spielberg . " Janet Hirshenson , the film 's casting director , felt that Jeff Goldblum would be the right choice to play Ian Malcolm after reading the novel . Jim Carrey also auditioned for the role . According to Hirshenson , Carrey " was terrific , too , but I think pretty quickly we all loved the idea of Jeff . " 
 Cameron Thor had previously worked with Spielberg on Hook , and initially auditioned for the role of Malcolm , before trying out for the role of Dodgson . Thor said about casting , " It just said ' shaving @-@ cream can ' in the script , so I spent endless time in a drug store to find the most photogenic . I went with <unk> , which ended up in the movie . I was so broke that I took the can home after the audition to use it . " Laura Dern was Spielberg 's first choice for the role of Ellie Sattler . Spielberg chose to cast Wayne Knight after seeing his acting performance in Basic Instinct , saying , " I waited for the credits to roll and wrote his name down " . 
 Ariana Richards said , " I was called into a casting office , and they just wanted me to scream . I heard later on that Steven had watched a few girls on tape that day , and I was the only one who ended up waking his sleeping wife off the couch , and she came running through the hallway to see if the kids were all right . " Joseph Mazzello had initially screen @-@ tested for a role in Hook , but was deemed too young . Spielberg promised Mazzello that they would work together on a future film . Robin Wright turned down a role in the film . Christina Ricci auditioned for a role , but did not receive it . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 After 25 months of pre @-@ production , filming began on August 24 , 1992 , on the Hawaiian island of Kauaʻi . While Costa Rica was considered as a location given it is the story 's setting , Spielberg 's concerns on infrastructure and accessibility made him choose a place where he had already worked before . The three @-@ week shoot involved various daytime exteriors for Isla Nublar 's forests . On September 11 , Hurricane Iniki passed directly over Kauaʻi , which caused the crew to lose a day of shooting . Several of the storm scenes from the movie are actual footage shot during the hurricane . The scheduled shoot of the Gallimimus chase was moved to <unk> Ranch on the island of Oahu and one of the beginning scenes had to be created by digitally animating a still shot of scenery . The opening scene was shot in Haiku , on the island of Maui , with additional scenes being filmed on the " forbidden island " of Niihau . Samuel L. Jackson was to film a lengthy death scene in which his character would be chased and killed by velociraptors , but the set was destroyed by Hurricane Iniki . By mid @-@ September , the crew moved back to California , to shoot the raptors in the kitchen at Stage 24 of the Universal studio lot . Given the kitchen set was filled with reflective surfaces , cinematographer Dean <unk> had to carefully plan the illumination while also using black cloths to hide the light reflections . The crew also shot on Stage 23 for the scenes involving the power supply , before going on location to Red Rock Canyon for the Montana dig scenes . The crew returned to Universal to shoot Grant 's rescue of Tim , using a fifty @-@ foot prop with hydraulic wheels for the car fall , and the Brachiosaurus encounter . The crew filmed scenes for the Park 's labs and control room , which used animations for the computers lent from Silicon Graphics and Apple . While Crichton 's book features Toyota cars in Jurassic Park , Spielberg got a deal with the Ford Motor Company , who provided seven Ford Explorers . The Explorers were modified by ILM 's crew and veteran <unk> George Barris to create the illusion that they were autonomous cars by hiding the driver in the car 's trunk . Barris also customized the Jeep Wranglers featured in the production . 
 The crew moved to Warner Bros. Studios ' Stage 16 to shoot the T. rex 's attack on the <unk> powered SUVs . Shooting proved frustrating because of water soaking the foam rubber skin of the animatronic dinosaur , which caused the animatronic T. rex to shake and quiver from the extra weight when the foam absorbed the water . This forced Stan Winston 's crew to dry the model with <unk> between takes . On the set , Malcolm distracting the dinosaur with a flare was included at Jeff Goldblum 's suggestion , as he felt a heroic action was better than going by the script , where like Gennaro , Malcolm would get scared and run away . The ripples in the glass of water caused by the T. rex 's footsteps were inspired by Spielberg listening to Earth , Wind and Fire in his car , and the vibrations the bass rhythm caused . Lantieri was unsure of how to create the shot until the night before filming , when he put a glass of water on a guitar he was playing , which achieved the concentric circles in the water Spielberg wanted . The next morning , guitar strings were put inside the car and a man on the floor plucked the strings to achieve the effect . Back at Universal , the crew filmed scenes with the Dilophosaurus on Stage 27 . Finally , the shoot finished on Stage 12 , with the climactic chases with the raptors in the Park 's computer rooms and Visitor 's Center . Spielberg changed the climax to bring back the T. rex , abandoning the original ending in which Grant uses a platform machine to maneuver a raptor into a fossil tyrannosaur 's jaws . The scene which already had the juxtaposition of live dinosaurs in a museum filled with fossils , while also destroying the bones , now also had an ending where the T. rex saved the protagonists , and afterwards did what Spielberg described as a " King Kong roar " while an ironic banner reading " When Dinosaurs Ruled the Earth " flew . The film wrapped twelve days ahead of schedule on November 30 , and within days , editor Michael Kahn had a rough cut ready , allowing Spielberg to go ahead with filming Schindler 's List . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Special effects work continued on the film , with Tippett 's unit adjusting to new technology with Dinosaur Input Devices : models which fed information into the computers to allow themselves to animate the characters like stop motion puppets . In addition , they acted out scenes with the raptors and Gallimimus . As well as the computer @-@ generated dinosaurs , ILM also created elements such as water splashing and digital face replacement for Ariana Richards ' stunt double . Compositing the dinosaurs onto the live action scenes took around an hour . Rendering the dinosaurs often took two to four hours per frame , and rendering the T. rex in the rain even took six hours per frame . Spielberg monitored their progress from Poland during the filming of Schindler 's List , having teleconferences four times a week with ILM 's crew . The director described working simultaneously in two vastly different productions as " a bipolar experience " , where he used " every ounce of intuition on Schindler 's List and every ounce of craft in Jurassic Park " . 
 Along with the digital effects , Spielberg wanted the film to be the first with digital sound . He funded the creation of DTS , which would allow audiences to " really hear the movie the way it was intended to be heard " . The sound effects crew , supervised by George Lucas , were finished by the end of April . Sound designer Gary Rydstrom considered it a fun process , given the film had all kinds of noise – animal sounds , rain , gunshots , car crashes – and at times no music . During the process , Spielberg would take the weekends to fly from Poland to Paris , where he would meet Rydstrom to see the sound progress . Jurassic Park was finally completed on May 28 , 1993 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Composer John Williams began scoring the film at the end of February , and it was recorded a month later . John Neufeld and Alexander Courage provided the score 's orchestrations . Similar to another Spielberg film he scored , Close Encounters of the Third Kind , Williams felt he needed to write " pieces that would convey a sense of ' awe ' and fascination " given it dealt with the " overwhelming happiness and excitement " that would emerge from seeing live dinosaurs . In turn more suspenseful scenes such as the Tyrannosaurus attack earned frightening themes . The first soundtrack album was released on May 25 , 1993 . For the 20th anniversary of the release of the film , a new soundtrack was issued for digital download on April 9 , 2013 including four bonus tracks personally selected by Williams . 
 = = Release = = 
 Universal took the lengthy pre @-@ production to carefully plan the Jurassic Park marketing campaign , which cost $ 65 million and had deals with 100 companies to market 1 @,@ 000 products . These included three Jurassic Park video games by Sega and Ocean Software , a toy line by Kenner that was distributed by Hasbro , McDonald 's " Dino @-@ Sized meals " , and a novelization aimed at young children . 
 The film 's trailers only gave fleeting glimpses of the dinosaurs , a tactic journalist Josh Horowitz described as " that old Spielberg axiom of never revealing too much " when Spielberg and director Michael Bay did the same for their production of Transformers in 2007 . The film was marketed with the tagline " An Adventure 65 Million Years In The Making . " This was a joke Spielberg made on set about the genuine , thousands of years old mosquito in amber used for Hammond 's walking stick . 
 The film premiered at the Uptown Theater on June 9 , 1993 , in Washington , D.C. , in support of two children 's charities . Two days later it opened nationwide , in 2 @,@ 404 theater locations and an estimated 3 @,@ 400 screens . Internationally it was equally wide at 3 @,@ 400 prints . Following the film 's release , a traveling exhibition called The Dinosaurs of Jurassic Park began , showcasing dinosaur skeletons and film props . 
 Jurassic Park was broadcast on television for the first time on May 7 , 1995 , following the April 26 airing of The Making of Jurassic Park . Some 68 @.@ 12 million people tuned in to watch , garnering NBC a 36 percent share of all available viewers that night . Jurassic Park was the highest @-@ rated theatrical film broadcast on television by any network since the April 1987 airing of Trading Places . In June – July 1995 the film was aired a number of times on the TNT network . 
 = = = Theatrical re @-@ releases = = = 
 In anticipation of the Blu @-@ ray release , Jurassic Park had a digital print released in UK cinemas on September 23 , 2011 . It wound up grossing £ 245 @,@ 422 ( $ 786 @,@ 021 ) from 276 theaters , finishing at eleventh on the weekend box office . 
 Two years later , on the 20th anniversary of Jurassic Park , a 3D version of the film was released in cinemas . Spielberg declared that he had produced the film with a sort of " subconscious 3D " , as scenes feature animals walking toward the cameras and some effects of foreground and background overlay . In 2011 , he stated in an interview that Jurassic Park was the only of his works he had considered for a conversion , and once he saw the 3D version of Titanic in 2012 , he liked the new look of the film so much that he hired the same retrofitting company , Stereo D. Spielberg and cinematographer Janusz Kaminski supervised the nine @-@ month process closely in @-@ between the production of Lincoln . Stereo D executive Aaron Parry declared that the conversion was an evolution of what the company had done with Titanic , " being able to capitalize on everything we learned with Jim on Titanic and take it into a different genre and movie , and one with so many technical achievements . " The studio had the help of ILM , which contributed some elements and updated effects shots for a better visual enhancement . It opened on the United States and seven other territories on April 5 , 2013 , with other countries receiving the re @-@ release in the following six months . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film made its VHS and LaserDisc debut on October 4 , 1994 . With 17 million units sold in both formats , Jurassic Park is the fifth best @-@ selling VHS tape ever . 
 Jurassic Park was first released on Collector 's Edition DVD on October 10 , 2000 , in both a widescreen and fullscreen , and in a box set along with sequel The Lost World : Jurassic Park and both movies ' soundtrack albums . It ended as the 13th best @-@ selling DVD of 2000 counting both versions , finishing the year with 910 @,@ 000 units sold . Following the release of Jurassic Park III , a new box set with all films called Jurassic Park Trilogy was released on December 11 , 2001 ; it was re @-@ released on VHS and DVD as part of its 15th anniversary on October 8 , 2004 . It was repackaged as Jurassic Park Adventure Pack on November 29 , 2005 . 
 The trilogy was released on Blu @-@ ray on October 25 , 2011 , debuting at fifth on the Blu @-@ ray charts , and being nominated as the best release of the year by both the Las Vegas Film Critics Society and the Saturn Awards . In 2012 , Jurassic Park was among twenty @-@ five films chosen by Universal for a box set that celebrated the studio 's 100th anniversary , while also receiving a standalone 100th anniversary Blu @-@ ray featuring an augmented reality cover . The following year , the 20th anniversary 3D conversion was issued on Blu @-@ ray 3D . 
 On June 1 , 2016 , Jurassic Park , along with its sequels The Lost World and Jurassic Park III , were added to the Netflix streaming service . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Jurassic Park became the highest grossing film released worldwide up to that time . Following $ 3 @.@ 1 million from midnight screenings on June 10 , the film earned $ 47 million in its first weekend , with the $ 50 @.@ 1 million total breaking the opening weekend record set by Batman Returns the year before . By the end of its first week , Jurassic Park had grossed $ 81 @.@ 7 million , and stayed at number one for three weeks . It eventually grossed $ 357 million in the U.S. and Canada . Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold over 86 @.@ 2 million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run . The film also did very well in international markets , breaking opening records in the United Kingdom , Japan , India , South Korea , Mexico , and Taiwan , ultimately earning $ 914 million worldwide , with Spielberg reportedly making over $ 250 million from the film . It surpassed Spielberg 's own E.T. the Extraterrestrial as the highest grossing film ever worldwide , and became second to E.T. in North America earnings . Jurassic Park 's record was only surpassed in 1998 by Titanic , the first film to gross over $ 1 billion . 
 The 3D re @-@ release of Jurassic Park opened at fourth place in North America , with $ 18 @.@ 6 million from 2 @,@ 771 locations . IMAX showings accounted for over $ 6 million , with the 32 percent being the highest IMAX share ever for a nationwide release . The international release had its most successful weekend in the last week of August , when it managed to climb to the top of the overseas box office with a $ 28 @.@ 8 million debut in China . The reissue earned $ 45 @,@ 385 @,@ 935 in North America and $ 44 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 internationally as of August 2013 , leading to a lifetime gross of $ 402 @,@ 453 @,@ 882 in North America and $ 628 @,@ 723 @,@ 171 overseas , totaling up to a worldwide gross of $ 1 @,@ 029 @,@ 939 @,@ 903 , making Jurassic Park the 17th film to surpass the $ 1 billion mark . It was the first and only Universal Pictures film to surpass the $ 1 billion mark until 2015 , when the studio got three such films , Furious 7 , Minions , and the fourth installment of the Jurassic Park franchise , Jurassic World . It currently ranks as the 21st highest @-@ grossing film of all time , both in North America ( unadjusted for inflation ) and worldwide . It is the fourth highest @-@ grossing film released by Universal , and the highest @-@ grossing film directed by Spielberg . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Jurassic Park received critical acclaim . High praise was heaped on the visual effects , musical score , and Spielberg 's direction , although there was some criticism leveled at the script and departures from the book . Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes retrospectively gave the film a " Certified Fresh " rating of 93 % , based on 116 reviews , with rating average score of 8 @.@ 3 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " Jurassic Park is a spectacle of special effects and life @-@ like animatronics , with some of Spielberg 's best sequences of sustained awe and sheer terror since Jaws . " Metacritic gave the film a score of 68 out of 100 , based on 20 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Janet Maslin of The New York Times called it " a true movie milestone , presenting <unk> and fear @-@ inspiring sights never before seen on the screen ... On paper , this story is tailor @-@ made for Mr. Spielberg 's talents ... [ but ] [ i ] t becomes less crisp on screen than it was on the page , with much of the enjoyable jargon either mumbled confusingly or otherwise thrown away . " In Rolling Stone , Peter Travers described the film as " colossal entertainment — the eye @-@ popping , mind @-@ bending , kick @-@ out @-@ the @-@ jams thrill ride of summer and probably the year [ ... ] Compared with the <unk> , the characters are dry bones , indeed . Crichton and co @-@ screenwriter David Koepp have flattened them into <unk> on the trip from page to screen . " Roger Ebert noted , " The movie delivers all too well on its promise to show us dinosaurs . We see them early and often , and they are indeed a triumph of special effects artistry , but the movie is lacking other qualities that it needs even more , such as a sense of awe and wonderment , and strong human story values . " Henry Sheehan argued , " The complaints over Jurassic Park 's lack of story and character sound a little off the point , " pointing out the story arc of Grant learning to protect Hammond 's grandchildren despite his initial dislike of them . Empire magazine gave the film five stars , hailing it as " quite simply one of the greatest blockbusters of all time . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In March 1994 , Jurassic Park won all three Academy Awards for which it was nominated : Best Sound Editing , Best Sound Mixing , and Best Visual Effects ( at the same ceremony , Spielberg , editor Michael Kahn and composer John Williams won Academy Awards for Schindler 's List ) . The film won honors outside the U.S. including the 1994 BAFTA for Best Special Effects , as well as the Award for the Public 's Favorite Film . It won the 1994 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , and the 1993 Saturn Awards for Best Science Fiction Film , Best Direction , Best Writing for Crichton and Koepp and Best Special Effects . The film won the 1993 People 's Choice Awards for Favorite All @-@ Around Motion Picture . Young Artist Awards were given to Ariana Richards and Joseph Mazzello , with the film winning an Outstanding Action / Adventure Family Motion Picture award . In 2001 , the American Film Institute ranked Jurassic Park as the 35th most thrilling film of American cinema . The film has been included in the book 1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die , film lists by Empire magazine , and The Guardian . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In the years following its release , Jurassic Park has frequently been cited by film critics and industry professionals as one of the greatest movies of the action and thriller genres . The American Film Institute named Jurassic Park the 35th most thrilling film of all time on June 13 , 2001 . The Chicago Film Critics Association also ranked Jurassic Park as the 55th scariest movie of all time and , in 2005 , Bravo chose the scene in which Lex and Tim are stalked by two raptors in the kitchen as the 95th scariest movie moment ever . On Empire magazine 's fifteenth anniversary in 2004 , it judged Jurassic Park the sixth most influential film of the magazine 's lifetime . Empire called the first encounter with a Brachiosaurus the 28th most magical moment in cinema . In 2008 , an Empire poll of readers , filmmakers , and critics also rated it one of the 500 greatest films of all time . On Film Review 's fifty @-@ fifth anniversary in 2005 , it declared the film to be one of the five most important in the magazine 's lifetime . In 2006 , IGN ranked Jurassic Park as the 19th greatest film franchise ever . In a 2010 poll , the readers of Entertainment Weekly rated it the greatest summer movie of the previous 20 years . The popularity of the movie caused the management of the National Basketball Association expansion franchise founded in Toronto in 1995 to adopt the nickname Raptors . 
 The biggest impact Jurassic Park had on subsequent films regarded Industrial Light and Magic 's computer @-@ generated visual effects . Film historian Tom Shone commented on the film 's innovation and influence , saying that " In its way , Jurassic Park heralded a revolution in movies as profound as the coming of sound in 1927 . " Many filmmakers saw Jurassic Park 's effects as a realization that many of their visions , previously thought unfeasible or too expensive , were now possible . ILM owner George Lucas , realizing the success of creating realistic live dinosaurs by his own company , started to make the Star Wars prequels ; Stanley Kubrick decided to invest in pet project A.I. Artificial Intelligence , to which he would later bring Spielberg to direct ; and Peter Jackson began to re @-@ explore his childhood love of fantasy films , a path that led him to The Lord of the Rings and King Kong . Jurassic Park has also inspired films and documentaries with dinosaurs such as the American adaptation of Godzilla , Dinosaur from the Deep , <unk> ( in which Laura Dern 's mother Diane Ladd starred ) , Dinosaur Island and Walking with Dinosaurs . Stan Winston , enthusiastic about the new technology pioneered by the film , joined with IBM and director James Cameron to form a new special effects company , Digital Domain . 
 = = = Sequels and merchandise = = = 
 After the enormous success of the film , Spielberg requested Michael Crichton to write a sequel novel , leading to the 1995 book The Lost World , which in turn was adapted as The Lost World : Jurassic Park on May 23 , 1997 , also directed by Spielberg and written by David Koepp . Another film , Jurassic Park III , was released on July 18 , 2001 under the direction of Joe Johnston and Spielberg as executive producer , featuring an original script that incorporated unused elements from Crichton 's original Jurassic Park . A fourth installment Jurassic World was released in theaters on June 12 , 2015 . Spielberg again produced , with Colin Trevorrow directing a script written by himself and Derek Connolly . 
 The story of the film was also continued in auxiliary media , at times even unattached to the film sequels themselves . These included a series of Jurassic Park comic books written by Steve Englehart for Topps Comics , and video games such as Ocean Software 's Jurassic Park 2 : The Chaos Continues ( 1994 ) , Vivendi 's Jurassic Park : Operation Genesis ( 2003 ) and Telltale Games ' Jurassic Park : The Game ( 2011 ) . 
 All of the Universal Parks & Resorts include a Jurassic Park @-@ themed ride . The first was Jurassic Park : The Ride at Universal Studios Hollywood on June 15 , 1996 , built after six years of development at a cost of $ 110 million . Said attraction was replicated on Universal Studios Japan in 2001 . Islands of Adventure in Orlando , Florida , has an entire section of the park dedicated to Jurassic Park that includes the main ride , christened " Jurassic Park River Adventure " , and many smaller rides and attractions based on the series . In Universal Studios Singapore , opened in 2010 , the Themed Zone named The Lost World consists mostly of Jurassic Park rides , such as the roller coaster Canopy Flyer and the river rapids Jurassic Park Rapids Adventure . 
 = Strange Stories = 
 Strange Stories was a pulp magazine which ran for thirteen issues from 1939 to 1941 . It was edited by Mort Weisinger , who was not credited . Contributors included Robert Bloch , Eric Frank Russell , C. L. Moore , August Derleth , and Henry Kuttner . Strange Stories was a competitor to the established leader in weird fiction , Weird Tales . With the launch , also in 1939 , of the well @-@ received Unknown , Strange Stories was unable to compete . It ceased publication in 1941 when Weisinger left to edit Superman comic books . 
 = = Publication history and contents = = 
 Fantasy and occult fiction had often appeared in popular magazines before the twentieth century , but the first magazine to specialize in the genre , Weird Tales , appeared in 1923 and by the 1930s was the genre 's industry leader . In 1939 , two magazines were launched in the same niche : one was Unknown , from Street & Smith ; the other was Strange Stories , published by Standard Magazines and edited by Mort Weisinger , who was already editing Thrilling Wonder Stories and Startling Stories for Standard . Weisinger obtained stories from many authors who contributed to Weird Tales , including August Derleth , Henry Kuttner , and Robert Bloch , who between them accounted for 40 of the 148 stories the magazine printed over its thirteen issues . Critics consider little of the fiction memorable . Among the better @-@ received stories were two by Kuttner : " Cursed be the City " and " The Citadel of Darkness " in the April and August 1939 issues respectively ; " <unk> 's Heads " , by Derleth , which science fiction historian Robert Weinberg described as " perhaps Derleth 's best weird fantasy for any magazine " ; and some stories by Manly Wade Wellman in the early issues . Other contributors included Eric Frank Russell , C. L. Moore , and Seabury Quinn . There were no serialized novels ; at the time , Standard 's policy forbade them . Weinberg described the covers by Standard 's in @-@ house artists , Rudolph <unk> and Earle K. Bergey , as " among the worst ever seen on any pulp " . The magazine was an attempt to imitate Weird Tales , but Weisinger was never able to give it any distinctive character of its own . It received little assistance from its sister magazines in Standard 's publishing stable ; typically each magazine carried advertisements for other Standard publications , but Startling Stories and Thrilling Wonder Stories rarely mentioned Strange Stories in this way . 
 Weisinger left Standard Magazines in 1941 to edit Superman comics , and Leo Margulies , the editorial director at Standard , was not interested in continuing the magazine . The final issue was dated February 1941 . Some of the stories purchased for Strange Stories but left unpublished later appeared in the other Standard magazines , including " The Road to Yesterday " , by Kuttner , which appeared in the August 1941 issue of Thrilling Adventure , and " I Married a Ghost " , by Seabury Quinn , which was published in Thrilling Mystery in July 1941 . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 The thirteen issues of Strange Stories were in pulp format . They were 128 pages long and priced at 15 cents until June 1940 , after which the page count went down to 96 and the price was reduced to 10 cents . The editor was Mort Weisinger , who was not credited . The publisher was Better Publications , a subsidiary of Standard Magazines of New York . Strange Stories stayed on a bimonthly schedule throughout its run . There were three issues to a volume , except the final volume which had only one . 
 = Extinction ( Star Trek : Enterprise ) = 
 " Extinction " is the fifty @-@ fifth episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise , the third episode of season three . It first aired on September 24 , 2003 , on the UPN network in the United States . This was the first episode following the addition of the prefix " Star Trek " to the title of the series . Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship , Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . 
 Season three of Enterprise features an ongoing story following an attack on Earth by previously unknown aliens called the Xindi . In this episode , while investigating a planet visited by the Xindi , several crewmembers including Captain Jonathan Archer become infected with a virus that mutates them into another species . The crew of the Enterprise must prevent an alien race from exterminating the mutated crew @-@ members while developing a cure themselves . The episode was written by story editor André Bormanis and directed by Star Trek : The Next Generation alumnus LeVar Burton . 
 " Extinction " was shot across seven days , with the soundstage transformed into an alien jungle for filming . John Eaves designed a Xindi pod , as well as an alien spaceship which he strongly disliked . Jolene Blalock , Scott Bakula , Linda Park and Dominic Keating were each required to undergo extended make @-@ up sessions during six days of the shoot in order to show their characters in various states of mutation . Around four million viewers watched " Extinction " on first broadcast , but the critical reception was mixed . Although the actors who underwent additional make @-@ up were praised , the plot was found to be similar to previous episodes in the franchise and the ending was poor . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On Enterprise , Sub @-@ Commander T 'Pol is called to the command center by Captain Archer . Archer tells her that he has located a nearby planet that the Xindi recently visited . Both then travel down to the surface with Lieutenant Reed and Ensign Sato . They discover a Xindi shuttle along with two dead crewmembers , one of whom has been incinerated . With little warning , Archer , Sato and Reed suddenly begin to transform physically into a new species , but T 'Pol seems somehow resistant to the changes . 
 T 'Pol is able to communicate with Archer after gaining use of the universal translator . She learns they have been overcome with an overwhelming instinct to reach a city called " <unk> " , the homeland of their species . Meanwhile Commander Tucker and an away team of MACOs , equipped with biohazard suits , manage to capture and return Reed to the ship . Archer and Sato flee and T 'Pol opts to stay with them . Doctor Phlox soon determines that they were infected by a mutagenic virus , and concludes that T 'Pol 's Vulcan genetics rendered her immune . 
 Two " containment ships " soon arrive , demanding access to Enterprise in order to stop the virus that killed millions of their people 60 years ago . Tucker refuses , but invites their leader , Tret , aboard . Tret explains that the original inhabitants of the planet , the <unk> <unk> , created the virus in an effort to continue their species . Believing it impossible to cure , he sends a team to the planet 's surface to neutralize Archer and Sato . Archer leads Sato and T 'Pol to <unk> , but they find it in ruins . Tucker then beams down with a team of MACOs and rescues them . Enterprise then warps away , but the alien ships pursue and attack the ship . Tucker asks Tret to allow Phlox more time to synthesize an antidote , but Tret refuses . Before he can board the ship , Phlox arrives with Archer and Sato — now mostly restored — and promises Tret a sample . Later , as Phlox plans to destroy the last vial of the virus , Archer tell him to keep it as a legacy of the now extinct species . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was directed by LeVar Burton , who had previously directed more than twenty other episodes of the franchise . He had also previously played Geordi La Forge in Star Trek : The Next Generation . Scott Bakula praised Burton 's work on Enterprise , saying that he had a " great energy and a great sense of fun " and said that the flame @-@ throwers in " Extinction " got the former TNG actor " excited " . The writer , André Bormanis , was previously the science advisor for the various Star Trek series and was the story editor on Enterprise . Joining the cast in a guest role as Tret was Roger Cross , who had appeared in several science fiction series such as The X Files , Stargate SG @-@ 1 and Andromeda . He also appeared alongside Burton 's The Next Generation co @-@ star , Patrick Stewart , in X2 : X @-@ Men United . Returning in the same role in played in " The Xindi " , the first episode of season three , was Daniel Dae Kim as Corporal Chang . 
 Filming on " Extinction " began on July 31 , 2003 , with a shoot that lasted the following seven working days . To represent the jungle of the alien planet , the soundstage was inundated with foliage . A Xindi landing pod was created to appear in those same scenes . Several of the main cast were required to undergo extended make @-@ up sessions lasting three or four hours every day for six days of the shoot in order for their characters to appear in a number of different stages of mutation . The make @-@ up on Jolene Blalock was not as extensive as that on Scott Bakula , Dominic Keating and Linda Park due to her character 's Vulcan anatomy . Both Bakula and Keating had to wear bladders on their throats as a special effect which were inflated when they growled . Following the experience , Park praised John Billingsley , who in his role as Doctor Phlox has to undertake similar make @-@ up regimes for every episode . 
 Both the Xindi landing pod and the alien spaceship were designed by John Eaves . He also produced a series of designs for a Vulcan shuttle which ended up being written out of the episode . The Xindi pod went through three designs being approved , while the alien spaceship was accepted on the first submission . However Eaves regretted this , as he had submitted a spaceship design which he strongly disliked , calling it " by far my least favorite of anything I have ever drawn " . It was based on a hatchet housed in a tool pouch . Eaves also developed the concept artwork for the alien temple . 
 This was the first episode of the series following the title change from Enterprise to Star Trek : Enterprise , and so it was the first time that the new title card appeared . Also , " Extinction " was dedicated to Jerry Fleck , which appeared at the end of the episode before the credits . He had died in his sleep during the filming of the episode " Twilight " and was working on pre @-@ production for another one , " North Star " . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " Extinction " was first aired on September 24 , 2003 , on UPN within the United States . It received a 2 @.@ 5 / 4 percent share of the television audience , meaning that it was seen by 2 @.@ 5 percent of all households , and 4 percent of all households watching television at the time of the broadcast . It was viewed by approximately four million viewers , making it the lowest viewed episode of season three at this point . 
 Michelle Erica Green reviewed the episode for TrekNation , saying it was a typical " crewmembers transform into scary aliens " episode . She compared it to similar episodes from elsewhere in the Star Trek franchise such as " Masks " from Star Trek : The Next Generation and " Threshold " from Star Trek : Voyager . She had hope for a twist in the story , but instead found the ending of the episode " superfluous " and " sanctimonious " . She did praise the performance of Jolene Blalock for " keeping T 'Pol credible and sympathetic " , as well as Linda Park and Scott Bakula for the scenes in which they played the transformed versions of their characters . 
 The first home media release of " Extinction " was as part of the season three DVD box set , released in the United States on September 27 , 2005 . The Blu @-@ ray release of Enterprise was announced in early 2013 , and released on January 7 , 2014 . 
 = Luton Town F.C. = 
 Luton Town Football Club / <unk> <unk> / is a professional association football club based since 1905 at Kenilworth Road , Luton , Bedfordshire . Founded in 1885 , it is nicknamed " the Hatters " and affiliated to the Bedfordshire County Football Association . Its first @-@ team is contesting the fourth tier of English football , League Two , during the 2016 – 17 season . The club 's history includes major trophy wins , several financial crises , numerous promotions and relegations , and some spells of sustained success . It was perhaps most prominent between 1982 and 1992 , when it was a member of English football 's top division , at that time the First Division ; the team won its first major honour , the Football League Cup , in 1988 . 
 The club was the first in southern England to turn professional , making payments to players as early as 1890 and turning fully professional a year later . It joined the Football League before the 1897 – 98 season , left in 1900 because of financial problems , and rejoined in 1920 . Luton reached the First Division in 1955 – 56 and contested a major final for the first time when playing Nottingham Forest in the 1959 FA Cup Final . The team was then relegated from the top division in 1959 – 60 , and demoted twice more in the following five years , playing in the Fourth Division from the 1965 – 66 season . However , it was promoted back to the top level by 1974 – 75 . 
 Luton Town 's most recent successful period began in 1981 – 82 , when the club won the Second Division , and thereby gained promotion to the First . Luton defeated Arsenal 3 – 2 in the 1988 Football League Cup Final and remained in the First Division until relegation at the end of the 1991 – 92 season . Between 2007 and 2009 , financial difficulties caused the club to fall from the second tier of English football to the fifth in successive seasons . The last of these relegations came during the 2008 – 09 season , when 30 points were docked from Luton 's record for various financial irregularities . Luton thereafter spent five seasons in non @-@ League football before winning the Conference Premier in 2013 – 14 , securing promotion back into the Football League . 
 = = History = = 
 Luton Town Football Club was formed on 11 April 1885 , the product of a merger of the two leading local teams , Luton Town Wanderers and Excelsior . Initially based at Excelsior 's <unk> Lane ground , the club began making payments to certain individual players in 1890 . The following year , Luton became the first club in southern England to be fully professional . The club was a founder member of the Southern Football League in the 1894 – 95 season and finished as runners @-@ up in its first two seasons . It then left to help form the United League and came second in that league 's inaugural season before joining the Football League ( then based mostly in northern and central England ) for 1897 – 98 , concurrently moving to a new ground at Dunstable Road . The club continued to enter a team to the United League for two more seasons , and won the title in 1897 – 98 . Poor attendance , high wages and the high travel and accommodation costs that resulted from Luton 's distance from the northern heartlands of the Football League crippled the club financially , and made it too expensive to compete in that league . A return to the Southern League was therefore arranged for the 1900 – 01 season . 
 Eight years after arriving at Dunstable Road , Luton moved again , settling at their current ground , Kenilworth Road , in 1905 . Captain and left winger Bob Hawkes became Luton 's first international player when he was picked to play for England against Ireland on 16 February 1907 . A poor 1911 – 12 season saw Luton relegated to the Southern League 's Second Division ; the club won promotion back two years later . After the First World War broke out , Luton took part in The London Combination during 1915 – 16 , and afterwards filled each season with friendly matches . A key player of the period was Ernie Simms , a forward . Simms was invalided back to England after being wounded on the Italian front , but recovered enough to regain his place in the Luton team and scored 40 goals during the 1916 – 17 season . 
 The Luton side first played in the white and black colours which it has retained for much of its history during the 1920 – 21 season , when the club rejoined the Football League ; the players had previously worn an assortment of colour combinations , most permanently sky blue shirts with white shorts and navy socks . Such was the quality of Luton 's team at this time that despite playing in the third tier , a fixture between Ireland and England at Windsor Park on 22 October 1921 saw three Luton players on the pitch — Louis Bookman and Allan Mathieson for Ireland , and the club 's top goalscorer , Simms , for England . However , after Luton finished fourth in the division , the squad was broken up as Simms , Bookman and Mathieson joined South Shields , Port Vale and Exeter City respectively . Luton stayed in the Third Division South until 1936 – 37 , when the team finished top and won promotion to the Second Division , at that time the second tier of English football . During the promotion season , striker Joe Payne scored 55 goals in 39 games ; during the previous season he had scored 10 in one match against Bristol Rovers , which remains a Football League record today . 
 During the early 1950s , one of Luton 's greatest sides emerged under manager Dally Duncan . The team included Gordon Turner , who went on to become Luton 's all @-@ time top goalscorer , Bob Morton , who holds the record for the most club appearances , and Syd Owen , an England international . During this period , Luton sides also featured two England international goalkeepers , Ron Baynham and Bernard <unk> , as well as Irish internationals Seamus Dunne , Tom Aherne and George Cummins . This team reached the top flight for the first time in 1955 – 56 , after finishing the season in second place behind Birmingham City on goal average . A few years of success followed , including an FA Cup Final appearance against Nottingham Forest in 1958 – 59 ; at the end of the season , Owen was voted FWA Footballer of the Year . However , the club was relegated the following season and , by 1964 – 65 , was playing in the fourth tier . 
 In yo @-@ yo club fashion , Luton were to return . A team including Bruce Rioch , John Moore and Graham French won the Fourth Division championship in 1967 – 68 under the leadership of former player Allan Brown ; two years later Malcolm Macdonald 's goals helped them to another promotion , while comedian Eric Morecambe became a director of the club . Luton Town won promotion back to the First Division in 1973 – 74 , but were relegated the following season by a solitary point . Former Luton player David Pleat was made manager in 1978 , and by 1982 – 83 the team was back in the top flight . The team which Pleat assembled at Kenilworth Road was notable at the time for the number of black players it included ; during an era when many English squads were almost entirely white , Luton often fielded a mostly black team . Talented players such as Ricky Hill , Brian Stein and Emeka <unk> made key contributions to the club 's success during this period , causing it to accrue " a richer history of black stars than any in the country " , in the words of journalist Gavin Willacy . 
 On the last day of the 1982 – 83 season , the club 's first back in the top tier , it narrowly escaped relegation : playing Manchester City at Maine Road , Luton needed to win to stay up , while City could escape with a draw . A late winner by Yugoslavian substitute <unk> Antić saved the team and prompted Pleat to dance across the pitch performing a " jig of joy " , an image that has become iconic . The club achieved its highest ever league position , seventh , under John Moore in 1986 – 87 , and , managed by Ray Harford , won the Football League Cup a year later with a 3 – 2 win over Arsenal . With ten minutes left on the clock and Arsenal 2 – 1 ahead , a penalty save from stand @-@ in goalkeeper Andy Dibble sparked a late Luton rally : Danny Wilson equalised , before Brian Stein scored the winner with the last kick of the match . The club reached the League Cup Final once more in 1988 – 89 , but lost 3 – 1 to Nottingham Forest . 
 The club was relegated from the top division at the end of the 1991 – 92 season , and sank to the third tier four years later . Luton stayed in the third @-@ tier Second Division until relegation at the end of the 2000 – 01 season . Under the management of Joe Kinnear , who had arrived halfway through the previous season , the team won promotion from the fourth tier at the first attempt . " Controversial " owner John Gurney unsettled the club in 2003 , terminating Kinnear 's contract on his arrival in May ; Gurney replaced Kinnear with Mike Newell before leaving Luton as the club entered administration . Newell 's team finished as champions of the rebranded third @-@ tier Football League One in 2004 – 05 . 
 While Newell 's place was taken first by Kevin Blackwell and later former player Mick Harford , the team was then relegated twice in a row , starting in 2006 – 07 , and spent the latter part of the 2007 – 08 season in administration , thus incurring a ten @-@ point deduction from that season 's total . The club then had a total of 30 points docked from its 2008 – 09 record by the Football Association and the Football League for financial irregularities dating back several years . These deductions proved to be too large an obstacle to overcome , but Luton came from behind in the final of the Football League Trophy to win the competition for the first time . 
 Relegation meant that 2009 – 10 saw Luton playing in the Conference Premier , a competition which the club had never before participated in . The club unsuccessfully contested the promotion play @-@ offs three times in four seasons during their time as a non @-@ League club , employing five different managers . In the 2012 – 13 FA Cup fourth round , Luton won their away tie against Premier League club Norwich City 1 – 0 and , in doing so , became the first non @-@ League team to beat a side from England 's top division since 1989 . In the 2013 – 14 season , under the management of John Still , Luton won the Conference Premier championship with three games to spare , and thereby secured a return to the Football League from 2014 – 15 . 
 = = Club identity = = 
 The club 's nickname , " the Hatters " , reflects Luton 's historical connection with the hat making trade , which has been prominent there since the 17th century . The nickname was originally a variant on the now rarely seen straw @-@ <unk> . Supporters of the club are also called Hatters . 
 The club is associated with two very different colour schemes — white and black ( first permanently adopted in 1920 ) , and orange , navy and white ( first used in 1973 , and worn by the team as of the 2015 – 16 season ) . Luton mainly wore a combination of light blue and white before 1920 , when white shirts and black shorts were first adopted . These colours were retained for over half a century , with the colour of the socks varying between white and black , until Luton changed to orange , navy and white at the start of the 1973 – 74 season . Luton began playing in white shirts , shorts and socks in 1979 , with the orange and navy motif reduced to trim ; navy shorts were adopted in 1984 . This palette was retained until the 1999 – 2000 season , when the team played in orange shirts and blue shorts . From 2000 to 2008 , Luton returned to white shirts and black shorts ; orange was included as trim until 2007 . The white , navy and orange palette favoured in the 1980s was brought back in 2008 , following the results of a club poll , but a year later the colours were changed yet again , this time to a predominantly orange strip with white shorts . Navy shorts were readopted in 2011 . Luton are wearing orange shirts , navy shorts and white socks during the 2015 – 16 season . 
 Luton Town have traditionally used the town 's crest as its own in a manner similar to many other teams . The club 's first badge was a white eight @-@ pointed star , which was emblazoned across the team 's shirts ( then a deep cochineal red ) in 1892 . Four years later a crest comprising the club 's initials intertwined was briefly adopted . The shirts were thereafter plain until 1933 , when Luton first adopted a badge depicting a straw boater , which appeared on Luton shirts . The letters " <unk> " were added in 1935 , and this basic design remained until 1947 . The club then played without a badge until 1970 , when the club began to wear the town crest regularly , having first done so in the 1959 FA Cup Final . 
 In 1973 , concurrently with the club 's switch to the orange kit , a new badge was introduced featuring the new colours . The new emblem depicted a stylised orange football , bearing the letters " Lt " , surrounded by the club 's name in navy blue text . In 1987 , the club switched back to a derivative of the town emblem , with the shield portion of the heraldic crest becoming the team 's badge ; the only similarity with the previous design was the inclusion of the club name around the shield in navy blue . The " rainbow " badge , introduced in 1994 , featured the town crest below an orange and blue bow which curved around to meet two footballs , positioned on either side of the shield , with the club name underneath . This badge was used until 2005 , when a replacement very similar to the 1987 version was adopted , featuring black text rather than blue and a straw boater in place of the outstretched arm depicted in the older design . The club 's founding year , 1885 , was added in 2008 . The badge was altered once more during the 2009 – 10 pre @-@ season , with the red of the town crest being replaced with orange to better reflect the club colours . 
 The first sponsor to appear on a Luton Town shirt was <unk> , a local motor company based in Dunstable , who sponsored the club from March 1980 to 1982 ; the deal was worth £ 50 @,@ 000 . Subsequent sponsors have been Bedford Trucks ( 1982 to 1990 ) , Vauxhall ( 1990 to 1991 ) , Universal Salvage Auctions ( 1991 to 1999 ) , <unk> ( 1999 to 2003 ) , Travel Extras ( 2003 to 2005 ) , Electrolux ( 2005 to 2008 ) , <unk> Sportswear ( 2008 to 2009 ) , and EasyJet and <unk> ( concurrently , 2009 to 2015 ) . Since August 2015 , the club 's kit has been sponsored by <unk> and the local education establishment Barnfield College . 
 The club released the song " Hatters , Hatters " , a collaboration between the Luton team and the Bedfordshire @-@ based musical comedy group the Barron Knights , in 1974 . Eight years later another song featuring vocals by the Luton players , " We 're Luton Town " , was released to celebrate the club 's promotion to the First Division . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Luton Town 's first ground was at <unk> Lane , the former ground of Excelsior . The ground was next to the Dunstable to Luton train line , and players regularly claimed to have trouble seeing the ball because of smoke from the trains . A damaging financial loss during 1896 – 97 forced Luton to sell the stadium to stay afloat and , as a result , the club moved across the tracks to a stadium between the railway and Dunstable Road . The Dunstable Road ground was opened by Herbrand Russell , 11th Duke of Bedford , who also donated £ 50 towards the £ 800 building costs . When the site was sold for housing in 1905 , the club was forced to move again at short notice , to its present Kenilworth Road site , in time for the start of the 1905 – 06 season . 
 The 10 @,@ 356 capacity all @-@ seater stadium is in the Bury Park area of Luton , and named after the road that runs along one end of it , although the official address of the club is 1 Maple Road . Opposite the eponymous Kenilworth Stand is the Oak Road End , which has evolved from a stand first used exclusively by Luton supporters , then later by away supporters , and now used by both except in times of high ticket demand from away clubs . The Main Stand is flanked by the David Preece Stand , and opposite them stands a row of executive boxes . These boxes replaced the Bobbers Stand in 1986 , as the club sought to maximise income . 
 The original Main Stand burnt down in 1921 , and was replaced by the current stand before the 1922 – 23 campaign . The ground underwent extensive redevelopment during the 1930s , and the capacity by the start of the Second World War was 30 @,@ 000 . Floodlights were installed before the 1953 – 54 season , but it was 20 years before any further modernisation was carried out . In 1973 the Bobbers Stand became all @-@ seated , and in 1985 the grass pitch was replaced with an artificial playing surface ; it quickly became unpopular and was derided as " the plastic pitch " . 
 A serious incident involving hooliganism before , during and after a match against Millwall in 1985 caused the club 's then chairman , Conservative MP David Evans , to introduce a scheme effective from the start of 1986 – 87 banning all visiting supporters from the ground , and requiring home fans to carry identity cards when attending matches . Conversion to an all @-@ seater ground also began in 1986 . Away fans returned for 1990 – 91 , and grass a year later . The David Preece Stand was erected in 1991 , and the conversion of the Kenilworth Stand to an all @-@ seater was completed in 2005 . 
 = = = New stadium = = = 
 The club first stated its intent to leave Kenilworth Road in 1955 . Even then the ground was small compared to rival stadia , and its location made significant redevelopment difficult . The team has since made several attempts to relocate . Leaving Luton for the nearby new town of Milton Keynes was unsuccessfully proposed several times , most notably in the 1980s . The club sold Kenilworth Road to Luton Council in 1989 , and has since leased it . A planning application for a new ground , the " Kohlerdome " proposed by chairman David Kohler in 1995 , was turned down by the Secretary of State in 1998 , and Kohler left soon after . 
 In 2007 , the club 's then @-@ owners proposed a controversial plan to relocate to a site near Junction 12 of the M1 motorway , near Harlington and <unk> . A planning application was made on the club 's behalf by former chairman Cliff Bassett , but the application was withdrawn almost immediately following the club 's takeover in 2008 . In 2009 , the club began an independent feasibility study to determine a viable location to move to . The club did not rule out redeveloping Kenilworth Road and , in October 2012 , entered talks to buy the stadium back from Luton Borough Council . By 2015 these plans had been dropped in favour of a move to a new location , with Managing Director Gary Sweet confirming that the club was in a position to " buy land , secure the best possible professional advice ... and to see the [ planning ] application process through to the receipt of consent . " In April 2016 the club announced its intention to build and move into a 17 @,@ 500 @-@ capacity stadium on the Power Court site in central Luton . 
 = = Supporters and rivalries = = 
 During the 2014 – 15 season , Luton Town had an average home league attendance of 8 @,@ 702 — the second highest in League Two behind only Portsmouth . In the 2013 – 14 season , when the club were in the Conference Premier , the club had significantly higher support than the other clubs in its league , with an average home attendance of 7 @,@ 387 ; more than twice compared to the second highest of 3 @,@ 568 . Average attendances at Kenilworth Road fell with the installation of seats and the club 's reduction in stature , dropping from 13 @,@ 452 in 1982 – 83 to their 2014 – 15 level — a slump of 35 % over 32 years . A supporters ' trust , Trust in Luton , owns shares in the club and elects a representative to the club 's board . The club 's official supporters ' group , Luton Town Supporters ' Club , merged with Trust in Luton in 2014 . The club is associated with another supporters ' group , the breakaway Loyal Luton Supporters Club . Trust in Luton has , since March 2014 , held the legal right to veto any changes to the club 's identity , including name , nickname , colours , club crest and mascot . 
 Luton Town supporters maintain a bitter rivalry with Hertfordshire @-@ based Watford . Watford have remained the higher ranked team at the end of every season since 1997 . However , overall Luton still hold the superior record in the fixture between the two clubs ; out of 118 competitive matches there have been 53 Luton victories and 36 for Watford , with 29 draws . A survey taken in 2003 showed that there was also animosity between Luton Town fans and those of west London club Queens Park Rangers . 
 The club produces an official match programme for home games , Talk of the Town . A character known as Happy Harry , a smiling man wearing a straw boater , serves as the team 's mascot and appears on the Kenilworth Road pitch before matches . In December 2014 , after the seafront statue of Eric Morecambe in his birthplace Morecambe was restored , Luton and Morecambe F.C. jointly announced that the winners of future Luton – Morecambe fixtures would be awarded the " Eric Morecambe Trophy " . 
 = = Records and statistics = = 
 The record for the most appearances for Luton is held by Bob Morton , who turned out for Luton 562 times in all competitions . Morton also holds the record for the most Football League appearances for the club , with 495 . Fred Hawkes holds the record for the most league appearances for Luton , having played in 509 league matches . Six players , Gordon Turner , Andy Rennie , Brian Stein , Ernie Simms , Herbert Moody and Steve Howard , have scored more than 100 goals for Luton . 
 The first player to be capped while playing for Luton was left winger Robert Hawkes , who took to the field for England against Ireland at Goodison Park on 16 February 1907 . The most capped player is Mal Donaghy , who earned 58 Northern Ireland caps while at the club . The first player to score in an international match was Joe Payne , who scored twice in his only game for England against Finland on 20 May 1937 . Payne also holds the Football League record for the most goals in a game — he hit 10 past Bristol Rovers on 13 April 1936 . 
 The club 's largest wins have been a 15 – 0 victory over Great Yarmouth Town on 21 November 1914 in the FA Cup and a 12 – 0 win over Bristol Rovers in the Third Division South on 13 April 1936 . Luton 's heaviest loss was a 9 – 0 defeat against Small Heath in the Second Division on 12 November 1898 . 
 Luton 's highest home attendances are 30 @,@ 069 against Blackpool in the FA Cup on 4 March 1959 and 27 @,@ 911 against Wolverhampton Wanderers in the First Division on 5 November 1955 . 
 The highest transfer fee received for a Luton Town player is the £ 3 million West Bromwich Albion paid for Curtis Davies on 31 August 2005 . The most expensive player Luton Town have ever bought was Lars <unk> , who cost £ 850 @,@ 000 from Odense Boldklub on 21 August 1989 . 
 = = Players = = 
 As of 23 July 2016 . 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 The club operates a Development Squad , made up of contracted senior players , youth team scholars and trialists , which plays in the Southern Division of The Central League . The club also fields an under @-@ 18 team in the Football League Youth Alliance South East Conference . Luton 's youth set @-@ up consists of ten Soccer Centres across Bedfordshire and North Hertfordshire , two Centres of Excellence ( one in Luton , one in Dunstable ) , and an Academy in Baldock that caters for players in the under @-@ 9 to under @-@ 16 age groups . 
 = = = Notable former players = = = 
 = = Backroom staff = = 
 As of 26 July 2016 . 
 = = = Directors = = = 
 Chairman : Nick Owen 
 Vice Chairman : David Wilkinson 
 Chief Executive : Gary Sweet 
 Senior Operations Manager : Kevan Platt 
 Directors : Paul Ballantyne , Bob <unk> , Mike Herrick 
 Associate Directors : Stephen Browne , Mick Pattinson 
 Financial Director : Simon Gibb 
 Club Secretary : Mark Dennis 
 = = = Management = = = 
 Manager : Nathan Jones 
 Assistant Manager : Paul Hart 
 First Team Coach : Joaquin Gomez 
 Goalkeeping Coach : Kevin Dearden 
 Head of Sports Science : Jared Roberts @-@ Smith 
 Chief Recruitment Officer : Mick Harford 
 Head of Youth Operations : Dan Walder 
 Youth Academy and Development Manager : Andy <unk> 
 Youth Team Manager : Paul Driver 
 <unk> : Simon <unk> 
 = = Managers = = 
 As of 17 December 2015 . Only managers in charge for a minimum of 50 competitive matches are counted . 
 Key : M 
 = matches ; W = 
 matches won ; D 
 = matches drawn ; L = 
 matches lost 
 = = Honours = = 
 Luton Town 's major honours are detailed below ; non @-@ League achievements are omitted . For a list of all club honours , including those won outside the Football League , see List of Luton Town F.C. records and statistics : Honours and achievements . 
 = Parable of the Sunfish = 
 " The Parable of the Sunfish " is an anecdote with which Ezra Pound opens ABC of Reading , a 1934 work of literary criticism . Pound uses this anecdote to emphasize an empirical approach for learning about art , in contrast to relying on commentary rooted in abstraction . While the parable is based on students ' recollections of Louis Agassiz 's teaching style , Pound 's retelling diverges from these sources in several respects . The parable has been used to illustrate the benefits of scientific thinking , but more recent literary criticism has split on whether the parable accurately reflects the scientific process and calls into question Pound 's empirical approach to literature . 
 = = The Parable = = 
 The text of the parable below is excerpted from Pound 's ABC of Reading . 
 A post @-@ graduate student equipped with honors and diplomas went to Agassiz to receive the final and finishing touches . The great man offered him a small fish and told him to describe it . 
 Post @-@ Graduate Student : " That 's only a sunfish . " 
 Agassiz : " I know that . Write a description of it . " 
 After a few minutes the student returned with the description of the <unk> <unk> , or whatever term is used to conceal the common sunfish from vulgar knowledge , family of <unk> , etc . , as found in textbooks of the subject . 
 Agassiz again told the student to describe the fish . 
 The student produced a four @-@ page essay . Agassiz then told him to look at the fish . At the end of three weeks the fish was in an advanced state of decomposition , but the student knew something about it . <unk> 
 = = Context = = 
 = = = ABC of Reading = = = 
 Pound opens ABC of Reading with the following pronouncement : 
 The proper <unk> for studying poetry and good letters is the method of contemporary biologists , that is careful first @-@ hand examination of the matter , and continual <unk> of one ' slide ' or specimen with another . No man is equipped for modern thinking until he has understood the anecdote of Agassiz and the sunfish . 
 In the parable , a graduate student is sent to noted biologist Louis Agassiz to complete his education , and Agassiz asks the student three times to describe a sunfish specimen . The student replies with , in turn , the common name of the fish , a brief summary of the species , and a four @-@ page essay on the species . Agassiz finally tells the student to " look at the fish " and " [ a ] t the end of three weeks the fish was in an advanced state of decomposition , but the student knew something about it . " The text of the parable itself spans 131 words over sixteen lines and is often reproduced in full when cited . 
 Pound contrasts this empiricism against knowledge gained through increasingly abstract definitions . As an example , Pound relates what might happen if a European is asked to define " red " . After the initial response that red is a color , Pound imagines asking for a definition of color and having it described in terms of vibration , with vibration then defined in terms of energy , and that successive abstractions eventually reach a level where language has lost its power . Returning to empiricism , Pound reminds the reader that the progress of science increased rapidly once " Bacon had suggested the direct examination of phenomena , and after Galileo and others had stopped discussing things so much , and had begun really to look at them " . Pound provides several other examples of the same contrasting ideas throughout the first chapter , ranging over topics as diverse as chemistry , Chinese writing , and Stravinsky . At the end of the chapter he summarizes his argument by claiming abstraction does not expand knowledge . 
 = = = Literary essays = = = 
 Pound subsequently refers to the parable in two essays : " The Teacher 's Mission " and " Mr Housman at Little Bethel " . Both were republished in The Literary Essays of Ezra Pound and reference Agassiz without including details of the parable . " The Teacher 's Mission " in particular provides a straightforward explanation of how Pound wished the parable to be interpreted . 
 = = = = " Mr Housman at Little Bethel " = = = = 
 In January 1934 , Pound published a critique of A. E. Housman 's The Name and Nature of Poetry in the Criterion . As part of the critique , Pound offers an emendation to Housman 's claim that " the intelligence " of the eighteenth century involved " some repressing and silencing of poetry " . Pound replies that the root cause was the tendency towards abstract statements , which came about in part because eighteenth century authors " hadn 't heard about Professor Agassiz 's fish . " 
 = = = = " The Teacher 's Mission " = = = = 
 Also in 1934 , Pound published an essay critiquing existing methods for teaching literature in general and university @-@ level instruction methods in particular . He identifies the root of the problem as abstraction and uses the word " liberty " as an example of a term where a specific , concrete meaning has been lost . Pound finds this situation " inexcusable AFTER the era of ' Agassiz and the fish ' " and demands an approach to general education that " parallels [ ... ] biological study based on <unk> and <unk> of particular specimens . " 
 = = = Shaler 's Autobiography = = = 
 Nathaniel Shaler left his humanist studies and joined Agassiz 's lab at Harvard University , having already read Agassiz 's introductory essay on classification . His autobiography details his initial interactions with Agassiz . With regard to his first assignment , Shaler recorded that Agassiz brought him a small fish to study with the stipulation that Shaler not discuss it with anyone or read anything on the topic until Agassiz had given him permission . When Shaler asked Agassiz for more explicit instructions , Agassiz replied that he could not be more explicit than saying " [ f ] ind out what you can without damaging the specimen " . After the first hours , Shaler thought he had " compassed that fish , " but despite Agassiz always being " within call " he was not asked to present his conclusions . During the course of the following week , Shaler recorded the details of " how the scales went in series , their shape , the form and placement of the teeth , etc . " 
 At length on the seventh day , came the question " Well ? " and my disgorge of learning to him as he sat on the edge of my table puffing his cigar . At the end of the hour 's telling , he swung off and away , saying " That is not right . " 
 Shaler concluded Agassiz was testing him to see if he was capable of " doing hard , continuous work without the support of a teacher " and redoubled his efforts , starting from scratch and , over the course of seven ten @-@ hour days , managed to describe the specimen to Agassiz 's satisfaction . 
 = = = Scudder 's " Look at your fish ! " = = = 
 Samuel Hubbard Scudder recorded a similar experience , first published in 1874 as " Look at Your Fish " in Every Saturday magazine . Agassiz again starts his new student off with a fish preserved in alcohol and instructs the student to " look at it " , and promises " by and by I will ask what you have seen . " As opposed to Pound 's decomposing sunfish , Scudder 's account emphasizes the care taken to keep the specimen in good condition : 
