 In the same year , together with Subhas Mukhopadhyay and others , Ray was able to revive Sandesh , the children 's magazine which his grandfather once published . Ray had been saving money for some years to make this possible . A duality in the name ( Sandesh means both " news " in Bengali and also a sweet popular dessert ) set the tone of the magazine ( both educational and entertaining ) . Ray began to make illustrations for it , as well as to write stories and essays for children . Writing became his major source of income in the years to come . 
 In 1962 , Ray directed Kanchenjungha . Based on his first original screenplay , it was his first film in colour . The film tells of an upper @-@ class family spending an afternoon in Darjeeling , a picturesque hill town in West Bengal . They try to arrange the engagement of their youngest daughter to a highly paid engineer educated in London . He had first conceived shooting the film in a large mansion , but later decided to film it in the famous hill town . He used the many shades of light and mist to reflect the tension in the drama . Ray noted that while his script allowed shooting to be possible under any lighting conditions , a commercial film contingent present at the same time in Darjeeling failed to shoot a single scene , as they only wanted to do so in sunshine . 
 In the sixties , Ray visited Japan and took particular pleasure in meeting the filmmaker Akira Kurosawa , for whom he had very high regard . While at home , he would take an occasional break from the hectic city life by going to places such as Darjeeling or Puri to complete a script in isolation . 
 In 1964 Ray made Charulata ( The Lonely Wife ) ; it was the culmination of this period of work , and regarded by many critics as his most accomplished film . Based on " <unk> " , a short story of Tagore , the film tells of a lonely wife , Charu , in 19th @-@ century Bengal , and her growing feelings for her brother @-@ in @-@ law Amal . Critics have referred to this as Ray 's Mozartian masterpiece . He said the film contained the fewest flaws among his work , and it was his only work which , given a chance , he would make exactly the same way . Madhabi Mukherjee 's performance as Charu , and the work of both Subrata Mitra and Bansi Chandragupta in the film , have been highly praised . Other films in this period include Mahanagar ( The Big City ) , Teen Kanya ( Three Daughters ) , <unk> ( The Expedition ) and <unk> o Mahapurush ( The Coward and the Holy Man ) . 
 = = = New directions ( 1965 – 82 ) = = = 
 In the post @-@ Charulata period , Ray took on projects of increasing variety , ranging from fantasy to science fiction to detective films to historical drama . Ray also made considerable formal experimentation during this period . He expressed contemporary issues of Indian life , responding to a perceived lack of these issues in his films . The first major film in this period is Nayak ( The Hero ) , the story of a screen hero travelling in a train and meeting a young , sympathetic female journalist . Starring Uttam Kumar and Sharmila Tagore , in the twenty @-@ four hours of the journey , the film explores the inner conflict of the apparently highly successful matinée idol . In spite of the film 's receiving a " Critics prize " at the Berlin International Film Festival , it had a generally muted reception . 
 In 1967 , Ray wrote a script for a film to be called The Alien , based on his short story " <unk> <unk> " ( " <unk> Babu 's Friend " ) , which he wrote in 1962 for Sandesh , the Ray family magazine . Columbia Pictures was the producer for what was a planned US @-@ India co @-@ production , and Peter Sellers and Marlon Brando were cast as the leading actors . Ray found that his script had been copyrighted and the fee appropriated by Mike Wilson . Wilson had initially approached Ray through their mutual friend , Arthur C. Clarke , to represent him in Hollywood . Wilson copyrighted the script credited to Mike Wilson & Satyajit Ray , although he contributed only one word . Ray later said that he never received a penny for the script . After Brando dropped out of the project , the project tried to replace him with James Coburn , but Ray became disillusioned and returned to Calcutta . Columbia expressed interest in reviving the project several times in the 1970s and 1980s , but nothing came of it . When E.T. was released in 1982 , Clarke and Ray saw similarities in the film to his earlier Alien script . Ray claimed that this film plagiarized his script . Ray said that Steven Spielberg 's movie " would not have been possible without my script of ' The Alien ' being available throughout America in mimeographed copies . " Spielberg denied any plagiarism by saying , " I was a kid in high school when this script was circulating in Hollywood . " ( Spielberg actually graduated high school in 1965 and released his first film in 1968 . Besides The Alien , two other unrealised projects that Ray had intended to direct were adaptations of the ancient Indian epic , the Mahābhārata , and E. M. Forster 's 1924 novel A Passage to India . In 1969 , Ray released what would be commercially the most successful of his films . Based on a children 's story written by his grandfather , Goopy <unk> Bagha Byne ( The Adventures of Goopy and Bagha ) , it is a musical fantasy . Goopy the singer and Bagha the drummer , endowed with three gifts by the King of Ghosts , set out on a fantastic journey . They try to stop an impending war between two neighboring kingdoms . Among his most expensive enterprises , the film project was difficult to finance . Ray abandoned his desire to shoot it in color , as he turned down an offer that would have forced him to cast a certain Hindi film actor as the lead . 
 Ray made a film from a novel by the young poet and writer , Sunil Gangopadhyay . Featuring a musical motif structure acclaimed as more complex than Charulata , Aranyer Din <unk> ( Days and Nights in the Forest ) traces four urban young men going to the forests for a vacation . They try to leave their daily lives behind . All but one of them become involved in encounters with women , which becomes a deep study of the Indian middle class . According to Robin Wood , " a single sequence [ of the film ] ... would offer material for a short essay " . 
 After Aranyer , Ray addressed contemporary Bengali life . He completed what became known as the Calcutta trilogy : Pratidwandi ( 1970 ) , <unk> ( 1971 ) , and Jana Aranya ( 1975 ) , three films that were conceived separately but had thematic connections . Pratidwandi ( The Adversary ) is about an idealist young graduate ; if disillusioned at the end of film , he is still uncorrupted . Jana Aranya ( The Middleman ) showed a young man giving in to the culture of corruption to make a living . <unk> ( Company Limited ) portrayed an already successful man giving up his morality for further gains . In the first film , Pratidwandi , Ray introduces a new , elliptical narrative style , such as scenes in negative , dream sequences , and abrupt flashbacks . In the 1970s , Ray adapted two of his popular stories as detective films . Though mainly addressed to children and young adults , both Sonar Kella ( The Golden Fortress ) and Joi Baba <unk> ( The Elephant God ) found some critical following . 
 Ray considered making a film on the Bangladesh Liberation War but later abandoned the idea . He said that , as a filmmaker , he was more interested in the travails of the refugees and not the politics . In 1977 , Ray completed <unk> Ke Khiladi ( The Chess Players ) , a Hindi film based on a story by Munshi Premchand . It was set in Lucknow in the state of Oudh , a year before the Indian rebellion of 1857 . A commentary on issues related to the colonisation of India by the British , this was Ray 's first feature film in a language other than Bengali . It is his most expensive and star @-@ studded film , featuring Sanjeev Kumar , Saeed Jaffrey , Amjad Khan , Shabana Azmi , Victor <unk> and Richard Attenborough . 
 In 1980 , Ray made a sequel to Goopy <unk> Bagha Byne , a somewhat political <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Kingdom of Diamonds ) . The kingdom of the evil Diamond King , or <unk> Raj , is an allusion to India during Indira Gandhi 's emergency period . Along with his acclaimed short film <unk> ( <unk> 's Diary ) and hour @-@ long Hindi film , <unk> , this was the culmination of his work in this period . 
 = = = The last phase ( 1983 – 92 ) = = = 
 In 1983 , while working on <unk> Baire ( Home and the World ) , Ray suffered a heart attack ; it would severely limit his productivity in the remaining 9 years of his life . <unk> Baire was completed in 1984 with the help of Ray 's son ( who operated the camera from then on ) because of his health condition . He had wanted to film this Tagore novel on the dangers of fervent nationalism for a long time , and wrote a first draft of a script for it in the 1940s . In spite of rough patches due to Ray 's illness , the film did receive some critical acclaim . It had the first kiss fully portrayed in Ray 's films . In 1987 , he made a documentary on his father , Sukumar Ray . 
 Ray 's last three films , made after his recovery and with medical strictures in place , were shot mostly indoors , and have a distinctive style . They have more dialogue than his earlier films and are often regarded as inferior to his earlier body of work . The first , <unk> ( An Enemy of the People ) is an adaptation of the famous Ibsen play , and considered the weakest of the three . Ray recovered some of his form in his 1990 film Shakha <unk> ( Branches of the Tree ) . In it , an old man , who has lived a life of honesty , comes to learn of the corruption of three of his sons . The final scene shows the father finding solace only in the companionship of his fourth son , who is uncorrupted but mentally ill . Ray 's last film , <unk> ( The Stranger ) , is lighter in mood but not in theme . When a long @-@ lost uncle arrives to visit his niece in Calcutta , he arouses suspicion as to his motive . This provokes far @-@ ranging questions in the film about civilisation . 
 In 1992 , Ray 's health deteriorated due to heart complications . He was admitted to a hospital , but never recovered . The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences awarded him an Honorary Academy Award . Ray is the first and the only Indian , yet , to receive the honor . Twenty @-@ four days before his death , Ray accepted the award in a gravely ill condition , calling it the " Best achievement of [ his ] movie @-@ making career . " He died on 23 April 1992 at the age of 71 . 
 = = Film craft = = 
 Satyajit Ray considered script @-@ writing to be an integral part of direction . Initially he refused to make a film in any language other than Bengali . In his two non @-@ Bengali feature films , he wrote the script in English ; translators interpreted it in Hindi or Urdu under Ray 's supervision . Ray 's eye for detail was matched by that of his art director Bansi Chandragupta . His influence on the early films was so important that Ray would always write scripts in English before creating a Bengali version , so that the non @-@ Bengali Chandragupta would be able to read it . The craft of Subrata Mitra garnered praise for the cinematography of Ray 's films . A number of critics thought that his departure from Ray 's crew lowered the quality of cinematography in the following films . Though Ray openly praised Mitra , his single @-@ mindedness in taking over operation of the camera after Charulata caused Mitra to stop working for him after 1966 . Mitra developed " bounce lighting " , a technique to reflect light from cloth to create a diffused , realistic light even on a set . Ray acknowledged his debts to Jean @-@ Luc Godard and François Truffaut of the French New Wave for introducing new technical and cinematic innovations . 
 Ray 's regular film editor was <unk> Datta , but the director usually dictated the editing while Datta did the actual work . Because of financial reasons and Ray 's meticulous planning , his films were mostly cut in @-@ camera ( apart from Pather Panchali ) . At the beginning of his career , Ray worked with Indian classical musicians , including Ravi Shankar , Vilayat Khan , and Ali Akbar Khan . He found that their first loyalty was to musical traditions , and not to his film . He had a greater understanding of Western classical forms , which he wanted to use for his films set in an urban milieu . Starting with Teen Kanya , Ray began to compose his own scores . 
 He used actors of diverse backgrounds , from famous film stars to people who had never seen a film ( as in Aparajito ) . Robin Wood and others have lauded him as the best director of children , pointing out memorable performances in the roles of Apu and Durga ( Pather Panchali ) , Ratan ( Postmaster ) and Mukul ( Sonar Kella ) . Depending on the talent or experience of the actor , Ray varied the intensity of his direction , from virtually nothing with actors such as <unk> Dutt , to using the actor as a puppet ( Subir Banerjee as young Apu or Sharmila Tagore as Aparna ) . Actors who had worked for Ray praised his customary trust but said he could also treat incompetence with total contempt . 
 = = Literary works = = 
 Ray created two popular fictional characters in Bengali children 's literature — Feluda , a detective , and Professor Shonku , a scientist . The Feluda stories are narrated by <unk> Ranjan Mitra aka <unk> , his teenage cousin , something of a Watson to Feluda 's Holmes . The science fictions of Shonku are presented as a diary discovered after the scientist had mysteriously disappeared . Ray also wrote a collection of nonsense verse named Today Bandha <unk> Dim , which includes a translation of Lewis Carroll 's " Jabberwocky " . He wrote a collection of humorous stories of Mullah Nasiruddin in Bengali . 
 His short stories were published as collections of 12 stories , in which the overall title played with the word twelve ( for example Aker <unk> <unk> , or literally " Two on top of one " ) . Ray 's interest in puzzles and puns is reflected in his stories . Ray 's short stories give full rein to his interest in the macabre , in suspense and other aspects that he avoided in film , making for an interesting psychological study . Most of his writings have been translated into English . Most of his screenplays have been published in Bengali in the literary journal <unk> . Ray wrote an autobiography about his childhood years , <unk> <unk> Chilam ( 1982 ) , translated to English as Childhood Days . 
 Ray penned his experiences during the period when he filmed the Apu Trilogy in his memoirs titled My Years with Apu : A Memoir . 
 He also wrote essays on film , published as the collections : Our Films , Their Films ( 1976 ) , <unk> <unk> ( 1976 ) , and <unk> Bole Shooting ( 1979 ) . During the mid @-@ 1990s , Ray 's film essays and an anthology of short stories were also published in English in the West . Our Films , Their Films is an anthology of film criticism by Ray . The book contains articles and personal journal excerpts . The book is presented in two sections : Ray first discusses Indian film , before turning his attention toward Hollywood , specific filmmakers ( Charlie Chaplin and Akira Kurosawa ) , and movements such as Italian neorealism . His book <unk> <unk> was published in translation in 2006 as Speaking of Films . It contains a compact description of his philosophy of different aspects of the cinemas . 
 = = Ray as calligrapher = = 
 Satyajit Ray designed four typefaces for roman script named Ray Roman , Ray Bizarre , Daphnis , and Holiday Script , apart from numerous Bengali ones for the Sandesh magazine . Ray Roman and Ray Bizarre won an international competition in 1971 . In certain circles of Calcutta , Ray continued to be known as an eminent graphic designer , well into his film career . Ray illustrated all his books and designed covers for them , as well as creating all publicity material for his films , i.e. , Ray 's artistic playing with the Bengali graphemes was also revealed in the cine posters and cine promo @-@ brochures ' covers . He also designed covers of several books by other authors . In his calligraphic technique there are deep impacts of : ( a ) Artistic pattern of European musical staff notation in the <unk> <unk> ; ( b ) <unk> ( " ritual painting " mainly practiced by Bengali women at the time of religious festival ; the term denotes ' to coat with ' . Generally categorized as " Folk " <unk> cf. in Ray 's graphemes representations . 
 Thus , so @-@ called division between classical and folk art is blurred in Ray 's representation of Bengali graphemes . The three @-@ tier X @-@ height of Bengali graphemes was presented in a manner of musical map and the contours , curves in between horizontal and vertical meeting @-@ point , follow the patterns of <unk> . It is also noticed that the metamorphosis of graphemes ( This might be designated as " <unk> " ) as a living object / subject in Ray 's positive manipulation of Bengali graphemes . 
 = = Critical and popular response = = 
 Ray 's work has been described as full of humanism and universality , and of a deceptive simplicity with deep underlying complexity . The Japanese director Akira Kurosawa said , " Not to have seen the cinema of Ray means existing in the world without seeing the sun or the moon . " But his detractors find his films glacially slow , moving like a " majestic snail . " Some find his humanism simple @-@ minded , and his work anti @-@ modern ; they criticize him for lacking the new modes of expression or experimentation found in works of Ray 's contemporaries , such as Jean @-@ Luc Godard . As Stanley Kauffman wrote , some critics believe that Ray assumes that viewers " can be interested in a film that simply dwells in its characters , rather than one that imposes dramatic patterns on their lives . " Ray said he could do nothing about the slow pace . Kurosawa defended him by saying that Ray 's films were not slow , " His work can be described as flowing <unk> , like a big river " . 
 Critics have often compared Ray to artists in the cinema and other media , such as Chekhov , Renoir , De Sica , Hawks or Mozart . The writer V. S. Naipaul compared a scene in <unk> Ki Khiladi ( The Chess Players ) to a Shakespearean play ; he wrote , " only three hundred words are spoken but goodness ! – terrific things happen . " Even critics who did not like the aesthetics of Ray 's films generally acknowledged his ability to encompass a whole culture with all its nuances . Ray 's obituary in The Independent included the question , " Who else can compete ? " His work was promoted in France by The Studio des Ursuline cinema . 
 Praising his contribution to the world of cinema , Martin Scorsese mentions : " His work is in the company of that of living contemporaries like Ingmar Bergman , Akira Kurosawa and Federico Fellini . " 
 Political ideologues took issue with Ray 's work . In a public debate during the 1960s , Ray and the Marxist filmmaker Mrinal Sen engaged in an argument . Sen criticised him for casting a matinée idol such as Uttam Kumar , whom he considered a compromise . Ray said that Sen only attacked " easy targets " , i.e. the Bengali middle @-@ classes . However Ray himself has made movies on Bengali middle class in films like Pratidwandi and Jana Aranya set during the period of the naxalite movement in Bengal . Advocates of socialism said that Ray was not " committed " to the cause of the nation 's downtrodden classes ; some critics accused him of glorifying poverty in Pather Panchali and <unk> <unk> ( Distant Thunder ) through lyricism and aesthetics . They said he provided no solution to conflicts in the stories , and was unable to overcome his bourgeois background . During the naxalite movements in the 1970s , agitators once came close to causing physical harm to his son , Sandip . Early in 1980 , Ray was criticised by an Indian M.P. and former actress Nargis Dutt , who accused Ray of " exporting poverty . " She wanted him to make films to represent " Modern India . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Satyajit Ray is a cultural icon in India and in Bengali communities worldwide . Following his death , the city of Calcutta came to a virtual standstill , as hundreds of thousands of people gathered around his house to pay their last respects . Satyajit Ray 's influence has been widespread and deep in Bengali cinema ; a number of Bengali directors , including Aparna Sen , Rituparno Ghosh and Gautam Ghose as well as Vishal Bhardwaj , Dibakar Banerjee , Shyam Benegal and Sujoy Ghosh from Hindi cinema in India , Tareq Masud and Tanvir <unk> in Bangladesh , and <unk> Ahmad in England , have been influenced by his film craft . Across the spectrum , filmmakers such as <unk> Dasgupta , Mrinal Sen and Adoor Gopalakrishnan have acknowledged his seminal contribution to Indian cinema . Beyond India , filmmakers such as Martin Scorsese , Francis Ford Coppola , James Ivory , Abbas Kiarostami , Elia Kazan , François Truffaut , Carlos Saura , Isao Takahata , Wes Anderson , Danny Boyle and many other noted filmmakers from all over the world have been influenced by his cinematic style , with many others such as Akira Kurosawa praising his work . Gregory Nava 's 1995 film My Family had a final scene that repeated that of Apur Sansar . Ira Sachs 's 2005 work Forty Shades of Blue was a loose remake of Charulata . Other references to Ray films are found , for example , in recent works such as Sacred Evil , the Elements trilogy of Deepa Mehta . According to Michael Sragow of The Atlantic Monthly , the " youthful coming @-@ of @-@ age dramas that have flooded art houses since the mid @-@ fifties owe a tremendous debt to the Apu trilogy " . The trilogy also introduced the bounce lighting technique . Kanchenjungha ( 1962 ) introduced a narrative structure that resembles later hyperlink cinema . Pratidwandi ( 1972 ) helped pioneer photo @-@ negative flashback and X @-@ ray digression techniques . Together with Madhabi Mukherjee , Ray was the first Indian film figure to be featured on a foreign stamp ( Dominica ) . 
 Many literary works include references to Ray or his work , including Saul Bellow 's Herzog and J. M. Coetzee 's Youth . Salman Rushdie 's Haroun and the Sea of Stories contains fish characters named Goopy and Bagha , a tribute to Ray 's fantasy film . In 1993 , UC Santa Cruz established the Satyajit Ray Film and Study collection , and in 1995 , the Government of India set up Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute for studies related to film . In 2007 , the BBC declared that two Feluda stories would be made into radio programs . During the London Film Festival , a regular " Satyajit Ray Award " is given to a first @-@ time feature director whose film best captures " the artistry , compassion and humanity of Ray 's vision " . Wes Anderson has claimed Ray as an influence on his work ; his 2007 film , The Darjeeling Limited , set in India , is dedicated to Ray . Ray also a graphic designer , designed most of his film posters , combining folk @-@ art and calligraphy to create themes ranging from mysterious , surreal to comical ; an exhibition his posters was held at British Film Institute in 2013 . 
 = = Awards , honours and recognitions = = 
 Ray received many awards , including 32 National Film Awards by the Government of India , and awards at international film festivals . At the 11th Moscow International Film Festival in 1979 , he was awarded with the Honorable Prize for the contribution to cinema . At the Berlin International Film Festival , he was one of only three filmmakers to win the Silver Bear for Best Director more than once and holds the record for the most number of Golden Bear nominations , with seven . At the Venice Film Festival , where he had previously won a Golden Lion for Aparajito ( 1956 ) , he was awarded the Golden Lion Honorary Award in 1982 . That same year , he received an honorary " <unk> à Satyajit Ray " award at the 1982 Cannes Film Festival . 
 Ray is the second film personality after Chaplin to have been awarded an honorary doctorate by Oxford University . He was awarded the Dadasaheb Phalke Award in 1985 and the Legion of Honor by the President of France in 1987 . The Government of India awarded him the Padma Bhushan in 1965 and the highest civilian honour , Bharat Ratna , shortly before his death . The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences awarded Ray an Honorary Oscar in 1992 for Lifetime Achievement . It was one of his favourite actresses , Audrey Hepburn , who represented the Academy on that day in Calcutta . Ray , unable to attend the ceremony due to his illness , gave his acceptance speech to the Academy via live video feed from the hospital bed . In 1992 he was posthumously awarded the Akira Kurosawa Award for Lifetime Achievement in Directing at the San Francisco International Film Festival ; it was accepted on his behalf by actress Sharmila Tagore . 
 In 1992 , the Sight & Sound Critics ' Top Ten Poll ranked Ray at No. 7 in its list of " Top 10 Directors " of all time , making him the highest @-@ ranking Asian filmmaker in the poll . In 2002 , the Sight & Sound critics ' and directors ' poll ranked Ray at No. 22 in its list of all @-@ time greatest directors , thus making him the fourth highest @-@ ranking Asian filmmaker in the poll . In 1996 , Entertainment Weekly magazine ranked Ray at No. 25 in its " 50 Greatest Directors " list . In 2007 , Total Film magazine included Ray in its " 100 Greatest Film Directors Ever " list . 
 = = Ray family = = 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Portia fimbriata = 
 Portia fimbriata , sometimes called the fringed jumping spider , is a jumping spider ( family Salticidae ) found in Australia and Southeast Asia . Adult females have bodies 6 @.@ 8 to 10 @.@ 5 millimetres long , while those of adult males are 5 @.@ 2 to 6 @.@ 5 millimetres long . Both sexes have a generally dark brown carapace , reddish brown chelicerae ( " fangs " ) , a brown underside , dark brown palps with white hairs , and dark brown abdomens with white spots on the upper side . Both sexes have fine , faint markings and soft fringes of hair , and the legs are spindly and fringed . However , specimens from New Guinea and Indonesia have orange @-@ brown carapaces and yellowish abdomens . In all species of the genus Portia , the abdomen <unk> when the spider is well fed or producing eggs . 
 The hunting tactics of Portia are versatile and adaptable . All members of Portia have instinctive hunting tactics for their most common prey , but can improvise by trial and error against unfamiliar prey or in unfamiliar situations , and then remember the new approach . There are differences in the hunting tactics of the regional populations of P. fimbriata . Those in Australia 's Northern Territory are poor at hunting jumping spiders and better against non @-@ salticid web @-@ building spiders and against insects . The Sri Lanka variant is fair against other jumping spiders , and good against web spiders and insects . P. fimbriata in Queensland is an outstanding predator of other jumping spiders and of web spiders , but poor against insects . The Queensland variant use a unique " cryptic stalking " technique which prevents most jumping spider prey from identifying this P. fimbriata as a predator , or even as an animal at all . Some jumping spider prey have partial defences against the cryptic stalking technique . All types of prey spiders occasionally counter @-@ attack , but all Portia species have very good defences , starting with especially tough skin . 
 When meeting another of the same species , P. fimbriata does not use cryptic stalking but displays by moving quickly and smoothly . In P. fimbriata from Queensland , contests between males usually are very brief and do no damage . Contests between Portia females are usually long and violent , and the victor may evict a loser and then eat the loser 's eggs – but victorious females of P. fimbriata from Queensland do not kill and eat the losing female . If a P. fimbriata male from Queensland displays to a female , she may run away or she may charge at him . If the pair reach agreement after this , they will copulate if she is mature , and if she is sub @-@ adult he will cohabit in her nest until she finishes moulting , and then they copulate . P. fimbriata typically copulates much quicker than other jumping spiders . Unlike in other Portia species , females of P. fimbriata do not eat their mates during courting , nor during or after copulation . 
 = = Body structure and appearance = = 
 Females of the jumping spider Portia fimbriata have bodies 6 @.@ 8 to 10 @.@ 5 millimetres long , while those of adult males are 5 @.@ 2 to 6 @.@ 5 millimetres long . : 100 The Queensland variety is typically smaller than the Northern Territory variety . The cephalothorax is about 4 millimetres long and 3 millimetres wide , and the abdomen about 4 millimetres long and 2 @.@ 2 millimetres wide . The front of the cephalothorax is large and angular , and the face is broad , high and flat . In Australia and Taiwan , both sexes have a generally dark brown carapace , reddish brown chelicerae ( " jaws " ) , a brown underside , and dark brown palps with white hairs . Both sexes also have fine , faint markings and soft fringes of hair . : 6 However , the female has a white fringe just above the chelicerae , while the back half of the male 's cephalothorax has a white band round the bottom edge and a white groove down the back . While male spiders ' palps are larger than females ' , : 572 – 573 the palps of P. fimbriata females have a fringe of hair that makes them look about as larger as males ' . The abdomens of both sexes are dark brown , with white spots on the upper side . Wanless ' female from New Guinea has an orange carapace and chelicerae with sooty markings , palps mainly light yellow , legs orange @-@ brown legs , and abdomen light yellow . Wanless also found a male from the Amboina area in Indonesia , showing an orange @-@ brown carapace and chelicerae , yellow @-@ brown to orange @-@ brown palps , orange @-@ brown legs and a light yellowish abdomen . : 99 – 100 
 = = Movement = = 
 When not hunting for prey or a mate , Portia species adopt a special posture , called the " cryptic rest posture " , pulling their legs in close to the body and their palps back beside the chelicerae ( " jaws " ) , which obscures the outlines of these appendages . When walking , all Portia species have a slow , " choppy " gait that preserves their concealment : pausing often and at irregular intervals ; waving their legs continuously and their palps jerkily up and down ; and moving each appendage out of time with the others : 6 and continuously varying the speed and timing . : 418 Portia ′ s walk is unlike that of any other spider , and this gait and the spider 's fringes gives the appearance of light flickering through the forest canopy and reflecting from a piece of detritus . : 6 In Queensland , P. fimbriata walks and waves more jerkily and about twice as slowly as other Portia species , including P. fimbriata in other areas . : 433 
 If disturbed , most Portia species leap upwards about 100 to 150 millimetres , often from the cryptic rest pose , and often over a wide trajectory . Usually Portia then either freezes or runs about 100 millimetres and then freezes . However , P. fimbriata in Queensland rarely runs or leaps . : 434 
 = = Senses = = 
 Although other spiders can also jump , salticids including Portia fimbriata have significantly better vision than other spiders , : 521 and their main eyes are more acute in daylight than a cat 's and 10 times more acute than a dragonfly 's . Jumping spiders have eight eyes , the two large ones in the center @-@ and @-@ front position ( the anterior @-@ median eyes , also called " principal eyes " : 51 ) housed in tubes in the cephalothorax and providing acute vision . The other six are secondary eyes , positioned along the sides of the carapace and acting mainly as movement detectors . : 16 In most jumping spiders , the middle pair of secondary eyes are very small and have no known function , but those of Portia species are relatively large , and function as well as its other secondary eyes . : 424 : 232 The main eyes focus accurately on an object at distances from approximately 2 centimetres to infinity , : 51 and in practice can see up to about 75 centimetres . : 53 Like all jumping spiders , P. fimbriata can take in only a small visual field at one time , as the most acute part of a main eye can see all of a circle up to 12 millimeters wide at 20 centimeters away , or up to 18 millimeters wide at 30 centimeters away . 
 Generally the jumping spider subfamily Spartaeinae , which includes the genus Portia , cannot discriminate objects at such long distances as the members of subfamilies <unk> or Lyssomaninae can . However , the main eyes of Portia have vision about as acute as the best of the jumping spiders : the <unk> <unk> neglectus can distinguish prey and conspecifics up to 320 millimetres away ( 42 times its own body length ) , while P. fimbriata can distinguish these up to 280 millimetres ( 47 times its own body length ) . The main eyes of P. fimbriata can also identify features of the scenery up to 85 times its own body length , which helps the spider to find detours . : 21 
 However , a Portia takes a relatively long time to see objects , possibly because getting a good image out of such tiny eyes is a complex process and needs a lot of scanning . This makes a Portia vulnerable to much larger predators such as birds , frogs and mantises , which a Portia often cannot identify because of the other predator 's size . 
 Spiders , like other arthropods , have sensors , often modified setae ( bristles ) , for smell , taste , touch and vibration , protruding through their cuticle ( " skin " ) . : 532 – 533 A Portia can sense vibrations from surfaces , and use these for mating and for hunting other spiders in total darkness . It can use air- and surface " smells " to detect prey which it often meets , to identify members of the same species , to recognise familiar members , and to determine the sex of other member of the same species . : 13 
 = = Hunting and feeding = = 
 = = = Hunting tactics of the genus Portia = = = 
 Members of the genus Portia have been called " eight @-@ legged cats " , as their hunting tactics are as versatile and adaptable as a lion 's . All members of Portia have instinctive tactics for their most common prey , but can improvise by trial and error against unfamiliar prey or in unfamiliar situations , and then remember the new approach . They can also make detours to find the best attack angle against dangerous prey , even when the best detour takes a Portia out of visual contact with the prey , and sometimes the planned route leads to abseiling down a silk thread and biting the prey from behind . Such detours may take up to an hour , and a Portia usually picks the best route even if it needs to walk past an incorrect route . : 422 
 While most jumping spiders prey mainly on insects and by active hunting , : 340 females of Portia also build webs to catch prey directly . These " capture webs " are funnel @-@ shaped and widest at the top : 513 and are about 4 @,@ 000 cubic centimetres in volume . : 429 – 431 A Portia often builds her own web on to one of a web @-@ based non @-@ salticid spider . When not joined to another spiders ' , a P. fimbriata female 's capture web is generally suspended from rigid foundations such as boughs and rocks . : 432 Males of Portia do not build capture webs . : 429 
 A Portia can pluck another spider 's web with a virtually unlimited range of signals , either to lure the prey out into the open or calming the prey by monotonously repeating the same signal while the Portia walks slowly close enough to bite it . : 340 – 341 Such tactics enable Portia species to take web spiders from 10 % to 200 % of a Portia ′ s size , and Portia species hunt in all types of webs . : 491 In contrast , other cursorial spiders generally have difficulty moving on webs , and web @-@ building spiders find it difficult to move in webs unlike those they build . When hunting in another spider 's web , a Portia ′ s slow , choppy movements and the flaps on its legs make it resemble leaf detritus caught in the web and blown in a breeze . : 514 P. fimbriata and some other Portia species use breezes and other disturbances as " smokescreens " in which these predators can approach web spiders more quickly , and revert to a more cautious approach when the disturbance disappears . : 313 A few web spiders run far away when they sense the un @-@ rhythmical gait of a Portia entering the web – a reaction Wilcox and Jackson call " Portia panic " . : 418 
 If a large insect is struggling in a web , Portia usually waits for up to a day until the insect stops struggling , even if the prey is thoroughly stuck . : 448 When an insect is stuck in a web owned by P. labiata , P. schultzi or any regional variant of P. fimbriata , and next to a web spider 's web , the web spider sometimes enters the Portia ′ s web , and the Portia pursues and catches the web spider . : 440 – 441 , 444 
 The webs of spiders on which Portia species prey sometimes contain dead insects and other arthropods which are uneaten or partly eaten . P. fimbriata ( in Queensland ) and some other Portia species such as P. labiata and P. schultzi sometimes scavenge these corpses if the corpses are not obviously decayed . : 448 
 When using its own web to catch other species of salticids , P. fimbriata conceals its conspicuous palps , which it does not do when stalking a web @-@ spider or occasionally a moving fly . 
 All Portia species eat eggs of other spiders , including eggs of their own species and of other cursorial spiders , and can extract eggs from cases ranging from the flimsy ones of Pholcus to the tough papery ones of Philoponella . While only P. fimbriata ( in Queensland ) captures cursorial spiders in their nests , all Portia species steal eggs from empty nests of cursorial spiders . : 448 
 The venom of Portia is unusually powerful against spiders . : 491 When a Portia stabs a small to medium spider ( up to the Portia ′ s weight : 428 ) , including another Portia , the prey usually runs away for about 100 to 200 millimetres , enters convulsions , becomes paralysed after 10 to 30 seconds , and continues convulsing for 10 seconds to 4 minutes . Portia slowly approaches the prey and takes it . : 441 – 443 Portia usually needs to inflict up to 15 stabbings to completely immobilise a larger spider ( 1 @.@ 5 to 2 times to the Portia ′ s weight : 428 ) , and then Portia may wait about 20 to 200 millimetres away for 15 to 30 minutes from seizing the prey . : 441 – 443 Insects are usually not immobilised so quickly but continue to struggle , sometimes for several minutes . : 441 – 443 
 Occasionally a Portia is killed or injured while pursuing prey up to twice Portia ′ s size . In tests , Portia labiata is killed in 2 @.@ 1 % of pursuits and injured but not killed in 3 @.@ 9 % , while P. schultzi is killed in 1 @.@ 7 % and injured but not killed in 5 @.@ 3 % . In Queensland , P. fimbriata is killed in 0 @.@ 06 % of its pursuits and injured but not killed in another 0 @.@ 06 % . A Portia ′ s especially tough skin often prevents injury , even when its body is caught in the other spider 's fangs . When injured , Portia bleeds and may sometimes lose one or more legs . Spiders ' palps and legs break off easily when attacked , Portia ′ s palps and legs break off exceptionally easily , which may be a defence mechanism , and Portia species are often seen with missing legs or palps , while other salticids in the same habitat are not seen with missing legs or palps . : 450 A P. fimbriata specimen , now in the Australian Museum collection , regenerated a lost limb about 7 days after moulting . 
 = = = Hunting tactics of P. fimbriata = = = 
 All performance statistics summarise result of tests in a laboratory , using captive specimens . : 429 – 430 Female P. fimbriatas ' tactics and performance show regional differences between the populations in Queensland , the Northern Territory and Sri Lanka . : 424 The table also includes females of P. africana around Lake Victoria , of P. schultzi elsewhere in Kenya and of P. labiata in Sri Lanka for comparison . : 424 , 432 , 434 
 P. fimbriata in all regions fix their own webs to solid surfaces such as rocks and tree trunks and boughs , while some other Portia species often fix their webs to pliant stems and leaves and on the lower branches of trees . : 432 
 A test in 2001 showed that four jumping species take nectar , either by sucking free nectar from the surface of flowers or biting the flowers with their fangs . The spiders fed in cycles of two to four minutes , then groomed their bodies and especially their chelicerae , before another cycle . A more formal part of the test showed that 90 juvenile jumping spiders , including P. fimbriata , generally prefer to suck from blotting soaked with a 30 % solution of sugar rather than paper soaked with distilled water . The authors suggest that , in the wild , nectar may be a frequent , convenient way to get some nutrients , as it would avoid the work , risks and costs ( such as making venom ) of predation . Jumping spiders may benefit from amino acids , lipids , vitamins and minerals normally found in nectar . 
 = = = = Tactics in Queensland = = = = 
 Portia fimbriata from Queensland is the most thoroughly studied <unk> ( spider @-@ eating ) salticid . Robinson ( 2010 ) said that the Queensland P. fimbriata has the most varied prey capture techniques of any animal in the world except humans and other simians . When not using its own web , the Queensland P. fimbriata preys mainly on salticids of other genera , generally using against them a special tactic called " cryptic stalking " . 
 Adult males are less ready to pursue and less efficient at catching than adult females , especially against larger prey . Males are quite effective against small web spiders , and reluctant to tackle large ones although they catch them in about 50 % of attempts . Against other jumping spiders , males do not pursue large ones and pursue about 48 % of small ones , catching 84 % of those they pursue . : 438 Males of Portia do not build large webs for catching prey ( " capture webs " ) . : 429 
 A test in 1997 showed that P. fimbriata ′ s preferences for different types of prey are in the order : web spiders ; jumping spiders ; and insects . : 337 – 339 These preferences apply to both live prey and motionless lures , and to P. fimbriata specimens without prey for 7 days ( " well @-@ fed " : 335 ) and without prey for 14 days ( " starved " : 335 ) . P. fimbriata specimens without prey for 21 days ( " extra @-@ starved " ) showed no preference for different types of prey . : 339 The test included as prey several species of web spiders and jumping spiders , and the selection of the prey species showed no evidence of affecting the results . : 337 – 339 Insects were represented by the house fly Musca domestica . : 335 
 When hunting most other salticids in Queensland , P. fimbriata exaggerates the slowness and " choppiness " of its normal gait ( sometimes called " robotlike " : 6 ) and holds its palps retracted beside its fangs , as it also does in the cryptic rest pose . If the salticid prey faces P. fimbriata , P. fimbriata freezes until the prey turns away . : 750 This " cryptic stalking " appears unique to Queensland , where most other jumping spiders fail to recognize a disguised stalking P. fimbriata as a predator , or even as an animal at all . : 447 P. fimbriata from Queensland uses cryptic stalking against both salticids native to Queensland and against imported salticids . : 445 Other salticids often defend themselves when stalked by other species of Portia or by P. fimbriata outside Queensland , and the Queensland P. fimbriata ′ s cryptic stalking may be a regional adaptation to the abundant but dangerous salticid prey , especially <unk> queenslandicus , in the local rainforest . : 750 – 751 P. fimbriata uses cryptic stalking even against some oddly @-@ shaped salticids such as the flattened <unk> and the elongated , mantis @-@ like <unk> longicauda . : 455 All of P. fimbriata ′ s salticid prey have a pair of large , forward @-@ facing principal eyes , a feature that arachnologists also use to distinguish salticids from all other spiders . : 455 – 456 
 Euryattus , another jumping spider from Queensland , has a partly overlapping range with P. fimbriata ′ s : 416 – 417 and is abundant in their common range , and adult and large juvenile P. fimbriatas hunt Euryattus adopting specific tactics . Unlike most jumping spiders , Euryattus makes a nest by suspending a dead rolled @-@ up leaf by silk lines from vegetation . P. fimbriata catches Euryattus females by mimicking the vibrations made by Euryattus males as part of their courtship , and this deception lures Euryattus females out of their nests . In tests , a Euryattus from P. fimbriata ′ s range recognises the predator and defends itself , while Euryattus specimens from outside P. fimbriata ′ s range seldom recognise the threat . P. fimbriata finds it easier to catch a Euryattus from outside the predator 's home range than to capture the same species from P. fimbriata ′ s range . : 416 – 417 This may be an example of an evolutionary arms race . 
 P. fimbriata does not stalk at all species of the ant @-@ mimic jumping spider genus <unk> , : 449 – 450 , 455 and uses cryptic stalking only about 20 % of the time against other ant @-@ mimicking salticids and against beetle @-@ mimicking salticids . : 453 P. fimbriata also sometimes does not use cryptic stalking against females of the salticid subfamily Lyssomaninae . These females are unusually translucent , and the translucent cuticle makes the anterior @-@ median eyes ( front @-@ and @-@ center ) show light and dark regions that flicker in and out when viewed head on . <unk> males are not translucent and do not produce this flickering , and P. fimbriata uses cryptic stalking consistently against the males . This suggests that the flickering anterior @-@ median eyes of <unk> females may reduce the ability of P. fimbriata to identify these females as jumping spiders . 
 When encountering J. queenlandicus , P. fimbriata often first notices chemical cues on J. queenlandicus ′ silken safety lines and then looks for its prey . The smell makes P. fimbriata to quicker to see the prey , : 6 , 12 possibly by lowering thresholds in the visual system . : 36 – 37 Sometimes P. fimbriata cannot see J. queenlandicus through the prey 's camouflage , and " hunts by speculation " , jumping high in the air , so that J. queenlandicus betrays itself by turning and looking for the disturbance . : 6 : 749 P. fimbriata then turns toward J. queenslandicus and waves its palps . : 1601 It appears that only P. fimbriatas from Queensland behaves this way while Portia species from other areas did not , that P. fimbriata from Queensland reacts this way only to J. queenslandicus , and that J. queenslandicus perceives no chemical warnings that P. fimbriata is around . : 749 
 When stalking any non @-@ salticid , P. fimbriata does not use cryptic stalking and does not consistently pull its palps back nor consistently freeze when faced by the prey . P. fimbriata adopts cryptic stalking only after recognizing prey as a jumping spider . 
 In Queensland , P. fimbriata is reluctant to jump into the webs of prey spiders , while other Portia species do this at any opportunity . : 515 The Queensland orb web spider Argiope <unk> shakes it web violently to shake off intruders , and P. fimbriata finds a detour that allows it to abseil on to the prey . : 422 When the web spider <unk> <unk> is busy wrapping up its own prey and is less aware of other predators , P. fimbriata uses this activity as a type of smokescreen to approach the web spider . : 147 
 P. fimbriata uses non @-@ cryptic stalking against <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> spiders , and against flies , but does not stalk beetles or ants . : 453 
 Unlike other Portia species , P. fimbriata in Queensland readily invades the nests of cursorial spiders , plucking or cutting the nest . If the resident spider eventually leaves the nest , P. fimbriata stalks it . If the resident spider tries to counterattack and then retreats into the nest , P. fimbriata may attack the other spider as it re @-@ enters the nest , or may wait motionless until the prey exits . If a stabbed prey spider retreats into the nest , P. fimbriata in Queensland never enters the nest , but waits for the prey to move out , and then P. fimbriata kills it . : 444 – 447 
 A test in a deliberately artificial environment explored the Queensland P. fimbriata ′ s ability to solve a novel problem by trial and error . A little island was set up in the middle of a miniature atoll , and the space between with them was filled with water . The gap was too wide for the spiders to jump all the way , and the spiders ' options were to leap and then swim or to swim only . The testers encouraged some specimens by using a tiny scoop to make waves toward the atoll when the spiders chose the option the testers preferred ( leap and then swim , or swim only ) , and discouraged some specimens by making waves back toward the island when the spiders chose the option the testers did not want – in other words , the testers " rewarded " one group for " successful " behaviour and " penalised " the other group for " unwanted " behaviour . : 284 – 286 The Queensland P. fimbriata specimens generally repeated successful behaviour and switched if the first try was unsuccessful , irrespective of which option ( leap and then swim or to swim only ) the testers chose as " good " for each specimen . : 1215 
 = = = = Tactics in Northern Territory = = = = 
 In the Northern Territory , P. fimbriata has no special tactics against other jumping spiders and tries to treat them as if they were web spiders , and then either tries to jump on them or gives up . Hence this variant is poor at catching other jumping spiders . The Northern Territory variant of P. fimbriata is not as good as the Queensland one as catching web spiders , but better than the Sri Lanka variant and some other species of Portia . It is not enthusiastic about pursuing insects , but very good at catching those it pursues , as the performance table above shows : 424 , 432 , 434 While pursuits by the Queensland variant typically take 26 minutes , those of the Northern Territory variant typically take 3 to 5 minutes , like some other species of Portia . : 439 – 440 , 449 
 = = = = Tactics in Sri Lanka = = = = 
 The Sri Lanka variant enthusiastically pursues other jumping spiders and is slightly better than most Portia species in tests , but about half as effective as the Queensland variant . In Sri Lanka , P. fimbriata is not a prolific hunter of web spiders or insects , but quite efficiently catches those it pursues . : 424 , 432 , 434 Like other Portia species , the Sri Lanka P. fimbriata typically take 3 to 5 minutes for a pursuit . : 439 – 440 , 449 
 = = Reproduction and lifecycle = = 
 Before courtship , a male Portia spins a small web between boughs or twigs , and he hangs under that and ejaculates on to it . : 467 He then takes up the semen into reservoirs in the palpal bulbs on his pedipalps . : 581 – 583 
 A laboratory test showed how males of P. fimbriata from Queensland minimise the risk of meeting each other , by recognising fresh pieces of blotting paper , some containing their own silk draglines and some containing another male 's draglines . Males also were attracted by fresh blotting paper containing females ' draglines , while females do not respond to fresh blotting paper containing males ' draglines . This suggested that the males usually search for females , rather than vice versa . Neither sex responded to one week @-@ old blotting paper , irrespective of whether it contained males ' or females ' draglines . A similar series of tests showed that P. labiata showed the same patterns of responses between the sexes . 
 When meeting another of the same species , P. fimbriata does not stalk but displays by moving quickly and smoothly , and displays at 4 to 27 centimetres away . It raises its legs , its body sways from side to side , and the palps are lowered below the chelicerae ( " fangs " ) . This is very different from the stalking it uses when encountering another salticid of a different species , despite receiving the same visual stimulus , the sight of the other 's large anterior @-@ median eyes . Although P. fimbriata is influenced by pheromones much more than is usual among salticids , visual cues alone are enough to start displays and distinguish members of the same species from other salticids , even if neither partner moves . The spindly , fringed legs of Portia species may identify members of the same species , as well as concealing these spiders from other salticid species . 
 In P. fimbriata from Queensland and in some other species , contests between males usually last only 5 to 10 seconds , and only their legs make contact . : 466 Contests between Portia females are usually long and violent , : 518 and in P. fimbriata from Queensland these often including grappling that sometimes breaks a leg . : 466 A victor may evict a loser , and then eat the loser 's eggs and take over the loser 's web . : 518 : 466 Unlike in some other Portia species , victorious females of P. fimbriata from Queensland do not kill and eat the losers . : 466 
 A female that sees a male may approach slowly or wait . The male then walks erect and displays by waving his legs and palps . If the female does not run away , she gives a " propulsive display " first . If the male stands his ground and she does not run away or repeat the propulsive display , he approaches and , if she is mature , they copulate , the male inserting the tip of one of his palpal bulbs into the female 's copulatory opening , using the first palp that made scraping contact . : 459 – 464 If the female is sub @-@ adult ( one moult from maturity ) , a male or sometimes a sub @-@ adult male of P. fimbriata may cohabit in the female 's capture web . : 467 Portia species usually mate on a web or on a dragline made by the female . : 518 P. fimbriata typically copulates for about 100 seconds , while other genera can take several minutes or even several hours . : 518 : 465 Unlike in some other Portia species , females of P. fimbriata from Queensland do not eat their mates during courting , nor during : 464 or after copulation . 
 When hunting , mature females of P. fimbriata , P. africana , P. fimbriata , P. labiata , and P. schultzi emit olfactory signals that reduce the risk that any other females , males or juveniles of the same species may contend for the same prey . The effect inhibits aggressive mimicry against a prey spider even if the prey spider is visible , and also if the prey is inhabiting any part of a web . If a female of one of these Portias smells a male of the same species , the female stimulates the males to court . These Portia species do not show this behaviour when they receive olfactory signals from members of other Portia species . 
 In laboratory tests , Portia species including P. fimbriata mate with other species , but the females then produce no eggs . : 466 
 P. fimbriata in Queensland prefers to lay eggs on dead , brown leaves about 20 millimetres long , suspended near the top of its capture web , and then cover the eggs with a sheet of silk . If there is no dead leaf available , the female will make a small horizontal silk platform in the capture web , lay the eggs on it , and then cover the eggs . In Northern Territory , P. fimbriata occasionally lays eggs in a dead leaf , but more usually in a silk egg sac on a small horizontal web suspended on the main web . : 434 – 435 , 469 
 Like all arthropods , spiders moult and , after hatching , the life stage before each moult is called an " instar " . Specimens of P. fimbriata become mature at instar 7 , 8 or 9 . In an experiment using P. fimbriata spiderlings from Queensland , 64 % of those fed only on spiders survived to maturity , 37 % of those fed on a mixture of spiders and insects survived , and all those fed solely on insects died before reaching the 6th instar . For moulting , all Portia species spin a horizontal web whose diameter is about twice the spider 's body length and is suspended only 1 to 4 millimetres below a leaf . The spider lies head down , and often slides down 20 to 30 millimetres during moulting . : 496 Portia species spin a similar temporary web for resting . : 513 P. fimbriata in Queensland can be very sedentary , in some cases remaining in the same web for over 48 days during a series of moults . : 239 
 = = Ecology = = 
 P. fimbriata is found in the rain forests of India , Nepal , Sri Lanka , Hong Kong , Taiwan , New Guinea , the Solomon Islands , Malaysia including Malacca , Indonesia , and in Australia 's Northern Territory and Queensland . : 424 : 302 : 99 – 100 It lives on foliage , tree trunks , boulders , and rock walls . Throughout its range , this is the most common species of the genus Portia . Queensland specimens of P. fimbriata live near running water and where there is moderate light , while Northern Territory specimens live in caves where the light varies from rather dark at the back to much brighter around the mouths . Other populations of Portia also live with higher light levels than in Queensland , and some members of these other populations are found in webs exposed to direct sunlight for part of the day . : 431 In Queensland , P. fimbriata shares its environment with a common prey , the very abundant <unk> queenslandicus , and with large populations of other non @-@ Portia salticids and non @-@ salticid web @-@ building spiders . : 432 
 Ants prey on P. fimbriata while P. fimbriata does not stalk ants , regarding them as poisonous or very unpleasant . : 454 – 455 P. fimbriata is also preyed upon by birds , frogs , and mantises . 
 It is often difficult to find P. fimbriata in the wild , as its shape and movements are well disguised . The Queensland variety is quite easy to raise , while the Northern Territory variety is quite troublesome to maintain . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 P. fimbriata is one of 17 species in the genus Portia as of May 2016 . Wanless divided the genus Portia into two species groups : the schultzi group , in which males ' palps have a fixed tibial apophysis ; and the <unk> group , in which the apophysis of each palp in the males has a joint separated by a membrane . : 87 – 88 The schultzi group includes P. schultzi , P. africana , P. fimbriata , and P. labiata . : 93 – 94 , 99 – 100 , 102 – 105 
 The species P. fimbriata was originally described by Carl Ludwig Doleschall as <unk> fimbriata in 1859 . The species has also been named Attus fimbriatus ( Doleschall , 1859 ) , <unk> fimbriatus ( Doleschall , 1859 ) , Linus fimbriatus ( Doleschall , 1859 ) and <unk> ocellata ( Hogg , 1915 ) , and Portia fimbriata ( Doleschall , 1859 ) , and the last is now used . According to Jackson and <unk> , P. fimbriata , as currently defined , probably includes two or more distinct species . In particular , Queensland P. fimbriata are probably a distinct species from Sri Lankan P. fimbriata , as matings between the two groups are infertile . : 480 
 Portia is in the subfamily Spartaeinae , which is thought to be primitive . : 491 Molecular phylogeny , a technique that compares the DNA of organisms to reconstruct the tree of life , indicates that Portia is a member of the clade Spartaeinae , that Spartaeinae is basal ( quite similar to the ancestors of all jumping spiders ) , and that Portia ′ s closest relatives are the genera Spartaeus , Phaeacius , and Holcolaetis . : 53 
 = Tegetthoff @-@ class battleship = 
 The Tegetthoff class ( sometimes erroneously named the Viribus Unitis class ) was the sole class of dreadnought battleship built for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . Four ships were built , Viribus Unitis , Tegetthoff , Prinz Eugen and Szent István . Three of the four were laid down in Trieste , with Szent István being built at Rijeka , to incorporate both parts of the dual monarchy into the construction of the ships . The smaller size of the shipyards in Rijeka meant that Szent István was built three years after her sisters , with slightly different characteristics . 
 The first three ships , Viribus Unitis , Tegetthoff and Prinz Eugen were joined by their sister in 1915 , when they bombarded the Italian installations at Ancona . The Tegetthoffs attempted to sortie through the Otranto Barrage with the support of lighter ships in 1918 , but failed after Szent István was sunk . After the transfer to State of Slovenes , Croats and Serbs , <unk> Unitis was sunk by Italian frogmen , and Tegetthoff and Prinz Eugen were transferred to Italy and France , respectively . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Dimensions = = = 
 The ships had an overall length of 152 metres ( 498 ft 8 in ) , a beam of 27 @.@ 90 metres ( 91 ft 6 in ) , and a draught of 8 @.@ 70 metres ( 28 ft 7 in ) at deep load . They displaced 20 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 19 @,@ 684 long tons ) at load and 21 @,@ 689 tonnes ( 21 @,@ 346 long tons ) at deep load . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The propulsion consisted of four Parsons steam turbines , each of which was housed in a separate engine @-@ room . The turbines were powered by twelve Babcock & Wilcox boilers . The turbines were designed to produce a total of 27 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 20 @,@ 134 kW ) , which was theoretically enough to attain her designed speed of 20 knots ( 23 mph ; 37 km / h ) , but no figures from her speed trials are known to exist . She carried 1 @,@ 844 @.@ 5 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 815 @.@ 4 long tons ) of coal , and an additional 267 @.@ 2 tonnes ( 263 @.@ 0 long tons ) of fuel oil that was to be sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . At full capacity , she could steam for 4 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 800 km ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 12 mph ; 19 km / h ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Each ship had an armament consisting of twelve 305 @-@ millimetre ( 12 in ) / 45 @-@ caliber K 10 guns in four triple turrets mounted on the center @-@ line , forward and aft of the superstructure . Their secondary armament consisted of twelve 150 @-@ millimetre ( 5 @.@ 91 in ) / 50 K 10 guns mounted in casemates amidships . Eighteen 70 @-@ millimetre ( 3 in ) / 50 K 10 guns were mounted on open pivots on the upper deck above the casemates . Three more 66 @-@ mm K 10 guns were mounted on the upper turrets for anti @-@ aircraft duties . Four 530 @-@ millimetre ( 21 in ) submerged torpedo tubes were fitted , one each in the bow , stern and on each broadside ; twelve torpedoes were carried . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The waterline armour belt of the Tegetthoff class measured 280 millimetres ( 11 in ) thick between the midpoints of the fore and aft barbettes and thinned to 150 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) further towards the bow and stern , but did not reach either the bow or the stern . It was continued to the bow by a small patch of 110 – 130 @-@ millimetre ( 4 – 5 in ) armour . The upper armour belt had a maximum thickness of 180 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) , but it thinned to 110 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) from the forward barbette all the way to the bow . The casemate armour was also 180 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) thick . The sides of the main gun turrets , barbettes and main conning tower were protected by 280 millimetres ( 11 in ) of armour , except for the turret and conning tower roofs which were 60 to 150 millimetres ( 2 to 6 in ) thick . The thickness of the decks ranged from 30 to 48 millimetres ( 1 to 2 in ) in two layers . The underwater protection system consisted of the extension of the double bottom up to the lower edge of the waterline armour belt , with a thin 10 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) plate acting as the outermost bulkhead . It was backed by a torpedo bulkhead that consisted of two layered 25 @-@ millimetre plates . The total thickness of this system was only 1 @.@ 60 metres ( 5 ft 3 in ) which made it incapable of containing a torpedo warhead detonation or mine explosion without rupturing . 
 = = = Variations = = = 
 Szent István , built at Fiume , differed from her half @-@ sisters mainly in her machinery . She only had two shafts and two turbines , unlike the four shaft arrangement of the other ships of her class . External differences included a platform built around the fore funnel which extended from the bridge to the after funnel and on which several searchlights were installed . A further distinguishing feature was the modified ventilator trunk in front of the mainmast . She was the only ship of her class not to be fitted with torpedo nets . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Construction = = 
 The Austro @-@ Hungarian government ordered the construction of a new fleet in 1908 , following the announcement of the start of construction of the first dreadnought for the Regia Marina ( the Italian navy ) , Dante Alighieri . The ships of this class were among the first ships to utilize triple gun turrets for their main armament , the first one being the Italian battleship Dante Alighieri , which the Austro @-@ Hungarian ships were supposed to act against in a war ; as for the Italian ship , this choice made it possible to deliver a heavier broadside than other dreadnoughts of a similar size . The triple turrets were built at the Škoda Works , in Plzeň , Bohemia ( Czech republic ) , and was available at short notice because Škoda were already working on a design for an order for the Russian navy . 
 The first unit was to bear the name of Wilhelm von Tegetthoff , an Austrian naval admiral of the 19th century , but Franz Joseph I wanted it to be named after his personal motto , Viribus Unitis ( Latin for " With united forces " ) . In any event , the class name remained Tegetthoff . 
 The first three ships were built at the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino yard , Trieste , but as a condition of agreeing to the construction and financing of the new fleet , the Hungarian parliament insisted that one of the battleships be built at the Hungarian facility , the Danubius yard at Fiume – Rijeka ( pronounced : <unk> ) , now Croatia . However , the <unk> shipyard had until then never built anything larger than a destroyer , therefore delayed construction as the yard was extended in preparation for the dreadnought . For this reason the final ship , delivered seventeen months late , was given a Hungarian name — named Szent István after Saint Stephen , the first king and patron saint of Hungary . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The assistance of the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet was called upon by the German Mediterranean Division , which consisted of the battlecruiser SMS Goeben and light cruiser SMS Breslau . The German ships were attempting to break out of Messina , where they had been coaling prior to the outbreak of war — British ships had begun to assemble off Messina in an attempt to trap the Germans . By this time , the Austro @-@ Hungarians had not yet fully mobilized their fleet , though the three <unk> and three Tegetthoffs , along with several cruisers and smaller craft , were available . The Austro @-@ Hungarian high command , wary of instigating war with Great Britain , ordered the fleet to avoid the British ships , and only to support the Germans openly while they were in Austro @-@ Hungarian waters . On 7 August , when the Germans broke out of Messina , the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet , including the Tegetthoff @-@ class battleships , sailed as far south as Brindisi , before returning to port . 
 After the breakout , the Austro @-@ Hungarian navy saw very little action , spending much of its time in its base at Pola ( now Pula , Croatia ) . The navy 's general inactivity was partly caused by a lack of coal , which became a problem as the war progressed , and partly by a fear of mines in the Adriatic ( which also kept the Italian navy in port for most of the war ) . They did , however , leave Pula to bombard Ancona in May 1915 . On 23 May 1915 , four hours after the Italian declaration of war reached the main Austro @-@ Hungarian naval base at Pola , the members of the Tegetthoff class and the rest of the fleet departed to bombard the Italian coast . The Austro @-@ Hungarian ships bombarded the important naval base at Ancona , and later the coast of Montenegro , without opposition ; by the time Italian ships arrived on the scene , the Austro @-@ Hungarians were safely back in Pola . 
 = = = = Otranto Raid = = = = 
 In 1918 Admiral Miklós Horthy de Nagybánya became rear admiral of the fleet , and he determined to use the fleet to attack the Otranto Barrage . On 8 June 1918 he took Viribus Unitis and Prinz Eugen south with a small supporting flotilla ; on the evening of 9 June , Szent István and Tegetthoff followed . In trying to make maximum speed in order to catch up , Szent István 's turbines started to overheat and speed had to be reduced to 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . When an attempt was made to raise more steam in order to increase to 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) Szent István produced an excess of smoke , attracting the attention of a pair of patrolling Italian torpedo boats at 3 @.@ 20 a.m. on 10 June . MAS @-@ 21 attacked Tegetthoff , but one of her torpedoes failed to leave the launch tube and the other failed to explode . MAS @-@ 15 however succeeded in striking Szent István with two torpedoes at 3 : 31 a.m. Tegetthoff returned to the scene to take Szent István in tow . An attempt to beach the ship on nearby <unk> Island ( northwest of Zara ) was considered , but the ship was taking on too much water . At 6 : 12 am , with the pumps unequal to the task , Szent István capsized , taking 89 of her crew with her . The last half @-@ hour of the sinking was filmed in stages from Tegetthoff ( one of only two battleship sinkings on the high seas to ever be filmed , the other being that of the British battleship HMS Barham in the Second World War ) . Fearing further attacks by torpedo boats or destroyers from the Italian navy , his element of surprise now compromised , Admiral Horthy called off the attack and the fleet returned to base for the remainder of the war . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 After it was clear that Austria @-@ Hungary had lost World War I , the Austrian government decided to give Viribus Unitis , along with much of the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet , to the newly formed State of Slovenes , Croats and Serbs . This move would have avoided handing the fleet to the Allies , since the new state had declared neutrality . Following the transfer , she was renamed Yugoslavia . 
 On 1 November 1918 , the transfer being still unknown , two men of the Regia Marina , Raffaele <unk> and Raffaele Rossetti , rode a primitive manned torpedo ( nicknamed the <unk> or " leech " ) into the Austro @-@ Hungarian naval base at Pola . Using limpet mines , they then sank Viribus Unitis , as well as the freighter Wien . 
 Traveling down the rows of Austrian battleships , the two men encountered Viribus Unitis at around 4 : 40 am . Rossetti placed one canister of TNT on the hull of the battleship , timed to explode at 6 : 30 am . He then flooded the second canister , sinking it on the harbor floor close to the ship . This second canister exploded close to the Austrian freighter Wien , resulting in her sinking . The men had no breathing sets , and therefore had to keep their heads above water . They were discovered and taken prisoner just after placing the explosives under the battleship 's hull . The Italians did not know that the Austrian government had handed over Viribus Unitis , along with most of the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet , to the newly created State of Slovenes , Croats and Serbs . The two @-@ man team were captured and taken aboard Viribus Unitis , where they informed the new captain of the battleship what they had done but did not reveal the exact position of the explosives . Vuković then arranged for the two prisoners to be taken safely to the sister ship Tegetthoff , and ordered the evacuation of the ship . The explosion did not happen at 6 : 30 as predicted and Vuković returned to the ship with many sailors ( believing mistakenly that the Italians had lied ) . He therefore remained on his ship and went down with her and 300 – 400 of her crew when the mines exploded shortly afterwards at 6 : 44 . Following the explosion , the battleship sank in 15 minutes . The two Italian crew were interned for a few days until the end of the war and were honored by the Kingdom of Italy with the Gold Medal of Military Valor . 
 On 4 November Italian troops entered Pola and seized Tegetthoff and Prinz Eugen . The Italians kept Tegetthoff for their own use , although they broke her up in 1924 following the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 , but she had first featured in the movie <unk> di nostri mari ( Heroes of our seas ) about the sinking of Szent István . Prinz Eugen became French property — they removed the main armament for inspection and used the ship to test aerial bombardment attacks , before she was finally used as a target ship by the battleships Paris , Jean Bart , and France , and sunk in the Atlantic . 
 = Postgame Mortem = 
 " Postgame Mortem " is the thirteenth episode of the third season of the American mystery television series Veronica Mars , and the fifty @-@ seventh episode overall . Written by Joe Voci and directed by John T. Kretchmer , the episode premiered on The CW on February 13 , 2007 . The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars as she deals with life as a college student while moonlighting as a private detective . 
 The episode is the first of two episodes to deal with the murder of the basketball coach at Veronica 's school Hearst College , Tom Barry ( Matt McKenzie ) . In this episode , Veronica tries to clear the coach 's son , Josh ( Jonathan Chase ) of charges of his murder . Meanwhile , Logan ( Jason Dohring ) , heartbroken from his breakup with Veronica in " There 's Got to Be a Morning After Pill " , ends up babysitting the eleven @-@ year @-@ old sister ( Juliette Goglia ) of one of his friend Dick 's ( Ryan Hansen ) paramours , and they begin to emotionally connect with each other . In addition , Veronica and Keith find out that two of the main suspects ' alibis do not match . 
 " Postgame Mortem " was one of series creator Rob Thomas 's favorite episodes of the season . In particular , a scene in which Logan and Heather run into Veronica in an elevator was Thomas 's favorite of the year , praising Goglia 's performance in the scene and episode . In addition , Dohring contacted Rob Thomas to discuss his character 's development . The episode received 2 @.@ 37 million viewers and mixed reviews from critics , with many praising the case @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week and being more mixed on the Logan – Heather subplot . Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club referred to Heather as a non @-@ sexualized Manic Pixie Dream Girl , while Alan Sepinwall believed that it worked well comedically and dramatically . 
 = = Plot synopsis = = 
 The Hearst basketball coach , Tom Barry , berates his team , including Wallace ( Percy Daggs III ) , after a game , and the coach 's son quits as a result . One of Logan 's teachers tells Dick that Logan must start attending classes . Dick sneaks into Logan 's apartment for the hotel staff and finds it a mess . Veronica works at Mars Investigations for the day and walks in to find the Coach 's family in the office , as the Coach has died . The son who quit , Josh , is the prime suspect , but the family suspects Mel Stolz ( Jeremy Roberts ) or one of the PCH bikers . Dick tries to set up Logan on a double date before realizing that one of the “ twins ” is actually eleven years old . Dick and the older sister leave , leading Logan to babysit the other sister , Heather ( Juliette Goglia ) although Logan just goes to bed . Keith talks to Mel Stolz , who says that he was on a plane at the time . Dick calls Logan and says he is in Las Vegas , leaving Logan to babysit Heather for another day . 
 Weevil ( Francis Capra ) organizes a meeting between Veronica and the PCHers , and the new leader says that they would not kill someone over a bad car like the Coach 's vehicle . Mason ( Robert Ri 'chard ) , one of the team 's former star basketball players , testifies to Sheriff Lamb ( Michael Muhney ) that Josh is responsible for his father ’ s death . The Sheriff arrests Josh , and Veronica learns that the Coach 's car was found in the water . Logan and Heather begin to actually enjoy each other 's company . Keith speaks to Mindy O 'Dell ( Jaime Ray Newman ) , stating that he will continue to search for Dean Cyrus O 'Dell 's killer . Veronica questions Mason , but he ends up angrily walking away . Veronica and Keith recuperate , and Keith says that Cyrus 's car was taken out within the timeframe of the murder . Heather sends a radio request to play a special song from Logan to Veronica , while Veronica interrogates the hotel staff . One of them says that he heard two men yelling in the room . Veronica and Logan have a chance meeting in the elevator . 
 Hank Landry ( Patrick Fabian ) tells Veronica that she has successfully applied for the first part of an FBI internship with the help of a recommendation from the Dean . Keith questions Mrs. O 'Dell heavily , and she subsequently fires him from the case , although he says that he will not stop investigating . Veronica visits Josh in jail , who suspects Mason . Dick returns , getting a divorce from the older sister , and Logan and Heather remain friends . In Veronica 's criminology class , she is arrested for aiding Josh to escape from prison . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Postgame Mortem " was written by Joe Voci and directed by John T. Kretchmer , marking Voci 's first writing credit and Kretchmer 's thirteenth directing credit . The episode was one of series creator Rob Thomas 's favorite episodes of season three , along with " Of Vice and Men " , " Show Me the Monkey " , " Poughkeepsie , Tramps and Thieves " , and " Mars , Bars " . The DVD for the season contains one deleted scene of the episode . It depicts Veronica going into the police station and asking Sheriff Lamb about Josh 's recent arrest . Thomas explained in his introduction to the scene that while it was initially written for its comedic value , it became " an example of staging killing the comedy " . He explained that Lamb had to frequently turn all the way around to speak to Veronica and Deputy Sacks ( Brandon Hillock ) , a fact which he thought made the scene awkward . 
 Thomas described the scene in which Veronica encounters Logan and Heather in an elevator before Heather tells her that Logan is in love with her as his favorite scene of the season and that it lived up to high expectations . In writing this subplot , Thomas and the crew started with this scene and " wrote backwards " in order to make it fit in with the rest of the episode 's story . Knowing the scene 's importance to the writers , Kretchmer used more lighting setups than would be typically used in an elevator scene . Thomas also enjoyed Juliette Goglia 's performance in both the scene and the episode , referring to her as " a star " . Immediately prior to this episode , Thomas received a call from Jason Dohring , the actor of Logan , who was confused about the character 's continual state of grief following his breakup with Veronica . Thomas responded that that part in his character arc was all setup to the subplot involving Heather . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Postgame Mortem " received 2 @.@ 37 million viewers , ranking 102nd out of 104 in the weekly rankings . This was a slight decrease from the figures of the previous week 's episode , " There 's Got to Be a Morning After Pill " , which earned 2 @.@ 40 million viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 BuddyTV lauded the episode , writing that it was one of the best Veronica Mars episodes in months , mainly due to the reappearances of Wallace , Weevil , and Cliff , leading to what the reviewer called " an old school Veronica Mars feel . " Logan and Heather 's subplot also garnered praise : " It ’ s a nice departure from the oft repeated scenario of Logan exercising indiscretion . " Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club gave a positive review , praising the case of @-@ the @-@ week and the episode 's development of the Dean O 'Dell mystery . He argued that this story arc was the best of the series so far , writing " What makes this third season 's second mystery work is that it is so balanced . [ … ] It 's a closed system with multiple possibilities . " He was also intrigued by the case @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week , noting that it stood out from others because of the fact that it was not resolved within the episode . However , he was negative towards the Heather @-@ Logan subplot and dynamic , referring to Heather as a type of Manic Pixie Dream Girl who is not sexualized . " Heather is so ridiculously contrived as a way to help Logan out of his funk that it 's almost embarrassing . " Television Without Pity graded the episode an " A " , stating that " I 'm all for anything that gets Veronica and Keith working together on a big case . " 
 Reviewer Alan Sepinwall , on his blog What 's Alan Watching ? , praised the decision to include a multiple @-@ week mystery . He thought that spreading the case out allowed the episode to focus on the main story arc and Logan 's subplot as well as allow the main mystery time to finish . He was also complimentary towards the Logan – Heather plotline , lauding Goglia 's performance ; he also stated that the episode gave him renewed interest in the Dean O 'Dell case . Eric Goldman , writing for IGN , rated the episode a 7 @.@ 7 out of 10 , indicating that it was " good " . He was highly critical of the subplot involving Logan and Heather , stating that it " rode the line of insufferable " . While opining that it had some good comedic moments , he thought that the majority of the subplot involved heavy use of clichés . However , he was more mixed to positive towards the case @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week . The reviewer felt a sense of anticipation about the fact that this storyline did not resolve itself in the episode : " it 's hard not to be anxious to see where this is going . " 
 = Holkham Hall = 
 Holkham Hall ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) is an 18th @-@ century country house located adjacent to the village of Holkham , Norfolk , England . The house was constructed in the Palladian style for Thomas Coke , 1st Earl of Leicester ( fifth creation ) by the architect William Kent , aided by the architect and aristocrat Lord Burlington . 
 Holkham Hall is one of England 's finest examples of the Palladian revival style of architecture , and the severity of its design is closer to Palladio 's ideals than many of the other numerous Palladian style houses of the period . The Holkham Estate , had been built up by Sir Edward Coke , the founder of his family fortune . He bought <unk> manor in 1609 , though never lived there , and many other purchases of land in Norfolk to endow to his six sons . His fourth son , John , inherited the land and married heiress Meriel Wheatley in 1612 . They made Hill Hall their home and by 1659 John had complete ownership of all three Holkham manors . It is the ancestral home of the Coke family , the Earls of Leicester of Holkham . 
 The interior of the hall is opulently , but by the standards of the day , simply decorated and furnished . Ornament is used with such restraint that it was possible to decorate both private and state rooms in the same style , without oppressing the former . The principal entrance is through the Marble Hall , which is in fact made of pink Derbyshire alabaster ; this leads to the piano nobile , or the first floor , and state rooms . The most impressive of these rooms is the Saloon , which has walls lined with red velvet . Each of the major state rooms is symmetrical in its layout and design ; in some rooms , false doors are necessary to fully achieve this balanced effect . 
 = = Architects and patron = = 
 Holkham was built by 1st Earl of Leicester , Thomas Coke , who was born in 1697 . A cultivated and wealthy man , Coke made the Grand Tour in his youth and was away from England for six years between 1712 and 1718 . It is likely he met both Burlington — the aristocratic architect at the forefront of the Palladian revival movement in England — and William Kent in Italy in 1715 , and that in the home of Palladianism the idea of the mansion at Holkham was conceived . Coke returned to England , not only with a newly acquired library , but also an art and sculpture collection with which to furnish his planned new mansion . However , after his return , he lived a feckless life , <unk> himself with drinking , gambling and hunting , and being a leading supporter of cockfighting . He made a disastrous investment in the South Sea Company and when the South Sea Bubble burst in 1720 , the resultant losses delayed the building of Coke 's planned new country estate for over ten years . Coke , who had been made Earl of Leicester in 1744 , died in 1759 — five years before the completion of Holkham — having never fully recovered his financial losses . Thomas 's wife , Lady Margaret Tufton , Countess of Leicester ( 1700 – 1775 ) , would oversee the finishing and furnishing of the house . 
 Although Colen Campbell was employed by Thomas Coke in the early 1720s , the oldest existing working and construction plans for Holkham were drawn by Matthew Brettingham , under the supervision of Thomas Coke , in 1726 . These followed the guidelines and ideals for the house as defined by Kent and Burlington . The Palladian revival style chosen was at this time making its return in England . The style made a brief appearance in England before the Civil War , when it was introduced by Inigo Jones . However , following the Restoration it was replaced in popular favour by the Baroque style . The " Palladian revival " , popular in the 18th century , was loosely based on the appearance of the works of the 16th @-@ century Italian architect Andrea Palladio . However it did not adhere to Palladio 's strict rules of proportion . The style eventually evolved into what is generally referred to as Georgian , still popular in England today . It was the chosen style for numerous houses in both town and country , although Holkham is exceptional for both its severity of design and for being closer than most in its adherence to Palladio 's ideals . 
 Although Thomas Coke oversaw the project , he delegated the on @-@ site architectural duties to the local Norfolk architect Matthew Brettingham , who was employed as the on @-@ site clerk of works . Brettingham was already the estate architect , and was in receipt of £ 50 a year ( about 7 @,@ 000 pounds per year in 2016 terms ) in return for " taking care of his Lordship 's buildings " . William Kent was mainly responsible for the interiors of the Southwest pavilion , or family wing block , particularly the Long Library . Kent produced a variety of alternative exteriors , suggesting a far richer decoration than Coke wanted . Brettingham described the building of Holkham as " the great work of [ my life ] " , and when he published his " The Plans and Elevations of the late Earl of Leicester 's House at Holkham " , he immodestly described himself as sole architect , making no mention of Kent 's involvement . However , in a later edition of the book , Brettingham 's son admitted that " the general idea was first struck out by the Earls of Leicester and Burlington , assisted by Mr. William Kent " . 
 In 1734 , the first foundations were laid ; however , building was to continue for thirty years , until the completion of the great house in 1764 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Palladian style was admired by Whigs such as Thomas Coke , who sought to identify themselves with the Romans of antiquity . Kent was responsible for the external appearance of Holkham ; he based his design on Palladio 's unbuilt Villa Mocenigo , as it appears in I Quattro Libri dell 'Architettura , but with modifications . 
 The plans for Holkham were of a large central block of two floors only , containing on the piano nobile level a series of symmetrically balanced state rooms situated around two courtyards . No hint of these courtyards is given externally ; they are intended for lighting rather than recreation or architectural value . This great central block is flanked by four smaller , rectangular blocks , or wings , and at each corners is linked to the main house not by long colonnades — as would have been the norm in Palladian architecture — but by short two @-@ storey wings of only one bay . 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The external appearance of Holkham can best be described as a huge Roman palace . However , as with most architectural designs , it is never quite that simple . Holkham is a Palladian house , and yet even by Palladian standards the external appearance is austere and devoid of ornamentation . This can almost certainly be traced to Coke himself . The on @-@ site , supervising architect , Matthew Brettingham , related that Coke required and demanded " <unk> " , which can be interpreted as comfort . Hence rooms that were adequately lit by one window , had only one , as a second might have improved the external appearance but could have made a room cold or draughty . As a result , the few windows on the piano nobile , although symmetrically placed and balanced , appear lost in a sea of brickwork ; albeit these yellow bricks were cast as exact replicas of ancient Roman bricks expressly for Holkham . Above the windows of the piano nobile , where on a true Palladian structure the windows of a mezzanine would be , there is nothing . The reason for this is the double height of the state rooms on the piano nobile ; however , not even a blind window , such as those often seen in Palladio 's own work , is permitted to alleviate the severity of the facade . On the ground floor , the rusticated walls are pierced by small windows more reminiscent of a prison than a grand house . One architectural commentator , Nigel Nicolson , has described the house as appearing as functional as a Prussian riding school . 
 The principal , or South façade , is 344 feet ( 104 @.@ 9 m ) in length ( from each of the flanking wings to the other ) , its austerity relieved on the piano nobile level only by a great six @-@ columned portico . Each end of the central block is terminated by a slight projection , containing a Venetian window surmounted by a single storey square tower and capped roof , similar to those employed by Inigo Jones at Wilton House nearly a century earlier . A near identical portico was designed by Inigo Jones and Isaac de Caus for the Palladian front at Wilton , but this was never executed . 
 The flanking wings contain service and secondary rooms — the family wing to the south @-@ west ; the guest wing to the north @-@ west ; the chapel wing to the south @-@ east ; and the kitchen wing to the north @-@ east . Each wing 's external appearance is identical : three bays , each separated from the other by a narrow recess in the elevation . Each bay is surmounted by an unadorned pediment . The composition of stone , recesses , varying pediments and chimneys of the four blocks is almost reminiscent of the English Baroque style in favour ten years earlier , employed at Seaton Delaval Hall by Sir John Vanbrugh . One of these wings , as at the later Kedleston Hall , was a self @-@ contained country house to accommodate the family when the state rooms and central block were not in use . 
 The one storey porch at the main north entrance was designed in the 1850s by Samuel Sanders Teulon , although stylistically it is indistinguishable from the 18th @-@ century building . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 Inside the house , the Palladian form reaches a height and grandeur seldom seen in any other house in England . It has , in fact , been described as " The finest Palladian interior in England . " The grandeur of the interior is obtained with an absence of excessive ornament , and reflects Kent 's career @-@ long taste for " the eloquence of a plain surface " . Work on the interiors ran from 1739 to 1773 . The first habitable rooms were in the family wing and were in use from 1740 , the Long Library being the first major interior completed in 1741 . Among the last to be completed and entirely under Lady Leicester 's supervision is the Chapel with its alabaster reredos . The house is entered through the Marble Hall ( though the chief building fabric is in fact pink Derbyshire alabaster ) , modelled by Kent on a Roman basilica . The room is over 50 feet ( 15 m ) from floor to ceiling and is dominated by the broad white marble flight of steps leading to the surrounding gallery , or peristyle : here alabaster Ionic columns support the coffered , gilded ceiling , copied from a design by Inigo Jones , inspired by the Pantheon in Rome . The fluted columns are thought to be replicas of those in the Temple of Fortuna <unk> , also in Rome . Around the hall are statues in niches ; these are predominantly plaster copies of classical deities . 
 The hall 's flight of steps lead to the piano nobile and state rooms . The grandest , the Saloon , is situated immediately behind the great portico , with its walls lined with patterned red <unk> ( a mixture of wool , linen and silk ) and a coffered , gilded ceiling . In this room hangs Rubens 's Return from Egypt . On his Grand Tour , the Earl acquired a collection of Roman copies of Greek and Roman sculpture which is contained in the extensive Statue Gallery , which runs the full length of the house north to south . The North Dining Room , a cube room of 27 feet ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) contains an Axminster carpet that perfectly mirrors the pattern of the ceiling above . A bust of Aelius Verus , set in a niche in the wall of this room , was found during the restoration at Nettuno . A classical apse gives the room an almost temple air . The apse in fact , contains concealed access to the labyrinth of corridors and narrow stairs that lead to the distant kitchens and service areas of the house . Each corner of the east side of the principal block contains a square salon lit by a huge Venetian window , one of them — the Landscape Room — hung with paintings by Claude Lorrain and Gaspar Poussin . All of the major state rooms have symmetrical walls , even where this involves matching real with false doors . The major rooms also have elaborate white and multi @-@ coloured marble fireplaces , most with carvings and sculpture , mainly the work of Thomas Carter , though Joseph Pickford carved the fireplace in the Statue Gallery . Much of the furniture in the state rooms was also designed by William Kent , in a stately classicising baroque manner . 
 So restrained is the interior decoration of the state rooms , or in the words of James Lees @-@ Milne , " chaste " , that the smaller , more intimate rooms in the family 's private south @-@ west wing were decorated in similar vein , without being overpowering . The long library running the full length of the wing still contains the collection of books acquired by Thomas Coke on his Grand Tour through Italy , where he saw for the first time the Palladian villas which were to inspire Holkham . 
 The Green State bedroom is the principal bedroom ; it is decorated with paintings and tapestries , including works by Paul Saunders and George Smith Bradshaw . It is said that when Queen Mary visited , Gavin Hamilton 's " lewd " depiction of Jupiter <unk> Juno " was considered unsuitable for that lady 's eyes and was banished to the attics " . 
 = = Grounds = = 
 Work to the designs of William Kent on the park commenced in 1729 , several years before the house was constructed . This event was commemorated by the construction in 1730 of the obelisk , 80 feet ( 24 m ) in height , standing on the highest point in the park . It is located over half a mile to the south and on axis with the centre of the house . An avenue of trees stretches over a mile south of the obelisk . Thousands of trees were planted on what had been windswept land ; by 1770 the park covered 1 @,@ 500 acres ( 6 @.@ 1 km2 ) . Other garden buildings designed by Kent are , near the far end of the avenue the Triumphal Arch , designed in 1739 but only completed in 1752 and the domed doric temple ( 1730 – 35 ) in the woods near the obelisk . Above the main entrance to the house within the Marble Hall is this inscription : 
 THIS SEAT , on an open barren Estate 
 Was planned , planted , built , decorated . 
 And inhabited the middle of the <unk> Century 
 By <unk> 's <unk> <unk> of <unk> 
 Under Coke of Norfolk , the great @-@ nephew and heir of the builder , extensive improvements were made to the park and by his death in 1842 it had grown to its present extent of over 3 @,@ 000 acres ( 12 km2 ) . As well as planting over a million trees on the estate Coke employed the architect Samuel Wyatt to design over a number of buildings , including a series of farm buildings and farmhouses in a simplified neo @-@ classical style and , in the 1780s , the new walled kitchen gardens covering 6 acres ( 24 @,@ 000 m2 ) . The gardens stand to the west of the lake and include : A fig house , a peach house , a <unk> , and other greenhouses . Wyatt 's designs culminated in c . 1790 with the Great Barn , located in the park half a mile south @-@ east of the obelisk . The cost of each farm was in the region of £ 1 @,@ 500 to £ 2 @,@ 600 : Lodge Farm , Castle Acre , cost £ 2 @,@ 604 6s . <unk> in 1797 – 1800 . The lake to the west of the house , originally a marshy inlet or creek off the North Sea , was created in 1801 – 03 by the landscape gardener William Eames . 
 After his death , Coke was commemorated by the Coke Monument , designed by William Donthorne and erected in 1845 – 8 at a cost to the tenants of the estate of £ 4 @,@ 000 . The monument consists of a Corinthian column 120 feet ( 37 m ) high , surmounted by a drum supporting a <unk> and a plinth decorated with bas @-@ reliefs carved by John Henning , Jr . The corners of the plinth support sculptures of an ox , sheep , plough and seed @-@ drill . Coke 's work to increase farm yields had resulted in the rental income of the estate rising between 1776 and 1816 from £ 2 @,@ 200 to £ 20 @,@ 000 , and had considerable influence on agricultural methods in Britain . 
 In 1850 , Thomas Coke , 2nd Earl of Leicester , called in the architect William Burn to build new stables to the east of the house , in collaboration with W. A. Nesfield , who had designed the parterres . Work started at the same time on the terraces surrounding the house . This work continued until 1857 and included , to the south and on axis with the house , the monumental fountain of Saint George and the Dragon dated c . 1849 – 57 sculpted by Charles Raymond Smith . To the east of the house and overlooking the terrace , Burn designed the large stone orangery , with a three @-@ bay pedimented centre and three @-@ bay flanking wings . The orangery is now roofless and windowless . 
 = = Holkham today = = 
 The cost of the construction of Holkham is thought to have been in the region of £ 90 @,@ 000 . This vast cost nearly ruined the heirs of the 1st Earl , but had the result that they were financially unable to alter the house to suit the whims of taste . Thus , the house has remained almost untouched since its completion in 1764 . Today , this perfect , if severe , example of Palladianism is at the heart of a thriving private estate of some 25 @,@ 000 acres ( 100 km2 ) . Though open to the public on Sundays , Mondays and Thursdays , it is still the family home of the Earls of Leicester of Holkham . 
 = Pelli Chesi Choodu = 
 Pelli Chesi Choodu ( English : Try to conduct a marriage ) is a 1952 Indian bilingual satirical comedy film directed by L. V. Prasad and produced by B. Nagi Reddy and Aluri Chakrapani under their company Vijaya Vauhini Studios . The film was made simultaneously in Telugu and Tamil with the title Kalyanam Panni Paar . It features N. T. Rama Rao , <unk> Varalakshmi , Yandamuri <unk> Rao and Savitri in the lead roles . S. V. Ranga Rao , Dr. <unk> Krishnayya , Doraswamy and <unk> are seen in supporting roles in the Telugu version while C. V. V. Panthulu replaced Krishnayya in the Tamil version . 
 Pelli Chesi Choodu deals with the negative effects of the dowry system in India through the marital life of Venkata Ramana ( Rama Rao ) and Ammadu ( Varalakshmi ) . The film 's production began after the release of Vijaya Vauhini Studios ' Pathala Bhairavi ( 1951 ) . Marcus Bartley was recruited as the cinematographer and the film was edited by C. P. Jambulingam and M. S. Money . Ghantasala composed the film 's music . 
 Pelli Chesi Choodu was released on 19 February 1952 while Kalyanam Panni Paar was released 100 days later . Both versions were commercially successful and achieved cult status . Pelli Chesi Choodu was remade in Kannada as Maduve Madi Nodu ( 1965 ) by Vijaya Vauhini Studios and in Hindi as Shaadi Ke Baad ( 1972 ) by Prasad . While the Kannada version was commercially successful , the Hindi version was a commercial failure . 
 = = Plot = = 
 <unk> lives in a village with her sons Raja and Kundu , and her daughter Ammadu . Raja is a teacher and a theatre enthusiast . Along with Kundu and a group of fellow actors , Raja performs plays in a local theatre during his free time . Raja 's maternal uncle Govindayya , a pleader , wants him to marry his daughter Chitti , who is in a relationship with a bodybuilder named Bheemudu . Raja rejects the proposal and Govindayya offers to find a suitable bridegroom for Ammadu if Raja marries Chitti . Raja rejects the proposal and with Kundu he sets out to find a suitable bridegroom for Ammadu . 
 In a distant village , Raja and Kundu meet <unk> Viyyanna , a zamindar ( aristocrat ) and the president of the panchayat . Viyyanna is a complex character of declining fortunes and generous spirit who believes in respecting his guests . Raju and Viyyanna 's daughter Savitri fall in love and their wedding is quickly arranged . Viyyanna also finds a bridegroom named Venkata Ramana , a pleader living in Madras ( now Chennai ) , for Ammadu . Ramana 's father , Venkatapathy , demands a large dowry , which Viyyanna promises to pay . 
 At the marriage venue , Govindayya plots revenge by inciting Venkatapathy to insist on the dowry being paid before the marriage . Viyyanna issues a <unk> note ; Venkatapathy rejects it and drags Ramana from the marriage hall . However , Ramana leaves for Madras and lives there with Ammadu . When Venkatapathy arrives , Ramana feigns mental illness while Ammadu and Raja pretend to be a nurse and a doctor . Ammadu endears herself to Venkatapathy by showing interest in his recitals of the puranas . 
 Ramana ' recovers ' from the mental illness and Ammadu , who has been pregnant , gives birth to their son , causing a fresh round of gossip in the village . Govindayya tries to take advantage of this and after numerous failed attempts , he persuades Venkatapathy to conduct Ramana 's marriage with Chitti . Viyyanna considers this to be an insult and conducts the marriage of Chitti and Bheemudu at his residence . Govindayya and his wife <unk> refuse to acknowledge the marriage . 
 When Venkatapathy asks Ramana to marry Chitti , he refuses and foregoes the wealth he is entitled to inherit in exchange for Ammadu and their newborn son . Govindayya asks Venkatapathy to marry Chitti and <unk> protests , reuniting Chitti and Bheemudu . A helpless Govindayya is confronted by Viyyanna , who threatens to use his influence as a president of the panchayat to have him arrested if he does not reform himself . Govindayya begs pardon and flees with his family . The film ends with everyone present in Ramana 's house , laughing maniacally . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 After producing Shavukar ( 1950 ) and Pathala Bhairavi ( 1951 ) , B. Nagi Reddy and Aluri Chakrapani announced a film titled Pelli Chesi Choodu , which would be directed by L. V. Prasad and financed by their company Vijaya Vauhini Studios . Pelli Chesi Choodu was made as a bilingual film ; it was shot simultaneously in Telugu and Tamil , with the Tamil version titled Kalyanam Panni Paar , the first Tamil film directed by Prasad . Chakrapani wrote the film 's script , which was based on the negative effects of the dowry system in India . Marcus Bartley was recruited as the cinematographer and the film was edited by C. P. Jambulingam and M. S. Money . Madhavapeddi Gokhale and Kaladhar were the film 's art directors , and the music score was composed by Ghantasala . Chalapathi Rao and Jagannadham were the production executives . Pasumarthi Krishnamurthy choreographed the song sequences . <unk> Prakash Rao worked as an assistant director under Prasad ; Rao directed <unk> ( 1952 ) during the post @-@ production phase of Pelli Chesi Choodu . 
 N. T. Rama Rao and <unk> Varalakshmi were chosen as one of the leading pairs of actors . During the songs ' shoot , Ghantasala taught Rama Rao to play harmonium and gave him a few music lessons so he would look believable in the film . Yandamuri <unk> and Savitri , who had played minor roles in Shavukar and Pathala Bhairavi , were chosen as the other leading pair . In playing the role of the zamindar , S. V. Ranga Rao exhibited a strange body language , inspired by a stranger he had observed at a railway station . Dr. <unk> Krishnayya and <unk> Panthulu played the role of Rama Rao 's father in the Telugu and Tamil versions . Padmanabham played two roles ; a postman and Ranga Rao 's friend . 
 The child artists in the film were members of <unk> <unk> 's ' <unk> ' troupe . They were trained by <unk> <unk> Rao , whose nephew Gade Balakrishna " Kundu " Rao played a key role in the film 's Telugu and Tamil versions . Vijaya Vauhini Studios hired actors on a monthly salaried basis for this film ; one of these was M. Mallikarjuna Rao , who later directed films <unk> ( 1965 ) , <unk> Balam ( 1969 ) , and <unk> 116 ( 1976 ) . Differences between Chakrapani and Varalakshmi occurred during the last stage of principal photography . Chakrapani wanted to replace Varalakshmi with Anjali Devi and reshoot the entire film . However , Devi mediated between them and resolved the differences . Mohan Kanda , who later became the Chief Secretary of Andhra Pradesh before its bifurcation , also appeared in the film as a child artist . 
 Differences between Rama Rao and Varalakshmi due to the latter 's tantrums , also occurred . When Varalakshmi refused to touch Rama Rao 's feet in the scene in which his father drags him from the marriage hall , Prasad asked Nagi Reddy 's son B. L. N. Prasad — the second assistant cameraman working under Bartley — to wear a dhoti and stand before her . Chakrapani liked a scene in a play in which a group of police officers in ascending hierarchy , each junior gave up his chair for the senior ; he used the same idea in Savitri 's marriage sequences in the film . Similarly , Prasad incorporated part of a stage play enacted by children into the film , which Nagi Reddy 's son <unk> Reddy was a part of . Prasad also made a cameo appearance in the film . 
 = = Music = = 
 The official soundtracks of Pelli Chesi Choodu and Kalyanam Panni Paar were composed by Ghantasala . The sound mixing process was supervised by A. Krishnan and Siva Ram . The soundtrack was processed by N. C. Sen Gupta and was orchestrated by Master Venu . This was Ghantasala 's third film as a music director under his five @-@ film contract with Vijaya Vauhini Studios . <unk> Satyanarayana wrote the lyrics for " Amma <unk> " and " <unk> O <unk> " , while Pingali Nagendrarao wrote the lyrics for the other fifteen songs . Four of the songs featured the child artists . 
 The song " Pelli <unk> " was composed using the Kalyani raga . Ghantasala recorded the songs " Manasa <unk> <unk> <unk> " and " <unk> Venkataramana " first with <unk> . He was not satisfied and recorded them again with P. Leela ; the soundtrack 's gramophone records featured both versions . The soundtrack was released in December 1952 under the Saregama music label . It was a critical and commercial success , Ashish Rajadhyaksha and Paul Willemen , in their book Encyclopaedia of Indian Cinema , termed the songs " Amma <unk> " and " Pelli <unk> " as " especially popular " . 
 Track listing 
 = = Release , reception and legacy = = 
 Pelli Chesi Choodu had its theatrical release on 19 February 1952 , 100 days before to that of Kalyanam Panni Paar . Both versions were released with a final reel length of 5 @,@ 243 metres ( 17 @,@ 201 ft ) and were given a " U " ( Universal ) certificate by the Central Board of Film Certification with a run time of 156 minutes . Both versions were commercially successful ; the Telugu version completing a 100 @-@ day run in 11 centres , and the Tamil version completed a 100 @-@ day run in many centres . The Telugu version completed a 182 @-@ day run at Durga Kala Mandiram , Vijayawada , where celebrations marking the film 's success were held . Rama Rao and Varalakshmi did not attend the event because of the differences between them . 
 Reviewing the film , M. L. Narasimham of The Hindu called Pelli Chesi Choodu a " text @-@ book for filmmakers " on " how to make a clean and wholesome entertainer on a burning issue without resorting to slogan @-@ mongering , and yet driving home the point in a subtle manner " . Narasimham also said the actors " deserved full marks for excellent performance " in the film . In his book Alanati Chalana Chitram , K. N. T. Sastry wrote that Pelli Chesi Choodu is an ensemble comedy that " abounds in intrigues and disguises gearing to the making and breaking of marriage alliances " . 
 According to the film historian Randor Guy , Pelli Chesi Choodu was the first in a series of satirical comedies directed by Prasad and produced by Vijaya Vauhini Studios . Guy said the film 's box office performance made Prasad famous in both Telugu and Tamil cinema . After Pelli Chesi Choodu , Prasad and Vijaya Vauhini Studios collaborated on Missamma ( 1955 ) and Appu Chesi Pappu Koodu ( 1959 ) . All three films were profitable ventures and achieved cult status in Telugu cinema . Pelli Chesi Choodu is considered as one of the acclaimed films in the careers of Prasad and Varalakshmi . Relangi Narasimha Rao 's 1988 Telugu film , which was also about the negative effects of dowry system in India , was titled Pelli Chesi Choodu . Pelli Chesi Choodu was also used as the title of a 2014 theatrical play staged by Sri Sai Arts , which won a Nandi Award . 
 = = Remakes and colourisation plans = = 
 Vijaya Vauhini Studios remade the film in Kannada as Maduve Madi Nodu ( 1965 ) . It was directed by <unk> Krishnamurthy and features Rajkumar and Leelavathi in the lead roles . Maduve Madi Nodu was a profitable venture . Prasad remade the film in Hindi as Shaadi Ke Baad ( 1972 ) , in which <unk> , Rakhee and <unk> Sinha reprised the roles played by Rama Rao , Varalakshmi and Ranga Rao in the original . Shaadi Ke Baad underperformed at the box office . 
 In late November 2007 , a Hyderabad @-@ based company named Goldstone Technologies acquired the film negative rights to 14 Telugu films produced by Vijaya Vauhini Studios , including Mayabazar ( 1957 ) and Pelli Chesi Choodu , to release digitally re @-@ mastered versions in colour . The remastered and colourised version of Mayabazar was released in January 2010 and performed well in theatres , but Goldstone Technologies decided not to remaster the remaining 14 films , including Pelli Chesi Choodu ; the company said most of the producers who sold the rights of the negatives to television channels lost control over them . Goldstone added that there were many legal issues over ownership and copyright whenever other producers tried to do something on their own . 
 = Reform Act 1832 = 
 The Representation of the People Act 1832 ( known informally as the 1832 Reform Act , Great Reform Act or First Reform Act to distinguish it from subsequent Reform Acts ) was an Act of Parliament ( indexed as 2 & 3 Will . IV c . 45 ) that introduced wide @-@ ranging changes to the electoral system of England and Wales . According to its preamble , the Act was designed to " take effectual Measures for correcting divers Abuses that have long prevailed in the Choice of Members to serve in the Commons House of Parliament " . Before the reform , most members nominally represented boroughs . The number of electors in a borough varied widely , from a dozen or so up to 12 @,@ 000 . Frequently the selection of MPs was effectively controlled by one powerful patron : for example Charles Howard , 11th Duke of Norfolk controlled eleven boroughs . Criteria for qualification for the franchise varied greatly among boroughs , from the requirement to own land , to merely living in a house with a hearth sufficient to boil a pot . 
 There had been calls for reform long before 1832 , but without success . The Act that finally succeeded was proposed by the Whigs , led by Prime Minister Charles Grey , 2nd Earl Grey . It met with significant opposition from the <unk> factions in Parliament , who had long governed the country ; opposition was especially pronounced in the House of Lords . Nevertheless , the bill was eventually passed , mainly as a result of public pressure . The Act granted seats in the House of Commons to large cities that had sprung up during the Industrial Revolution , and removed seats from the " rotten boroughs " : those with very small electorates and usually dominated by a wealthy patron . The Act also increased the electorate from about 500 @,@ 000 to 813 @,@ 000 , with about one in five adult males allowed to vote , from a total population ( including women and children ) of some 14 million ( about 5 @.@ 8 % of the total population - in comparison : in Baden , Germany , it was 17 % at that time , in France 5 % ) . 
 The full title is An Act to amend the representation of the people in England and Wales . Its formal short title and citation is " Representation of the People Act 1832 ( 2 & 3 Wm . IV , c . 45 ) " . The Act applied only in England and Wales ; the Scottish Reform Act 1832 and Irish Reform Act 1832 brought similar changes to Scotland and Ireland , respectively . 
 = = The unreformed House of Commons = = 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 After the Act of Union 1800 , sometimes referred to as the Act of Union 1801 , the unreformed House of Commons was composed of 658 members , of whom 513 represented England and Wales . There were two types of constituencies ; counties and boroughs . County members were supposed to represent landholders , while borough members were supposed to represent the mercantile and trading interests of the kingdom . Counties were historical national subdivisions established between the 8th and 16th centuries . They were not merely parliamentary constituencies : many components of government ( including courts and the militia ) were organised along county lines . The members of Parliament chosen by the counties were known as Knights of the Shire . In Wales each county elected one member , while in England each county elected two members until 1826 , when Yorkshire 's representation was increased to four , following the disenfranchisement of the Cornish borough of Grampound . 
 Parliamentary boroughs in England ranged widely in size from small hamlets to large cities , partly because they had evolved haphazardly . The earliest boroughs were chosen in the Middle Ages by county sheriffs , and even a village might be deemed a borough . Many of these early boroughs ( such as Winchelsea and Dunwich ) were substantial settlements at the time of their original enfranchisement , but later went into decline , and by the early 19th century some only had a few electors , but still elected two MPs ; they were often known as rotten boroughs . In later centuries the reigning monarch decided which settlements to enfranchise . The monarchs seem mostly to have done so capriciously , often with little regard for the merits of the place they were enfranchising . Of the 70 English boroughs that Tudor monarchs enfranchised , 31 were later disenfranchised . Finally , the parliamentarians of the 17th century compounded the inconsistencies by re @-@ enfranchising 15 boroughs whose representation had lapsed for centuries , seven of which were later disenfranchised by the Reform Act . After Newark was enfranchised in 1661 , no additional boroughs were enfranchised , and the unfair system remained unchanged until the Reform Act of 1832 . Grampound 's disenfranchisement in 1821 was the sole exception . Most English boroughs elected two MPs ; but five boroughs elected only one MP : Abingdon , Banbury , Bewdley , Higham Ferrers and Monmouth . The City of London and the joint borough of Weymouth and Melcombe Regis each elected four members . The Welsh boroughs each returned a single member . 
 = = = The franchise = = = 
 Statutes passed in 1430 and 1432 , during the reign of Henry VI , standardised property qualifications for county voters . Under these Acts , all owners of freehold property or land worth at least forty shillings in a particular county were entitled to vote in that county . This requirement , known as the forty shilling freehold , was never adjusted for inflation ; thus the amount of land one had to own in order to vote gradually diminished over time . The franchise was restricted to males by custom rather than statute ; on rare occasions women had been able to vote in parliamentary elections as a result of property ownership . Nevertheless , the vast majority of people were not entitled to vote ; the size of the English county electorate in 1831 has been estimated at only 200 @,@ 000 . Furthermore , the sizes of the individual county constituencies varied significantly . The smallest counties , Rutland and Anglesey , had fewer than 1 @,@ 000 voters each , while the largest county , Yorkshire , had more than 20 @,@ 000 . Those who owned property in multiple constituencies could vote multiple times ; there was usually no need to live in a constituency in order to vote there . 
 In boroughs the franchise was far more varied . There were broadly six types of parliamentary boroughs , as defined by their franchise : 
 boroughs in which freemen were electors ; 
 boroughs in which the franchise was restricted to those paying scot and lot , a form of municipal taxation ; 
 boroughs in which only the ownership of a burgage property qualified a person to vote ; 
 boroughs in which only members of the corporation were electors ( such boroughs were perhaps in every case " pocket boroughs " , because council members were usually " in the pocket " of a wealthy patron ) ; 
 boroughs in which male householders were electors ( these were usually known as " <unk> boroughs " , as the usual definition of a householder was a person able to boil a pot on his / her own hearth ) ; 
 boroughs in which freeholders of land had the right to vote . 
 Some boroughs had a combination of these varying types of franchise , and most had special rules and exceptions , so many boroughs had a form of franchise that was unique to themselves . 
 The largest borough , Westminster , had about 12 @,@ 000 voters , while many of the smallest , usually known as " rotten boroughs " , had fewer than 100 each . The most famous rotten borough was Old Sarum , which had 13 burgage plots that could be used to " manufacture " electors if necessary — usually around half a dozen was thought sufficient . Other examples were Dunwich ( 32 voters ) , Camelford ( 25 ) , and Gatton ( 7 ) . 
 = = = = Women 's suffrage = = = = 
 The claim for the women 's vote appears to have been first made by Jeremy Bentham in 1817 when he published his Plan of Parliamentary Reform in the form of a Catechism , and was taken up by William Thompson in 1825 , when he published , with Anna Wheeler , An Appeal of One Half the Human Race , Women , Against the <unk> of the Other Half , Men , to <unk> Them in Political , and Thence in Civil and Domestic Slavery : In Reply to Mr. Mill 's Celebrated Article on Government . In the " celebrated article on Government " , James Mill had stated : 
 ... all those individuals whose interests are indisputably included in those of other individuals may be struck off without any inconvenience ... In this light also women may be regarded , the interests of almost all of whom are involved in that of their fathers or in that of their husbands . 
 The passing of the Act seven years later enfranchising " male persons " was , however , a more significant event ; it has been argued that it was the inclusion of the word " male " , thus providing the first explicit statutory bar to women voting , which provided a focus of attack and a source of resentment from which , in time , the women 's suffrage movement grew . 
 = = = Pocket boroughs , bribery = = = 
 Many constituencies , especially those with small electorates , were under the control of rich landowners , and were known as nomination boroughs or pocket boroughs , because they were said to be in the pockets of their patrons . Most patrons were noblemen or landed gentry who could use their local influence , prestige , and wealth to sway the voters . This was particularly true in rural counties , and in small boroughs situated near a large landed estate . Some noblemen even controlled multiple constituencies : for example , the Duke of Norfolk controlled eleven , while the Earl of Lonsdale controlled nine . Writing in 1821 , Sydney Smith proclaimed that " The country belongs to the Duke of Rutland , Lord Lonsdale , the Duke of Newcastle , and about twenty other holders of boroughs . They are our masters ! " T. H. B. Oldfield claimed in his Representative History of Great Britain and Ireland that , out of the 514 members representing England and Wales , about 370 were selected by nearly 180 patrons . A member who represented a pocket borough was expected to vote as his patron ordered , or else lose his seat at the next election . 
 Voters in some constituencies resisted outright domination by powerful landlords , but were often open to corruption . Electors were bribed individually in some boroughs , and collectively in others . In 1771 , for example , it was revealed that 81 voters in New Shoreham ( who constituted a majority of the electorate ) formed a corrupt organisation that called itself the " Christian Club " , and regularly sold the borough to the highest bidder . Especially notorious for their corruption were the " <unk> " , or individuals who had amassed fortunes in the British colonies in Asia and the West Indies . The <unk> , in some cases , even managed to wrest control of boroughs from the nobility and the gentry . Lord Chatham , Prime Minister of Great Britain during the 1760s , casting an eye on the fortunes made in India commented that " the importers of foreign gold have forced their way into Parliament , by such a torrent of corruption as no private hereditary fortune could resist " . 
 = = Movement for reform = = 
 = = = Early attempts at reform = = = 
 During the 1640s , England endured a civil war that pitted King Charles I and the Royalists against the Parliamentarians . In 1647 , different factions of the victorious parliamentary army held a series of discussions , the Putney Debates , on reforming the structure of English government . The most radical elements proposed universal manhood suffrage and the reorganisation of parliamentary constituencies . Their leader Thomas Rainsborough declared , " I think it 's clear , that every man that is to live under a government ought first by his own consent to put himself under that government . " More conservative members disagreed , arguing instead that only individuals who owned land in the country should be allowed to vote . For example , Henry Ireton stated , " no man hath a right to an interest or share in the disposing of the affairs of the kingdom ... that hath not a permanent fixed interest in this kingdom . " The views of the conservative " Grandees " eventually won out . Oliver Cromwell , who became the leader of England after the abolition of the monarchy in 1649 , refused to adopt universal suffrage ; individuals were required to own property ( real or personal ) worth at least £ 200 in order to vote . He did nonetheless agree to some electoral reform ; he disfranchised several small boroughs , granted representation to large towns such as Manchester and Leeds , and increased the number of members elected by populous counties . These reforms were all reversed , however , after Cromwell 's death and the last parliament to be elected in the Commonwealth period in 1659 reverted to the electoral system as it had existed under Charles I. 
 Following Restoration of the monarchy in 1660 the issue of parliamentary reform lay dormant until it was revived in the 1760s by the Whig Prime Minister William Pitt , 1st Earl of Chatham ( " Pitt the Elder " ) , who called borough representation " the rotten part of our Constitution " ( hence the term " rotten borough " ) . Nevertheless , he did not advocate an immediate disfranchisement of rotten boroughs . He instead proposed that a third member be added to each county , to <unk> the borough influence . The Whigs failed to unite behind the expansion of county representation ; some objected to the idea because they felt that it would give too much power to the aristocracy and gentry in rural areas . Ultimately , despite Chatham 's exertions , Parliament took no action on his proposals . The cause of parliamentary reform was next taken up by Lord Chatham 's son , William Pitt the Younger ( variously described as a Tory and as an " independent Whig " ) . Like his father , he shrank from proposing the wholesale abolition of the rotten boroughs , advocating instead an increase in county representation . The House of Commons rejected Pitt 's resolution by over 140 votes , despite receiving petitions for reform bearing over twenty thousand signatures . In 1783 , Pitt became Prime Minister but was still unable to achieve reform . King George III was averse to the idea , as were many members of Pitt 's own cabinet . In 1786 , the Prime Minister proposed a reform bill , but the House of Commons rejected it on a 174 – 248 vote . Pitt did not raise the issue again for the remainder of his term . 
 = = = Aftermath of the French Revolution = = = 
 Support for parliamentary reform plummeted after the launch of the French Revolution in 1789 . Reacting to the excesses of the revolution , many English politicians became steadfastly opposed to any major political change . Despite this reaction , several Radical Movement groups were established to agitate for reform . A group of Whigs led by James Maitland , 8th Earl of Lauderdale and Charles Grey founded an organisation advocating parliamentary reform in 1792 . This group , known as the Society of the Friends of the People , included 28 MPs . In 1793 , Grey presented to the House of Commons a petition from the Friends of the People , outlining abuses of the system and demanding change . He did not propose any specific scheme of reform , but merely a motion that the House inquire into possible improvements . Parliament 's reaction to the French Revolution was so negative , that even this request for an inquiry was rejected by a margin of almost 200 votes . Grey tried to raise the subject again in 1797 , but the House again rebuffed him by a majority of over 150 . 
 Other notable pro @-@ reform organisations included the Hampden Clubs ( named after John Hampden , an English politician who opposed the Crown during the English Civil War ) and the London Corresponding Society ( which consisted of workers and artisans ) . But the " Radical " reforms supported by these organisations ( for example , universal suffrage ) found even less support in Parliament . For example , when Sir Francis Burdett , chairman of the London Hampden Club , proposed a resolution in favour of universal suffrage , equally sized electoral districts , and voting by secret ballot to the House of Commons , his motion found only one other supporter ( Lord Cochrane ) in the entire House . 
 Despite such setbacks , popular pressure for reform remained strong . In 1819 , a large pro @-@ reform rally was held in Birmingham . Although the city was not entitled to any seats in the Commons , those gathered decided to elect Sir Charles Wolseley as Birmingham 's " <unk> representative " . Following their example , reformers in Manchester held a similar meeting to elect a " <unk> attorney " . Between 20 @,@ 000 and 60 @,@ 000 ( by different estimates ) attended the event , many of them bearing signs such as " Equal Representation or Death " . The protesters were ordered to disband ; when they did not , the Manchester <unk> suppressed the meeting by force . Eleven people were killed and several hundred injured , the event later to become known as the Peterloo Massacre . In response , the government passed the Six Acts , measures designed to quell further political agitation . In particular , the Seditious Meetings Act prohibited groups of more than 50 people from assembling to discuss any political subject without prior permission from the sheriff or magistrate . 
 = = = Reform during the 1820s = = = 
 Since the House of Commons regularly rejected direct challenges to the system of representation by large majorities , supporters of reform had to content themselves with more modest measures . The Whig Lord John Russell brought forward one such measure in 1820 , proposing the disfranchisement of the notoriously corrupt borough of Grampound in Cornwall . He suggested that the borough 's two seats be transferred to the city of Leeds . Tories in the House of Lords agreed to the disfranchisement of the borough , but refused to accept the precedent of directly transferring its seats to an industrial city . Instead , they modified the proposal so that two further seats were given to Yorkshire , the county in which Leeds is situated . In this form , the bill passed both houses and became law . In 1828 , Lord John Russell suggested that Parliament repeat the idea by abolishing the corrupt boroughs of Penryn and East Retford , and by transferring their seats to Manchester and Birmingham . This time , however , the House of Lords rejected his proposals . In 1830 , Russell proposed another , similar scheme : the enfranchisement of Leeds , Manchester , and Birmingham , and the disfranchisement of the next three boroughs found guilty of corruption ; again , the proposal was rejected . 
 Support for reform came from an unexpected source — a faction of the Tory Party — in 1829 . The Tory government under Arthur Wellesley , 1st Duke of Wellington , responding to the danger of civil strife in largely Roman Catholic Ireland , drew up the Catholic Relief Act 1829 . This legislation repealed various laws that imposed political disabilities on Roman Catholics , in particular laws that prevented them from becoming members of Parliament . In response , disenchanted Tories who perceived a danger to the established religion came to favour parliamentary reform , in particular the enfranchisement of Manchester , Leeds , and other heavily <unk> cities in northern England . 
 = = Passage of the Reform Act = = 
 = = = First Reform Bill = = = 
 The death of King George IV on 26 June 1830 dissolved Parliament by law , and a general election was held . Electoral reform , which had been frequently discussed during the preceding parliamentary session , became a major campaign issue . Across the country , several pro @-@ reform " political unions " were formed , made up of both middle and working class individuals . The most influential of these was the Birmingham Political Union , led by Thomas Attwood . These groups confined themselves to lawful means of supporting reform , such as petitioning and public oratory , and achieved a high level of public support . 
 The Tories won a majority in the election , but the party remained divided , and support for the Prime Minister ( the Duke of Wellington ) was weak . When the Opposition raised the issue of reform in one of the first debates of the year , the Duke made a controversial defence of the existing system of government , recorded in the formal " third @-@ party " language of the time : 
 He was fully convinced that the country possessed , at the present moment , a legislature which answered all the good purposes of legislation , — and this to a greater degree than any legislature ever had answered , in any country whatever . He would go further , and say that the legislature and system of representation possessed the full and entire confidence of the country . [ ... ] He would go still further , and say , that if at the present moment he had imposed upon him the duty of forming a legislature for any country [ ... ] he did not mean to assert that he could form such a legislature as they possessed now , for the nature of man was incapable of reaching such excellence at once . [ ... ] [ A ] s long as he held any station in the government of the country , he should always feel it his duty to resist [ reform ] measures , when proposed by others . 
 The Prime Minister 's absolutist views proved extremely unpopular , even within his own party . Less than two weeks after Wellington made these remarks , on 15 November 1830 he was forced to resign after he was defeated in a motion of no confidence . Sydney Smith wrote , " Never was any administration so completely and so suddenly destroyed ; and , I believe , entirely by the Duke 's declaration , made , I suspect , in perfect ignorance of the state of public feeling and opinion . " Wellington was replaced by the Whig reformer Charles Grey , who had by this time the title of Earl Grey . 
 Lord Grey 's first announcement as Prime Minister was a pledge to carry out parliamentary reform . On 1 March 1831 , Lord John Russell brought forward the Reform Bill in the House of Commons on the government 's behalf . The bill disfranchised 60 of the smallest boroughs , and reduced the representation of 47 others . Some seats were completely abolished , while others were redistributed to the London suburbs , to large cities , to the counties , and to Scotland and Ireland . Furthermore , the bill standardised and expanded the borough franchise , increasing the size of the electorate ( according to one estimate ) by half a million voters . 
 On 22 March , the vote on the second reading attracted a record 608 members , including the non @-@ voting Speaker ( the previous record was 530 members ) . Despite the high attendance , the second reading was approved by only one vote , and further progress on the Reform Bill was difficult . During the committee stage , Isaac Gascoyne put forward a motion objecting to provisions of the bill that reduced the total number of seats in the House of Commons . This motion was carried , against the government 's wishes , by 8 votes . Thereafter , the ministry lost a vote on a procedural motion by 22 votes . As these divisions indicated that Parliament was against the Reform Bill , the ministry decided to request a dissolution and take its appeal to the people . 
 = = = Second Reform Bill = = = 
 The political and popular pressure for reform had grown so great that pro @-@ reform Whigs won an overwhelming House of Commons majority in the general election of 1831 . The Whig party won almost all constituencies with genuine electorates , leaving the Tories with little more than the rotten boroughs . The Reform Bill was again brought before the House of Commons , which agreed to the second reading by a large majority in July . During the committee stage , opponents of the bill slowed its progress through tedious discussions of its details , but it was finally passed in September , by a margin of more than 100 votes . 
 The Bill was then sent up to the House of Lords , a majority in which was known to be hostile to it . After the Whigs ' decisive victory in the 1831 election , some speculated that opponents would abstain , rather than openly defy the public will . Indeed , when the Lords voted on the second reading of the bill after a memorable series of debates , many Tory peers did refrain from voting . However , the Lords Spiritual mustered in unusually large numbers , and of 22 present , 21 voted against the Bill . It failed by 41 votes . 
 When the Lords rejected the Reform Bill , public violence ensued . That very evening , riots broke out in Derby , where a mob attacked the city jail and freed several prisoners . In Nottingham , rioters set fire to Nottingham Castle ( the home of the Duke of Newcastle ) and attacked Wollaton Hall ( the estate of Lord Middleton ) . The most significant disturbances occurred at Bristol , where rioters controlled the city for three days . The mob broke into prisons and destroyed several buildings , including the palace of the Bishop of Bristol , the mansion of the Lord Mayor of Bristol , and several private homes . Other places that saw violence included Dorset , Leicestershire , and Somerset . 
 Meanwhile , the political unions , which had hitherto been separate groups united only by a common goal , decided to form the National Political Union . Perceiving this group as a threat , the government issued a proclamation pursuant to the Corresponding Societies Act 1799 declaring such an association " unconstitutional and illegal " , and commanding all loyal subjects to shun it . The leaders of the National Political Union ignored this proclamation , but leaders of the influential Birmingham branch decided to co @-@ operate with the government by discouraging activities on a national level . 
 = = = Third Reform Bill = = = 
 After the Reform Bill was rejected in the Lords , the House of Commons immediately passed a motion of confidence affirming their support for Lord Grey 's administration . Because parliamentary rules prohibited the introduction of the same bill twice during the same session , the ministry advised the new king , William IV , to prorogue Parliament . As soon as the new session began in December 1831 , the Third Reform Bill was brought forward . The bill was in a few respects different from its predecessors ; it no longer proposed a reduction in the total membership of the House of Commons , and it reflected data collected during the census that had just been completed . The new version passed in the House of Commons by even larger majorities in March 1832 ; it was once again sent up to the House of Lords . 
 Realizing that another rejection would not be politically feasible , opponents of reform decided to use amendments to change the bill 's essential character ; for example , they voted to delay consideration of clauses in the bill that disfranchised the rotten boroughs . The ministers believed that they were left with only one alternative : to create a large number of new peerages , swamping the House of Lords with pro @-@ reform votes . But the prerogative of creating peerages rested with the king , who recoiled from so drastic a step and rejected the unanimous advice of his cabinet . Lord Grey then resigned , and the king invited the Duke of Wellington to form a new government . 
 The ensuing period became known as the " Days of May " , with so great a level of political agitation that some feared revolution . Some protesters advocated non @-@ payment of taxes , and urged a run on the banks ; one day signs appeared across London reading " Stop the Duke ; go for gold ! " £ 1 @.@ 8 million was withdrawn from the Bank of England in the first days of the run ( out of about £ 7 million total gold in the Bank 's possession ) . The National Political Union and other organisations sent petitions to the House of Commons , demanding that they withhold supply ( cut off funding to the government ) until the House of Lords should acquiesce . Some demonstrations called for the abolition of the nobility , and some even of the monarchy . In these circumstances , the Duke of Wellington had great difficulty in building support for his premiership , despite promising moderate reform . He was unable to form a government , leaving King William with no choice but to recall Lord Grey . Eventually the king consented to fill the House of Lords with Whigs ; however , without the knowledge of his cabinet , Wellington circulated a letter among Tory peers , encouraging them to desist from further opposition , and warning them of the consequences of continuing . At this , enough opposing peers relented . By abstaining from further votes , they allowed the legislation to pass in the House of Lords , and the Crown was thus not forced to create new peers . The bill finally received the Royal Assent on 7 June 1832 , thereby becoming law . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Provisions = = = 
 = = = = Abolition of seats = = = = 
 The Reform Act 's chief objective was the reduction of the number of nomination boroughs . There were 203 boroughs in England before the Act . The 56 smallest of these , as measured by their housing stock and tax assessments , were completely abolished . The next 30 smallest boroughs each lost one of their two MPs . In addition Weymouth and Melcombe Regis 's four members were reduced to two . Thus in total the Act abolished 143 borough seats in England ( one of the boroughs to be completely abolished , Higham Ferrers , had only a single representative ) . 
 = = = = Creation of new seats = = = = 
 In their place the Act created 130 new seats in England and Wales : 
 26 English counties were divided into two divisions with each division being represented by two members . 
 8 English counties and 3 Welsh counties each received an additional representative . 
 Yorkshire , which was represented by four MPs before the Act was given an extra two MPs ( so that each of its three ridings was represented by two MPs ) . 
 22 large towns were given two MPs . 
 Another 21 towns ( of which two were in Wales ) were given one MP . 
 Thus 65 new county seats and 65 new borough seats were created in England and Wales . The total number of English members fell by 17 and the number in Wales increased by four . The boundaries of the new divisions and parliamentary boroughs were defined in a separate Act , the Parliamentary Boundaries Act 1832 . 
 = = = = Extension of the franchise = = = = 
 The Act also extended the franchise . In county constituencies , in addition to forty @-@ shilling freeholders , franchise rights were extended to owners of land in copyhold worth £ 10 and holders of long @-@ term leases ( more than sixty years ) on land worth £ 10 and holders of medium @-@ term leases ( between twenty and sixty years ) on land worth £ 50 and to tenants @-@ at @-@ will paying an annual rent of £ 50 . In borough constituencies all male householders living in properties worth at least £ 10 a year were given the right to vote – a measure which introduced to all boroughs a standardised form of franchise for the first time . Existing borough electors retained a lifetime right to vote , however they had qualified , provided they were resident in the boroughs in which they were electors . In those boroughs which had freemen electors , voting rights were to be enjoyed by future freemen as well provided their <unk> was acquired through birth or apprenticeship and they too were resident . 
 The Act also introduced a system of voter registration , to be administered by the overseers of the poor in every parish and township . It instituted a system of special courts to review disputes relating to voter qualifications . It also authorised the use of multiple polling places within the same constituency , and limited the duration of polling to two days . ( Formerly , polls could remain open for up to forty days . ) 
 The Reform Act itself did not affect constituencies in Scotland or Ireland . However , reforms there were carried out by the Scottish Reform Act and the Irish Reform Act . Scotland received eight additional seats , and Ireland received five ; thus keeping the total number of seats in the House of Commons the same as it had been before the Act . While no constituencies were disfranchised in either of those countries , voter qualifications were standardised and the size of the electorate was expanded in both . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Local Conservative Associations began to educate citizens about the Party 's platform and encouraged them to register to vote annually , as mandated by the Act . Press coverage of national politics in the local press was joined by in @-@ depth reports on provincial politics in the national press . Grassroots Conservatives therefore saw themselves as part of a national political movement during the 1830s . 
 The size of the pre @-@ Reform electorate is difficult to estimate . Voter registration was lacking , and many boroughs were rarely contested in elections . It is estimated that immediately before the 1832 Reform Act , 400 @,@ 000 English subjects were entitled to vote , and that after passage , the number rose to 650 @,@ 000 , an increase of more than 60 % . 
 Tradesmen , such as shoemakers , believed that the Reform Act had given them the vote . One example is the shoemakers of Duns , Berwickshire . They created a banner celebrating the Reform Act which declared " The battle 's won . Britannia 's sons are free . " This banner is on display at People 's History Museum in Manchester . 
 Many major commercial and industrial cities became separate parliamentary boroughs under the Act . The new constituencies saw party conflicts inside the middle @-@ class , and between the middle @-@ class and working @-@ class . Iwami looked at elections in the medium @-@ sized borough of Halifax , 1832 – 1852 , and reports that the party organizations , and the voters themselves , depended heavily on local social relationships and localized institutions . Having the vote encouraged many men to become much more active in the political , economic and social sphere . 
 = = = Tenant voters = = = 
 Most of the pocket boroughs abolished by the Reform Act belonged to the Tory Party . These losses were somewhat offset by the extension of the vote to tenants @-@ at @-@ will paying an annual rent of £ 50 . This clause , proposed by the Tory Marquess of Chandos , was adopted in the House of Commons despite opposition from the Government . The tenants @-@ at @-@ will thereby enfranchised typically voted as instructed by their landlords , who in turn normally supported the Tory party . This concession , together with the Whig Party 's internal divisions and the difficulties faced by the nation 's economy , allowed the Tories under Sir Robert Peel to make gains in the elections of 1835 and 1837 , and to retake the House of Commons in 1841 . 
 <unk> examines the votes in the House and reports that the traditional landed interest " suffered very little " by the terms of the 1832 Act . They continued to dominate Commons , while losing a bit of their power to enact laws that focused on their more parochial interests . By contrast , <unk> argues , the 1867 Reform Act caused serious erosion of their legislative power and the 1874 elections saw great landowners losing their county seats to the votes of tenant farmers in England and especially in Ireland . 
 = = = Limitations = = = 
 The Reform Act did very little to appease the working class by enfranchising them , since voters were required to possess property worth £ 10 , a substantial sum at the time . This split the alliance between the working class and the middle class , giving rise to the Chartist Movement . 
 Although it did disenfranchise most rotten boroughs , a few remained , such as Totnes in Devon and Midhurst in Sussex . Also , bribery of voters remained a problem . As Sir Thomas Erskine May observed , " it was too soon evident , that as more votes had been created , more votes were to be sold " . 
 The Reform Act strengthened the House of Commons by reducing the number of nomination boroughs controlled by peers . Some aristocrats complained that , in the future , the government could compel them to pass any bill , simply by threatening to swamp the House of Lords with new peerages . The Duke of Wellington lamented : " If such projects can be carried into execution by a minister of the Crown with impunity , there is no doubt that the constitution of this House , and of this country , is at an end . [ ... ] [ T ] here is absolutely an end put to the power and objects of deliberation in this House , and an end to all just and proper means of decision . " The subsequent history of Parliament , however , shows that the influence of the Lords was largely undiminished . They compelled the Commons to accept significant amendments to the Municipal Reform Bill in 1835 , forced compromises on Jewish emancipation , and successfully resisted several other bills supported by the public . It would not be until decades later , culminating in the Parliament Act 1911 , that Wellington 's fears would come to pass . 
 = = = Further reform = = = 
 During the ensuing years , Parliament adopted several more minor reforms . Acts of Parliament passed in 1835 and 1836 increased the number of polling places in each constituency , and reduced polling to a single day . Parliament also passed several laws aimed at combatting corruption , including the Corrupt Practices Act 1854 , though these measures proved largely ineffectual . Neither party strove for further major reform ; leading statesmen on both sides regarded the Reform Act as a final settlement . 
 There was considerable public agitation for further expansion of the electorate , however . In particular , the Chartist movement , which demanded universal suffrage for men , equally sized electoral districts , and voting by secret ballot , gained a widespread following . But the Tories were united against further reform , and the Liberal Party ( successor to the Whigs ) did not seek a general revision of the electoral system until 1852 . The 1850s saw Lord John Russell introduce a number of reform bills to correct defects the first act had left unaddressed . However , no proposal was successful until 1867 , when Parliament adopted the Second Reform Act . 
 An area the Reform Act did not address was the issue of municipal and regional government . As a result of archaic traditions , many English counties had enclaves and exclaves , which were mostly abolished in the Counties ( Detached Parts ) Act 1844 . Furthermore , many new conurbations and economic areas bridged traditional county boundaries by having been formed in previously obscure areas : the West Midlands conurbation bridged Staffordshire , Warwickshire and Worcestershire , Manchester and Liverpool both had hinterlands in Cheshire but city centres in Lancashire , while in the south Oxford 's developing southern suburbs were in Berkshire and London was expanding into Essex , Surrey and Middlesex . This led to further acts to reorganise county boundaries in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 Several historians credit the Reform Act 1832 with launching modern democracy in Britain . G. M. Trevelyan hails 1832 as the watershed moment at which " ' the sovereignty of the people ' had been established in fact , if not in law " . Sir Erskine May notes that " [ the ] reformed Parliament was , unquestionably , more liberal and progressive in its policy than the Parliaments of old ; more vigorous and active ; more susceptible to the influence of public opinion ; and more secure in the confidence of the people " , but admitted that " grave defects still remained to be considered " . Other historians have taken a far less laudatory view , arguing that genuine democracy began to arise only with the Second Reform Act in 1867 , or perhaps even later . Norman Gash states that " it would be wrong to assume that the political scene in the succeeding generation differed essentially from that of the preceding one " . E. A. Smith proposes , in a similar vein , that " when the dust had settled , the political landscape looked much as it had done before . 
 Historians have long pointed out that , in 1829 – 31 , it was the Ultra @-@ Tories or " Country Party " which pressed most strongly for Reform , regarding it as a means of weakening Wellington 's ministry , which had disappointed them by granting Catholic emancipation and by its economic policies . 
 Evans ( 1996 ) emphasises that the Reform Act " opened a door on a new political world " . Although Grey 's intentions were conservative , Evans says , and the 1832 Act gave the aristocracy an additional half @-@ century 's control of Parliament , the Act nevertheless did open constitutional questions for further development . Evans argues it was the 1832 Act , not the later reforms of 1867 , 1884 , or 1918 , that were decisive in bringing representative democracy to Britain . Evans concludes the Reform Act marked the true beginning of the development of a recognisably modern political system . 
 = B. J. Prager = 
 William J. " B. J. " Prager is a retired professional lacrosse attackman who played professional field lacrosse in the Major League Lacrosse ( MLL ) . He starred as a member of the Princeton Tigers men 's lacrosse team from 1999 through 2002 , where he was Ivy League rookie of the year , a three @-@ time United States Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association ( USILA ) All @-@ American ( twice third @-@ team , once honorable mention ) , a four @-@ time All @-@ Ivy League selection ( three @-@ time first team ) , a team captain and a NCAA Tournament Most Outstanding Player of a national champion team . For over a decade , he held the freshman goal scoring record at Princeton . 
 During his time at Princeton , the team qualified for the NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championship all four years , reached the championship game three times , won the championship game once and won four Ivy League championships . In his career , he has scored game @-@ winning overtime goals in both state high school and national collegiate championship games as well as participated on two championship MLL teams . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prager is from Garden City , New York on Long Island . He began playing lacrosse in fifth grade . In high school , he played both lacrosse and soccer . He led Garden City High School to an undefeated 21 – 0 season culminating on his overtime game @-@ winning goal in the 1997 New York State Public High School Athletic Association Class B Lacrosse Championship . In 1996 , the team had a 13 – 0 – 1 streak that included the Nassau County and Long Island Championships . During his high school career , he scored 154 goals . 
 = = College career = = 
 At Princeton he earned the 1999 Men 's Ivy League Rookie of the Year and the 2001 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championship tournament Most Outstanding Player . In both 2000 and 2002 , he was a third team USILA All @-@ American Team selection , while he was an honorable mention in 2001 . He was a first team All @-@ Ivy League selection in 1999 , 2000 & 2002 and a second team selection in 2001 . He was a 2002 USILA Scholar All @-@ American . He served as co @-@ captain of the 2002 team . His 25 goals as a freshman in 1999 was a Princeton freshman record . In 2010 , Ivy League Rookie of the Year Mike <unk> totaled 28 as a Princeton freshman to surpass Prager 's record . During his four @-@ year career , Princeton won the Ivy League Conference outright each year , achieving undefeated 6 – 0 records in 1999 – 2001 and having a 5 – 1 record in 2002 . 
 In 2000 , Prager tore his anterior cruciate ligament while he was the leading scorer with 23 goals in his first 8 + games and was lost for the remainder of the season . In the 2001 NCAA championship semifinals , Prager scored three goals against Towson State in a 12 – 11 victory . In the finals , he scored a total of four goals , including the game @-@ winning goal in overtime with an assist from Ryan Boyle as well as the ninth goal in the 10 – 9 victory over Syracuse . In the 2002 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championship semifinals , he scored five goals in an 11 – 9 victory over Johns Hopkins , but in the 13 – 12 finals loss , Syracuse defenseman Solomon Bliss held him to one goal . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 After graduating , Prager worked for Lehman Brothers in an analyst training program . He played with the Bridgeport Barrage during the 2002 and 2003 MLL seasons and then the Philadelphia Barrage from 2004 to 2006 . On July 19 , 2003 , Prager scored five goals in a 22 – 17 victory against the Baltimore Bayhawks . The Barrage won the Steinfeld Cup in both 2004 and 2006 . In 2006 , he scored the goal that ended the Denver Outlaws ' last lead possession of the game . He was second in the league in power play goals in 2004 and led both the 2004 and 2006 teams in shooting percentage . After retiring from professional play , Prager represented the New York Athletic Club . 
 = = Personal = = 
 His father is Bill Prager . Prager is from a family of competitive lacrosse players : His younger brother , Matt , who was in the class of 2005 , played at Princeton . The 2002 season was the first time the two of them played on the same organized team . Another brother , Pat , played lacrosse at C.W. Post . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = Princeton University = = = 
 = = = MLL = = = 
 The following are his MLL career stats : 
 = Inverted @-@ F antenna = 
 An inverted @-@ F antenna is a type of antenna used in wireless communication . It consists of a monopole antenna running parallel to a ground plane and grounded at one end . The antenna is fed from an intermediate point a distance from the grounded end . The design has two advantages over a simple monopole : the antenna is shorter and more compact , and the impedance matching can be controlled by the designer without the need for extraneous matching components . 
 The inverted @-@ F antenna was first conceived in the 1950s as a bent @-@ wire antenna . However , its most widespread use is as a planar inverted @-@ F antenna ( PIFA ) in mobile wireless devices for its space saving properties . PIFAs can be printed using the microstrip format , a widely used technology that allows printed RF components to be manufactured as part of the same printed circuit board used to mount other components . 
 PIFAs are a variant of the patch antenna . Many variants of this , and other forms of the inverted @-@ F , exist that implement wideband or multi @-@ band antennae . Techniques include coupled resonators and the addition of slots . 
 = = Evolution and history = = 
 The inverted @-@ F antenna is an evolution of the basic quarter @-@ wave monopole antenna . The wire F @-@ type antenna was invented in the 1940s . In this antenna the feed is connected to an intermediate point along the length of the antenna instead of to the base . The base is connected to ground . The advantage of doing this is that the input impedance of the antenna is dependent on the distance of the feed point from the grounded end . The portion of the antenna between the <unk> and the ground plane is essentially behaving as a short @-@ circuit stub . Thus , the designer can match the antenna to the system impedance by setting the position of the feed point ( RF systems commonly have a system impedance of 50 Ω whereas a λ / 4 monopole has an impedance of 36 @.@ 5 Ω ) . 
 The inverted @-@ L antenna is a monopole antenna bent over to run parallel to the ground plane . It has the advantage of compactness and a shorter length than the λ / 4 monopole , but the disadvantage of a very low impedance , typically just a few ohms . The inverted @-@ F antenna combines the advantages of both these antennae ; it has the compactness of the inverted @-@ L and the impedance matching capability of the F @-@ type . 
 The inverted @-@ F antenna was first proposed in 1958 by the group at Harvard led by <unk> W. P. King . King 's antenna was in wire form and was intended for use in missiles for telemetry . 
 = = Planar implementation = = 
 A planar inverted @-@ F antenna ( PIFA ) is used for wireless circuitry implemented in microstrip . The microstrip format is the format of choice for modern RF electronics . It can be used to implement required distributed element RF components such as filters , while at the same time being economical because the same mass production methods are used as for printed circuit boards . 
 A printed inverted @-@ F antenna can be implemented in the classic inverted @-@ F shape , usually to one side of the circuit board where the ground plane has been removed from underneath the antenna . However , another approach is a modified patch antenna , the shorted patch antenna . In this approach , one edge of the patch , or some intermediate point , is grounded with grounding pins or <unk> through to the ground plane . This works on the same principle as an inverted @-@ F ; viewed sideways , the F shape can be seen , it is just that the antenna element is very wide in the horizontal plane . The shorted patch antenna has a wider bandwidth than the thin line type due to the greater radiation area . Like the thin line type , the shorted patch antenna can be printed on the same printed circuit board as the rest of the circuitry . However , they are commonly printed on to their own board , or on to a dielectric fixed to the main board . This is done so that the antenna , can be suspended and effectively be in air dielectric , is a greater distance from the ground plane than it would otherwise be , or the dielectric used is a more suitable material for RF performance . 
 The term PIFA is reserved by many authors ( e.g. Sánchez @-@ Hernández ) for the shorted patch antenna where the antenna element is wide with the ground plane underneath . The thin line type of inverted @-@ F antennae with the ground plane to one side like A and B in the diagram are just called IFA even if they are in planar format . An author may even call an IFA of this type a printed inverted @-@ F antenna but still reserve PIFA for the shorted patch type ( e.g. Hall and Wang . ) 
 A common configuration for a shorted patch antenna is to place the shorting pin as close to one corner as possible with the feed pin relatively close to the shorting pin . In this configuration , the resonant frequency is given approximately by , 
 <formula> 
 where 
 <unk> is the resonant frequency 
 w , b are the width and breadth of the patch 
 c is the speed of light 
 <unk> is the dielectric constant of the substrate . 
 This formula only holds if the antenna is not affected by nearby <unk> , such as the casing of the device . 
 Another variation that may be encountered is the meandered inverted @-@ F antenna . Where there is insufficient board space to extend an antenna to the full required length , the antenna may be meandered to reduce its height while retaining its designed electrical length . This can be compared to the spiralling of an antenna as found in the rubber <unk> antenna . 
 Inverted @-@ F antennae have narrow bandwidths . A wider bandwidth can be achieved by lengthening the antenna , which increases its radiation resistance . Another solution is to place two antennae in close proximity . This works because coupled resonators have a bandwidth wider than the bandwidth of either resonator on its own . Most of the techniques for producing multi @-@ band antennae are also effective at broadening bandwidth . 
 = = Multi @-@ band antennae = = 
 The need for multi @-@ band antennae arises with mobile devices that need to roam between countries and networks where the frequency bands used can often be different . Perhaps the most conceptually simple design , first reported in 1997 , is to nest two PIFA patch antennae one inside the other . Another technique is to insert one or more spur lines into the patch , which has the effect of coupled resonators broadening the band . Other techniques rely on multiple modes being generated , which makes for a more compact design . Examples of this are the C @-@ slot pattern , which is a similar pattern to the interdigital filter , and the tightly meandered pattern shown as , respectively , C and D in the diagram . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Inverted @-@ F antennae are widely used in compact hand @-@ held wireless devices where space is at a premium . This includes mobile phones and tablet computers using wireless transmissions such as GSM , Bluetooth , and WiFi . The planar inverted @-@ F antenna is the most frequently used internal antenna in mobile phone designs . 
 These antennae are also of use for vehicle telematics . Vehicle manufacturers like to use antennae that follow the contours of the vehicle for style and aerodynamic reasons . <unk> PIFAs can be used to combine the antennae feeds for mobile phone , satellite navigation , and car radio . 
 An R @-@ shaped dual @-@ band PIFA has been proposed for use on military vehicles . The bands to be covered are 225 MHz and 450 MHz . These frequencies are in the same ratio as the mobile phone GSM bands at 900 MHz and 1 @.@ 8 GHz so the design could be used for this application as well if the dimensions were scaled down to suit . 
 = Daedalus ( Star Trek : Enterprise ) = 
 " Daedalus " is the tenth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise . Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . In this episode , as the crew of Enterprise help Doctor Emory Erickson ( Bill Cobbs ) conduct experimental transporter tests , a dangerous anomaly is detected on board . 
 It was the second script written by Alan Brennert and Ken LaZebnik , and was directed by David Straiton - his second of the season . " Daedalus " was a bottle episode which used only the standing sets . Show runner Manny Coto had sought to create an origin story for the transporter with " Daedalus " , but was not pleased with either the script or the completed episode . The episode originally aired on January 14 , 2005 , on UPN . It received a Nielsen rating of 1 @.@ 9 / 4 percent . Critical reception was mixed , but the relationship between Doctor Erickson , his daughter Danica ( Leslie Silva ) and Captain Archer ( Scott Bakula ) was received positively due to the character development . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Old family friends of Captain Archer , Doctor Emory Erickson and his daughter Danica , beam aboard Enterprise to test new sub @-@ quantum transporter technology Erickson has developed . Catching up , Danica confides in Archer that her father has not been himself since the loss of her brother , Quinn , some 15 years ago in an early transporter experiment . After they arrive in “ the Barrens ” — a sub @-@ space node void of starlight for a hundred light years — in order to test Erickson 's new work , a strange anomaly is detected on the ship . Crewman Burrows is sent to investigate but is found dead , having been exposed to high levels of Delta radiation . 
 In the meantime , Commander T 'Pol takes time to rediscover herself in the light of recent events : the teachings of Surak held in the Kir 'Shara ; the death of her mother ; the annulment of her marriage ; her apparent cure from Pa <unk> Syndrome ; and her relationship with Commander Tucker . Tucker assists Erickson with the test , but is brushed aside when he seeks to learn more about the technology . Following a successful trial @-@ run , which sets a new record for the longest transport ever conducted , Tucker confides in Archer that many of the upgrades and modifications to the ship 's power systems were not necessary for the test . 
 The " photonic ghost " reappears , and T 'Pol manages to visually scan it , revealing that it is Erickson 's long @-@ lost son . Archer now realizes that his old family friends have misled him , and are simply using the ship to somehow rescue Quinn from the node . Erickson freely admits the deception , and asks Archer to trust and help him . Despite the deception , he agrees , aggressively ordering a reluctant T 'Pol and a dissenting Tucker to comply . Finally , Tucker and Erickson manage to recover Quinn , but he suffers severe cellular degeneration in the process and dies soon after . Erickson , aware of the consequences he may now face , is happy to finally bring him home and put him to rest . 
 = = Production = = 
 The title of the episode was a direct reference to the namesake in Greek mythology , with Erickson taking the Daedalus while his son relates to Icarus . Of the guest stars , Bill Cobbs had previously appeared in other science fiction genre films and television shows such as Demolition Man and The Outer Limits , while Leslie Silva had appeared as Lesley Silva in Odyssey 5 - a television series created and produced by the Enterprise season four show runner Manny Coto . 
 In an interview with Science Fiction Weekly , Coto explained that he wanted to create an origin episode for the transporter - taking elements of classic Star Trek such as Zefram Cochrane and " The Ultimate Computer " as inspiration . However , he was not happy with the either the script or the final episode , describing it as " flawed " . He felt that the series worked better as multi @-@ episode arcs rather than as stand alone episodes . 
 " Daedalus " was a bottle show , which used only existing standing sets and a reduced number of special effect shots compared to those earlier in the season . The production suffered a power failure on the final day of filming , which caused a two @-@ hour delay to the filming of interviews for features for the DVD release . The episode was directed by David Straiton ; " Daedalus " was his second episode of the season following the second @-@ part of " Storm Front " . It was also the second credits for two new writers on the show , Ken LaZebnik and Alan Brennert - the former wrote " Borderland " and Brennert was credited as Michael Bryant for the episode " Cold Station 12 " . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " Daedalus " was first broadcast on January 14 , 2005 , on UPN within the United States . The broadcast received Nielsen ratings of 1 @.@ 9 / 4 percent . Therefore , it was seen by 1 @.@ 9 percent of all households , and 4 percent of all those watching television at the time of broadcast . It received lower ratings than The WB , who aired episodes of What I Like About You and Grounded for Life , and came last of all the major networks . 
 Michelle Erica Green while writing for TrekNation , felt that " Daedalus " was a remix of a variety of prior Star Trek episodes across a number of series including " The Ultimate Computer " , " Silicon Avatar " and " <unk> " amongst others . She felt that the relationship between Archer and Danica worked , as did the subplot with Tucker and T 'Pol . Jamahl Epsicokhan of the website " Jammer 's Reviews " described the episode as " an overall failed episode " and compared it to the Star Trek : Deep Space Nine episode " The Visitor " - an episode he described as " infinitely better " than " Daedalus " . He felt that the final arc of the episode was obvious from the start , but liked how the relationship worked between Archer , Erickson , and Danica because of the character development . He gave the episode two our of four stars . 
 The first home media release of " Daedalus " was as part of the season four DVD box set of Enterprise , originally released in the United States on November 1 , 2005 . The Blu ray release of the fourth season of Enterprise was on April 1 , 2014 . 
 = Brabham BT19 = 
 The Brabham BT19 / ˈbræbəm / is a Formula One racing car designed by Ron Tauranac for the British Brabham team . The BT19 competed in the 1966 and 1967 Formula One World Championships and was used by Australian driver Jack Brabham to win his third World Championship in 1966 . The BT19 , which Brabham referred to as his " Old Nail " , was the first car bearing its driver 's name to win a World Championship race . 
 The car was initially conceived in 1965 for a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ litre ( 92 @-@ cubic inch ) Coventry Climax engine , but never raced in this form . For the 1966 Formula One season the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) doubled the limit on engine capacity to 3 litres ( 183 cu in ) . Australian company Repco developed a new V8 engine for Brabham 's use in 1966 , but a disagreement between Brabham and Tauranac over the latter 's role in the racing team left no time to develop a new car to handle it . Instead , the existing BT19 chassis was modified for the job . 
 Only one BT19 was built . It was bought by Repco in 2004 and put on display in the National Sports Museum in Melbourne , Australia , in 2008 . It is often demonstrated at motorsport events . 
 = = Concept = = 
 The BT19 was created by Australian designer Ron Tauranac for the Brabham Racing Organisation ( BRO ) to use in the 1965 season of the Formula One motor racing World Championship . The BT19 , and its contemporary the Lotus 39 , were built to use the new <unk> flat @-@ 16 engine from Coventry Climax . Only one example of the BT19 design was built , and it never raced in its original form . Climax abandoned the <unk> 's development before the end of 1965 , their existing <unk> V8 engines proving powerful enough to propel Jim Clark 's Lotus 33 to seven wins and the drivers ' championship . 
 For 1966 , the engine capacity limit in Formula One was doubled from 1 @.@ 5 litres ( 92 cu in ) to 3 litres ( 183 cu in ) . It was not feasible to enlarge existing 1 @.@ 5 @-@ litre engines to take full advantage of the higher limit and Climax chose not to develop a new 3 @-@ litre motor , leaving many teams without a viable engine for 1966 . 
 The new 3 @-@ litre engines under development by competing team Ferrari had 12 cylinders . Jack Brabham , owner and lead driver of BRO , took a different approach to the problem of obtaining a suitable engine . He persuaded Australian company Repco to develop a new 3 @-@ litre eight @-@ cylinder engine for him , largely based on available components ; the engine would produce less power than Ferrari 's , but would be lighter , easier to fix and more fuel efficient . 
 Brabham cars were designed and built by Motor Racing Developments Ltd . ( MRD ) , which was jointly owned by Tauranac and Jack Brabham and built cars for customers in several racing series . The Formula One racing team , BRO , was a separate company wholly owned by Jack Brabham . It bought its cars from MRD but Tauranac had little connection with the race team between 1962 and 1965 . 
 At the end of the 1965 season Tauranac was losing interest in this arrangement , reasoning that " it was just a matter of a lot of effort for no real interest because I didn 't get to go racing very much " and " I might as well get on with my main line business , which was selling production cars . " Although Brabham investigated using chassis from other manufacturers , the two men eventually agreed that Tauranac would have a greater interest in the Formula One team , which MRD eventually took over completely from BRO . This agreement was not reached until November 1965 . Repco delivered the first example of the new engine to the team 's headquarters in the United Kingdom in late 1965 , just weeks before the first Formula One race to the new regulations , the non @-@ championship South African Grand Prix on 1 January 1966 . Rather than build a new car in the limited time available , BRO pressed chassis number F1 @-@ 1 @-@ 1965 , the sole and unused BT19 , into service . 
 = = Chassis and suspension = = 
 Tauranac built the BT19 around a mild steel spaceframe chassis similar to those used in his previous Brabham designs . The use of a spaceframe was considered a conservative design decision ; by 1966 , most of Brabham 's competitors were using the theoretically lighter and stiffer monocoque design , introduced to Formula One by Lotus during the 1962 season . Tauranac believed that contemporary monocoques were not usefully stiffer than a well @-@ designed spaceframe and were harder to repair and maintain . The latter was a particular concern for Brabham , which was the largest manufacturer of customer single @-@ seater racing cars in the world at the time . The company 's reputation rested in part on BRO – effectively the official ' works ' team – using the same technology as its customers , for whom ease of repair was a significant consideration . One mildly novel feature was the use of oval @-@ section , rather than round , tubing around the cockpit , where the driver sits . In a spaceframe or monocoque racing car , the cockpit is effectively a hole in the structure , weakening it considerably . For a given cross sectional area , oval tubing is stiffer in one direction than round tubing . Tauranac happened to have a supply of oval tubing and used it to stiffen the cockpit area . The car weighed around 1250 pounds ( 567 kg ) , around 150 lb ( 68 @.@ 0 kg ) over the minimum weight limit for the formula , although it was still one of the lightest cars in the 1966 field . The race starting weight of a 1966 Brabham @-@ Repco with driver and fuel was estimated to be around 1 @,@ 415 lb ( 642 kg ) , about 280 lb ( 127 kg ) less than the more powerful rival Cooper T81 @-@ Maseratis . 
 The bodywork of the BT19 is glass @-@ reinforced plastic , finished in Brabham 's usual racing colours of green with gold trimming around the nose . Although the science of aerodynamics would not greatly affect Formula One racing until the 1968 season , Tauranac had been making use of the Motor Industry Research Association wind tunnel since 1963 to refine the shape of his cars . Brabham has attributed the car 's " swept @-@ down nose and the upswept rear lip of the engine cowl " to Tauranac 's " attention to aerodynamic detail " . During the 1967 season , the car appeared with small winglets on the nose , to further reduce lift acting at the front of the car . 
 Against the trend set by the Lotus 21 in 1961 , the BT19 's suspension , which controls the relative motion of the chassis and the wheels , is outboard all round . That is , the bulky springs and dampers are mounted in the space between the wheels and the bodywork , where they interfere with the airflow and increase unwanted aerodynamic drag . Tauranac persisted with this apparently conservative approach based on wind tunnel tests he had carried out in the early 1960s , which indicated that a more complicated inboard design , with the springs and dampers concealed under the bodywork , would provide only a 2 % improvement in drag . He judged the extra time needed to set up an inboard design at the racetrack to outweigh this small improvement . At the front the suspension consists of unequal length , non @-@ parallel double wishbones . The front uprights , the solid components upon which the wheels and brakes are mounted , were modified from the Alford & Alder units used on the British Triumph Herald saloon . The rear suspension is formed by a single top link , a reversed lower wishbone and two radius rods locating cast magnesium alloy uprights . Wheels were initially 13 inches ( 330 mm ) in diameter , but soon upgraded to 15 in ( 380 mm ) at the rear , and later still 15 in at the front as well . These increases enabled the use of larger , more powerful brakes . Steel disc brakes are used on all four wheels and were of 10 @.@ 5 in ( 270 mm ) diameter for the smaller wheels and 11 in ( 280 mm ) for the larger ones . The car ran on treaded Goodyear tyres throughout its racing career . 
 The BT19 continued Tauranac 's reputation for producing cars that handled well . Brabham has since commented that it " was beautifully balanced and I loved its readiness to drift through fast curves . " Brabham referred to the car as his Old Nail ; Ron Tauranac has explained this as being " because it was two years old , great to drive and had no vices . " 
 = = Engine and transmission = = 
 Repco racing engines were designed and built by a small team at a Repco subsidiary , Repco @-@ Brabham engines Pty Ltd , in Maidstone , Australia . Repco 's 620 series engine is a normally aspirated unit with eight cylinders in a ' V ' configuration . It uses American engine blocks obtained from Oldsmobile 's aluminium alloy 215 engine . Oldsmobile 's 215 engine , used in the F @-@ 85 Cutlass compact car between 1961 and 1963 , was abandoned by General Motors after production problems . Repco fitted their own cast iron cylinder liners into the Oldsmobile blocks , which were also stiffened with two Repco magnesium alloy castings and feature Repco @-@ designed cylinder heads with chain @-@ driven single overhead camshafts . The internals of the unit consist of a bespoke <unk> crankshaft , Daimler connecting rods and specially cast pistons . The cylinder head design means that the engine 's exhaust pipes exit on the outer side of the block , and therefore pass through the spaceframe before tucking inside the rear suspension , a layout which complicated Tauranac 's design work considerably . The engine is water @-@ cooled , with oil and water radiators mounted in the nose . 
 The 620 engine was light for its time , weighing around 340 lb ( 154 kg ) , compared to 500 lb ( 227 kg ) for the Maserati V12 , but in 3 litre Formula One form only produced around 300 brake horsepower ( 220 kW ) at under 8000 revolutions per minute ( rpm ) , compared to 330 – 360 bhp ( 250 – 270 kW ) produced by the Ferrari and Maserati <unk> . However , it produced high levels of torque over a wide range of engine speeds from 3500 rpm up to peak torque of 233 pound feet ( 316 N · m ) at 6500 rpm . Installed in the lightweight BT19 chassis , it was also relatively fuel efficient ; on the car 's debut Brabham reported that the BT19 achieved 7 miles per gallon ( 40 L / 100 km ) , against figures of around 4 mpg ( 70 L / 100 km ) for its " more exotic rivals " . This meant that it could start a Grand Prix with only 35 gallons ( 160 L ) of fuel on board , compared to around 55 gallons ( 250 L ) for the Cooper T81 @-@ Maseratis . The engine had one further advantage over bespoke racing engines : parts were cheap . For example , the engine blocks were available for GB £ 11 each and the connecting rods cost £ 7 each . 
 The 740 series unit used in the three races for which the car was entered in 1967 has a different , lighter , Repco @-@ designed engine block . It also has redesigned cylinder heads which , among other improvements , mean that its exhausts are mounted centrally and do not pass through the spaceframe or rear suspension , unlike those of the 620 series . It produced a maximum of 330 bhp ( 250 kW ) . 
 The BT19 was initially fitted with a Hewland HD ( Heavy Duty ) gearbox , originally designed for use with less powerful 2 @-@ litre engines . The greater power of the 3 @-@ litre Repco engine was more than the gearbox could reliably transmit when accelerating at full power from rest , with the result that Brabham normally made very gentle starts to avoid gearbox breakages . The HD was later replaced with the sturdier DG ( Different Gearbox ) design , produced at the request of both Brabham and Dan Gurney 's Anglo American Racers team . It later became a popular choice for other constructors . 
 = = Racing history = = 
 Although regarded by its designer as a " lash @-@ up " , BT19 had a very successful Formula One racing career , almost entirely in the hands of Jack Brabham . BT19 was entered in several non @-@ championship Formula One races before the beginning of the 1966 world championship season . At the non @-@ championship South African Grand Prix at East London on 1 January , BT19 was the only new 3 @-@ litre car present . It recorded the fastest time in the qualifying session before the race – therefore taking pole position for the start of the race – and led the majority of the event before the fuel injection pump seized . Similar problems stopped the car on the second lap of the Syracuse Grand Prix in Sicily , but at the International Trophy at the Silverstone circuit , Brabham set pole position , a new lap record , and led the whole race to win ahead of 1964 champion John Surtees in a 3 @-@ litre works Ferrari . 
 The 1966 world championship season opened with the Monaco Grand Prix . Brabham was affected by a cold , and qualified poorly before retiring when the BT19 's gearbox failed . Surtees led the race in his Ferrari before his differential failed on lap 15 ; the race was won by Jackie Stewart in a 2 @-@ litre BRM <unk> . At the following Belgian Grand Prix at the Spa circuit , Brabham survived an enormous 135 miles per hour ( 215 km / h ) slide in the rain on the first lap . The shower eliminated half the field , including Stewart , who would miss the next race with his injuries . The BT19 , using Goodyear tyres that were not suited to the conditions , came home fourth of five classified finishers . Surtees won the race for Ferrari , the last before he quit the Italian team . 
 At the French Grand Prix , held at the high speed Reims @-@ <unk> circuit , Brabham followed race leader Lorenzo Bandini closely from the start of the race , using the slipstream of Bandini 's more powerful Ferrari to tow him to up to 8 mph ( 13 km / h ) faster down the straights than the BT19 could manage on its own . This allowed Brabham to consolidate his lead over Ferrari 's second driver , Formula One novice Mike Parkes . After 12 laps Bandini pulled away from Brabham , eventually by over 30 seconds , but when the Italian car was delayed by a broken throttle cable on lap 32 , Brabham cruised to the finish to win from Parkes and become the first man to win a Formula One World Championship race in one of his own cars . 
 Although the first Brabham BT20 , the definitive 1966 car , had been available at Reims , Brabham continued with the BT19 and used it to win the next three championship races . Ferrari , competitive in all three championship races to that point , were not present for the British Grand Prix . The race was held on the tight and twisting Brands Hatch circuit , the track made slippery by oil leaking from other cars and by drizzle . Brabham set pole and led the entire race . At the next championship round , the Dutch Grand Prix , Brabham reported the low speed Zandvoort circuit to be " even more oily and treacherous than Brands . " Brabham won the race after Jim Clark 's less powerful 2 litre Lotus 33 @-@ Climax , which had passed Brabham for the lead mid @-@ race , was delayed by overheating problems . The German Grand Prix was held at the Nürburgring Nordschleife , which Brabham described as " Brands Hatch on steroids " . On the opening lap Brabham took the lead from Surtees , now driving a Cooper @-@ Maserati . Brabham won after a race @-@ long fight with the Englishman in the rain . With four wins and more finishes than any of his championship rivals , Brabham had a 22 @-@ point lead in the drivers championship and could only be caught in the championship by Surtees or Stewart if one of them won all three of the remaining races . 
 Jack Brabham used BT19 again at the Italian Grand Prix at Monza , another high speed circuit . A second BT20 was completed at the Italian track and Brabham tried it in practice for the race , but decided to race his Old Nail , which he felt was fitted with a stronger engine . As at Reims , Brabham successfully <unk> the race leaders early on , but an oil leakage stopped the car after 8 laps . Neither Surtees nor Stewart finished the race and Brabham clinched his third world championship . 
 Brabham used the BT19 once more that season to take pole position and victory at the non @-@ championship Oulton Park Gold Cup , before using a new BT20 for the final two races of the championship season . The BT19 was used again at three of the first four championship races in the 1967 Formula One season , debuting the new Repco 740 engine at the Monaco Grand Prix , where it took pole position , and finishing second at the Dutch Grand Prix . 
 Commenting on the reasons for the unexpected competitiveness of the 1966 Brabham @-@ <unk> in Formula One , motorsport historian Doug Nye has suggested that they " could score on weight over the more powerful Ferrari , BRM , Cooper @-@ Maserati , Eagle @-@ <unk> and Honda in their undeveloped forms , and on sheer ' grunt ' over such interim stop @-@ gap cars as the nimble 2 @-@ litre Climax and BRM V8 @-@ engined Lotus 33s and <unk> . " 
 BT19 also competed in the final two races of the 1965 / 66 Tasman Series in Australia , which was run to the pre @-@ 1961 Formula One regulations , including an engine capacity limit of 2 @.@ 5 litres . Tasman racing was the original purpose of the Repco engine and Brabham 's involvement was supposed to promote the 2 @.@ 5 @-@ litre version . Frank Hallam , head of the Repco @-@ Brabham organisation responsible for designing and building the Repco engines , has said that the smaller version " never put out the power per litre that the 3 litre engine produced " , which itself was not a powerful unit . Fitted with the 2 @.@ 5 @-@ litre engine BT19 recorded one retirement and a third place in the series . 
 = = Demonstrations = = 
 The BT19 was not raced in serious competition after 1967 . Brabham retired and moved back to Australia at the end of 1970 . He retained ownership of the car until 1976 , when it passed into the hands of Repco and was restored by the Repco Engine Parts Group . In 1986 , Automotive Components Ltd . ( ACL ) was formed by the management buyout of Engine Parts Group , which included the transfer of the BT19 to the new company . Since its restoration , the car has frequently been demonstrated at events , including the 1978 Australian Grand Prix at Sandown where Brabham was involved in a spirited demonstration with Juan Manuel Fangio driving his Mercedes @-@ Benz <unk> . Brabham and the car also appeared at the first Australian Grands Prix to be held on the Adelaide ( 1985 ) and Melbourne ( 1996 ) street circuits . It also appeared at the 2004 Goodwood Revival meeting in the United Kingdom . ACL sold the car back to Repco in 2004 . In 2008 the car was installed in the Australian National Sports Museum at the Melbourne Cricket Ground , on loan from Repco . 
 In 2002 , at the inaugural Speed on Tweed historic meeting at Murwillumbah , Brabham , then 76 , commented : " It 's been a wonderful car over the years and it 's been very well looked after and it 's a pleasure to come and drive it . Coming to Murwillumbah was a really good excuse to get back in the car and drive it again and I 'm afraid that 's something I 'll never ever get tired of . " 
 = = Complete results = = 
 = = = Formula One World Championship = = = 
 ( results in bold indicate pole position ) 
 = = = Non Championship results = = = 
 † This race was a support to the 1966 Surfers Paradise Trophy , 14 August 1966 
 = Action of 3 July 1810 = 
 The Action of 3 July 1810 was a minor naval engagement of the Napoleonic Wars , in which a French frigate squadron under Guy @-@ Victor Duperré attacked and defeated a convoy of Honourable East India Company East Indiamen near the Comoros Islands . During the engagement the British convoy resisted strongly and suffered heavy casualties but two ships were eventually forced to surrender . These were the British flagship , the Windham , which held off the French squadron to allow the surviving ship Astell to escape , and the Ceylon . The engagement was the third successful French attack on an Indian Ocean convoy in just over a year , the French frigates being part of a squadron operating from the Île de France under Commodore Jacques Hamelin . 
 Although a British frigate squadron under Josias Rowley was under orders to eliminate the French raiders , Rowley was distracted by the planned invasion of Île Bonaparte , which began the following week . Combined with limited British resources in the region , this allowed the French frigates significant freedom to attack British interests across the Ocean . The attack on Île Bonaparte was however part of a wider British strategy to seize and capture French raiding bases , and the success of the operation severely limited future French operations as Hamelin 's squadron was required for the defence of Île de France . As a result , this was the last successful attack on a British merchant convoy in the Indian Ocean during the Napoleonic Wars . 
 = = Background = = 
 Since the beginning of the Napoleonic Wars in 1803 , French privateers and naval frigates operating from the fortified island bases of Île de France and Île Bonaparte had attacked British shipping in the Indian Ocean . The huge distances involved , restrictions on supplies and the presence of Royal Navy warships and heavily armed East Indiamen had prevented these relatively weak French ships from attacking the convoys that transported millions of pounds worth of goods from British India and the Far East to the United Kingdom . When one French squadron under Admiral Linois had tried to seize a convoy in 1805 , it had been driven off by the aggressive tactics of the merchant captains . 
 In late 1808 , the French Navy despatched five frigates to the Indian Ocean to rendezvous at Île de France under the command of Commodore Jacques Hamelin . Although only four frigates eventually reached the French island , these were new vessels carrying 40 heavy guns each under orders to attack British shipping in the Bay of Bengal , in particular the large East Indiamen of the Honourable East India Company ( HEIC ) . The first frigate to discover a convoys was Caroline , which attacked a Europe @-@ bound convoy in the Action of 31 May 1809 . Capturing two East Indiamen carrying over £ 500 @,@ 000 worth of silk , Caroline brought her prizes back to the fortified port of Saint Paul on Île Bonaparte . 
 The British commander at the Cape of Good Hope , Albemarle Bertie , had also been planning an operation in the Indian Ocean during 1809 and assembled a squadron under Commodore Josias Rowley with orders to blockade the French islands , probe their defences and capture them if practical . Rowley found that his small squadron was unable to engage the French frigates and that the nearest British military base , Madras in British India , was much too far to be practical for staging amphibious operations . To remedy the latter problem , Rowley seized the small French island of Rodriguez with a force of British and Indian soldiers and garrisoned it as a supply base for his ships and as a military reserve to use in landings on the French islands . The first such operation was the Raid on Saint Paul in September 1809 , in which the town of Saint Paul was captured , Caroline and her prizes seized and Île Bourbon 's commander Nicolas Des Bruslys driven to suicide . 
 = = Continued raiding = = 
 Despite the British attack on Saint Paul , French frigates continued to operate in the Indian Ocean , Hamelin personally leading a cruise in the Bay of Bengal during the autumn . His ships seized a number of small merchantmen and in the Action of 18 November 1809 he personally defeated and captured three large East Indiamen in convoy . Before his squadron and their prizes returned to Île de France in late December , they had also captured the British brig HMS Victor and the large Portuguese frigate Minerva . During the winter few ships were at sea , as the risk of being caught in a seasonal hurricane was considered too severe to operate between December and March . Rowley correspondingly withdrew most of his forces to the Cape of Good Hope , leaving a handful of smaller ships to watch the French islands . Hamelin too kept his forces in harbour at Île de France , replenishing his ships and recruiting sailors from the large pool of unemployed men in Port Napoleon . 
 On 14 March , before Rowley could return to his blockade , Hamelin ordered a squadron to sea . This force consisted of the large frigate Bellone , the captured Minerva now renamed Minerve and the captured brig Victor . The force was led by Guy @-@ Victor Duperré on Bellone , with Pierre Bouvet in Minerve as his second in command . Avoiding the remaining frigates of the British blockade , Duperré 's ships escaped unnoticed and began cruising in the Bay of Bengal , capturing a few small vessels but making no serious impression on British trade in the region . By the 1 June , Duperré had moved to the Western Indian Ocean , sailing off Madagascar in the hope of sighting British ships from Cape Town . Due to the extended period at sea , his ships were in a poor state of repair and much of the following month was spent conducting repairs at isolated beaches . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At 06 : 00 on 3 July , Duperré 's squadron was cruising off the small island of <unk> when sails were sighted 36 nautical miles ( 67 km ) to the north east . Giving chase immediately , Duprée discovered that his quarry was a convoy of three large East Indiamen , Ceylon , Windham , under Captain Stewart , and Astell , commanded by Henry Meriton in Ceylon . Meriton was a highly experienced HEIC captain , who had twice been involved in successfully defending his convoy from French raiders : firstly at the Action of 4 August 1800 , when his ship Exeter had actually forced the surrender of the Médée , and then at the Battle of Pulo Aura in 1804 . The convoy had departed from Cape Town on 13 June with five ships , but two had to turn back after the Euphrates struck a rock and began to take in water . The others continued their journey to Madras via the Mozambique Channel . One of the East Indiamen , Windham , her captain John Stewart and many of her crew had been engaged and captured by Hamelin on 22 November 1809 in the Bay of Bengal and recaptured a month later by HMS Magicienne off Île de France . While Duperré 's three ships mounted 108 guns and carried fully trained naval crews , the HEIC ships had approximately 75 cannon between them and only a handful of their sailors were trained to military standards . Primarily crewed by lascar seamen , who had proven unreliable in the previous convoy actions , the merchant ships ' advantages lay in their large size and the 250 soldiers of the 24th Regiment of Foot that were aboard the ships . These troops were on passage to India and would be able to provide musket fire and repel boarders should the French attempt to board . 
 Confident that his squadron outclassed his opponent , Duperré ordered his ships to chase the East Indiamen , who , at Stewart 's suggestion , attempted to close with the shore where the wind and waves would not be as strong and they could better resist the French attack . By 09 : 30 however the Astell was forced to reduce sail or risk snapping her topmasts . This slowed the British convoy , Windham and Ceylon slowing too to protect Astell . Realising that he could not outrun Duperré , Meriton decided to turn his ships about and engage the French frigates . At 11 : 30 , Bellone closed the gap between the squadron and convoy to just 4 nautical miles ( 7 @.@ 4 km ) and Meriton ordered his ships to form an improvised battle line to meet the French attack . 
 The French attacked at 14 : 15 , Minerve approaching the British line and opening fire on the central ship Ceylon . In the intervening time , the British battleline had become disorganised , with Astell too far to the rear to properly support the other ships . With the British line wavering , Minerve and Victor closed with the convoy and began to exchange fire with the three merchant ships in a general action , during which Robert Hay , captain of Astell was seriously wounded . At 16 : 00 , Bouvet in Minerve pulled ahead of the struggling convoy and turned as if to ram and board Windham . Hoping to use the soldiers aboard to drive off the French ship , Captain Stewart turned to meet her . The damage done to Windham was however so severe that she was unable to make the turn correctly and Minerve passed just ahead of her , raking Windham and causing severe damage , the soldiers on Windham responding with musket fire . 
 As Minerve turned back towards the British convoy with the intention of cutting off the rearmost ships , Astell passed her more damaged companions to become the first ship in line . This left Windham , now at the rear , to face Minerve alone . Fortunately for Stewart , Minerve lost two topmasts as she turned to face his ship and had to pull away from the British to effect repairs . An hour and a half later , at 18 : 30 , Bellone joined the action , attacking Windham directly . Victor supported Bellone and accompanied the flagship as she moved ahead to attack Ceylon and Astell . By 19 : 00 , with Ceylon damaged so severely that she could no longer effectively sail or fight , third officer Tristam Fleming hauled the ship out of the battle line and ordered his crew to cease firing : Meriton and his second officer Thomas Oldham had both been seriously wounded by grape shot . 
 With Ceylon no longer engaged , Duperré pulled ahead to engage Astell but found that Stewart had brought his battered Windham between the French frigate and the third East Indiaman . In the growing darkness , Stewart attempted to hail Astell to propose boarding Bellone together , but the remaining officers either ignored or did not hear the suggestion as Astell extinguished all her lights and made all sail to escape the action , receiving a final broadside from Bellone as she pulled away . Alone , Stewart continued to engage the French ships to enable Astell to make her escape . At 19 : 20 the repaired Minerve returned and took possession of Ceylon , and at 19 : 45 Stewart surrendered for the second time in less than a year : his ship badly damaged and casualties mounting among his crew and passengers . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Astell was the only HEIC ship to escape , disappearing in the darkness and later reaching a safe port from which despatches were sent to London recounting the action . On the basis of these accounts , the crew and officers of Astell were rewarded with £ 2 @,@ 000 from the company directors to be shared among them . Casualties in the British convoy had been heavy , Windham losing six killed and 18 wounded , Ceylon six killed and 21 wounded ( including Meriton and Oldham ) and Astell eight killed and 37 wounded ( including Hay ) . In all , 20 British sailors and soldiers were killed and 76 wounded during the engagement , a figure which was matched by the French losses of 22 killed and 38 wounded : four killed and six wounded on Bellone , 17 killed and 29 wounded on Minerve and one killed and three wounded on Victor . The prizes were very severely damaged and Duperré was forced to take his squadron to an isolated beach on Anjouan until 17 July to effect repairs , before returning to Île de France . Command of Ceylon , renamed Ceylan was awarded to Lieutenant Vincent <unk> , of Minerve , and that of Windham , to ensign d <unk> . 
 Duperré did not meet any British ships on his journey back to the French island , as most of the British blockade squadron were engaged in the aftermath of the Invasion of Île Bonaparte , conducted during July by Commodore Rowley . With the British distracted by this amphibious operation , it was simple for Duperré to reach Grand Port on the south east coast of Île de France in spite of the small blockade squadron under Captain Samuel Pym . This narrow and well @-@ protected anchorage was considered to be the best place to refit the battered French squadron , but in August it came under attack by a British squadron in the Battle of Grand Port . This action was a disaster for the British as their ships became grounded in the unfamiliar shoals of the harbour and four frigates were lost under fire from shore batteries and Duperré 's squadron . 
 = North American Piedmontese cattle = 
 North American Piedmontese cattle are a breed of domestic beef cattle originating from an imported herd of select Italian purebred Piedmontese cattle ( Piemontese or <unk> bovina Piemontese ) . The foundation line of breeding stock was first imported from Italy into Canada in 1979 , and into the United States in the early 1980s . Piedmontese cattle are distinguished by a unique , naturally occurring gene identified as the myostatin allele mutation , or inactive myostatin gene . <unk> prohibits muscle growth whereas an inactive gene has the opposite effect . Purebred Piedmontese are homozygous , ( 2 copy ) , which means they have two identical alleles present for this unique gene . Research indicates the presence of the myostatin allele mutation produces morphological characteristics unique to the breed , such as double @-@ muscling , beef tenderness , reduced fat content and high yield . According to the North American Piedmontese Association ( NAPA ) , they are the first breed registry to base animal registration requirements on the presence of this specific gene which can be easily verified by DNA testing . 
 = = Evolution and history = = 
 North American Piedmontese cattle originated from a line of Italian purebred Piedmontese cattle , ( Italian : Piemontese or <unk> bovina Piemontese ) , in the region of Piedmont in northwest Italy . They continue to be cultivated in Italy as a " dual @-@ purpose animal ... having very rich milk used for specialty cheese production and beef marketed as a premium product . " There is much speculation on the breed 's evolution , but one theory by Italian professor , Silvano <unk> , is based on evidence obtained from fossil records and cave writings , and concludes that the breed descends from the ancient <unk> cattle , and the Pakistan Zebu cattle . Reports of the first historical evidence for breeding Piedmontese cattle dates back only to the late 1800s , however , and credits the work of Italian professor , Domenico <unk> . 
 In 1979 , the Piedmontese Breeding Co @-@ operative , Ltd. of Saskatchewan , Canada ( PBL Co @-@ op of Canada ) began preparations to import the first Piedmontese cattle into North America . There had been prior attempts at importation of the breed by the PBL Co @-@ op of Canada and other cattle breeders , but until that time the Italian Association , comprising small local farmers who wanted to maintain control of this unique gene pool , were reluctant to sell any of their purebred breeding stock . Another obstacle to overcome was the range of health protocols required for international shipping . The first successful importation occurred in the fall of 1979 with the arrival of five animals into Canada . Obtaining authorization and transfers to import the first five animals was the culmination of a half decade of effort , the cost of which is estimated at $ 100 @,@ 000 per animal based on 2014 values . The following year , Canada received more Italian imports of Piedmontese cattle , including five more bulls . The next year , Italian imports arrived in the US , including three additional sire lines and two cows . It was from that genetic base that the North American breed of Piedmontese cattle first began . In 1983 , the Canadian Piedmontese Association ( CPA ) was formed , followed by the Piedmontese Association of the United States ( <unk> ) in 1984 . By the 1990s , imports of semen and embryos were more substantial . Today there are several bloodlines available to cattle raisers in North America . 
 = = Genetics and crossbreeding = = 
 Like the original Italian Piedmontese , North American Piedmontese cattle are distinguished genetically by the presence of the myostatin allele mutation which causes the breed 's hypertrophic muscle growth , or " double muscling " . Compared with normal breeds of beef cattle , North American Piedmontese cattle are more proficient in converting feed into lean muscle . They also produce a higher percentage of the most desirable cuts of meat . They average 20 % more muscle with less bone and fat . Research indicates that there is less connective tissue within the muscle of " double @-@ muscled " cattle ; this would imply less background toughness and therefore more tender meat . 
 = = Prevalence among United States cattle = = 
 There are an estimated 28 – 30 million head of cattle currently in the United States . Of that total , nearly 70 % of all beef cattle are derived from Angus cattle . Less than one @-@ half of one percent are Piedmontese , or bred to Piedmontese cattle . As of 2014 , the number of registered Piedmontese pure @-@ blood breeding stock in the United States is estimated to be around 2 @,@ 000 head . 
 In the United States Piedmontese beef is regulated by the USDA , which requires that organisations involved in the sale of Piedmontese beef meet labeling and nutritional verification requirements . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The color of <unk> Piedmontese males is gray @-@ white with a considerable amount of black hairs on the head , most notable around the eyes , neck , shoulders , and on the distal regions of the legs . They occasionally have dark stains or spots on their hind legs or lateral faces of the trunk . The cows are primarily white with varying shades of gray or light red . Calves are born a pale fawn color which changes to gray @-@ white as they mature . <unk> are naturally horned , and have black pigmentation on the muzzle , eyelids , ears , tongue , tassel of the tail , anal opening , and on the outer skin of the sexual organs . 
 The color of Naturalean composites or crossbred cattle can be solid black or solid red with black or reddish pigmentation in the same areas as the pigmentation on <unk> . They may be horned or polled , and homozygous ( 2 copy ) , or heterozygous ( 1 copy ) . <unk> and Naturalean bulls are often crossed with traditional beef breeds like Black Angus or Hereford cattle because of substantial benefits in the crossbred results , including a higher protein meat that is lower in saturated fat , improved tenderness , and an approximate 7 % yield increase in salable carcass . <unk> problems are also reduced in the crossbreds . 
 = = North American Piedmontese Association ( NAPA ) = = 
 The North American Piedmontese Association ( NAPA ) was organized in September 2000 , and is the official breed registry for North American Piedmontese cattle . It is a member @-@ based , nonprofit breed registry headquartered in Washington , U.S. , and the first cattle breed registry with mandatory registration requirements based on the presence of the Piedmontese @-@ specific myostatin allele mutation . There are different categories of registration and <unk> within the registry . Only homozygous animals ( 2 copy ) can be registered , therefore breed true , and are eligible for registration in either the <unk> ( based on pedigree record ) , or Naturalean divisions . 
 The Naturalean division is for Piedmontese cattle that are either crossbred or could have qualified for <unk> registration but failed to meet the pedigree requirements , perhaps because of unregistered or unverified parentage . Prior to registration or recording , DNA testing is required to confirm the animal carries at least 1 copy of the Piedmontese @-@ specific myostatin gene . Naturalean animals that are DNA tested heterozygous ( 1 @-@ copy ) are not registered , rather they are issued a registration number with the prefix " recorded " . The 0 @-@ copy ( non @-@ carriers ) cattle are ineligible for registration in any category . 
 According to the North American Piedmontese Cattle Association , in the last decade of the 20th century , there was a noticeable upsurge in the importation of genetic material ( i.e. , embryos and semen ) . Thus , it is said that " there are now a wealth of blood lines " available from which to choose . 
 = Sue v Hill = 
 Sue v Hill was an Australian court case decided in the High Court of Australia on 23 June 1999 . It concerned a dispute over the apparent return of a candidate , Heather Hill , to the Australian Senate in the 1998 federal election . The result was challenged on the basis that Hill was a dual citizen of the United Kingdom and Australia , and that section 44 ( i ) of the Constitution of Australia prevents any person who is the citizen of a " foreign power " from being elected to the Parliament of Australia . The High Court found that , at least for the purposes of section 44 ( i ) , the United Kingdom is a foreign power to Australia . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Australian independence from the United Kingdom = = = 
 The degree to which Australia is and has been independent from the United Kingdom is a topic of much debate . The common view is that there has been an evolutionary process by which Australia has gained more and more independence . 
 The 1926 Imperial Conference resulted in the Royal and Parliamentary Titles Act 1927 , and the Balfour Declaration 1926 , which granted the Dominions equal status to the United Kingdom . However , laws passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom still had force in Australia , and laws passed by Australian parliaments would be invalid if they contradicted United Kingdom laws ( the doctrine of repugnancy ) . The Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1942 ended the doctrine of repugnancy , and provided that United Kingdom laws would only have force in Australia at Australia 's request . 
 The Australia Act 1986 ended all legal ties between Australia and the United Kingdom . The Act , enacted by the Parliament of Australia and the Parliament of the United Kingdom , ended the ability of the United Kingdom to make laws for Australia or enact the doctrine of repugnancy , and stopped all remaining avenues of appeal to the Privy Council from Australian courts , unless authorised by the High Court of Australia . 
 = = = 1998 election = = = 
 Heather Hill , a woman with Australian and United Kingdom dual citizenship , was a Queensland candidate for the Australian Senate for One Nation who contested the 1998 federal election . At the election on 3 October 1998 , Hill received 295 @,@ 903 first preference votes and was accordingly elected without the need to consider the distribution of preferences . 
 Henry Sue , a voter from Queensland , disputed the election of Hill and filed a petition under the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 in the High Court of Australia , sitting in its capacity as the Court of Disputed Returns . Sue argued that on the date of Hill 's nomination to the Senate she was still a citizen of the United Kingdom and thus , because of the operation of section 44 of the Australian Constitution , was ineligible to be elected to the Parliament of Australia . 
 Terry Sharples , a former One Nation candidate who had stood for the Senate in the 1998 election as an independent candidate , made a similar petition . Because both cases involved constitutional questions , and were substantially identical , they were heard together from 11 – 13 May 1999 . 
 = = Arguments = = 
 = = = Eligibility of Hill = = = 
 Sue argued that Hill was ineligible because of section 44 ( i ) of the Constitution of Australia , which provides that : 
 44 . Any person who - ( i ) Is under any acknowledgement of allegiance , obedience , or adherence to a foreign power , or is a subject or a citizen or entitled to the rights or privileges of a subject or citizen of a foreign power : ... shall be incapable of being chosen or of sitting as a senator or a member of the House of Representatives . 
 Sue argued that , since Australia was now an independent nation , the United Kingdom should properly be regarded as a foreign power . 
 Sue also raised the example of section 51 ( <unk> ) of the Australian Constitution , which grants the Parliament of Australia the power to make laws with respect to " naturalization and aliens " , and argued that since the word " aliens " in that section had come to be regarded to include people from the United Kingdom , so too should the word " foreign power " be understood to include the United Kingdom . 
 The Government of Australia decided to intervene in the case , and the Solicitor @-@ General of Australia , David Bennett , also argued that the United Kingdom was a " foreign power " . 
 Hill , on the other hand , argued that : " The United Kingdom was not a foreign power at Federation , is not a foreign power now and never will be a foreign power while the Constitution remains in its present form . " Hill said that because the Constitution was enacted as part of a statute of the British Imperial Parliament it derived its validity from British law . Further , she argued that because section 128 of the Australian Constitution provides that the Constitution cannot be changed except in accordance with that section , then only a constitutional referendum could change this special status of the United Kingdom , and the Australia Act had no effect , " so long as the United Kingdom retained any residual influence upon legislative , executive or judicial processes in Australia , it could not be regarded as ' foreign ' to Australia . " 
 = = = Jurisdiction = = = 
 Another question in the case was whether the High Court , sitting as the Court of Disputed Returns , had jurisdiction to hear the case . Hill argued that because of the structure of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 , the court could not hear the case . She argued that elections could not be disputed by petition if the dispute was about the eligibility of a candidate , as another provision of the Act meant that it would require a resolution of the relevant house of Parliament , the Senate in this case . 
 The Government argued that the sections of the Act dealing with disputation by petition encompassed any question about the validity of an election , including the eligibility of a candidate , and that the sections should be interpreted broadly . Sue made a similar argument , saying that the sections allowing disputes by petition and the sections allowing disputes by the relevant house of Parliament were not mutually exclusive and that elections could be disputed by either the Parliament or the people . 
 = = = Separation of powers = = = 
 Hill also argued that if the Electoral Act actually appeared to confer jurisdiction on the court , it was nevertheless invalid , as the determination of disputes about election results is a non @-@ judicial function . Also , the doctrine of separation of powers meant that non @-@ judicial power cannot be conferred on a Chapter III Court such as the High Court . 
 Both the Government and Sue argued that two previous decisions , which may have inter alia suggested that determining disputed returns is a non @-@ judicial function , were incorrect . They said that the jurisdiction conferred by the Act required the court to consider real issues and not " abstract or hypothetical questions " . They also said that the Act gave the court a wide discretion and allowed it to function in a manner entirely consistent with the exercise of judicial power . 
 = = Judgment = = 
 The High court ruled that Senator @-@ elect Hill had not been duly elected to the national parliament because at the time of her election she was a subject or citizen of a foreign power . 
 Five judgments were delivered , with Chief Justice Gleeson and Justices Gummow and Hayne writing a joint judgment , and Justices Gaudron , McHugh , Kirby and Callinan writing individual judgments . 
 = = = Jurisdiction = = = 
 Gaudron , and jointly Gleeson , Gummow and Hayne , decided that the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 validly conferred the jurisdiction to determine disputed elections on the High Court , in its capacity as the Court of Disputed Returns . They said that if Hill 's argument about the structure of the Act were correct , there would be the odd result that the court could hear disputes about a candidate 's eligibility under the Act itself ( which imposes certain requirements for candidates ) , but it would not be able to hear disputes about a candidate 's eligibility under the Constitution . They also said that if only a house of Parliament could dispute a candidate 's constitutional eligibility , then in the time it took for that house to determine the issue , an ineligible candidate would be able to participate in the business of that house , including passing laws and other activities . 
 The four judges then went on to decide that the jurisdiction involved an exercise of judicial power , mentioning an earlier decision of Justice Isaacs , in which he had taken a functional approach , and determined that some functions , when conferred upon a legislative or executive body , can involve the exercise of non @-@ judicial power , but the same functions when conferred on a judicial body involve the exercise of judicial power . The four judges found that the powers conferred on the court , to take evidence and compel witnesses and such , when vested in a judicial body such as the court , involved the exercise of judicial power . As such , the jurisdiction did not offend the separation of powers . 
 = = = Foreign power = = = 
 On the important issue of whether the United Kingdom was a " foreign power " , only Gaudron , and jointly Gleeson , Gummow and Hayne , decided the matter , the other three judges having already found that the court did not have jurisdiction to hear the case . All four judges deciding did find that the United Kingdom was a " foreign power " , because it no longer retained any legislative , executive or judicial influence over Australia . Gleeson , Gummow and Hayne said that the question was : 
 " ... not about whether Australia 's relationships with that power are friendly or not , close or distant , or meet any other qualitative description . Rather , the words invite attention to questions of international and domestic sovereignty . " 
 Thus , the question would revolve around legal connections , and not around " Australia 's strong historical and emotional ties with the United Kingdom . " 
 They first considered whether the United Kingdom had any legislative power over Australia . Section 1 of the Australia Act 1986 provides that : 
 1 . No Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom passed after the commencement of this Act shall extend , or be deemed to extend , to the Commonwealth , to a State or to a Territory as part of the law of the Commonwealth , of the State or of the Territory . 
 They held that this section completely removed any power held by the United Kingdom to exercise legislative power over Australia . Some commentators had suggested that section 1 of the Australia Act could pose constitutional problems in the United Kingdom , because of A. V. Dicey 's proposition that the Parliament cannot restrict its future actions . To this , Gleeson , Gummow and Hayne said : 
 " Provisions such as s 1 may present doctrinal questions for the constitutional law of the United Kingdom , in particular for the dogma associated with Dicey 's views as to the sovereignty of the Parliament at Westminster . Professor Sir William Wade pointed out more than forty years ago that Dicey never explained how he reconciled his assertions that Westminster could destroy or transfer sovereignty and the proposition that it could not bind future Parliaments . The effect in the United Kingdom of any amendment or repeal by the United Kingdom Parliament of s 1 would be for those adjudicating upon the constitutional law of that country . But whatever effect the courts of the United Kingdom may give to an amendment or repeal of the 1986 UK Act , Australian courts would be obliged to give their obedience to s 1 of the statute passed by the Parliament of the Commonwealth . " 
 Thus they decided that the position in Australia was not affected at all by the position in the United Kingdom , and for Australian purposes , the United Kingdom has no legislative power over Australia . 
 Similarly they decided that the United Kingdom could not exercise any judicial power over Australia , with the end of appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council , and the court 's previous decision , in Kirmani v Captain Cook Cruises Pty Ltd ( No 2 ) not to grant any more certificates of appeal . They also decided that no executive power existed over Australia , as although the sovereign monarch of Australia and the sovereign monarch of the United Kingdom are the same person , it had been accepted for a long time that the monarch acts in Australian matters on the advice of Australian ministers , and does not accept the advice of United Kingdom ministers in Australian matters at all . 
 Ultimately , they concluded that the United Kingdom was a distinct sovereign power and a distinct legal personality from Australia , and as such was a " foreign power " for the purposes of section 44 of the Australian Constitution . 
 = = = Hill 's renunciation = = = 
 The decision noted in paragraph 176 that an Australian having dual citizenship must take some step to renounce his or her former citizenship before he or she can be treated under Australian law as having renounced it , and noted in paragraph 104 that Hill had on 18 November 1998 become aware of steps that could be taken to renounce her British citizenship , and had taken steps to effect the renunciation on the following day . The election , however , had taken place on 3 October 1998 , on which date Hill was still a dual national . 
 However , it is important to note that the High Court also ruled that dual citizenship on its own will not be enough to disqualify someone under s 44 ( i ) . At paragraph 176 , the High Court makes the point that a person must take reasonable steps to renounce their non @-@ Australian citizenship . If renunciation is not possible , for example by either the laws of the foreign power not permitting it or the process being unreasonable , then the person will not be disqualified by operation of s 44 ( i ) . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 The court declared that Hill was not validly elected at the 1998 federal election . However , they did not declare the whole election invalid , acting on an earlier decision of the court , because although no effect could be given to voters ' preferences for Hill , their other preferences were not invalid , and those could be used to determine who should be elected in Hill 's stead . The court did not reach a definite decision about what action should be taken , remitting that question to a lower court . Eventually , Len Harris , the number two candidate on the One Nation ticket , was elected in Hill 's stead , taking up his seat on 1 July 1999 . 
 The invalidation of Hill 's election caused some controversy in Australian political life . Hill herself viewed the challenge to her election as an attempt by big business and the rich to destroy her , as revenge for One Nation 's critique of them during the election campaign . One Australian Broadcasting Corporation correspondent observed the irony that One Nation , a populist nationalist party , was " now suspected of not being quite Australian enough . " Australian Greens Senator Bob Brown , despite being politically opposed to One Nation , attacked the decision for disenfranchising the people who had voted for Hill . 
 Aside from this immediate effect , the case represented a clear recognition that the Australia Act 1986 finally and completely ended all legal ties between the United Kingdom and Australia , and that Australia has been a fully independent and sovereign nation in its own right since at least 3 March 1986 , when the Act came into force . Some commentators have criticised the evolutionary approach adopted by the court , and the court 's resultant failure to find a certain date on which Australia became independent , arguing that the distinction is more than merely symbolic and could have real consequences . However , even Justice Callinan , who questioned the evolutionary approach in this case , affirmed in a later case ( Attorney @-@ General Western Australia v <unk> ) that the effect of the Australia Act in finally recognising independence could not be doubted . 
 = Interstate 280 ( New Jersey ) = 
 Interstate 280 ( abbreviated I @-@ 280 ) is a 17 @.@ 85 @-@ mile ( 28 @.@ 73 km ) Interstate Highway in the U.S. state of New Jersey . It provides a spur from I @-@ 80 in Parsippany @-@ Troy Hills , Morris County to Newark , and I @-@ 95 ( the New Jersey Turnpike ) in Kearny , Hudson County . In Kearny , access is provided toward the Holland Tunnel and Lincoln Tunnel to New York City . The western part of the route runs through suburban areas of Morris and Essex counties , crossing the Watchung Mountains . Upon reaching The Oranges , the setting becomes more urbanized and I @-@ 280 runs along a depressed alignment before ascending again in Newark . I @-@ 280 includes a lift bridge , the William A. Stickel Memorial Bridge over the Passaic River between Newark and Harrison . The highway is sometimes called the Essex Freeway . I @-@ 280 interchanges with several roads , including the Garden State Parkway in East Orange and Route 21 in Newark . 
 A part of present @-@ day I @-@ 280 in Newark west of the Stickel Bridge was legislated as Route 25A in 1939 , a spur of Route 25 ( U.S. Route 1 / 9 ) that was to run from Jersey City west to Newark . This portion of road would become Route 58 in 1953 ( the Route 58 designation was removed in the 1990s ) . When the Interstate Highway System was being planned , the Route 3 freeway was planned to become an Interstate . The New Jersey State Highway Department favored the Essex Freeway instead between I @-@ 80 in Parsippany @-@ Troy Hills to I @-@ 95 in Kearny . The latter would become the Interstate and be designated I @-@ 280 . This road was built in the 1960s and completed west from Newark in 1973 . The portion east of Newark to the New Jersey Turnpike opened in 1980 . I @-@ 280 was once planned to continue east to I @-@ 78 near the Holland Tunnel but never was extended east of the New Jersey Turnpike . In the 2000s , the Stickel Bridge was reconstructed after the original structure was determined to be structurally deficient . Interstate 280 is one of two 3 digit interstate designations to appear on opposite coasts . Interstate 110 in California and Florida is the other one . 
 = = Route description = = 
 I @-@ 280 begins at I @-@ 80 and US 46 in Parsippany @-@ Troy Hills , Morris County and heads southeast into wooded surroundings as a four @-@ lane highway . The road comes to its first interchange with New Road before crossing the Whippany River into East Hanover . The freeway runs near some fields before heading back into woods and entering Roseland , Essex County at the crossing of the Passaic River . Shortly after the Passaic River , I @-@ 280 has a cloverleaf interchange with the Eisenhower Parkway ( CR 609 ) . At this point , the roadway widens to six lanes and runs near wooded suburban areas before reaching CR 527 at another cloverleaf interchange . Past CR 527 , I @-@ 280 makes a turn to the east before heading southeast into Livingston and intersecting CR 634 . Following this exit , the road enters West Orange and passes through Second Watchung Mountain in a cut . Past the mountain , the road heads back into suburban areas and comes to the exit for CR 636 , where the highway widens to eight lanes here and heads east to an interchange with CR 577 . After CR 577 , I @-@ 280 makes a sharp turn to the south and goes through First Watchung Mountain in another cut , resuming into suburbs again and heading south @-@ southeast as it comes interchanges at CR 660 and CR 508 Spur . 
 The terrain becomes urban soon after exit 10 , when it enters Orange . Here , I @-@ 280 narrows back to six lanes and heads onto a depressed alignment with frequent overpasses , running a short distance to the south of New Jersey Transit ’ s Morristown Line . Along this portion , the roadway has ramps to Essex Avenue , Day Street , and Center Street . Continuing into East Orange , the freeway passes under more streets as it runs next to the Morristown Line , interchanging with Harrison Street and Clinton Street . At a full interchange with the Garden State Parkway , I @-@ 280 also has access to CR 509 and <unk> Parkway . Following this junction , the highway widens to eight lanes before becoming ten lanes at the border with Newark . 
 After crossing under more city streets , the roadway comes to exit 13 , a left @-@ side exit and entrance to and from the west accessing 1st Street and a ramp from the east to Orange Street . At this point , the total amount of lanes on the road decreases from ten to four and I @-@ 280 eastbound heads up and over the exit 13 ramps , rejoining the westbound lanes on a bridge over First Street , Orange Street and the Newark City Subway . As the road returns to surface level and begins to parallel the Morris & Essex Lines and Montclair @-@ Boonton Line to the north , an unused bridge carries the western end of the 1954 section of freeway over the railroad to Orange Street east of Duryea Street . After this , I @-@ 280 passes under Clifton Avenue , which it has access to , and Nesbitt Street . It rises again to pass over Martin Luther King Boulevard , which is also has access to , Broad Street and Route 21 . Just after a large interchange with Route 21 , I @-@ 280 crosses the Passaic River again on the six @-@ lane William A. Stickel Memorial Bridge , a 125 @-@ foot ( 38 m ) vertical lift bridge , into Harrison , Hudson County . 
 I @-@ 280 continues to run just north of the railroad as a six @-@ lane freeway through Harrison , reaching an interchange with CR 508 . The road continues southeast through urban surroundings before turning east and passing to the north of a railroad yard , splitting from the railroad line as it runs into Kearny and enters the New Jersey Meadowlands . At the final interchange with CR 508 , I @-@ 280 has access to the Holland Tunnel via Route 7 , US 1 / 9 Truck and Route 139 . Past CR 508 , the freeway narrows to four lanes and comes to the toll plaza for the New Jersey Turnpike ( I @-@ 95 ) at exit 15W , at which point I @-@ 280 ends . Full access is provided with the Western Spur of the New Jersey Turnpike , which carries through I @-@ 95 traffic ; ramps to and from the north on the Eastern Spur of the New Jersey Turnpike allow for access to the Lincoln Tunnel via Route 495 . 
 Replacement of partial access in central Harrison with service roads , a new interchange , and an overpass ( to improve access to Harrison Avenue , the PATH station , and Red Bull Arena , and to give north @-@ south passage to local street traffic ) is in the planning stages . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now the easternmost part of I @-@ 280 was legislated as Route 25A in 1939 . This route was a branch of Route 25 ( US 1 / 9 ) that ran from Jersey City west through Kearny and Harrison across the Passaic River and into Newark , connecting with Route 21 and Clifton Avenue . The William A. Stickel Memorial Bridge opened in 1949 , with approaches stretching east to Harrison Avenue ( now CR 508 ) in Harrison ( crossing Cleveland Avenue and Hamilton Street at @-@ grade ) and west beyond Route 21 to Broad Street . Route 25A was redesignated as Route 58 in the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , and the next year an extension opened west beyond Clifton Avenue to Orange Street east of Duryea Street . 
 Around the time the Stickel Bridge opened , the Essex Freeway was planned to connect US 46 in Morris County east to the New Jersey Turnpike in Hudson County , with the intention of alleviating traffic along Route 10 . During planning for the Interstate Highway System in the 1950s , the Bureau of Public Roads proposed an Interstate Highway along Route 3 , to the north of Newark . The New Jersey State Highway Department countered with the proposed Essex Freeway , which would run from I @-@ 80 to the New Jersey Turnpike ( I @-@ 95 ) via the existing Route 58 , saying that the Route 3 corridor " does not meet Interstate standards , and cannot be economically converted to such standards . " The Essex Freeway was selected as the interstate corridor , which was called FAI Corridor 105 before being designated I @-@ 280 in 1958 . 
 Construction progressed slowly , starting in 1960 near Orange . There were many obstacles that had to be overcome when constructing I @-@ 280 . The first was whether to build the highway on an elevated or depressed alignment through urbanized areas of East Orange and Newark . Following opposition to the elevated option , it was decided to build I @-@ 280 on a depressed alignment through the area . In addition , there was an issue of building the road across First Watchung Mountain in West Orange . A tunnel had initially been considered , although the expense of such a project caused this alternative to be rejected . Instead , a rock cut along a longer route was built through the mountain . Much of the material that was excavated from this section of I @-@ 280 and east was removed via a temporary rail line that was built in the center of the right @-@ of @-@ way west to I @-@ 80 . 
 The construction of I @-@ 280 destroyed a large part of the historic urban cores of Orange , East Orange , and Newark . The Interstate passed through the historic downtown cores of East Orange and Orange , and many commercial buildings and historic Victorian homes were demolished in the process . 
 I @-@ 280 fully opened west from Newark to I @-@ 80 in Parsippany @-@ Troy Hills in 1973 . The portion of I @-@ 280 east of Newark was planned onto an alignment that would disrupt the fewest homes and would utilize existing railroad and utility right @-@ of @-@ way . The section east from Newark to the New Jersey Turnpike was built in 1979 @-@ 80 . In the 1966 plans , I @-@ 280 was to continue east to I @-@ 78 in Jersey City near the Holland Tunnel , following the CR 508 and Route 7 corridors ; this was planned again in the 1970s but never built . 
 In the 1990s , the Route 58 designation was officially removed from I @-@ 280 through Newark . In 2001 , the state determined the Stickel Bridge over the Passaic River and its approaches were structurally deficient and was going to need to be replaced after sections of it were falling apart . Instead of replacing the bridge , in 2007 the NJDOT decided to rehabilitate it at a lower cost . Reconstruction of the bridge was completed in April 2009 at a cost of $ 33 million . 
 I @-@ 280 , like many other highways in New Jersey , once had solar powered emergency call boxes every 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , however with the advent of cell phones the usage of these call boxes became extremely limited . To save on maintenance costs , the NJDOT removed these call boxes in 2005 . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Dimetrodon = 
 Dimetrodon ( / <unk> / ; meaning " two measures of teeth " ) is an extinct genus of synapsid that lived during the Early Permian period , around 295 – 272 million years ago ( Ma ) . It is a member of the family Sphenacodontidae . The most prominent feature of Dimetrodon is the large sail on its back formed by elongated spines extending from the vertebrae . It walked on four legs and had a tall , curved skull with large teeth of different sizes set along the jaws . Most fossils have been found in the southwestern United States , the majority coming from a geological deposit called the Red Beds in Texas and Oklahoma . More recently , fossils have been found in Germany . Over a dozen species have been named since the genus was first described in 1878 . 
 Dimetrodon is often mistaken for a dinosaur or as a contemporary of dinosaurs in popular culture , but it became extinct some 40 million years before the first appearance of dinosaurs . Reptile @-@ like in appearance and physiology , Dimetrodon is nevertheless more closely related to mammals than to modern reptiles , though it is not a direct ancestor or descendant of mammals . 
 Dimetrodon is assigned to a group traditionally called " mammal @-@ like reptiles " — more recently termed " stem @-@ mammals " or " non @-@ mammalian synapsids " . That is , many vertebrate paleontologists today group Dimetrodon together with mammals in an evolutionary group , or clade , called Synapsida , while they place dinosaurs with living reptiles and birds in a separate clade , <unk> . Single openings in the skull behind each eye , known as temporal fenestrae , and other skull features distinguish Dimetrodon and mammals from most of the earliest sauropsids . 
 Dimetrodon was probably one of the top predators in Early Permian ecosystems , feeding on fish and tetrapods , including reptiles as well as amphibians . Smaller Dimetrodon species may have had different ecological roles . The sail of Dimetrodon may have been used to stabilize its spine or to heat and cool its body as a form of thermoregulation . Some recent studies argue that the sail would have been ineffective at removing heat from the body , and was most likely used in sexual display . 
 = = Description = = 
 Dimetrodon was a quadrupedal , sail @-@ backed synapsid . Most Dimetrodon species ranged in length from 1 @.@ 7 to 4 @.@ 6 metres ( 5 @.@ 6 to 15 @.@ 1 ft ) and are estimated to have weighed between 28 and 250 kilograms ( 62 and 551 lb ) . The largest known species of Dimetrodon is D. <unk> at 4 @.@ 6 metres ( 15 ft ) and the smallest is D. teutonis at 60 centimetres ( 24 in ) . The larger species of Dimetrodon were among the largest predators of the Early Permian , although the closely related <unk> , known from skeletal fragments in slightly younger rocks , may have been even larger at an estimated 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) in total body length . 
 = = = Skull = = = 
 A single large opening on either side of the back of the skull links Dimetrodon with mammals and distinguishes it from most of the earliest sauropsids , which either lack openings or have two openings . Features such as ridges on the inside of the nasal cavity and a ridge at the back of the lower jaw are thought to be part of an evolutionary progression from early tetrapods ( four @-@ limbed vertebrates ) to mammals . 
 The skull of Dimetrodon is tall and compressed laterally , or side @-@ to @-@ side . The eye sockets are positioned high and far back in the skull . Behind each eye socket is a single hole called an infratemporal fenestra . An additional hole in the skull , the supratemporal fenestra , can be seen when viewed from above . The back of the skull ( the occiput ) is oriented at a slight upward angle , a feature that it shares with all other early synapsids . The upper margin of the skull slopes downward in a convex arc to the tip of the snout . The tip of the upper jaw , formed by the premaxilla bone , is raised above the part of the jaw formed by the maxilla bone to form a maxillary " step . " Within this step is a diastema , or gap in the tooth row . 
 = = = = Teeth = = = = 
 The size of the teeth varies greatly along the length of the jaws , lending Dimetrodon its name , which means " two measures of tooth " in reference to sets of small and large teeth . One or two pairs of caniniforms ( large pointed canine @-@ like teeth ) extend from the maxilla . Large incisor teeth are also present at the tips of the upper and lower jaws , rooted in the premaxillae and dentary bones . Small teeth are present around the maxillary " step " and behind the caniniforms , becoming smaller further back in the jaw . 
 Many teeth are widest at their <unk> and narrow closer to the jaws , giving them the appearance of a teardrop . Teardrop @-@ shaped teeth are unique to Dimetrodon and other closely related sphenacodontids , and help distinguish them from other early synapsids . As in many other early synapsids , the teeth of most Dimetrodon species are serrated at their edges . The serrations of Dimetrodon teeth were so fine that they resembled tiny cracks . The dinosaur Albertosaurus had similarly crack @-@ like serrations , but , at the base of each serration was a round void , which would have functioned to distribute force over a larger surface area and prevent the stresses of feeding from causing the crack to spread through the tooth . Unlike Albertosaurus , Dimetrodon teeth lacked adaptations that would stop cracks from forming at their serrations . The teeth of D. teutonis lack serrations , but still have sharp edges . 
 A study in 2014 shows that Dimetrodon was in an arms race against its prey . The smaller species , <unk> had no serrations since it ate small prey . As the prey grew larger , Dimetrodon started developing serrations and increasing in size . <unk> had enamel serrations that help it cut through flesh , and the same serrations can be found on <unk> . The second largest <unk> species , <unk> , has denticle serrations similar to sharks and theropod dinosaurs , making its teeth even more specialized to slice through flesh . This study not only shows the evolution of Dimetrodon over millions of years , but also shows that Dimetrodon was in an arms race against its prey . As prey grew larger , Dimetrodon countered it by growing larger and having sharper teeth . 
 = = = = Nasal cavity = = = = 
 On the inner surface of the nasal section of skull are ridges called <unk> , which may have supported cartilage that increased the area of the olfactory epithelium , the layer of tissue that detects odors . These ridges are much smaller than those of later synapsids from the Late Permian and Triassic , whose large <unk> are taken as evidence for warm @-@ bloodedness because they may have supported mucous membranes that warmed and moistened incoming air . Thus , the nasal cavity of Dimetrodon is transitional between those of early land vertebrates and mammals . 
 = = = = Jaw joint and ear = = = = 
 Another transitional feature of Dimetrodon is a ridge in the back of the jaw called the reflected lamina . The reflected lamina is found on the articular bone , which connects to the quadrate bone of the skull to form the jaw joint . In later mammal ancestors , the articular and quadrate separated from the jaw joint while the articular developed into the malleus bone of the middle ear . The reflected lamina became part of a ring called the tympanic annulus that supports the ear drum in all living mammals . 
 = = = Tail = = = 
 The tail of Dimetrodon makes up a large portion of its total body length and includes around 50 caudal vertebrae . Tails were missing or incomplete in the first described skeletons of Dimetrodon ; the only caudal vertebrae known were the eleven closest to the hip . Since these first few caudal vertebrae narrow rapidly as they progress farther from the hip , many paleontologists in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries thought that Dimetrodon had a very short tail . It was not until 1927 that a largely complete tail of Dimetrodon was described . 
 = = = Sail = = = 
 The sail of Dimetrodon is formed by elongated neural spines projecting from the vertebrae . Each spine varies in cross @-@ sectional shape from its base to its tip in what is known as " <unk> " differentiation . Near the vertebra body , the spine cross section is laterally compressed into a rectangular shape , and closer to the tip , it takes on a figure @-@ eight shape as a groove runs along either side of the spine . The figure @-@ eight shape is thought to reinforce the spine , preventing bending and fractures . A cross section of the spine of one specimen of Dimetrodon <unk> is rectangular in shape but preserves figure @-@ eight shaped rings close to its center , indicating that the shape of spines may change as individuals age . The microscopic anatomy of each spine varies from base to tip , indicating where it was embedded in the muscles of the back and where it was exposed as part of a sail . The lower or proximal portion of the spine has a rough surface that would have served as an anchoring point for the <unk> muscles of the back , and also has a network of connective tissues called <unk> 's fibers that indicate it was embedded within the body . Higher up on the distal ( outer ) portion of the spine , the bone surface is smoother . The <unk> , a layer of tissue surrounding the bone , is covered in small grooves that presumably supported the blood vessels that vascularized the sail . The large groove that runs the length of the spine was once thought to be a channel for blood vessels , but since the bone does not contain vascular canals , the sail is not thought to have been as highly vascularized as once thought . Some specimens of Dimetrodon preserve deformed areas of the neural spines that appear to be healed @-@ over fractures . The cortical bone that grew over these breaks is highly vascularized , suggesting that soft tissue must have been present on the sail to supply the site with blood vessels . Layered lamellar bone makes up most of the neural spine 's cross @-@ sectional area , and contains lines of arrested growth that can be used to determine the age of each individual at death . In many specimens of D. <unk> the distal portions of spines bend sharply , indicating that the sail would have had an irregular profile in life . Their <unk> suggests that soft tissue may not have extended all the way to the tips of the spines , meaning that the sail 's webbing may not have been as extensive as it is commonly imagined . 
 = = = Skin = = = 
 No fossil evidence of Dimetrodon 's skin has yet been found . Impressions of the skin of a related animal , <unk> , indicate that it would have been smooth and well @-@ provided with glands . Dimetrodon also may have had large scutes on the underside of its tail and belly , as other synapsids did . 
 = = Species = = 
 = = Classification history = = 
 = = = First descriptions by Cope = = = 
 Fossils now attributed to Dimetrodon were first studied by American paleontologist Edward Drinker Cope in the 1870s . Cope had obtained the fossils along with those of many other Permian tetrapods ( four @-@ limbed vertebrates ) from several collectors who had been exploring a group of rocks in Texas called the Red Beds . Among these collectors were Swiss naturalist Jacob Boll , Texas geologist W. F. Cummins , and amateur paleontologist Charles Hazelius Sternberg . Most of Cope 's specimens went to the American Museum of Natural History or to the University of Chicago 's Walker Museum ( most of the Walker fossil collection is now housed in the Field Museum of Natural History ) . 
 Sternberg sent some of his own specimens to German paleontologist Ferdinand <unk> at Munich University , although <unk> was not as prolific as Cope when it came to describing specimens . Cope 's rival Othniel Charles Marsh also collected some bones of Dimetrodon , which he sent to the Walker Museum . The first use of the name Dimetrodon came in 1878 when Cope named the species Dimetrodon <unk> , Dimetrodon <unk> , and Dimetrodon gigas in the scientific journal Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society . 
 However , the first description of a Dimetrodon fossil came a year earlier , when Cope named the species Clepsydrops limbatus from the Red Beds of Texas . ( The name Clepsydrops was first coined by Cope in 1875 for <unk> remains from Vermilion County , Illinois , and was later employed for many <unk> specimens from Texas ; many new species of sphenacodontids from Texas were assigned to either Clepsydrops or Dimetrodon in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries . ) C. limbatus was reclassified as a species of Dimetrodon in 1940 , meaning that Cope 's 1877 paper was the first record of Dimetrodon . 
 Cope was the first to describe a sail @-@ backed synapsid with the naming of Clepsydrops natalis in his 1878 paper , although he called the sail a fin and compared it to the crests of the modern basilisk lizard ( <unk> ) . Sails were not preserved in the specimens of D. <unk> and D. gigas that Cope described in his 1878 paper , but elongated spines were present in the D. <unk> specimen he described . Cope commented on the purpose of the sail in 1886 , writing , " The utility is difficult to imagine . Unless the animal had aquatic habits , and swam on its back , the crest or fin must have been in the way of active movements ... The limbs are not long enough nor the claws acute enough to demonstrate arboreal habits , as in the existing genus <unk> , where a similar crest exists . " 
 = = = Early 20th century descriptions = = = 
 In the first few decades of the twentieth century , American paleontologist E. C. Case authored many studies on Dimetrodon and described several new species . He received funding from the Carnegie Institution for his study of many Dimetrodon specimens in the collections of the American Museum of Natural History and several other museums . Many of these fossils had been collected by Cope but had not been thoroughly described , as Cope was known for erecting new species on the basis of only a few bone fragments . 
 Beginning in the late 1920s , paleontologist Alfred Romer restudied many Dimetrodon specimens and named several new species . In 1940 , Romer coauthored a large study with Llewellyn Ivor Price called " Review of the <unk> " in which the species of Dimetrodon named by Cope and Case were reassessed . Most of the species names considered valid by Romer and Price are still used today . 
 = = = New specimens = = = 
 In the decades following Romer and Price 's monograph , many Dimetrodon specimens were described from localities outside Texas and Oklahoma . The first was described from the Four Corners region of Utah in 1966 and another was described from Arizona in 1969 . In 1975 , Olson reported Dimetrodon material from Ohio . A new species of Dimetrodon called D. occidentalis ( meaning " western Dimetrodon " ) was named in 1977 from New Mexico . The specimens found in Utah and Arizona probably also belong to D. occidentalis . 
 Before these discoveries , a theory existed that a <unk> seaway separated what is now Texas and Oklahoma from more western lands during the Early Permian , isolating Dimetrodon to a small region of North America while a smaller <unk> called Sphenacodon dominated the western area . While this seaway probably did exist , the discovery of fossils outside Texas and Oklahoma show that its extent was limited and that it was not an effective barrier to the distribution of Dimetrodon . 
 In 2001 , a new species of Dimetrodon called D. teutonis was described from the Lower Permian Bromacker locality at the Thuringian Forest of Germany , extending the geographic range of Dimetrodon outside North America for the first time . 
 = = Phylogenetic classification = = 
 Dimetrodon is an early member of a group called synapsids , which include mammals and many of their extinct relatives , though it is not an ancestor any mammal ( which appeared millions of year later ) . It is often mistaken for a dinosaur in popular culture , despite having become extinct some 40 million years ( Ma ) before the first appearance of dinosaurs in the Triassic period . As a synapsid , Dimetrodon is more closely related to mammals than to dinosaurs or any living reptile . By the early 1900s most paleontologists called Dimetrodon a reptile in accordance with Linnean taxonomy , which ranked <unk> as a class and Dimetrodon as a genus within that class . Mammals were assigned to a separate class , and Dimetrodon was described as a " mammal @-@ like reptile " . Paleontologists theorized that mammals evolved from this group in ( what they called ) a reptile @-@ to @-@ mammal transition . 
 = = = Phylogenetic taxonomy of Synapsida = = = 
 Under phylogenetic systematics , the descendants of the last common ancestor of Dimetrodon and all living reptiles would include all mammals because Dimetrodon is more closely related to mammals than to any living reptile . Thus , if it is desired to avoid the clade that contains both mammals and the living reptiles , then Dimetrodon must not be included in that clade — nor any other " mammal @-@ like reptile " . Descendants of the last common ancestor of mammals and reptiles ( which appeared around 310 Ma in the Late Carboniferous ) are therefore split into two clades : Synapsida , which includes Dimetrodon and mammals , and <unk> , which includes living reptiles and all extinct reptiles more closely related to them than to mammals . 
 Within clade Synapsida , Dimetrodon is part of the clade Sphenacodontia , which was first proposed as an early synapsid group in 1940 by paleontologists Alfred Romer and Llewellyn Ivor Price , along with the groups <unk> and <unk> . All three groups are known from the Late Carboniferous and Early Permian . Romer and Price distinguished them primarily by postcranial features such as the shapes of limbs and vertebrae . <unk> was considered the most primitive group because its members appeared the most reptilian , and Sphenacodontia was the most advanced because its members appeared the most like a group called Therapsida , which included the closest relatives to mammals . Romer and Price placed another group of early synapsids called varanopids within Sphenacodontia , considering them to be more primitive than other sphenacodonts like Dimetrodon . They thought varanopids and Dimetrodon @-@ like sphenacodonts were closely related because both groups were carnivorous , although varanopids are much smaller and more lizard @-@ like , lacking sails . 
 The modern view of synapsid relationships was proposed by paleontologist Robert R. Reisz in 1986 , whose study included features mostly found in the skull rather than in the postcranial skeleton . Dimetrodon is still considered a <unk> under this phylogeny , but <unk> are now considered more basal synapsids , falling outside clade Sphenacodontia . Within Sphenacodontia is the group <unk> , which in turn contains Sphenacodontidae and Therapsida . Sphenacodontidae is the group containing Dimetrodon and several other sail @-@ backed synapsids like Sphenacodon and <unk> , while Therapsida includes mammals and their mostly Permian and Triassic relatives . 
 Below is the cladogram Clade Synapsida , which follows this phylogeny of Synapsida as modified from the analysis of Benson ( 2012 ) . 
 = = = Clade Synapsida = = = 
 The below cladogram shows the relationships of a few Dimetrodon species , from Brink et al . , ( 2015 ) . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Function of neural spines = = = 
 Paleontologists have proposed many ways in which the sail could have functioned in life . Some of the first to think about its purpose suggested that the sail may have served as camouflage among reeds while Dimetrodon waited for prey , or as an actual boat @-@ like sail to catch the wind while the animal was in the water . Another is that the long neural spines could have stabilized the trunk by restricting up @-@ and @-@ down movement , which would allow for a more efficient side @-@ to @-@ side movement while walking . 
 = = = = Thermoregulation = = = = 
 In 1940 , Alfred Romer and Llewellyn Ivor Price proposed that the sail served a thermoregulatory function , allowing individuals to warm their bodies with the sun 's heat . In the following years , many models were created to estimate the effectiveness of thermoregulation in Dimetrodon . For example , in a 1973 article in the journal Nature , paleontologists C. D. Bramwell and P. B. Fellgett estimated that it took a 200 kilograms ( 440 lb ) individual about one and a half hours for its body temperature to rise from 26 to 32 ° C ( 79 to 90 ° F ) . In 1986 , Steven C. Haack concluded that the warming was slower than previously thought and that the process probably took four hours . Using a model based on a variety of environmental factors and hypothesized physiological aspects of Dimetrodon , Haack found that the sail allowed Dimetrodon to warm faster in the morning and reach a slightly higher body temperature during the day , but that it was ineffective in releasing excess heat and did not allow Dimetrodon to retain a higher body temperature at night . In 1999 , a group of mechanical engineers created a computer model to analyze the ability of the sail to regulate body temperature during different seasons , and concluded that the sail was beneficial for capturing and releasing heat at all times in the year . 
 Most of these studies give two thermoregulatory roles for the sail of Dimetrodon : one as a means of warming quickly in the morning , and another as a way to cool down when body temperature becomes high . Dimetrodon and all other Early Permian land vertebrates are assumed to have been cold @-@ blooded or poikilothermic , relying on the sun to maintain a high body temperature . Because of its large size , Dimetrodon had high thermal inertia , meaning that changes in body temperature occurred more slowly in it than in smaller @-@ bodied animals . As temperatures rose in the mornings , the small @-@ bodied prey of Dimetrodon could warm their bodies much faster than could something the size of Dimetrodon . Many paleontologists including Haack have proposed that the sail of Dimetrodon may have allowed it to warm quickly in the morning in order to keep pace with its prey . The sail 's large surface area also meant heat could dissipate quickly into the surroundings , useful if the animal needed to release excess heat produced by metabolism or absorbed from the sun . Dimetrodon may have angled its sail away from the sun to cool off or restricted blood flow to the sail to maintain heat at night . 
 In 1986 , J. Scott Turner and C. Richard Tracy proposed that the evolution of a sail in Dimetrodon was related to the evolution of warm @-@ bloodedness in mammal ancestors . They thought that the sail of Dimetrodon enabled it to be homeothermic , maintaining a constant , albeit low , body temperature . Mammals are also homeothermic , although they differ from Dimetrodon in being endothermic , controlling their body temperature internally through heightened metabolism . Turner and Tracy noted that early therapsids , a more advanced group of synapsids closely related to mammals , had long limbs which can release heat in a manner similar to that of the sail of Dimetrodon . The homeothermy that developed in animals like Dimetrodon may have carried over to therapsids through a modification of body shape , which would eventually develop into the warm @-@ bloodedness of mammals . 
 Recent studies on the sail of Dimetrodon and other sphenacodontids support Haack 's 1986 contention that the sail was poorly adapted to releasing heat and maintaining a stable body temperature . The presence of sails in small @-@ bodied species of Dimetrodon such as D. milleri and D. teutonis does not fit the idea that the sail 's purpose was thermoregulation because smaller sails are less able to transfer heat and because small bodies can absorb and release heat easily on their own . Moreover , close relatives of Dimetrodon such as Sphenacodon have very low crests that would have been useless as thermoregulatory devices . The large sail of Dimetrodon is thought to have developed gradually from these smaller crests , meaning that over most of the sail 's evolutionary history , thermoregulation could not have served an important function . 
 Larger bodied specimens of Dimetrodon have larger sails relative to their size , an example of positive allometry . Positive allometry may benefit thermoregulation because it means that , as individuals get larger , surface area increases faster than mass . Larger @-@ bodied animals generate a great deal of heat through metabolism , and the amount of heat that must be dissipated from the body surface is significantly greater than what must be dissipated by smaller @-@ bodied animals . Effective heat dissipation can be predicted across many different animals with a single relationship between mass and surface area . However , a 2010 study of allometry in Dimetrodon found a different relationship between its sail and body mass : the actual scaling exponent of the sail was much larger than the exponent expected in an animal adapted to heat dissipation . The researchers concluded that the sail of Dimetrodon grew at a much faster rate than was necessary for thermoregulation , and suggested that sexual selection was the primary reason for its evolution . 
 = = = = Sexual selection = = = = 
 The allometric exponent for sail height is similar in magnitude to the scaling of interspecific antler length to shoulder height in cervids . Furthermore , as Bakker ( 1970 ) observed in the context of Dimetrodon , many lizard species raise a dorsal ridge of skin during threat and courtship displays , and positively allometric , sexually dimorphic frills and <unk> are present in extant lizards ( Echelle et al . 1978 ; Christian et al . 1995 ) . There is also evidence of sexual dimorphism both in the robustness of the skeleton and in the relative height of the spines of D. limbatus ( Romer and Price 1940 ) . 
 = = = Sexual dimorphism = = = 
 Dimetrodon may have been sexually dimorphic , meaning that males and females had slightly different body sizes . Some specimens of Dimetrodon have been hypothesized as males because they have thicker bones , larger sails , longer skulls , and more pronounced maxillary " steps " than others . Based on these differences , the mounted skeletons in the American Museum of Natural History ( AMNH <unk> ) and the Field Museum of Natural History may be males and the skeletons in the Denver Museum of Nature and Science ( MCZ 1347 ) and the University of Michigan Museum of Natural History may be females . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 Fossils of Dimetrodon are known from the United States ( Texas , Oklahoma , New Mexico , Arizona , Utah and Ohio ) and Germany , areas that were part of the supercontinent <unk> during the Early Permian . Within the United States , almost all material attributed to Dimetrodon has come from three geological groups in north @-@ central Texas and south @-@ central Oklahoma : the Clear Fork Group , the Wichita Group , and the Pearce River Group . Most fossil finds are part of lowland ecosystems which , during the Permian , would have been vast wetlands . In particular , the Red Beds of Texas is an area of great diversity of fossil tetrapods , or four @-@ limbed vertebrates . In addition to Dimetrodon , the most common tetrapods in the Red Beds and throughout Early Permian deposits in the southwestern United States , are the amphibians <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , the <unk> <unk> , the reptile <unk> , and the synapsids <unk> and Edaphosaurus . These tetrapods made up a group of animals that paleontologist Everett C. Olson called the " Permo @-@ Carboniferous <unk> , " a fauna that dominated the continental <unk> ecosystem for several million years . Based on the geology of deposits like the Red Beds , the fauna is thought to have inhabited a well @-@ vegetated lowland deltaic ecosystem . 
 = = = Food web = = = 
 Olson made many inferences on the paleoecology of the Texas Red beds and the role of Dimetrodon within its ecosystem . He proposed several main types of ecosystems in which the earliest tetrapods lived . Dimetrodon belonged to the most primitive ecosystem , which developed from aquatic food webs . In it , aquatic plants were the primary producers and were largely fed upon by fish and aquatic invertebrates . Most land vertebrates fed on these aquatic primary consumers . Dimetrodon was probably the top predator of the Red Beds ecosystem , feeding on a variety of organisms such as the large shark <unk> , the aquatic amphibians <unk> and <unk> , and the terrestrial tetrapods <unk> and <unk> . Insects are known from the Early Permian Red Beds and were probably involved to some degree in the same food web as Dimetrodon , feeding small reptiles like <unk> . The Red Beds assemblage also included some of the first large land @-@ living herbivores like Edaphosaurus and <unk> . Feeding primarily on terrestrial plants , these herbivores did not derive their energy from aquatic food webs . According to Olson , the best modern analogue for the ecosystem Dimetrodon inhabited is the Everglades . The exact lifestyle of Dimetrodon ( amphibious to terrestrial ) has long been controversial , but bone <unk> supports a terrestrial lifestyle , which implies that it would have fed mostly on land , on the banks , or in very shallow water . 
 The only species of Dimetrodon found outside the southwestern United States is Dimetrodon teutonis from Germany . Its remains were found in the <unk> Formation in a fossil site called the Bromacker locality . The Bromacker 's assemblage of Early Permian tetrapods is unusual in that there are few large @-@ bodied synapsids serving the role of top predators . D. teutonis is estimated to have been only 1 @.@ 7 metres ( 5 @.@ 6 ft ) in length , too small to prey on the large <unk> herbivores that are abundant in the Bromacker assemblage . It more likely ate small vertebrates and insects . Only three fossils can be attributed to large predators , and they are thought to have been either large varanopids or small sphenacodonts , both of which could potentially prey on D. teutonis . In contrast to the lowland deltaic Red Beds of Texas , the Bromacker deposits are thought to have represented an upland environment with no aquatic species . It is possible that large @-@ bodied carnivores were not part of the Bromacker assemblage because they were dependent on large aquatic amphibians for food . 
 = = = Juveniles = = = 
 Although some Dimetrodon species could grow very large , many juvenile specimens are known . 
 = Hurricane Isabel = 
 Hurricane Isabel was the costliest , deadliest , and strongest hurricane in the 2003 Atlantic hurricane season . The ninth named storm , fifth hurricane , and second major hurricane of the season , Isabel formed near the Cape Verde Islands from a tropical wave on September 6 in the tropical Atlantic Ocean . It moved northwestward , and within an environment of light wind shear and warm waters it steadily strengthened to reach peak winds of 165 mph ( 265 km / h ) on September 11 . After fluctuating in intensity for four days , Isabel gradually weakened and made landfall on the Outer Banks of North Carolina with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) on September 18 . It quickly weakened over land and became extratropical over western Pennsylvania the next day . 
 In North Carolina , the storm surge from Isabel washed out a portion of Hatteras Island to form what was unofficially known as Isabel Inlet . Damage was greatest along the Outer Banks , where thousands of homes were damaged or even destroyed . The worst of the effects of Isabel occurred in Virginia , especially in the Hampton Roads area and along the shores of rivers as far west and north as Richmond and Washington , DC . Virginia reported the most deaths and damage from the hurricane . About 64 % of the damage and 68 % of the deaths occurred in North Carolina and Virginia . Electric service was disrupted in areas of Virginia for several days , some more rural areas were without electricity for weeks , and local flooding caused thousands of dollars in damage . 
 Moderate to severe damage extended up the Atlantic coastline and as far inland as West Virginia . Roughly six million people were left without electric service in the eastern United States from the strong winds of Isabel . Rainfall from the storm extended from South Carolina to Maine , and westward to Michigan . Throughout the path of Isabel , damage totalled about $ 5 @.@ 7 billion ( 2003 USD , $ 7 @.@ 33 billion 2016 USD ) . 16 deaths in seven U.S. states were directly related to the hurricane , with 35 deaths in six states and one Canadian province indirectly related to the hurricane . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on September 1 . An area of low pressure associated with the wave moved slowly westward , and its convection initially appeared to become better organized . On September 3 , as it passed to the south of the Cape Verde islands , organization within the system degraded , though convection increased the next day . The system gradually became better organized , and Dvorak classifications began early on September 5 . Based on the development of a closed surface circulation , it is estimated the system developed into Tropical Depression Thirteen early on September 6 . Hours later , it intensified into Tropical Storm Isabel , though operationally the National Hurricane Center did not begin issuing advisories until 13 hours after it first developed . 
 Located within an area of light wind shear and warm waters , Isabel gradually organized as curved bands developed around a circular area of deep convection near the center . It steadily strengthened as it moved to the west @-@ northwest , and Isabel strengthened to a hurricane on September 7 subsequent to the development of a large , yet ragged eye located near the deepest convection . The eye , overall convective pattern , and outflow steadily improved in organization , and deep convection quickly surrounded the 40 @-@ mile ( 60 km ) -wide eye . Isabel intensified on September 8 to reach major hurricane status while located 1 @,@ 300 miles ( 2 @,@ 100 km ) east @-@ northeast of Barbuda . On September 9 , Isabel reached a primary peak intensity of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) for around 24 hours , a minimal Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . 
 Early on September 10 , the eyewall became less defined , the convection near the eye became eroded , and northeasterly outflow became slightly restricted . As a result , Isabel weakened slightly to a Category 3 hurricane . The hurricane turned more to the west due to the influence of the Bermuda @-@ Azores High . Later on September 10 , Isabel restrengthened to a Category 4 hurricane after convection deepened near the increasingly organizing eyewall . The hurricane continued to intensify , and Isabel reached its peak intensity of 165 mph ( 270 km / h ) on September 11 , a Category 5 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . Due to an eyewall replacement cycle , Isabel weakened slightly , though it retained Category 5 status for 24 hours . As Isabel underwent another eyewall replacement cycle , outflow degraded in appearance and convection around the eye weakened , and early on September 13 Isabel weakened to a strong Category 4 hurricane . A weakness in the ridge to its north allowed the hurricane to turn to the west @-@ northwest . After completing the replacement cycle , the hurricane 's large 40 mile ( 65 km ) wide eye became better defined , and late on the 13th Isabel re @-@ attained Category 5 status . A NOAA Hurricane Hunter Reconnaissance Aircraft flying into the hurricane launched a dropsonde which measured an instantaneous wind speed of 233 mph ( 375 km / h ) , the strongest instantaneous wind speed recorded in an Atlantic hurricane . Cloud tops warmed again shortly thereafter , and Isabel weakened to a strong Category 4 hurricane early on September 14 . Later that day , it re @-@ organized , and for the third time it attained Category 5 status while located 400 miles ( 650 km ) north of San Juan , Puerto Rico . 
 Cloud tops around the center warmed again early on September 15 and Isabel weakened to a Category 4 hurricane . Later that day , the inner core of deep convection began to deteriorate while the eye decayed in appearance . As a ridge to its northwest build southeastward , it resulted in Isabel decelerating as it turned to the north @-@ northwest . Increasing vertical wind shear contributed in weakening the hurricane further , and Isabel weakened to a Category 2 hurricane on September 16 while located 645 miles ( 1035 km ) southeast of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . Convection remained minimal , though outflow retained excellent organization , and Isabel remained a Category 2 hurricane for two days until making landfall between Cape Lookout and Ocracoke Island on September 18 with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . It weakened after it made landfall , though due to its fast forward motion Isabel remained a hurricane until reaching western Virginia early on September 19 . After passing through West Virginia as a tropical storm , Isabel became extratropical over Western Pennsylvania including Pittsburgh . The system crossed Lake Erie into Canada . Early on September 20 , the <unk> remnant of Isabel was absorbed by a larger extratropical storm over the Cochrane District of Ontario . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Two days before Isabel made landfall , the National Hurricane Center issued a hurricane watch from Little River , South Carolina to Chincoteague , Virginia , including the Pamlico and Albemarle Sounds and the lower Chesapeake Bay . The NHC also issued a tropical storm watch south of Little River , South Carolina to the mouth of the Santee River , as well as from Chincoteague , Virginia northward to Little Egg Inlet , New Jersey . Hurricane and tropical storm warnings were gradually issued for portions of the East Coast of the United States . By the time Isabel made landfall , a tropical storm warning existed from Chincoteague , Virginia to Fire Island , New York and from Cape Fear , North Carolina to the mouth of the Santee River in South Carolina , and a hurricane warning existed from Chincoteague , Virginia to Cape Fear . Landfall forecasts were very accurate ; from three days prior , the average track forecast error for its landfall was only 36 miles ( 58 km ) , and for 48 hours in advance the average track error was 18 miles ( 29 km ) . 
 Officials declared mandatory evacuations for 24 counties in North Carolina , Virginia , and Maryland , though in general not many left . According to a survey conducted by the United States Department of Commerce , evacuation rates were estimated as follows ; 45 % in the Outer Banks , 23 % in the area around the Pamlico Sound , 23 % in Virginia , and about 15 % in Maryland . The threat of Isabel resulted in the evacuation of hundreds of thousands of residents , primarily in North Carolina and Virginia , and included more than 12 @,@ 000 residents staying in emergency shelters . 
 19 major airports along the East Coast of the United States were closed , with more than 1 @,@ 500 flights canceled . The Washington Metro and Metrobus system closed prior to the arrival of the storm , and Amtrak canceled nearly all trains south of the nation 's capital . Schools and businesses throughout its path closed prior to Isabel 's arrival to allow time to prepare ; hardware and home improvement stores reported brisk business of plywood , flashlights , batteries , and portable generators , as residents prepared for the storm 's potential impact . The federal government was closed excluding emergency staff members . The United States Navy ordered the removal of 40 ships and submarines and dozens of aircraft from naval sites near Norfolk , Virginia . 
 A contingency plan was established at the Tomb of the Unknowns at Arlington National Cemetery that , should the winds exceed <unk> , the guards could take positions in the trophy room ( above the Tomb Plaza and providing continual sight of the Tomb ) but the plan was never implemented . However , it spawned an urban legend that the Third Infantry sent orders to seek shelter , orders that were deliberately disobeyed . 
 On September 18 , the Canadian Hurricane Centre issued heavy rainfall and wind warnings for portions of southern Ontario . A gale warning was also issued for Lake Ontario , eastern Lake Erie , the Saint Lawrence River and Georgian Bay . A news report on September 14 warned conditions could be similar to the disaster caused by Hurricane Hazel 49 years prior , resulting in widespread media coverage on the hurricane . Researchers on a Convair 580 flight studied the structure of Isabel transitioning into an extratropical storm , after two similar studies for Hurricane Michael in 2000 and Tropical Storm Karen in 2001 . While flying in a thunderstorm , ice build forced the plane to descend . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Strong winds from Isabel extended from North Carolina to New England and westward to West Virginia . The winds , combined with previous rainfall which moistened the soil , downed many trees and power lines across its path , leaving about 6 million electricity customers without power at some point . Parts of coastal Virginia , especially in the Hampton Roads and Northeast North Carolina areas , were without electricity for almost a month . Coastal areas suffered from waves and its powerful storm surge , with areas in eastern North Carolina and southeast Virginia reporting severe damage from both winds and the storm surge . Throughout its path , Isabel resulted in $ 3 @.@ 6 billion in damage ( 2003 USD , $ 4 @.@ 63 billion 2016 USD ) and 51 deaths , of which 16 were directly related to the storm 's effects . 
 The governors of Pennsylvania , West Virginia , Maryland , New Jersey , and Delaware declared states of emergency . Isabel was the first major hurricane to threaten the Mid @-@ Atlantic States and the Upper South since Hurricane Floyd in September 1999 . Isabel 's greatest effect was due to flood damage , the worst in some areas of Virginia since 1972 's Hurricane Agnes . More than 60 million people were affected to some degree — a similar number to Floyd but more than any other hurricane in recent memory . 
 = = = Caribbean and Southeast United States = = = 
 Powerful surf affected the northern coastlines of the islands in the Greater Antilles . Strong swells also lashed the Bahamas . During most hurricanes , the location of the Bahamas prevents powerful swells of Atlantic hurricanes from striking southeast Florida . However , the combination of the location , forward speed , and strength of Isabel produced strong swells through the Providence Channel onto a narrow 10 mile ( 16 km ) stretch of the southeastern Florida coastline ; wave heights peaked at 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) at Delray Beach . The swells capsized a watercraft and injured its two passengers at Boynton Beach , and a swimmer required assistance to be rescued near Juno Beach . Minor beach erosion was reported in Palm Beach County . In the northern portion of the state , waves reached up to 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 5 m ) in height at Flagler Beach , causing the Flagler Beach Pier to be closed due to damaged boards from the waves . Rip currents from Isabel killed a surfer at an unguarded beach in Nassau County , with an additional six people requiring rescue from the currents . The beaches were later closed during the worst of the rough surf . 
 In northeastern South Carolina , the outer rainbands produced moderate winds reaching 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) at Myrtle Beach . Rainfall was light , peaking at 1 @.@ 34 inches ( 34 mm ) in Loris . 
 = = = North Carolina = = = 
 Isabel produced moderate to heavy damage across eastern North Carolina , totaling $ 450 million ( 2003 USD , $ 579 million 2016 USD ) . Damage was heaviest in Dare County , where storm surge flooding and strong winds damaged thousands of houses . The storm surge produced a 2 @,@ 000 foot ( 600 m ) wide inlet on Hatteras Island , unofficially known as Isabel Inlet , isolating Hatteras by road for two months . Strong winds downed hundreds of trees of across the state , leaving up to 700 @,@ 000 residents without power . Most areas with power outages had power restored within a few days . The hurricane directly killed one person and indirectly killed two in the state . 
 = = = Virginia = = = 
 The storm surge assailed much of southeastern Virginia causing the worst flooding seen in the area since the 1933 Chesapeake – Potomac hurricane , peaking at an estimated 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) in Richmond along the James River . The surge caused significant damage to homes along river ways , especially along the middle reaches of the James River basin . The strong storm surge surpassed the floodgate to the Midtown Tunnel while workers attempted to close the gate ; about 44 million US gallons ( 170 @,@ 000 m3 ) of water flooded the tunnel entirely in just 40 minutes , with the workers barely able to escape . The damage to the electrical grid and flooding kept Old Dominion University , Norfolk State University , Virginia Commonwealth University and many of the region 's other major educational institutions closed for almost a week . Further inland , heavy rainfall was reported , peaking at 20 @.@ 2 inches ( 513 mm ) in Sherando , Virginia , causing damage and severe flash flooding . Winds from the hurricane destroyed over 1 @,@ 000 houses and damaged 9 @,@ 000 more ; damage in the state totaled about $ 1 @.@ 85 billion ( 2003 USD , $ 2 @.@ 38 billion 2016 USD ) , among the costliest tropical cyclones in Virginia history . The passage of Isabel also resulted in 32 deaths in the state , 10 directly from the storm 's effects and 22 indirectly related . 
 = = = Mid @-@ Atlantic = = = 
 About 1 @.@ 24 million people lost power throughout Maryland and Washington , D.C. The worst of Isabel 's effects came from its storm surge , which inundated areas along the coast and resulted in severe beach erosion . In Eastern Maryland , hundreds of buildings were damaged or destroyed by the storm surge and related tidal flooding . The most severe flooding occurred in the southern portions of Dorchester and Somerset counties and on Kent Island in Queen Anne 's County . Thousands of houses were affected in Central Maryland , with severe storm surge flooding reported in Baltimore and Annapolis . Washington , D.C. sustained moderate damage , primarily from the winds . Throughout Maryland and Washington , damage totaled about $ 945 million ( 2003 USD , $ 1 @.@ 22 billion 2016 USD ) , with only one direct fatality due to flooding . 
 The effects of the hurricane in Delaware were compounded by flooding caused by the remnants of Tropical Storm Henri days before . Moderate winds of up to 62 mph ( 100 km / h ) in Lewes downed numerous trees , tree limbs , and power lines across the state , leaving at least 15 @,@ 300 without power . Numerous low @-@ lying areas were flooded due to high surf , strong storm surge , or run @-@ off from flooding further inland . The passage of Hurricane Isabel resulted in $ 40 million in damage ( 2003 USD , $ 51 @.@ 5 million 2016 USD ) and no casualties in the state . 
 = = = Northeast United States = = = 
 The winds from Isabel downed hundreds of trees and power lines across New Jersey , leaving hundreds of thousands without power ; a falling tree killed one person . Rough waves and a moderate storm surge along the coastline caused moderate to severe beach erosion , and one person was killed from the rough waves . Damage in the state totaled $ 50 million ( 2003 USD , $ 64 @.@ 3 million 2016 USD ) . 
 The passage of Hurricane Isabel in Pennsylvania resulted in $ 160 million in damage ( 2003 USD , $ 206 million 2016 USD ) and 2 indirect deaths in Pennsylvania . One person suffered from carbon monoxide poisoning , believed to be caused due to improperly ventilated generators in an area affected by the power outages . Moderate winds left about 1 @.@ 4 million customers without power across the state as a result of trees falling into power lines , with dozens of houses and cars damaged by the trees . 
 Damage in New York totaled $ 90 million ( 2003 USD , $ 116 million 2016 USD ) , with Vermont reporting about $ 100 @,@ 000 in damage ( 2003 USD , $ 129 @,@ 000 2016 USD ) . Falling trees from moderate winds downed power lines across the region , causing sporadic power outages . Two people died in the region as a result of the hurricane , both due to the rough surf from Isabel . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 In West Virginia , the storm produced moderate rainfall across the state that peaked at 6 @.@ 88 in ( 175 mm ) near Sugar Grove . The rainfall resulted in mudslides and flash flooding , covering several roads and washing away two bridges . The South Branch Potomac River crested at 24 @.@ 7 feet ( 7 @.@ 5 m ) , 9 @.@ 3 feet ( 2 @.@ 8 m ) above flood state near Springfield . The flooding broke a levee at Michael Field , and in Mineral County one school and 14 basements were flooded . In Jefferson County , two people required rescue after a car drove into floodwaters . Although sustained winds were weak in the state , wind gusts reached 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) at Martinsburg . With the wet grounds , the wind gusts toppled thousands of trees , which fell onto homes , roads , and power lines . About 1 @.@ 4 million residents across the state were left without power . Damage in the state totaled $ 20 million ( 2003 USD , $ 25 @.@ 7 million 2016 USD ) . No deaths were reported , and three were injured from the hurricane . 
 Isabel dropped light to moderate precipitation across the eastern half of Ohio , with isolated locations reporting over 3 in ( 75 mm ) . Moisture from Isabel dropped light rainfall across eastern Michigan and peaked at 1 @.@ 55 inches ( 39 mm ) at Mount Clemens . Additionally , Doppler weather radar estimated rainfall approached 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) in St. Clair County . No damage was reported from Isabel in the region . 
 Swells from Isabel produced moderate surf along the Atlantic coast of Nova Scotia , particularly in the Gulf of Maine . Isabel also produced rough surf in Lake Ontario , with waves reaching 4 m ( 13 ft ) along the western portion . At Hamilton , the waves surpassed seawalls and produced spray onto coastal streets . Rainfall peaked at 59 mm ( 2 @.@ 3 in ) , which caused minor flooding and led to one traffic fatality . About 27 @,@ 000 people lost power , mostly near Toronto . The strong pressure gradient between Isabel and a high pressure system over eastern Canada produced strong easterly winds across lakes Ontario and Erie . A buoy in Lake Ontario reported a peak gust of 78 km / h ( 49 mph ) , and gusts reached as strong as 81 km / h ( 51 mph ) at Port Colborne , Ontario . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 By about a week after the passage of the hurricane , President George W. Bush declared disaster areas for 36 North Carolina counties , 77 counties and independent cities in Virginia , the entire state of Maryland , all three counties in Delaware and six West Virginia counties . The disaster declaration allocated the use of federal funds for rebuilding and providing aid in the aftermath of hurricane Isabel . By about four months after the passage of the hurricane , disaster aid totaled about $ 516 million ( 2003 USD , $ 664 million 2016 USD ) , primarily in North Carolina and Virginia . Over 166 @,@ 000 residents applied for individual assistance , with about $ 117 million ( 2003 USD , $ 151 million 2016 USD ) approved for residents to assist with temporary housing and home repairs . About 50 @,@ 000 business owners applied for Small Business Administration loans , with about $ 178 million ( 2003 USD , $ 229 million 2016 USD ) approved for the assistance loans . About 40 @,@ 000 people visited local disaster recovery centers , designed to provide additional information regarding the aftermath of the hurricane . 
 In North Carolina , hundreds of residents were stranded in Hatteras following the formation of Isabel Inlet . People who were not residents were not allowed to be on the Outer Banks for two weeks after the hurricane due to damaged road conditions . When visitors were allowed to return , many ventured to see the new inlet , despite a 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 @-@ km ) walk from the nearest road . Initially , long term solutions to the Isabel Inlet such as building a bridge or a ferry system were considered , though they were ultimately canceled in favor of pumping sand and filling the inlet . Coastal geologists were opposed to the solution , stating the evolution of the Outer Banks is dependent on inlets from hurricanes . Dredging operations began on October 17 , about a month after the hurricane struck . The United States Geological Survey used sand from the ferry channel to the southwest of Hatteras Island , a choice made to minimize the impact to submerged aquatic vegetation and due to the channel being filled somewhat during the hurricane . On November 22 , about two months after the hurricane struck , North Carolina Highway 12 and Hatteras Island were reopened to public access . On the same day , the ferry between Hatteras and Ocracoke was reopened . 
 In West Virginia , the power outages were restored within a week . Power workers throughout Canada assisted the severely affected power companies from Maryland to North Carolina . Hydro @-@ Québec sent 25 teams to the New York City area to assist in power outages . 
 Because of widespread property damage and extensive death tolls the name " Isabel " was retired after the 2003 season , and will not be used for future Atlantic hurricanes . It was replaced by " Ida " for the naming list for the 2009 season . The names Ina and Ivy were also suggested as possible replacement names . 
 = Upgrade U = 
 " Upgrade U " is a song by American singer and songwriter Beyoncé from her second studio album B 'Day ( 2006 ) . The song features additional vocals from American rapper Jay @-@ Z. It was composed by Swizz Beatz , Cameron Wallace , Beyoncé , MK , Makeba , Sean Garrett , Angela Beyincé , Jay @-@ Z , Willie Clarke , Clarence Reid , and Beyoncé 's sister , Solange . Columbia Records released " Upgrade U " as a promotional single on November 27 , 2006 in the United States only . " Upgrade U " draws from the genres of hip hop and contemporary R & B. The concept of the song revolves around a woman offering luxuries to a man to upgrade his lifestyle . 
 " Upgrade U " was generally well received by music critics , some praising Knowles ' assertiveness while singing about her desire to give luxuries to her man . Many also praised the natural chemistry that Knowles and Jay @-@ Z have in the song . After the release of B 'Day , " Upgrade U " started to gain popularity on R & B and hip hop radio stations in the United States . This prompted its pre @-@ release debut on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart and later on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart ; after its promotional release , the song peaked at number 11 and at number 59 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs and the Hot 100 charts respectively . 
 The music video for the song was directed by Melina Matsoukas , and took one and a half days of shooting . Knowles did an impersonation of Jay @-@ Z in the clip and is also seen amidst gold watches and jewelry , continuing the motif of luxury that is alluded to in the song . It finally emerged as the forty @-@ fifth best R & B / Hip @-@ Hop song of 2007 in the United States . Although Knowles did not perform " Upgrade U " in any televised appearances , the song was a part of her set list on The Beyoncé Experience tour ( 2007 ) , and I Am ... Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) , as well as her and Jay Z 's joint On the Run Tour ( 2014 ) . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Upgrade U " was written by Knowles , MK , Makeba , Sean Garrett , Angela Beyincé , Jay @-@ Z , Willie Clarke , Blowfly and Solange Knowles ; with production from Swizz Beatz , Cameron Wallace , and Knowles . It was recorded at Sony Music Studios in New York City . T.I. was to be the original guest on the song ; however , he was not able to record his verse for the song due to business reasons . Ultimately , Jay @-@ Z was selected as the featuring artist ; " Upgrade U " becoming his second collaboration with Knowles on B 'Day – the first being " Déjà Vu " ( 2006 ) . The song was released as a twelve @-@ inch promotional single on November 27 , 2006 , in the United States only . 
 = = Music structure , theme and lyrics = = 
 " Upgrade U " is a hip hop song , with influences of pop , soul , and modern R & B. According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing , the song is set in the key of D minor , with a moderate groove of 92 beats per minute in common time . Knowles ' vocals range from the note of G ♯ 3 to E5 . The song features a synth @-@ horn backdrop as well as a bounce @-@ based hand clap beat . Like most of the tracks on the album , the beat is reinforced by the Roland TR @-@ 808 drum machine , while the song also features a heavy bass . " Upgrade U " samples Betty Wright 's 1968 song " Girls Can 't Do What the Guys Do " , composed by Willie Clarke and Clarence Reid . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine noted that similarities between " Upgrade U " and songs from the Destiny 's Child era in the sense that it could make a " female self @-@ empowerment " anthem . According to Mike Joseph of PopMatters , " Upgrade U " contains " the natural chemistry " that Knowles and Jay @-@ Z have in real life . The concept of the song revolves around a woman offering luxuries to a man , to upgrade the lifestyle and the reputation of the latter ; similar to the concept of " Suga Mama " , another track from B 'Day . Similarly , Phil Harrison of Timeout commented that the song has " a strange business @-@ like " quality , which seems to posit a love affair as a business arrangement . 
 Throughout the song , both Jay @-@ Z and Knowles name @-@ check a list of goods from prestige brands , companies , and personalities : " Audemars Piguet " , a Swiss watchmaker ; " Jacob the <unk> " , a celebrity jeweler ; " Cartier " , a jeweler and watch manufacturer ; " Hermès " , a luxury goods company ; " Lorraine Schwartz " , a celebrity jeweler ; " Ralph Lauren Purple Label " , a higher @-@ end division of the famous designer 's clothing line ; " Natura <unk> Diamond Cream " , a diamond dust mixed with cream ; " 6 star pent suites " ( penthouse ) , of which only a handful exist in the world , such as at Crown Macau in China and Dreams Los Cabos near San Jose del Cabo in Mexico ; " The Amalfi Coast " , located in Southern Italy ; " Fendi " , a luxury goods company ; and " The Bloomberg Luxury Accommodation Group " , partly owned by the <unk> and Zobel families and located around the world catering to Hollywood @-@ millionaire types . According to Eb Haynes of AllHipHop , Knowles displays " a lot of strength and confidence " when she mentions the assets she will gift her man to upgrade his lifestyle . 
 The song opens with a dialogue between Knowles and Jay @-@ Z , with his verse rap sampling the lyrics , " How you gon ' upgrade me ? What 's higher than number one ? You know I used to beat that block . Now I be 's the block . " In the first verse , Knowles sings , " I hear you be the block but I 'm the lights that keep the streets on " . The chorus samples the lyrics : " You need a real woman in your life , that 's a good look [ ... ] Take care of home and still fly , that 's a good look [ ... ] Let me upgrade you , flip a new page " . In the second verse , according to Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe , Knowles " disturbingly conflates transforming her man into a leader " by providing him with Veblen goods with " what Martin [ Luther King , Jr . ] did for the people " , and after declaring herself the equal of her man offers to " let [ him ] take the lead role " . Describing the lyrics of the second verse as Knowles ' " funnier and more idiosyncratic than ever " , Tim Finney of Pitchfork Media commented that she boasts of the song 's " extreme makeover hard @-@ sell " as she probably knows that she is " the only R & B singer " who could deliver those lines " with a straight face . " Before the song ends , Jay @-@ Z performs another verse @-@ rap where he compares " the rock on his lady ’ s finger to a tumor " . In the third verse , Knowles declares to her love interest that his dynasty will ever remain incomplete without " a chief like [ her ] " . She then delivers the chorus again before switching to her fourth and last verse : " Hermes briefcase , Cartier top clips , silk @-@ lined blazers " and the song ends . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Upgrade U " received positive reviews from music critics , including those who complimented the assertive way in which Knowles expresses her desire of upgrading her partner with valuable assets . Eb Haynes of AllHipHop called the track " the finest of the Bonnie and Clyde , Ride or Die series " . Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe complimented the way that Knowles " declares herself an equal " and " disturbingly conflates transforming her man into a leader " . Chris Williams of The Washington Post described the track a reflection of " buy @-@ me @-@ love sentiments " . Andy Kellman of Allmusic considered " Upgrade U " the " most potent track on the album " , which he described as a " low @-@ slung Cameron Wallace production where Beyoncé wears and buys the pants while making her proposition sound more like empowerment than emasculation " . Tim Finney of Pitchfork Media called it a " stiffly blaring " track and praised its lyrics , describing them to paraphrase as eccentric in a pleasant manner . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine found " Upgrade U " could very well be a Destiny 's Child track . 
 Bernard Zuel of The Sydney Morning Herald referred to it as a " mechanical " track . Phil Harrison of Timeout commented that " [ ' Upgrade U ' ] hints at ambivalence towards bling aspirations . " Mike Joseph of PopMatters wrote that the song survives not only due to Knowles ' confident vocals , but also due to the chemistry that she and Jay @-@ Z have both in the song and in real @-@ life . He also added that Jay @-@ Z ’ s rhymes strongly suggest that " this rhyme animal is hungrier than ever " . Carolyn Davis of US Magazine described " Upgrade U " as a " catchy track " where Knowles and Jay @-@ Z address rumors concerning " a possible engagement " . 
 Joy Rosen of Entertainment Weekly 's listed " Upgrade U " at number five on his list of The 10 Best Songs of 2007 , complimenting the collaboration of Knowles and Jay @-@ Z in the song as " both halves of music 's power couple pay tribute to the virtues of materialism . " Shaheem Reid , Jayson Rodriguez and Rahman Dukes of MTV News placed the song at number 11 on his year @-@ end list of 27 Essential R & B Songs of 2007 . " Upgrade U " was nominated in the category of Best Duet / Collaboration at the 2007 BET Awards , but lost to " Runaway Love " by Ludacris ( featuring Mary J. Blige ) . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 After the release of B 'Day , and before " Upgrade U " ' s official release as a single , the song gained popularity on R & B and hip hop radio stations in the United States . Consequently , it entered the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , and later the US Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 92 in the issue dated November 18 , 2006 . After its release as a promotional single , it reached a peak at number fifty @-@ nine on the Hot 100 chart and a peak at number 11 on the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . The song re @-@ entered the " Hot 100 " chart on four occasions : it first fell out of the chart on January 13 , 2007 ; re @-@ entered on January 20 , 2007 , at number 94 and charted for two weeks only ; it re @-@ entered the chart on February 10 , 2007 , and was given the title of ' Best Comeback ' , though it fell off the chart the following week ; it re @-@ entered seven weeks later on March 24 , 2007 , at number 98 , and stayed there for two weeks ; The song made its last comeback on the Hot 100 chart on April 14 , 2007 , at number eighty , once again gaining the title of the ' Best Comeback ' . This time it remained in the chart for five weeks . Overall , it remained on the Hot 100 for eighteen non @-@ consecutive weeks . Although not officially released in the United Kingdom , " Upgrade U " charted for three weeks on the UK Singles Chart and peaked at number 176 on May 19 , 2007 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Upgrade U " was shot during the two @-@ week filming for the B 'Day Anthology Video Album . It was directed by Melina and Knowles herself . The video was shot between those of " Kitty Kat " and " Green Light " , and took about one and half days of filming . Jay @-@ Z performed his rap scenes first , afterwards Knowles studied his scene , and then did her impersonation of him . Melina said : " If anybody knows Jay @-@ Z , it would be Beyoncé " . Knowles commented on her impersonation of Jay @-@ Z on MTV , " I love what I did in [ ' Upgrade U ' ] because it 's completely out of my character , or at least the character that people think I am . I was pretending to be Jay [ <unk> ] , and he was there , and I told him he had to leave , because I couldn 't do it with him in the room — it was way too embarrassing . I think I did a pretty good job . I had the lip curl down ! " The video premiered on February 28 , 2007 , on BET 's 106 & Park , with the video for Knowles ' other single release , " Beautiful Liar " ( 2007 ) featuring Shakira , premiering the same day on Total Request Live ( TRL ) . 
 In the beginning of the video , Beyoncé is seen mouthing the words of Jay @-@ Z 's lyrics , dressed in masculine hip @-@ hop style clothing . She is later seen wearing vintage <unk> 907 sunglasses while singing in the backseat of a Rolls Royce Silver Cloud III . During the choruses she dances in a gold minidress , in front of a group of male back @-@ up dancers . She continues the Jay @-@ Z imitation through his rapped verse and , halfway through it , Jay @-@ Z appears to finish the rap himself with Beyoncé dancing around him , wearing a classic white dress @-@ shirt . Beyoncé is seen amidst gold watches and jewelry , continuing the motif of luxury that is alluded to in the song . The music video for " Upgrade U " peaked at number six on Black Entertainment Television 's 106 & Park while it peaked at number one in the United Kingdom on MTV Base 's Chart Show on May 16 , 2007 . The music video has been used as a commercial to advertise high definition satellite television from DirecTV ; though portions of the video were re @-@ shot for her announcement . 
 = = Live performances and covers = = 
