 Although Knowles did not perform the song in any televised appearances , it was a part of her set list on The Beyoncé Experience with Jay @-@ Z in Los Angeles on September 2 , 2007 , and her worldwide I Am ... Tour . When Knowles performed the song in Sunrise , Florida , on June 29 , 2009 , she was wearing a glittering gold leotard . As she sang , animated graphics of turntables , faders , and other nightclub equipment pulsed behind her , her dancers and the musicians . Knowles was accompanied by two drummers , two keyboardists , a percussionist , a horn section , three backup vocalists ( collectively called Suga Mama ) , and guitarist Bibi McGill . " Upgrade U " was included as the fourteenth and twenty @-@ second tracks on her live albums The Beyoncé Experience Live ( 2007 ) and I Am ... World Tour ( 2010 ) , respectively . " Upgrade U " was part of the set list of Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z 's co @-@ headlining On the Run Tour ( 2014 ) . 
 2 Pistols ' debut single " She Got It " which features T @-@ Pain phrases " let me upgrade u " has been used on his 2008 debut album , Death Before Dishonor . Additionally , Fabolous ' " Make Me Better " featuring Ne @-@ Yo phrases " front page ya " has been used on From Nothin ' to Somethin ' . The phrase " let me upgrade U " from the song has also been used in Lil ' Mama 's " Lip Gloss " , Kanye West 's first verse in the freestyle of Rich Boy 's " Throw Some D 's " , and Bow Wow 's rap verse on the remix of Paula DeAnda 's " Easy " . Lil Wayne performed a freestyle over the beat of " Upgrade U " on his mixtape Da Drought 3 that was also included on Nicki Minaj 's mixtape " Playtime Is Over " . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 12 " single 
 Side I 
 " Upgrade U " ( album version ) – 4 : 32 
 " Upgrade U " ( instrumental ) – 4 : 32 
 Side II 
 " Upgrade U " ( album version ) – 4 : 32 
 " Upgrade U " ( a cappella ) – 4 : 32 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from B 'Day liner notes . 
 Beyoncé Knowles and Jay @-@ Z – Vocals 
 Jason Goldstein – Mixing 
 Steve Tolle – Assistant Mixer 
 Sony Music Studios , New York City – Recording Location 
 Rob Kinelski – Recording Assistant 
 = = Charts = = 
 = A Song Flung Up to Heaven = 
 A Song Flung Up to Heaven is the sixth book in author Maya Angelou 's series of autobiographies . Set between 1965 and 1968 , it begins where Angelou 's previous book All God 's Children Need Traveling Shoes ends , with Angelou 's trip from Accra , Ghana , where she had lived for the past four years , back to the United States . Two " calamitous events " frame the beginning and end of the book — the assassinations of Malcolm X and Martin Luther King , Jr . Angelou describes how she dealt with these events and the sweeping changes in both the country and in her personal life , and how she coped with her return home . The book ends with Angelou at " the threshold of her literary career " , writing the opening lines to her first autobiography , I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings . 
 As she had begun to do in Caged Bird , and continued throughout her series , Angelou upheld the long tradition of African @-@ American autobiography . At the same time she made a deliberate attempt to challenge the usual structure of the autobiography by critiquing , changing , and expanding the genre . Most reviewers agreed that the book was made up of a series of vignettes . By the time Song was written in 2002 , sixteen years after her previous autobiography , Angelou had experienced great fame and recognition as an author and poet . She recited her poem On the Pulse of Morning at the inauguration of President Bill Clinton in 1993 , becoming the first poet to make an inaugural recitation since Robert Frost at John F. Kennedy 's in 1961 . She had become recognized and highly respected as a spokesperson for Blacks and women . Angelou was , as scholar Joanne Braxton has stated , " without a doubt , ... America 's most visible black woman autobiographer " . She had also become , as reviewer Richard Long stated , " a major autobiographical voice of the time " . 
 The title of Song was based upon the same poem , by African @-@ American poet Paul Lawrence Dunbar , the basis of her first autobiography . Like Angelou 's other autobiographies , the book was greeted with both praise and disappointment , although reviews were generally positive . Reviewers praised Angelou for " the culmination of a unique autobiographical achievement " , while others criticized her for coming across as " smug " . The 2002 spoken @-@ word album by the same name , based on the book , received a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album in 2003 . 
 = = Background = = 
 A Song Flung Up to Heaven ( 2002 ) is the sixth of Maya Angelou 's series of autobiographies , and at the time of its publication it was considered to be the final installment . It was completed 16 years after the publication of her previous autobiography , All God 's Children Need Traveling Shoes ( 1986 ) and over thirty years after the publication of her first , I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings . Angelou wrote two collections of essays in the interim , Wouldn 't Take Nothing for My Journey Now ( 1993 ) and Even the Stars Look Lonesome ( 1997 ) , which writer Hilton Als called her " wisdom books " and " homilies strung together with autobiographical texts " . She also continued her poetry with several volumes , including a collection of her poems , The Complete Collected Poems of Maya Angelou ( 1994 ) . In 1993 , Angelou recited her poem On the Pulse of Morning at the inauguration of President Bill Clinton , becoming the first poet to make an inaugural recitation since Robert Frost at John F. Kennedy 's inauguration in 1961 . Her recitation resulted in more fame and recognition for her previous works , and broadened her appeal " across racial , economic , and educational boundaries " . 
 By 2002 , when Song was published , Angelou had become recognized and highly respected as a spokesperson for Blacks and women . She was , as scholar Joanne Braxton has stated , " without a doubt , ... America 's most visible black woman autobiographer " . She had also become " a major autobiographical voice of the time " . Angelou was one of the first African @-@ American female writers to publicly discuss her personal life , and one of the first to use herself as a central character in her books . Writer Julian Mayfield , who called her first autobiography " a work of art that eludes description " , stated that Angelou 's series set a precedent not only for other Black women writers , but for the genre of autobiography as a whole . 
 Als called Angelou one of the " pioneers of self @-@ exposure " , willing to focus honestly on the more negative aspects of her personality and choices . For example , while Angelou was composing her second autobiography , Gather Together in My Name , she was concerned about how her readers would react to her disclosure that she had been a prostitute . Her husband Paul Du Feu talked her into publishing the book by encouraging her to " tell the truth as a writer " and to " be honest about it " . " Song " took 16 years to write because it was so painful for her to relive the events she described , including the assassinations of Malcolm X and Martin Luther King , Jr . She did not celebrate her birthday , April 4 , for many years because it was also the anniversary of King 's death , choosing instead to send his widow Coretta Scott King flowers . Although Song was considered the final installment in her series of autobiographies , Angelou continued writing about her life story through essays , and at the age of 85 , published her seventh autobiography Mom & Me & Mom ( 2013 ) , which focused on her relationship with her mother . The spoken word album based on Song and narrated by Angelou received a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album in 2003 . 
 = = = Title = = = 
 Angelou returned to the same poem she based the title of Caged Bird upon for the title of A Song Flung Up to Heaven , from the third stanza of the Paul Laurence Dunbar poem " Sympathy " . Along with Shakespeare , Angelou has credited Dunbar with forming her " writing ambition " . The caged bird , a symbol for the chained slave , is an image Angelou uses throughout all her writings . 
 I know why the caged bird sings , ah me , 
 When his wing is bruised and his bosom sore , 
 When he beats his bars and would be free ; 
 It is not a carol of joy or glee , 
 But a prayer that he sends from his heart 's deep core , 
 But a plea , that upward to Heaven he flings — 
 I know why the caged bird sings . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 A Song Flung Up to Heaven , which takes place between 1965 and 1968 , picks up where Angelou 's previous book , All God 's Children Need Traveling Shoes , ends , with Angelou 's airplane trip from Accra , Ghana , where she has spent the previous four years , back to the United States . Two " calamitous events " frame the beginning and end of the book — the assassinations of Malcolm X and Martin Luther King , Jr . Her nineteen @-@ year @-@ old son Guy has become an adult and is attending college in Ghana , and she is leaving a controlling relationship — her " romantic other " , whom she described as " a powerful West African man who had swept into my life with the urgency of a Southern hurricane " . She had also been invited to return to the US by Malcolm X , whom she had become friends with during his visit to Accra , to help her create the Organization of African Unity . 
 She postpones meeting with Malcolm X for a month and visits her mother and brother in San Francisco . Malcolm X is assassinated two days later . Devastated and grief @-@ stricken , she moves to Hawaii to be near her brother and to resume her singing and performing career , which she had given up before leaving for Africa several years earlier . She realizes , after seeing Della Reese perform , that she lacks the desire , commitment , and talent to be a singer . She instead returns to her writing career , but this time in Los Angeles instead of in New York City as she had earlier in her life . To earn extra money , Angelou becomes a market researcher in Watts and gets to know the neighborhood and its people . She witnesses the 1965 Watts Riots , knowing that doing so could lead to her arrest , and she is genuinely disappointed that it does not . 
 At one point , Angelou 's lover from Ghana , whom she calls " the African " , arrives in Los Angeles to take her back to Accra . Angelou enlists the aid of her mother and brother ; they come to her rescue once again by diverting the African first to Mexico and then back to Ghana . Guy , during a visit to his grandmother in San Francisco , gets into another car accident , similar to what happened before he began college in Ghana . His maturity is striking to his mother , and she leaves him in the care of his grandmother . 
 Angelou returns to New York , where she dedicates herself to her writing and renews many of the friendships made there in the past . She also describes her personal and professional relationships with Ruby Dee , Ossie Davis , <unk> Richards , and Frank Silvera . Martin Luther King , Jr. asks her to travel around the country promoting the Southern Christian Leadership Conference . She agrees , but " postpones again " , and he is assassinated on her 40th birthday . Again devastated , she isolates herself until invited to a dinner party also attended by her friend James Baldwin and cartoonist Jules Feiffer and his wife Judy . Judy Feiffer , inspired by her tales about Angelou 's childhood , contacts editor Robert Loomis , who challenges Angelou to write her autobiography as literature . She accepts his challenge , and Song ends with Angelou at " the threshold of her literary career " , writing the opening lines to her first autobiography , I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings : 
 " What are you looking at me for . I didn 't come to stay " . 
 = = Style and genre = = 
 Starting with Caged Bird , Angelou made a deliberate attempt while writing all her autobiographies , including Song , to challenge the usual structure of the autobiography by critiquing , changing , and expanding the genre . Her use of fiction @-@ writing techniques such as dialogue , characterization , and thematic development has often led reviewers to categorize her books as autobiographical fiction . Angelou stated in a 1989 interview that she was the only " serious " writer to choose the genre to express herself . As critic Susan Gilbert stated , Angelou was reporting not one person 's story , but the collective 's . Scholar Selwyn R. Cudjoe agreed , and viewed Angelou as representative of the convention in African @-@ American autobiography as a public gesture that spoke for an entire group of people . Angelou 's editor Robert Loomis was able to dare her into writing Caged Bird by challenging her to write an autobiography that could be considered " high art " , which she continued throughout her series , including her final autobiography . 
 Angelou 's autobiographies conform to the genre 's standard structure : they were written by a single author , they were chronological , and they contained elements of character , technique , and theme . In a 1983 interview with African @-@ American literature critic Claudia Tate , Angelou called her books autobiographies . When speaking of her unique use of the genre , Angelou acknowledged that she has followed the slave narrative tradition of " speaking in the first @-@ person singular talking about the first @-@ person plural , always saying I meaning ' we ' " . Reviewer Elsie B. Washington agreed , and stated that A Song Flung Up to Heaven " offers a glimpse into the life of a literary icon in the making " influenced by historical events and personalities such as Malcolm X , Martin Luther King , Jr . , and James Baldwin . 
 Angelou recognized that there were fictional aspects to all her books ; she tended to " diverge from the conventional notion of autobiography as truth " . Her approach paralleled the conventions of many African @-@ American autobiographies written during the abolitionist period in the US , when truth was often censored for purposes of self @-@ protection . Author Lyman B. Hagen has placed Angelou in the long tradition of African @-@ American autobiography , but insisted that she has created a unique interpretation of the autobiographical form . In a 1998 interview with journalist George Plimpton , Angelou discussed her writing process , and " the sometimes slippery notion of truth in nonfiction " and memoirs . When asked if she changed the truth to improve her story , she stated , " Sometimes I make a diameter from a composite of three or four people , because the essence in only one person is not sufficiently strong to be written about . " Although Angelou has never admitted to changing the facts in her stories , she has used these facts to make an impact with the reader . As Hagen stated , " One can assume that ' the essence of the data ' is present in Angelou 's work " . Hagen also stated that Angelou " fictionalizes , to enhance interest " . Angelou 's long @-@ time editor , Robert Loomis , agreed , stating that she could rewrite any of her books by changing the order of her facts to make a different impact on the reader . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Like Angelou 's previous autobiographies , Song received mostly positive reviews , although as the Poetry Foundation has said : " Most critics have judged Angelou 's subsequent autobiographies in light of her first , and I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings remains the most highly praised . " Kim Hubbard of People Magazine , for example , found Song unsatisfying and " hastily assembled " , but poetic like Caged Bird . Many reviewers appreciated what Kirkus Reviews called Angelou 's " nice structural turn " of framing Song with two assassinations . Paula Friedman of The New York Times Book Review appreciated Angelou 's " occasions of critical self @-@ assessment and modesty " not present in many other autobiographies . Patricia Elam of New Crisis agreed , stating that there is much to admire both about the book and about the " large life " , full of tension , laughter , and love , it describes . Elam also called Song " a spirit @-@ moving work that describes Angelou 's journey through an authentic and artistic life " . 
 Reviewer Margaret Busby , who saw this book " not so much an ending as a beginning " , called Song " the culmination of a unique autobiographical achievement , a glorious celebration of indomitable spirit " . Like other reviewers , Busby considered Song a series of " beautifully crafted vignettes " and found the book concise and readable . Scholar John McWhorter did not look at Angelou 's use of vignettes as positively , and stated that all of her books were short , divided into " ever shorter " chapters as her series progressed , and " sometimes seem written for children rather than adults " . McWhorter recognized , however , that Angelou 's precise prose and " striking and even jarring simplicity " was due to Angelou 's purposes of depicting African @-@ American culture in a positive way . Busby also recognized Angelou 's ability to find inspirational lessons from adversity , both nationally and personally , although the emphasis in this book was on the personal , especially her dilemmas as a mother and as a lover . 
 Amy Strong of The Library Journal , perhaps because Angelou 's life during the time the book took place was full of more personal loss than conflict and struggle , considered Song less profound and intense than the previous books in Angelou 's series . She predicted that Song ′ s direct and plainspoken style would be popular . Publishers Weekly , in its review of the book , agreed with Strong and saw " a certain resignation " in Song , instead of " the contentiousness " in Angelou 's other autobiographies . The reviewer also stated that those who lived through the era Angelou described would appreciate her assessment of it , and that Song was " a story of tragedy and triumph , well stated and clearly stamped by her own unique blend of Afro @-@ Americanism " . The assassinations in Song provided the book with depth as Angelou described the events of her life , which would be " mere meanderings " if described by a less skilled writer . The reviewer was able to see Angelou 's " gracious spirit " and found the book " satisfying " , although he considered it a " sometimes flat account " that lacked " the spiritual tone of Angelou 's essays , the openness of her poetry and the drama of her other autobiographies " . 
 Both McWhorter and scholar Hilton Als found Angelou 's writing throughout her series self @-@ important . Although McWhorter has admitted to being charmed by Angelou 's sense of authority she has inserted into her works , which he calls her " black @-@ mother wit " , he considered Angelou 's autobiographies after Caged Bird " smug " , and has stated that she " implicitly dares the reader to question her private line to God and Truth " . Als agreed , stating what made Song different from her preceding volumes is her " ever @-@ increasing unreliability " . Als stated that Angelou , in her six autobiographies , " has given us ... the self @-@ aggrandizing , homespun , and sometimes oddly prudish story of a black woman who , when faced with the trials of life , simply makes do " . Als believed that Angelou 's essays , written in the 1990s , were a better culmination of her work as an autobiographer . 
 = Jif ( lemon juice ) = 
 Jif is a brand of natural strength lemon juice prepared using lemon juice concentrate and water , whereby the concentrate is reconstituted using water . After reconstitution , it is packaged and marketed . It is sold in the United Kingdom and Ireland by Unilever . Jif is used as a <unk> and ingredient in dishes , and as a condiment . Two tablespoons is around the equivalent of the juice of one lemon . The product has a shelf life of six months . 
 Jif is packaged in a unique squeeze pack container shaped like a lemon , and in bottles . Development of the plastic container began in the 1950s , and was one of the original blow moulded containers used for food applications . Jif brand lemon juice was established in 1956 . The product is well known for its distinctive packaging , which itself has a unique history . 
 The original notion of lemon juice being packaged inside lemon @-@ shaped and coloured containers was the brainchild of Edward Hack in the 1950s . Bill Pugh , an English plastics designer , created a prototype based upon Hack 's concept . The company Edward Hack , Ltd. then produced and marketed Hax brand lemon juice in the plastic containers , using juice from Sicily . Stanley Wagner of Coldcrops , Ltd. also independently designed a very similar package , which was used for Realemon brand lemon juice . Realemon was later renamed to ReaLem by Coldcrops . Hax lemon juice was the first to be packaged and marketed in said lemon @-@ shaped container , with Coldcrops following shortly thereafter . A later agreement between Hax and Coldcrops led to Hax leaving the lemon juice business , whereby Coldcrops acquired the marketing rights for lemon juice in plastic lemon containers under the ReaLem brand . Coldcrops was acquired by Reckitt and Colman in 1956 , which rebranded the product under the Jif brand name . 
 " The Jif Lemon case " occurred in the 1980s , whereby The U.S. company Borden introduced lemon juice packaged in a similar plastic container to the United Kingdom . This resulted in a lawsuit initiated by Reckitt & Coleman against Borden , based upon the notion that Realemon was attempting to copy Jif 's packaging in attempts to mislead consumers , by passing off their product as Jif . The case was settled in 1990 in the Court of Appeal , which ruled in Reckitt & Coleman 's favour . 
 Jif is sometimes used on pancakes , and was marketed in the past to be used on pancakes for Shrove Tuesday . Due to the extensive advertising campaign and marketing efforts , some consumers referred to Shrove Tuesday as " Jif Lemon Day " . 
 = = Formulation = = 
 Jif is prepared from reconstituted lemon concentrate and water as primary ingredients , and is formulated to be the same strength as natural lemons . The concentrate is reconstituted using water . The product contains the food preservative <unk> ( sodium <unk> ) . Jif has a shelf life of six months . Two tablespoons is the equivalent of the juice of one lemon . 
 = = = Nutrition information = = = 
 A 5 ml serving size of Jif provides 1 kcal ( <unk> ) of energy and 0 @.@ 1 grams of carbohydrate . 
 = = = Uses = = = 
 Jif is used as an ingredient and <unk> in dishes and foods , and as a condiment , such as on pancakes . It may be used to add flavour to salads , sauces , fish and seafood , among other foods . It can be used in recipes that require or recommend the use of lemon juice . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 Aside from its unique and well @-@ known plastic , lemon @-@ shaped containers containing 55 ml of juice , usually known as " jiffy lemons " or " <unk> lemons " , Jif lemon juice is also sold in bottles . The plastic container is a squeeze pack container , whereupon squeezing the container releases juice from its nozzle . Jif containers were embossed with the brand name " Jif " in 1956 , the same year the company came into existence . Contemporary Jif containers have the phrase " Jif real lemon juice " embossed on the side of the squeeze pack . 
 The Jif plastic containers were originally made from polythene , and were one of the original and first blow moulded containers used for food applications . The plastic containers served to replace glass bottles used to package lemon juice . The plastic container was the brainchild of Edward Hack , and the container 's design was undertaken by Bill Pugh , the chief plastics designer at Cascelloid . In its development , Pugh carved a core made of wood , covered it with fresh lemon peel to give it a realistic texture , and then cast a plaster mould . This led to the realistic @-@ looking container that significantly resembles a lemon . 
 Some sources have stated that similar plastic lemon packaging existed in Italy at the time of the end of World War II , prior to the time of the packaging design in the United Kingdom . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Hax , Realemon and ReaLem brands = = = 
 Edward Hack developed the original idea and model of lemon juice being contained inside lemon @-@ shaped and coloured packaging in the 1950s . The product was then designed and produced by Cascelloid Ltd . Hack presented Cascelloid with a fresh lemon he acquired at Covent Garden , upon which to base the plastic container . Hack had performed significant searches at several markets to find an optimal model . Cascelloid stated that Hack reviewed and evaluated the entire inventory of lemons at Fortnum and Mason ’ s , Selfridges , Harrods and Covent Garden , the latter of which involved examining three cases of lemons that contained around 300 lemons in each case . 
 Bill Pugh , the chief plastics designer at Cascelloid , based in Leicester , and former Royal Air Force pilot , created a prototype of the blown lemon @-@ shaped plastic shaped container based upon Hack 's idea sometime in the 1950s , as well as other types of blown containers . Pugh 's experimented with the initial design until he was satisfied with its appearance . This plastic lemon product was then used for Hax lemon juice . Edward Hack , Ltd. produced and marketed Hax brand <unk> plastic lemon containers filled with two ounces of Sicilian lemon juice . Per Edward Hack , Ltd . , the juice was unfiltered , had no water added to it , and contained a preservative to prevent spoilage . Retailers could purchase the product in packs of six bags that contained 12 squeeze packs each , totalling 72 units . Upon introduction to the marketplace , Hax juice and the plastic lemon design received some press coverage per the unique nature and newness of the design . The Hax logo used on Hax lemon juice dates back to at least 1935 , at which time it was used in advertisements for Hax brand iodine pencils and Hax brand aspirin . 
 The plastic lemon container and the idea of marketing lemon juice in this manner was also undertaken independently by Stanley Wagner , a businessperson in the frozen food industry , and also a former Royal Air Force fighter pilot . Wagner 's plastic lemon was produced by Shipton , a plastics company . Wagner was with the company Coldcrops , Ltd . , which produced Realemon . The Realemon trademark was developed and used for a lemon juice product based upon reconstitution in the 1940s . Realemon was later renamed to ReaLem by Coldcrops . Hax lemon juice was the first to be packaged and marketed in said lemon @-@ shaped container , with Coldcrops following shortly thereafter with their own design . It is of intrigue to some that both Pugh and Wagner were both former Royal Air Force pilots . 
 Over the course of a ten @-@ month period from mid @-@ 1955 to early 1956 more than six million of the plastic juice lemons were sold by Coldcrops . This initially began under the brand name " Realemon " , and then after an objection by the then Board of Trade , the name was changed to " ReaLem " and marketed with the slogan " juice in a jiffy " . The Board of Trade objected because it was perceived that Coldcrops was possibly passing off their product as the Realemon brand from the United States . During this same time period , Hax was marketing tomato ketchup and brown sauce in custom @-@ shaped plastic containers , for use on restaurant tables . After a long argument about plastic containers , the two companies agreed that they would not compete with one @-@ another , and Coldcrops took the marketing rights for plastic lemons under the ReaLem brand . Coldcrops would market ReaLem lemon juice and agreed to not enter other plastic container markets . 
 = = = Jif brand = = = 
 Reckitt and Colman approached Stanley Wagner to buy Coldcrops , and after a very long negotiation a deal was concluded . A letter from Barclays Bank dated 21 June 1956 reads " Dear Mr Wagner , I have pleasure in enclosing two copies of the Draft for £ <unk> credited to your account , which the Bank will be pleased if you will accept as a souvenir of this most successful transaction " . The deal transferred ownership of the packaging and concept from Coldcrops to Reckitt & Coleman , and the new Jif @-@ brand lemon juice was launched in 1956 . All parties were delighted , Stanley Wagner with a substantial sum of money , for those days and a large profit from the six million lemons that had been sold , Reckitt 's even more so because the negotiating team had permission to pay far more for the business than they were able to achieve . Lemon farmers in Sicily were also pleased , because the demand had increased for Sicilian lemon juice , which was largely a by @-@ product of Sicilian lemon oil production . For many years , whilst producing lemon oil , Sicilians had found little use for the juice . Now there was a rapidly growing market for their near @-@ waste product . In 1970 , Jif continued to be prepared with lemon juice from Sicily . Later on , Unilever acquired the Jif brand in 1995 for the price of £ 250m , when it purchased Colman 's of Norwich . 
 At the time of Jif 's product launch in 1956 , it was marketed with the tagline ' Real lemon juice in a Jif ' . In 1956 , Jif was the sole brand of lemon juice packaged in a squeeze pack container in the United Kingdom . The new Jif brand used the packaging developed by Edward Hack . 
 = = = Competitors = = = 
 The U.S. company Borden acquired the rights to the ReaLemon brand of lemon juice in the United States in 1962 when it purchased the ReaLemon @-@ Puritan Company for around $ 12 @.@ 4 million . ReaLemon had began production in the U.S. in the 1930s . 
 Sales of ReaLemon realized successful profits in Europe in 1975 , at which time Borden expanded into the United Kingdom market , purveying a 250 ml bottle of lemon juice . By 1980 , ReaLemon comprised around 25 % of the U.K. lemon juice market . In response to this competition , Reckitt & Coleman began producing Jif in 150 <unk> and 250 ml @-@ sized bottles . Borden then began making plans to market ReaLemon in a lemon @-@ shaped package that was similar to Jif 's packaging . This resulted in a lawsuit initiated by Reckitt & Coleman against Borden , based upon the notion that ReaLemon was attempting to copy Jif 's packaging in attempts to mislead consumers , by passing off their product as Jif . 
 The case became known as " The Jif Lemon case " , and was settled in 1990 in the Court of Appeal . It was ruled that a sufficient public recognition of Jif 's packaging was existent , which created an established reputation for the brand . The ruling stated that consumers would be " likely to believe that the ReaLemon was a Jif Lemon when they saw it on a supermarket shelf . " The ruling in Reckitt & Colman 's favour occurred even though Reckitt & Colman did not register the plastic lemon packaging . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 Jif is sometimes used on pancakes . A well @-@ known advertising campaign introduced the catch @-@ phrase " Don 't forget the pancakes on Jif lemon day , " in reference to Shrove Tuesday , which is also referred to as Pancake Day . The campaign and slogan was devised by Reckitt and Colman . The Jif lemon @-@ shaped packaging aligned Jif with the consumption of pancakes on Shrove Tuesday in consumers ' minds , creating a strong link between the product and Shrove Tuesday . Due to the advertising campaign and marketing efforts , some consumers referred to Shrove Tuesday as " Jif Lemon Day " . Jif and pancakes is a popular combination on Shrove Tuesday . In 2000 , over 80 @,@ 000 Jif lemons were being produced per day to meet consumer demand for Pancake Day , beginning five weeks prior to Pancake Day . This occurred despite fresh lemons having greater availability during this time compared to other time periods . 
 = The Tale of Mrs. Tittlemouse = 
 The Tale of Mrs. Tittlemouse is a children 's book written and illustrated by Beatrix Potter , and published by Frederick Warne & Co. in 1910 . The tale is about housekeeping and insect pests in the home , and reflects Potter 's own sense of tidiness and her abhorrence of insect infestations . The character of Mrs. Tittlemouse debuted in 1909 in a small but crucial role in The Tale of The Flopsy Bunnies , and Potter decided to give her a tale of her own the following year . Her meticulous illustrations of the insects may have been drawn for their own sake , or to provoke horror and disgust in her juvenile readers . 25 @,@ 000 copies of the tale were initially released in July 1910 and another 15 @,@ 000 between November 1910 and November 1911 in Potter 's typical small book format . 
 Mrs. Tittlemouse is a <unk> who lives in a " funny house " of long passages and storerooms beneath a hedge . Her efforts to keep her dwelling tidy are thwarted by insect and arachnid intruders who create all sorts of messes about the place : a lost beetle leaves dirty footprints in a passage and a spider inquiring after Miss Muffet leaves bits of cobweb here and there . Her toad neighbour Mr. Jackson lets himself into her parlour , stays for dinner , and searches her storerooms for honey but leaves a mess behind . Poor Mrs. Tittlemouse wonders if her home will ever be tidy again , but after a good night 's sleep , she gives her house a fortnight 's spring cleaning , polishes her little tin spoons , and holds a party for her friends . 
 Potter 's life had become complicated with the demands of ageing parents and the business of operating a farm before the composition of Mrs. Tittlemouse , and , as a consequence , her literary and artistic productivity began a decline following the tale 's publication . She continued to publish sporadically but much of her work was drawn from decades @-@ old concepts and illustrations . Mrs. Tittlemouse marks the end of her two books a year output for Warnes . Scholars find the book 's depictions of the insects its great attraction . One critic finds a " nightmarish quality " in the tale reflected in Mrs. Tittlemouse 's almost endless war waged against insect pests . Characters from the tale have been modelled as porcelain figurines by Beswick Pottery beginning in 1948 , and the mouse 's image appeared on a Huntley & Palmer biscuit tin in 1955 . Other merchandise has been marketed depicting Mrs. Tittlemouse and her friends . Mrs. Tittlemouse was a character in a 1971 ballet film and her tale was adapted to an animated television series in 1992 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mrs. Tittlemouse is a tale in which no humans play a part and one in which events are treated as though they have occurred since time immemorial and far from human observance . It is a simple story , and one likely to appeal to young children . 
 Mrs. Tittlemouse is a " most terribly tidy little mouse always sweeping and dusting the soft sandy floors " in the " yards and yards " of passages and storerooms , nut @-@ cellars , and seed @-@ cellars in her " funny house " amongst the roots of a hedge . She has a kitchen , a parlour , a pantry , a larder , and a bedroom where she keeps her dust @-@ pan and brush next to her little box bed . She tries to keep her house tidy , but insect intruders leave dirty footprints on the floors and all sorts of messes about the place . 
 A beetle is <unk> away , a ladybird is exorcised with " Fly away home ! Your house is on fire ! " , and a spider inquiring after Miss Muffet is turned away with little ceremony . In a distant passage , Mrs. Tittlemouse meets Babbitty Bumble , a bumble bee who has taken up residence with three or four other bees in one of the empty storerooms . Mrs. Tittlemouse tries to pull out their nest but they buzz fiercely at her , and she retreats to deal with the matter after dinner . 
 In her parlour , she finds her toad neighbour Mr. Jackson sitting before the fire in her rocking chair . Mr. Jackson lives in " a drain below the hedge , in a very dirty wet ditch " . His coat tails drip with water and he leaves wet footmarks on Mrs. Tittlemouse 's parlour floor . She follows him about with a mop and dish @-@ cloth . 
 Mrs. Tittlemouse allows Mr. Jackson to stay for dinner , but the food is not to his pleasing , and he rummages about the cupboard searching for the honey he can smell . He discovers a butterfly in the sugar bowl , but when he finds the bees , he makes a big mess pulling out their nest . Mrs. Tittlemouse fears she " shall go distracted " as a result of the turmoil and takes refuge in the nut @-@ cellar . When she finally ventures forth , she discovers everybody has left but her house is a mess . She takes some moss , beeswax , and twigs to partly close up her front door to keep Mr. Jackson out . Exhausted , she goes to bed wondering if her house will ever be tidy again . 
 The fastidious little mouse spends a fortnight spring cleaning . She rubs the furniture with beeswax and polishes her little tin spoons , then holds a party for five other little wood @-@ mice wearing their Regency finery . Mr. Jackson attends but is forced to sit outside because Mrs. Tittlemouse has narrowed her door . He takes no offence at being excluded from the parlour . Acorn @-@ <unk> of honeydew are passed through the window to him and he toasts Mrs. Tittlemouse 's good health . 
 = = Background = = 
 Helen Beatrix Potter was born on July 28 , 1866 in London to barrister Rupert William Potter and his wife Helen ( Leech ) Potter . She was educated by governesses and tutors , and passed a quiet and solitary childhood reading , painting , drawing , tending a nursery menagerie of small animals , and visiting museums and art exhibitions . Her interests in the natural world and country life were nurtured with holiday trips to Scotland , the English Lake District , and Camfield Place , the Hertfordshire home of her paternal grandparents . 
 Potter 's adolescence was a quiet as her childhood . She grew into a spinsterish young woman whose parents groomed her to be a permanent resident and housekeeper in their home . She wanted to lead a useful life independent of her parents and considered a career in mycology , but the all @-@ male scientific community regarded her as an amateur and she abandoned fungi . She continued to paint and draw , and experienced her first professional artistic success in 1890 when she sold six designs of humanised animals to a greeting card publisher . 
 In 1900 , Potter revised a tale about a rabbit named Peter she had written for a child in 1893 , and prepared a dummy book of it in imitation of Helen Bannerman 's 1889 best @-@ seller The Story of Little Black Sambo . Unable to find a buyer , she published the book for family and friends at her own expense in December 1901 . Frederick Warne & Co. had earlier rejected the tale , but , anxious to compete in the booming small format children 's book market , reconsidered and accepted it following the recommendation of their prominent children 's book artist L. Leslie Brooke . Potter agreed to colour the pen and ink illustrations of the private edition , and chose the then @-@ new Hentschel three @-@ colour process for reproducing her watercolours . On October 2 , 1902 The Tale of Peter Rabbit was released . 
 Potter continued to publish children 's books with Warnes and used her sales profits and a small legacy from an aunt to buy Hill Top , a working farm of 34 acres ( 13 @.@ 85 ha ) in the Lake District in July 1905 . On August 25 , Potter 's fiancé and editor Norman Warne died suddenly ; she became very depressed and was ill for many weeks , but rallied to complete the last few tales she had planned or discussed with him . 
 = = Development and publication = = 
 In the years following Warne 's death and the purchase of Hill Top , Potter produced tales and illustrations inspired by her farm , its woodland surroundings , and nearby villages . She provided Warnes with two books per annum , but , by 1910 , she was juggling the demands of ageing parents with the business of operating Hill Top , and , as a result , her literary and artistic productivity began to decline . She published only one book in 1910 , The Tale of Mrs. Tittlemouse , and wrote to a friend on New Year 's Day 1911 : 
 I did not succeed in finishing more than one book last year ... I find it very difficult lately to get the drawings done . I do not seem to be able to go into the country for a long enough time to do a sufficient amount of sketching and when I was at Bowness last summer I spent most of my time upon the road going backwards & forwards to the farm – which was amusing , but not satisfactory for work . 
 Mrs. Tittlemouse actually made her debut in 1909 in Potter 's The Tale of The Flopsy Bunnies where she rescued the six children of Benjamin and Flopsy Bunny from Mr. McGregor 's grasp and was rewarded for her heroism with a quantity of rabbit wool at Christmas . In the last illustration , she is wearing a cloak and hood , and a muff and mittens fashioned from the wool . Mrs. Tittlemouse is a key ( not a central ) character in the tale , but a character incompletely personified , and one whose story Potter chose to develop in 1910 . 
 Potter was an unsentimental naturalist who thought no creature either good or bad , and had no qualms describing earwigs in Mrs. Tittlemouse 's passage or woodlice in her pantry . Her publisher Harold Warne however had different ideas about what was appropriate for a children 's book . He had become accustomed to Potter 's unusual choice of animal subjects through the years , but , ever sensitive to public reaction , thought she had gone a bit too far in Mrs. Tittlemouse with the earwig and the woodlice . The earwig was , at his behest , transmogrified into a beetle and the woodlice into " creepy @-@ crawly people " hiding in Mrs. Tittlemouse 's plate rack . " I can alter the text , when I get the proofs , " she wrote , " and will erase the offensive word ' wood @-@ lice ' ! " Potter argued for the generic term " slaters " for the woodlice , but was overruled . It was decided that an illustration of a centipede ( Miss Maggie <unk> ) would be withdrawn and replaced with a butterfly . 
 Potter usually tested a new work on an audience by writing the tale into an exercise book , pasting a few watercolour or pen and ink illustrations into the volume , and presenting the whole as a gift to a child . In the case of Mrs. Tittlemouse , Potter wrote the tale in a small leather @-@ covered notebook 150 by 85 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 9 in × 3 @.@ 3 in ) with twenty @-@ one pages of text and eight watercolours as a New Year 's gift for Warne 's youngest daughter , Nellie . Its inscription read , " For Nellie with love and best wishes for A Happy New Year . Jan. 1 . 1910 " . 
 The family called it " Nellie 's little book " and , when the book was published with twenty @-@ six colour pictures , the dedication remained the same . 25 @,@ 000 copies of The Tale of Mrs. Tittlemouse were released in July 1910 and available in a 138 by 104 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 4 in × 4 @.@ 1 in ) small book format in either blue @-@ grey or buff paper boards at 1 / - or decorated cloth at 1 / 6 . 10 @,@ 000 copies were released in November 1910 and another 5 @,@ 000 copies in November 1911 . Potter was pleased with the bound copies she received . " The buff is the prettiest colour , though it may not keep so clean " , she wrote to Warnes , " I think it should prove popular with little girls . " Her father wrote to the Warne children that his daughter 's sense of humour was ever @-@ fresh and never dull . 
 Potter intended to follow Mrs. Tittlemouse with a tale about a pig in a large format book similar to the original Ginger and Pickles . On one occasion , she passed an hour sketching inside the pig sty at Hill Top while the pig <unk> at her boots . She abandoned the pig book after fruitless attempts to make progress on it , and , instead , occupied the winter of 1910 – 11 with supervising the production of Peter Rabbit 's Painting Book , and the composition of The Tale of Timmy Tiptoes . 
 Almost sixty years after the publication of Mrs. Tittlemouse , the character appeared in the 1971 Royal Ballet film , The Tales of Beatrix Potter , and , in 1992 , her tale and The Tale of the Flopsy Bunnies were integrated into a single animated episode for the BBC series , The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends . 
 = = Illustrations = = 
 Mrs. Tittlemouse called upon Potter 's keen observation of insects , arachnids , and amphibians , and her youthful experience drawing them . Their depictions in text and illustration reflect her understanding of insect anatomy , colouration , and behaviour ; they are rendered with accuracy , humour , and true to their individual natures – she knew that toads only seek water during the spawning season , for example , and that they can smell honey . The spider and the butterfly are very much like those she drew from microscopic studies in the 1890s . 
 Potter 's source for the wildlife and the insect drawings in Mrs. Tittlemouse were those she had executed in her early adulthood , either directly from nature or by observing specimens in the collections of the Victoria and Albert Museum . The interest in the book 's illustrations lies in the microscopic accuracy of the insects rather than in any human qualities exhibited by Mrs. Tittlemouse or Mr. Jackson . Potter is uncharacteristically careless in the depiction of the insects however . They appear to be drawn for their own sake , or seem to be out of scale with the heroine , or to change scale without reason . The ladybird seems larger than Mrs. Tittlemouse , and the spider appears first larger than Mrs. Tittlemouse in one picture and then smaller in another . The bees are sometimes out of scale with both the toad and the mouse . 
 The nature artist and the fantasy artist in Potter are at odds : the mouse , the toad , and the insects share the same habitat but there seems no logical reason for the mouse and the toad to be humanised while the insects remain their natural selves . Logically , they should be humanised , too . While the toad is an invader like the insects , he does Mrs. Tittlemouse the service of ridding her house of the bees yet is inexplicably excluded from the party , an affront to the reader 's sense of social right and wrong . It is possible Potter 's carelessness in the details of Mrs. Tittlemouse can be attributed to a desire on her part to simply display her ability to draw from nature or to her interest in book production being supplanted by a growing interest in farming and local life and politics in Sawrey . 
 = = Scholarly commentaries = = 
 Ruth K. MacDonald of the New Mexico State University writes in Beatrix Potter ( 1986 ) that the tale is about housekeeping and dealing with insect pests in the home , and points out that it reflects Potter 's pride and pleasure in keeping her house at Hill Top tidy . Tales about humanised mice came easily to Potter , but , unlike the urban mice in The Tailor of Gloucester and The Tale of Two Bad Mice , Mrs. Tittlemouse is a country mouse living beneath a hedge somewhere near Potter 's Sawrey . With its narrow passages , small rooms , low ceilings , and well @-@ stocked storerooms , Mrs. Tittlemouse 's dwelling is similar to Potter 's own at Hill Top . The author 's obvious approval of Mrs. Tittlemouse 's fastidious housekeeping has its source in her own pleasure in keeping her farmhouse neat , and ( like Mrs. Tittlemouse ) in being the mistress of her domain . Mrs. Tittlemouse 's abhorrence of insect pests reflects Potter 's own , but the artist in Potter preserves their beauty in the illustrations – she does not censor their antennae or their groping limbs . Potter thought girls would like the tale best , and would experience the same sort of reaction to insect pests she did – to wit , complete horror and disgust . 
 M. Daphne Kutzer , Professor of English at the State University of New York at Plattsburgh and author of Beatrix Potter : Writing in Code ( 2003 ) , points out that the tale is a comic one taking place completely indoors and one with an obvious anxiety about dirt . There is not the sort of revelry one would expect in a tale about a miniature household but rather a " desperate sense " of wanting to keep that household free of invaders and unwanted outsiders . The Tale of Two Bad Mice is another tale about a miniature household , but there Potter is on the side of the invading two bad mice . Mrs. Tittlemouse is concerned as much about middle class <unk> as the dolls Lucinda and Jane in The Tale of Two Bad Mice but , in Mrs. Tittlemouse , Potter is on the side of the invaded rather than the invaders , who are purely animals with no human characteristics . 
 Kutzer attributes some of the tale 's anxiety to Potter 's own unhappiness over her fame as a writer and the intrusiveness of visitors at Hill Top who assumed a presumptuous familiarity with the author or regarded her as nothing more than an exhibit for the tourist to take in . Potter was proprietary over Hill Top and jealously guarded it to and for herself and some of this jealousy is projected onto Mrs. Tittlemouse 's anxiety about the sanctity of her home . She is not a recluse – she invites her friends to a party – but like Potter she needs to be in complete control . 
 Kutzer thinks the tale has a " nightmarish quality " . Poor Mrs. Tittlemouse cannot keep one step ahead of the various intruders . Although the house is her own , she has no control over who inhabits it : she finds bees nesting in an empty storeroom and woodlice hiding in the plate rack . She is trapped in her own home , her hours occupied with fighting off invaders from without to the point where she is sure she will " go distracted " . Although Mr. Jackson drives the unwanted intruders away , he leaves behind a mess of honey smears , moss , thistledown , and dirty footprints that Mrs. Tittlemouse invests two weeks of her life into cleaning up . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 Potter asserted her tales would one day be nursery classics , and part of the process in making them so was marketing strategy . She was the first to exploit the commercial possibilities of her characters and tales with spinoffs such as a Peter Rabbit doll , an unpublished Peter Rabbit board game , and a Peter Rabbit nursery wallpaper between 1903 and 1905 . Similar " side @-@ shows " ( as she termed the ancillary merchandise ) were produced over the following two decades . 
 In 1947 , Frederick Warne & Co. gave the John Beswick Factory of Longton , Staffordshire rights and licences to produce the Potter characters in porcelain . Mrs. Tittlemouse was among the first ten Beswick figurines produced in 1948 , and was followed by Mr. Jackson in 1974 , Mother Lady Bird in 1989 , Babbitty Bumble in 1989 , and another Mrs. Tittlemouse in 2000 . A Mrs. Tittlemouse embossed plate was produced between 1982 and 1984 . 
 Mrs. Tittlemouse appeared on the lid of a Huntley & Palmer biscuit tin in 1955 , and in 1973 , The Eden Toy Company of New York became the first and only American company to be granted licensing rights to manufacture stuffed Beatrix Potter characters in plush . Mrs. Tittlemouse was released in 1975 . In 1975 , Crummles of Poole , Dorset began manufacturing Beatrix Potter enamelled boxes , and eventually released a 32 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) diameter enamelled box depicting Babbitty Bumble and Mrs. Tittlemouse holding her book . 
 In 1977 , Schmid & Co. of Toronto and Randolph , Massachusetts was granted licensing rights to Beatrix Potter , and produced a Mrs. Tittlemouse music box playing " It 's a Small World " the same year . A Mr. Jackson flat ceramic Christmas ornament followed in 1984 , and a hanging ornament depicting Mrs. Tittlemouse in her little box bed in 1987 . 
 = = Reprints and translations = = 
 As of 2010 , all 23 of Potter 's small format books remain in print , and are available as complete sets in presentation boxes . A 400 @-@ page omnibus edition is also available . First editions , early reprints , and limited edition facsimiles of the Mrs. Tittlemouse manuscript are available through antiquarian booksellers . 
 The English language editions of Potter 's books still bore the Frederick Warne imprint in 2010 , despite the company being sold to Penguin Books in 1983 . In 1985 Penguin remade the book 's printing plates from new photographs of the original drawings , and in 1987 released the entire collection as The Original and Authorized Edition . 
 Potter 's books have been translated into almost 30 languages , including Greek and Russian . The Tale of Mrs. Tittlemouse was translated into Afrikaans in 1930 as Die Verhaal van <unk> <unk> and into Dutch in 1970 as Het Verhaal die <unk> <unk> . Under licence to <unk> @-@ Shoten of Tokyo , in the 1970s The Tale of Mrs. Tittlemouse and 11 other stories were released in Japanese . In 1986 , MacDonald observed that the Potter books had become a traditional part of childhood in both English @-@ speaking lands and those in which the books had been translated . 
 = Striptease ( film ) = 
 Striptease is a 1996 American erotic comedy film directed , produced , and written by Andrew Bergman , and stars Demi Moore , Burt Reynolds and Ving Rhames . The film is based on Carl Hiaasen 's novel of the same name , and is about a stripper who becomes involved in both a child @-@ custody dispute and corrupt politics . 
 Striptease was generally reviled by critics . It wound up winning several Golden Raspberry Awards , which are given to the worst in cinema . Among these awards given to Striptease was the Award for Worst Picture of 1996 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film revolves around former FBI secretary Erin Grant , who loses custody of her young daughter Angela ( Rumer Willis ) to her ex @-@ husband Darrell , who is a criminal and cost Erin her job . To afford an appeal to get her daughter back , Erin becomes a stripper at the Eager Beaver , a Miami strip club . A Congressman named David Dilbeck visits the club and immediately begins to adore Erin . Aware of Dilbeck 's embarrassing indulgences , another Eager Beaver patron approaches Erin with a plan to manipulate the congressman to settle the custody battle and help her get Angela back . However , Dilbeck has powerful business connections who want to ensure he remains in office . Consequently , those who can embarrass him in an election are murdered . Meanwhile , Erin retrieves her daughter from Darrell 's negligent care . 
 Dilbeck 's personal interest in Erin persists , and she is invited to perform privately for him . He asks her to become his lover and later his wife , despite his staff 's concerns that she knows too much . A debate occurs as to whether to kill Erin or simply keep her quiet by threatening to take away her daughter . However , Erin and a police officer ( Armand Assante ) begin to suspect the congressman 's guilt in the murders , and Erin concocts a plan to bring the congressman to justice . She tricks him into confessing on tape , and he is soon after arrested . Thus , Erin regains full custody of Angela , gets her job in the FBI back , and retires from stripping , and Darrell returns to prison after he is convicted of his crimes . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 Castle Rock Entertainment produced Striptease . The film is based on the novel Strip Tease by Floridian crime writer Carl Hiaasen . It was published in 1993 and was a bestseller . The screenplay itself was written by Andrew Bergman , who also directed . According to one critic , the novel 's plot is " quite faithfully followed " by the screenplay , but in bringing the complicated story to the screen , " Bergman forgets to explain persuasively what a nice girl like Erin — smart , spunky and a former FBI employee — is doing in a dump called the Eager Beaver . " 
 Concerns that the ending of the film was not comical enough resulted in rewrites and reshoots , causing a one @-@ month delay . Part of these concerns owed to test screenings , where audiences objected to a scene where Dilbeck becomes violent . Later test screenings also turned up less than favorable reactions . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Moore played the main female character , Erin Grant . For the film , she was paid $ 12 @.@ 5 million , which was at the time a record for an actress . To prepare for her role , Moore visited strip clubs in New York City , California , and Florida , and she met with strippers . Moore really did dance topless in the part , and this was the sixth time she showed her breasts on film . She also read the novel , exercised , and practiced yoga . Moore was cast before other important parts were cast , creating some interest in the project . In the first attempt at filming Moore stripping , two hundred actors were used to portray the audience . Although their salaries were small , many accepted the role to see Moore nude . After waiting for a while , when Moore finally appeared and started dancing the crowd turned so loud and wild that the shooting had to temporarily cease . As Moore said , " After my experience , I felt very confident . " 
 The cast included some notable real @-@ world strippers such as Pandora Peaks . Rhames plays a bouncer named Shad . The filmmakers , in trying actors out for Shad 's part , looked for someone " at least 6 ' 2 and physically massive ... any ethnicity . " ( Rhames is African American ) . Reynolds played Congressman Dilbeck , and he based his performance after politicians he knew in his early life , through his father , a police chief . Reynolds was not an actor that the filmmakers originally had in mind for the part , but Reynolds wanted it , contacted Castle Rock head Rob Reiner , and traveled to Miami to audition . He accepted a salary lower than what he had made in his earlier career . Moore 's own daughter Rumer Willis , who was 7 years old when the film was released , played Erin 's daughter Angela . As Moore explained , " she [ Willis ] wanted it so badly " that Moore asked that Willis be considered for the part . In reality this required Willis to see Moore dancing topless , for a scene in which Angela sees Erin performing . However , Moore said that this was acceptable , as " We don 't shame the body , we encourage the body as something beautiful and natural , and my children bathe with me , and I walk around naked . " 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Striptease : Music from the Motion Picture Soundtrack was released on June 25 , 1996 . While the soundtrack did not include every song heard in the film , a notable exclusion were most tracks Erin ( Demi Moore 's character ) danced to in the film , which , aside from " If I Was Your Girlfriend " by Prince , were all sung by Annie Lennox ( whether as part of the Eurythmics or solo ) . While " Sweet Dreams ( Are Made of This ) " was featured on the disc , " Money Can 't Buy It " , " Cold " and " Little Bird " were left off , as was " Missionary Man " , which was played during the end credits . Furthermore , it excluded the song " ( Pussy , Pussy , Pussy ) Whose Kitty Cat Are You ? " by the Light Crust Doughboys which won the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Original Song . 
 = = Release = = 
 Striptease was distributed by Sony and was finally released in the United States on June 28 , 1996 , after a June 23 premiere in New York City . It opened in Australia , France and Germany in August , and Argentina , Italy , Bolivia , South Africa , the United Kingdom , Brazil and Japan in September . 
 Nudity was heavily emphasized in advertisements . The Motion Picture Association of America raised concerns regarding a posters which it felt revealed too much of Moore 's naked body . A Castle Rock employee argued : " There are racier perfume ads . " 
 The previous year 's film about nude dancers , Showgirls , was generally disliked , so filmmakers feared audiences would pre @-@ judge Striptease on this basis . To avoid any association , advertisements were designed to make Striptease look more comedic than Showgirls , which was a drama . Besides the subject matter , Striptease and Showgirls did have two notable connections . The choreography in these films was by the same person , Marguerite Derricks . Both also featured performances by Rena <unk> , who plays a dancer in each . To promote the film , Moore appeared on the Late Show with David Letterman and a Barbara Walters special . In both cases , she danced or otherwise exhibited her body . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Striptease received generally negative reviews from film critics . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times complimented some of the characters , but ultimately concluded the film failed because " all of the characters are hilarious except for Demi Moore 's . " He felt the drama surrounding the main character " throws a <unk> over the rest of the party . " Ebert also found the nudity not too sexy . Leonard Maltin was harsher , writing in his book that the film was too depressing , and " Not funny enough , or dramatic enough , or sexy enough , or bad enough , to qualify as entertainment in any category . " Barbara Cramer concurred with Ebert that Moore 's character was written too dramatically , compared to other characters . She said the film was predictable and would appeal mostly to " post @-@ pubescent schoolboys or closet voyeurs . " However , Cramer also cited Reynolds ' " his best role in years , " and that Rhames was " worth the price of admission . " Brian D. Johnson of Maclean 's , who thought Moore 's acting was terrible , predicted that despite Moore 's financial success , her career depended on the success of this film and the film was " tacky , pretentious @-@ and boring . " This critic described Striptease as displaying Moore 's vanity . Dave Ansen of Newsweek , sharing Ebert 's view on Moore 's character , also claimed Striptease failed as a drama because it had no mystery , revealing the identity of its villains early . Moreover , the " damsel @-@ in @-@ distress angle generates zero tension . " Daniel P. Franklin , in his book Politics and Film : The Political Culture of Film in the United States went so far as to call Striptease " the worst film ever made " and stated " The film pays homage to Moore 's surgical breast enhancement " . Nathan Rabin , reviewing the film for his series " My Year of Flops " , described the film thus : " Moore 's dour lead performance sabotages the film from the get @-@ go . It 's as if director Andrew Bergman told Moore she was acting in a serious drama about a struggling single mother ... and then told everyone else in the cast that they were making a zany crime comedy filled with kooky characters , sleazy hustlers , dumbass opportunists , and outsized caricatures . " Striptease currently holds a 12 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 68 reviews . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The film received seven Golden Raspberry nominations and won six , namely for Worst Picture , Worst Director , Worst Screenplay , Worst Actress , Worst Original Song ( " ( Pussy Pussy Pussy ) Whose Kitty Cat Are You ? " ) , and Worst Screen Couple . The only category the film lost was Worst Supporting Actor for Burt Reynolds , which went to Marlon Brando for The Island of Dr. Moreau . In winning the Worst Picture Razzie , Striptease defeated The Island of Dr. Moreau , Barb Wire , The <unk> , and Ed . Moore won for Worst Actress while she and Reynolds shared for Worst Screen Couple . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Striptease made $ 12 @,@ 322 @,@ 069 in its first weekend , falling behind The Nutty Professor with Eddie Murphy , Eraser starring Arnold Schwarzenegger , and Disney 's The Hunchback of Notre Dame , in which Moore voiced one of the main characters . Ultimately , Striptease made $ 33 @,@ 109 @,@ 743 in the United States , and domestically it was the 47th highest grossing film of 1996 . It made $ 113 @,@ 309 @,@ 743 internationally , having grossed £ 2 @,@ 104 @,@ 480 in the UK and ¥ 102 @,@ 419 @,@ 500 in Japan . 
 The film 's distribution rights were transferred to Warner Bros. in 1999 . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In 1997 , Striptease made news again when it was shown in a fourth @-@ grade class in Chicago , Illinois . The teacher claimed the students chose the film , but he drew criticism since the film was risqué . ( The violent 1996 film Scream was shown in the same school on the same day , causing further controversy . ) In 2000 in Ireland , some viewers criticized the Radio Telefís Éireann for running Striptease . These viewers questioned the film 's appropriateness and some considered it demeaning to women . However , the station felt it was not pornography and it was aired at night . 
 In 2003 , Radioactive Films used a scene from Striptease featuring Moore nude in a video called Hollywood 's Hottest . This raised a dispute as to whether use of the scene qualified as fair use . A lawsuit was launched as a consequence . 
 = My Little Pony : Friendship Is Magic fandom = 
 My Little Pony : Friendship Is Magic is an animated television series produced by Hasbro as part of the My Little Pony toy franchise , which is tied in with the 2010 launch of dolls and play sets , and original programming for U.S. cable channel Discovery Family ( formerly Hub Network ) . Lauren Faust was selected as the creative developer and executive producer for the show , based on her previous animation experience with shows like The Powerpuff Girls and Foster 's Home for Imaginary Friends . Under Hasbro 's guidance , Faust developed the show to appeal to the target demographic of young girls and their parents , but created characters and settings that challenged formerly stereotypical norms of " girly " images , and added adventure and humorous elements to keep parents interested . The show is animated using Flash , and produced at DHX Media 's animation studio in Vancouver , Canada . Its production is overseen by director Jayson Thiessen , who took over as showrunner after Faust stepped down after the second season . 
 The show received praise from television critics and parental groups . It also found an unlikely audience in a large group of adult Internet users in late 2010 and early 2011 . These fans , mostly male , were drawn to the show 's characters , stories , animation style , and influence of the show 's propagation as an Internet meme . The fandom adopted the name brony ( plural bronies ) , a portmanteau of " bro " and " pony " . Though initially considered to propagate the humorous and ironic concept of people enjoying a show for young girls , the fandom has shown deeper appreciation for the show far beyond this concept , and is considered part of a New Sincerity trend . Its technology @-@ savvy members have created numerous works in writing , music , art , and video based on the show , have established websites and fan conventions for the show , and have participated in charitable events around the show and those that create it . Bronies are a subculture . 
 The appreciation of the show by an older audience came as a surprise to Hasbro , Faust , and others involved with its development , but they have embraced the older fans while staying focused on the show 's intended audience . Such reciprocity has included participation in fan conventions by the show 's voice actors and producers , recognition of the brony fandom in official promotional material , and incorporating background characters popularized by the fans ( such as the fandom @-@ named " Derpy Hooves " ) into in @-@ jokes within the show . As a result of these efforts in part , My Little Pony : Friendship Is Magic has become a major commercial success with the series becoming the highest rated original production in Hub Network 's broadcast history . 
 = = History = = 
 One of the first critical reviews of Friendship Is Magic , published shortly after the initial broadcast in October 2010 , was written by Amid Amidi for the animation website Cartoon Brew . Amidi wrote that the show was a sign of " the end of the creator @-@ driven era in TV animation " . Amidi 's essay expressed concern that assigning a talent like Faust to a toy @-@ centric show was part of a trend towards a focus on profitable genres of animation , such as toy tie @-@ ins , to deal with a fragmented viewing audience , and overall " an admission of defeat for the entire movement , a white flag @-@ waving moment for the TV animation industry . " Although the article said this concern was over the fact that more and more shows seem to be driven by company executives who want to sell their products , rather than creators . Though the show had been discussed on 4chan 's cartoon forum before the essay 's publication , the alarmist nature of the essay led to more interest in the show , resulting in a positive response for the series for its plot , characters , and animation style . This reaction soon spread to the other boards of 4chan , where elements of the show quickly inspired recurring jokes and memes on the site . Some of these included adopting phrases from the show like " <unk> " , " <unk> " , and " <unk> " , instead of " anybody " , " everybody " , and " nobody " , or jokingly stating that they watch the show for the " plot " , a reference to the ponies ' flanks . 
 The number of Friendship Is Magic posts drew attention on the site . Fans of the show defended it against various trolling attacks from other 4chan boards , leading to a temporary ban on the discussion of anything related to ponies . Christopher Poole , the founder of 4chan , briefly acknowledged the popularity of the show on the site at the 2011 South by Southwest festival . Poole has since created a dedicated board for discussion of the show and its fandom . Though the discussion of the show continued at 4chan , fans created other venues to discuss it , and the fandom spread to other Internet forums . 
 The adult interest in the show is comparable to that of The Magic Roundabout , Tiny Toon Adventures , Rocko 's Modern Life , Animaniacs , <unk> Laboratory , The Powerpuff Girls , SpongeBob SquarePants , Yo Gabba Gabba ! , and Phineas and Ferb : older audiences appreciate jokes aimed at adult viewers and a sense of nostalgia for older cartoons and animated films . Many of the aforementioned shows had attracted college @-@ aged fans who , when Friendship Is Magic was airing , would be raising children of their own . The show references works that older viewers would recognize , such as I Love Lucy , The Benny Hill Show , X @-@ Men , 2001 : A Space Odyssey , Diamond Dogs , The Big Lebowski , The Avengers , Star Wars , and Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas . Most of these fans are surprised by their fondness for the show . Shaun Scotellaro , operator of Equestria Daily , one of the main fan websites for the show , said , " Honestly , if someone were to have told me I 'd be writing a pony blog seven months ago , I would have called them insane . " He commented that the spread among adults was accelerated by its presence in online gaming . Mike Fahey , an editor for the gaming website Kotaku , noted that the fandom was " building friendships among a diverse group of people that otherwise might have just sat on either side of the Internet , flinging insults at each other " . Dr. Patrick Edwards , who performed several " Brony Studies " to survey and analyze the fandom , observed that the brony fandom is unlike most other fandoms which " aren 't welcoming to people who are different " , and promote the show 's message of love and tolerance . Further interest came from the furry community , which includes a large number of animation fans . One contributor to " The Brony Study " ( below ) , Dr. Marsha Redden said that the adult fans are " a reaction to the US having been engrossed in terrorism for past ten years " in a manner similar to the Cold War , and are " tired of being afraid , tired of angst and animosity " ; the show and its fandom are outlets from those strifes . She compared the brony fandom to that of the bohemian and beatniks after World War II and of the hippies after the Vietnam War . In a similar vein , Amy Keating Rogers , one of the show 's writers , believes that the fans have come to like Friendship Is Magic due to " so much cynicism and negativity out there in so many [ other ] shows " , while the show " has such a positive message " that counters this . 
 = = Fan activities = = 
 Older fans of the show use the word " brony " , a portmanteau of the words " bro " and " pony " . Though this generally refers to male fans , the term is often applied to fans of either gender . Another term , " <unk> " , has been used to refer to older female fans of the show . Two informal surveys of 2 @,@ 300 and 9 @,@ 000 participants respectively revealed that the average age of adult fans is around 21 , that approximately 86 % were male , and that 63 % were currently pursuing a college degree or higher qualification . A subsequent 2013 survey with over 21 @,@ 000 respondents showed similar numbers , and highlighted that the majority of fans were in the 15 @-@ 30 age range , with the average age between 19 and 20 , and over 65 % were heterosexual . Further , using the Jungian personality test , the survey revealed that the largest fraction of respondents ( approximately 27 % ) fell into the " <unk> " classification , which normally only occurs in 1 @-@ 3 % of the population , according to the surveyors . Many in the fandom who had difficulty in meeting others or being treated fairly by others found the fandom as a way to meet people with similar interests and become more social . Hub Network 's CEO and President Margaret Loesch , who was the executive producer of the 1980s and 1990s animated My Little Pony television shows , noted that there were male fans of those past shows , but there are considerable more for Friendship Is Magic due to the quality of the show and the influence of social media and the Internet . 
 Some bronies are enlisted personnel in various United States Armed Forces , who have included the various " cutie marks " symbols from the show as insignia on their uniforms or equipment , despite not being appropriate practice for most branches , or worn only during training operations . Margaret Loesch , the CEO and President of The Hub , noted from an email from a group of United States enlisted personnel in Afghanistan explained how they came by the show through way of their daughters , but found the emphasis on teamwork and covering each other 's backs resonated with their military onset . An informal statistical census suggests that as of September 2012 , there are between 7 and 12 @.@ 4 million people in the United States that would identify themselves as bronies . 
 A more detailed study , " The Brony Study " , is currently being conducted by Dr. Patrick Edwards , a psychology professor at Wofford College with his neuropsychologist associate Dr. Redden . The two had initially compiled one of the forementioned informal surveys and Edwards has presented the results at the ongoing brony conventions . Edwards noted that the brony culture provided " the opportunity to study a fan phenomenon from its inception " , and planned to continue the survey to watch the evolution of the culture . Professor emeritus Bill Ellis of Penn State University has compared the brony culture to that of otaku , fans of Japanese anime . Ellis , speaking at the 2012 <unk> convention , considered that both bronies and otaku fans are " psychologically and developmentally normal " and are simply " non @-@ majoritarian " in their choice of active interests . Ellis noted that fans of both groups often are ridiculed for their interest in media targeted for the opposite gender . 
 Though the initial growth of the fandom may have come from 4chan participants enjoying the ironic nature of grown men enjoying a show for girls , the fandom continues to grow based on sincere appreciation of the work . Robert Thompson , a professor of media studies at Syracuse University , stated that " It 's one thing for guys to like motorcycles and muscle cars and soccer . For a guy to like My Little Pony , it 's so out there that it becomes almost avant garde . It has a hip quality to it . " According to Angela <unk> of Wired , the fandom is an example of internet neo @-@ sincerity , where these older viewers watch the show " un @-@ ironically " and " without guilt " breaking gender stereotypes , furthermore creating new material around it . Prof. Roberta Pearson of the University of Nottingham in film and television studies stated that " This is a level of fan devotion I 've not seen before , " while Prof. Charles <unk> of the University of Northern Colorado in communication studies suggested that this effort is an indication of the " ultra @-@ cult era " that bronies exhibit , where " media consumers discover extremely unexpected and obscure media texts to cultivate uniqueness and distinctiveness for their mediated identities " . 
 = = = Online = = = 
 Websites such as Equestria Daily and <unk> were created for fans to share artwork , stories , music , and news about the show . Founded in January 2011 , Equestria Daily had over 36 million pageviews in its first 9 months , and has since surpassed 500 million views in June 2014 ; the blog , that receives more than 175 @,@ 000 visits a day and is fully funded by advertising revenue , was established by 23 @-@ year @-@ old college student Shaun Scotellaro for the purpose of collecting fan fiction and news specific to Friendship Is Magic . Shaun eventually cut back on his community college classes in order to continue running the site out of his parents ' house in Glendale , Arizona , when it grew in popularity . He believed the show needed a unified fan base at the time , as there existed an overarching concern that Hasbro would not be authorizing a second season . 
 = = = Conventions = = = 
 Fans commonly organize local meet @-@ ups and conventions in their local areas . One of the first published conventions was BronyCon , which was first held in New York City at which the show 's supervising director Thiessen was as a guest . The first convention attracted 100 people , but the third , held in January 2012 , was attended by 800 , and the fourth , where developer Lauren Faust and voice actors John de Lancie , Tara Strong , Andrea Libman , Peter New , Lee Tockar , Amy Keating Rogers , Cathy Weseluck and Meghan McCarthy were special guests which expanded to a two @-@ day event in June 2012 at the Meadowlands Exposition Center in New Jersey , with more than 4 @,@ 000 attending . Tara Strong had even attended the convention Canterlot Gardens in a full Twilight Sparkle cosplay to surprise fans . Subsequent BronyCon events since 2013 moved to a larger space provided by the Baltimore Convention Center , with more than 8 @,@ 000 attending . Other brony conventions include Everfree Northwest in Seattle , Washington , <unk> in Chicago , Illinois , Canterlot Gardens in Cleveland , Ohio , Equestria LA in Los Angeles , <unk> in Burlingame , California , <unk> NY in the metropolitan New York City region , <unk> in British Columbia , Canada , <unk> in Germany , <unk> in Manchester , United Kingdom , PonyCon AU in Sydney , Australia , Crystal Mountain Pony Con in Salt Lake City , Utah and Pacific PonyCon in San Diego , California . Nearly a dozen brony conventions were planned in 2012 . In addition , established My Little Pony conventions prior to the Friendship Is Magic show , such as the " My Little Pony Fair " or " UK PonyCon " , have seen increases in their numbers due to the attendance of bronies . A long @-@ running annual art show , the " My Little Pony Project " , where artists re @-@ imagine My Little Pony figurines and toys into works of art , has also seen additional attendance and contributions from the brony community . 
 = = = Charity and fundraising = = = 
 The fandom is considered to be charitable , raising money for a number of different efforts . The Brony Thank You Fund was originally established to create a fan @-@ funded advertisement to air on Hub Network as a thank you to the show 's creators in November 2012 . The charitable drive far exceeded its goal , with additional funds used to give money to provide toys for children through Toys For Tots . The fund has since incorporated in the state of New Hampshire , and successfully registered as a non @-@ profit 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organization under United States law . They claim to be the first such media @-@ related fandom to achieve this status . In December 2013 , the Fund donated $ 50 @,@ 000 to endow an animation scholarship in perpetuity at the California Institute of the Arts . Similarly , a group called " Bronies for Good " ran blood drives and raised over $ 60 @,@ 000 during 2012 for charities like the Children 's Cancer Association , Room to Read , <unk> , and Your Siblings . Voice actress Tara Strong has gained help from the fandom for her " Kiki 's Cancer Fund " to help the daughter of a close friend who had been diagnosed with a brain tumor , and has stated that the child " wouldn 't be alive today without the My Little Pony fans " ; raising $ 100 @,@ 000 to help however , the girl subsequently died of her illness . Faust enlisted help from the bronies to raise money for the Wildlife Learning Center in California , with the Center offering to name some of its animals after characters in the show when certain donation levels were raised . 
 In January 2014 , 11 @-@ year @-@ old Michael <unk> became hospitalized after attempting suicide from being bullied by others at his school for being a fan of the show ; the brony community subsequently reached out to the family and with several of the show 's production and voice actors , started a charity drive to help pay for his medical bills and starting a non @-@ profit organization to help combat bullying ; the efforts raised over $ 48 @,@ 000 within a week and more than $ 72 @,@ 000 a month later . Many of these donations were raised by Tony Wayne and other tattoo artists across the country , with the funds going to Michael 's family and anti @-@ bullying charities . Thousands of men and women received pony tattoos to both support Michael and show their support for anti @-@ bullying . 
 The documentary film , Bronies : The Extremely Unexpected Adult Fans of My Little Pony , was funded several times over its requested Kickstarter amount , allowing the filmmakers to expand the scope of the project . An organized group of fans , calling themselves the " Humble Brony Bundle " , accepted donations from its members towards the Humble Indie Bundle , a charitable independent video game sales drive for Child 's Play and the American Red Cross , which topped the contribution list for one sale and contributed the largest single donation for a later sale after a friendly competition with Minecraft developer Markus Persson . In the next major bundle , the same friendly rivalry topped the donation charts ; the Humble Brony Bundle donated over US $ 13 @,@ 000 and exceeded Persson 's and the rest of the leaderboard 's donation . 
 = = = Arts and entertainment = = = 
 Many artists use sites such as deviantArt to display fan art based on existing and fan @-@ created characters , more than 500 @,@ 000 pieces of Friendship Is Magic artwork were present on deviantArt by June 2012 . Adult fans have also created a number of plush toys and other figures based on the show 's and fandom @-@ created characters , which they sell on eBay and other auction sites to other fans , sometimes for over 100 US dollars . 
 Videos that incorporate footage from the show , including music videos , parodies and remakes of movie and video game trailers , are posted regularly on YouTube . One early video that caught media attention was made by high school student Stephen Thomas , using science to dissect some of the physical impossibilities on My Little Pony as part of a class presentation ; it was later featured on the Tosh.0 website . Remixed versions of professional works using Friendship Is Magic footage have been noticed by their creators ; filmmaker Edgar Wright noted My Little Pony versions of the trailers for his films Scott Pilgrim vs. the World and Hot Fuzz . Top Gear 's UK blog team and the UK edition of the Top Gear magazine noted a video using clips of their show featuring pony characters . A fan @-@ made Friendship Is Magic version of South Korean rapper Psy 's " Gangnam Style " music video incorporating an " invisible horse dance " has been highlighted by media outlets as one of the top takes on the video . One fan , Zachary Rich , created a full @-@ length Flash @-@ based fan episode , " Double <unk> " , as part of his college coursework at the Savannah College of Art and Design . Pony @-@ based videos of " Weird Al " Yankovic 's songs that Yankovic had highlighted in his Twitter feed led to discussions between the musician and the show directors and eventually guest appearance in the show in the fourth season episode " Pinkie Pride " . 
 The fan community has produced numerous fan fiction works , one of the longest being " Fallout : Equestria " written by " <unk> " based on the Fallout video game series . Some fans have created video games based on Friendship Is Magic , such as the fighting game My Little Pony : Fighting Is Magic , modifications of existing games like Team Fortress 2 and The Elder Scrolls V : Skyrim , or crossover artwork between the animated show and video game settings . Flash @-@ based applications allow fans to create their own pony characters in the artistic style of the show . 
 The fandom has been noted for the quantity and diversity of music produced by its members , including cover versions of songs from the show and original songs inspired by the show and its fandom . In January 2014 , <unk> ( an iOS and web app ) was released that collected over 7 @,@ 000 songs and remixes inspired by the show . " Everfree Network " , a brony media network , compiled more than 4 @,@ 800 pieces of fan music by over 500 different musicians in late December 2011 . Thiessen commented that many of these fan productions approach the quality of his studio 's work , and suggested the possibility of crowd @-@ sourcing some aspects of future production , while the show 's composer , Daniel Ingram , often features fan @-@ made songs on his personal <unk> . A group of fan musicians compiled a charity album of original songs , entitled Smile , which raised over $ 21 @,@ 000 within a month for the Children 's Cancer Association . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 = = = Production staff and cast = = = 
 Lauren Faust , the then @-@ executive producer , expressed appreciation for show 's adult fans on her deviantArt page . Faust had not expected men without children to watch it , but said , " The fact that they did and that they were open @-@ minded and cool enough and secure in their masculinity enough to embrace it and love it and go online and talk about how much they love it — I 'm kind of proud . " Of her surprise to the unexpected fandom , Faust said , " From the messages I 've received , these episodes have lifted spirits , brought parents and kids together , changed perspectives and inspired the most unlikely of people in the most unlikely of places . Who would have thought it from a show about candy colored ponies ? " 
 Faust noted the cynicism about the brony fandom , and commented that in considering the idea of grown men watching a show for little girls , " They think there 's something wrong with that , something devious about it " ; she noted that it was " upsetting to me that people jump to those conclusions " . Faust believes that her future animated shows aimed at girls will be easier to sell considering the male adult fandom of Friendship Is Magic , and that that type of programming is not as great a risk as is perceived . After Hasbro issued a cease and desist to the Fighting Is Magic project over the use of copyrighted and trademarked characters , Faust offered to provide the developers with original character arts to allow them to continue to develop the game without copyright issues . 
 The Internet groups surrounding the fandom have enabled the show 's producers to quickly assess their work ; Thiessen stated " As soon as the episode airs , I can go online and see people 's responses in real time " . Many of the creative staff are on various social media services and directly interact with the fandom , including doing questions @-@ and @-@ answer sessions live during the broadcast of new episodes . Ingram was pleased with the fan 's reaction to the show 's music but said , " I never forget about the original demographic of our show , which is six @-@ year @-@ old girls . Just because it 's for kids ... I don 't think that influences me in terms of how sophisticated I want to make the music . " 
 The voice actors also showed appreciation for adult fans . Andrea Libman , who plays Pinkie Pie and Fluttershy , found that more people wanted to meet her as a result of the show , and commented that among the fan community , " there 's some really talented artists doing really amazing stuff " . Tara Strong , who voices Twilight Sparkle , used Twitter to interact with fans and started a " <unk> " meme trend . Ashleigh Ball , who voices Rainbow Dash and Applejack , attributes increased attention her band Hey Ocean ! has received to the brony community . Child voice actress Michelle <unk> , who voices Apple Bloom and provides the singing voice for Sweetie Belle , has collaborated with fan musicians to create new works . 
 John de Lancie was enthralled by the sudden surge in fandom from the brony community after the broadcast of a two @-@ part second season episode featuring his voice work as Discord ( which Faust had modeled after a character previously voiced by de Lancie , Q from Star Trek : The Next Generation ) , and has embraced the attention . He compared the male fandom of a girl @-@ oriented show to the large number of female fans of the original Star Trek series , and the parallels of what the fans did to support the respective shows . De Lancie helped to make a Kickstarter @-@ funded documentary at the fourth BronyCon convention about the growing fandom , Bronies : The Extremely Unexpected Adult Fans of My Little Pony . Faust , de Lancie and Strong were credited as executive producers on the project . The funding drive ended with over $ 320 @,@ 000 in pledges , making it the second most funded film project on Kickstarter at the time . After its release , the project has announced plans to remake the documentary to incorporate additional footage taken at European fandom gatherings . This has been shown at film festivals in 2013 and released for home media distribution . 
 Similarly , Ball 's surprise at the appreciation of the fandom led her to participate in another documentary , A Brony Tale , directed by Brent Hodge , recording her participation at the January 2012 BronyCon event in New York City , as well as discussions with members of the fandom . The film , which was picked up for distribution by Morgan Spurlock , debuted to critical praise at the 2014 Tribeca Film Festival , and reached theatrical and home media markets in July 2014 . 
 At times , portions of the brony fandom have often reacted passionately to changes in the direction of the show , such as in the above change to " The Last Roundup " episode involving the Derpy Hooves character . Similarly , the Season 3 finale episode " Magical Mystery Cure " ended with the main character Twilight Sparkle transforming into a winged unicorn ( alicorn ) and being named a princess . This change was revealed prior to the episode 's airing , and a portion of the fandom were critical of the change , comparing it to a " jump the shark " moment for the show , while others considered that it was a significant change of one of the show 's more popular characters that most of the brony fandom could relate with . The showrunners had to offer that while Twilight 's physical appearance would change , this would not otherwise alter her personality or the general concept of the show . On the announcement of the My Little Pony : Equestria Girls feature @-@ length animated film , in which the pony characters are re @-@ envisioned as human teenage girls going to high school , a large fraction of the adult fandom reacted negatively towards the premise . Several stated that it was a corporate play by Hasbro and veered away from the direction that Faust had envisioned for the show at its onset , while others commented on the cliched aspect of a high school comedy , the overly thin appearance of the human characters , and other factors . The fan site Equestria Daily had issued a caution to its readers to not lash out at the show 's creators who had also worked on the film , and other more predominate figures of the fandom urged others to continue to support the staff . Equestria Daily 's Shaun Scotellaro considered the fandom 's behavior to be " your typical overreaction to something changing in your favorite series " . 
 = = = = Allusion within the show = = = = 
 Faust and the production team have acknowledged some of the fandom and fan @-@ created elements of the show and incorporated them into the animation . Though Hasbro 's priority is to deliver a child @-@ friendly show , the writers and production staff , according to Linda Steiner , senior vice president of Hasbro Studios , " We will certainly , for fun , do the ' <unk> ' [ sic ] check to see if this could pass with them , but our job is to deliver to the kids first . " Margaret Loesch , president and chief executive of Hub Network , said that they have kept their nods to the fandom to subtle hints . She added , " We haven 't driven this movement , the fans have , and we don 't want to get ahead of that . We want to nourish this phenomenon , not manipulate it . " A writer for the show , Meghan McCarthy , said , " Some pop culture @-@ y things are thrown in , but we don 't want to do anything that 's too ' wink wink ' . It detracts from the story that we 're trying to tell " . Many of the nods to the older audience are drawn in by the storyboard artists and animators , who are challenged to populate scripted scenes with background ponies ; McCarthy points the example of ponies fashioned after the main characters from The Big Lebowski due to having to fill in space for scenes set in a bowling alley for the episode " The Cutie Pox " . 
 In the first episode , a background Pegasus pony is shown in one scene with a cross @-@ eyed stare , the result of an overlooked animator 's joke . The 4chan boards quickly dubbed the character " Derpy Hooves " ( based on the internet slang word " <unk> " ) and created a more detailed personality for her despite having minimal on @-@ screen time . Faust responded to the fans , and the production team has kept the " Derpy " character with the cross @-@ eyed look starting with " Feeling Pinkie Keen " , where the team incorporated her into a slapstick sight gag . The character has since become a mascot of the fandom . According to supervising director Jayson Thiessen , the teams considered the character " like a little Easter Egg for people to catch " . 
 At the conclusion of the first season , one of the show 's animators confirmed that " Derpy " would be a scripted background character in the second season , and was a part of several sight gags . In the original broadcast of the mid @-@ season episode " The Last Roundup " as well as on the home media The Friendship Express release , " Derpy " was called out by name by Rainbow Dash , and given lines ( as voiced by St. Germain ) and <unk> mannerisms as a direct call @-@ out to the brony fandom . Though most of the fans appreciated the inclusion , some viewers had a negative response to the character , believing it insulted the mentally handicapped . Hasbro subsequently modified these scenes , and while " Derpy " is still present in subsequent broadcast and digital versions of the episode , she is not named , and a different voice is used . According to Hasbro 's Nicole Agnello , " Some viewers felt that aspects of the episode ' The Last Roundup ' did not stay true to the core message of friendship which is the heart and soul of the series . Hasbro Studios decided to make slight audio alterations to this single episode . " Despite Hasbro 's intentions , some members of the brony community were disappointed , and some made efforts to restore the original voice . " Derpy " remained in background cameos throughout other episodes in season 2 and 3 . Within season 4 , Derpy was re @-@ introduced , remaining silent and unnamed but with her original wall @-@ eyed look , as a side character in the main story of " Rainbow Falls " . The appearance was planned as a big reveal for the brony fans , according to co @-@ director Jim Miller , and that " she is here to stay " according to Hasbro 's vice president for entertainment Mike Vogel . The Derpy character is used often on Hasbro 's marketing of the show . For example , Hasbro 's exclusive pony toy at the Comic @-@ Con International and My Little Pony Fair in 2012 was based on " Derpy " , and has the same cross @-@ eye look . 
 Other non @-@ speaking background characters that caught the attention of the fandom have also had expanded roles . A female unicorn pony character , sporting neon colors , wearing sunglasses , and manning a DJ mixer that briefly appeared in " Suited for Success " , was given the stage name " DJ <unk> @-@ 3 " in an online poll held by Equestria Daily . This name was reused in the " Equestria Girls " advertisement . The character also appeared as a DJ in the season 2 finale , " A Canterlot Wedding - Part 2 " , and became part of the new release of My Little Pony toys in late 2012 , and was the 2013 San Diego Comic Convention exclusive figurine . The character additionally had an expanded yet non @-@ speaking role in the second Equestria Girls film , Rainbow Rocks . 
 Fans of the show nicknamed a male character with a brown coat , messy brown mane , and an hourglass Cutie Mark " Doctor Whooves " because of a purported likeness to David Tennant 's portrayal of The Doctor from the long @-@ running BBC television series Doctor Who . The character had a minor speaking role in the episode " Call of the Cutie " and a brief role as a time @-@ keeper in the episode " The Super Speedy Cider <unk> 6000 " . Other licensed media further carry the homage ; Enterplay 's trading card line associate the character , named " Time Turner " , as dealing with " all things timey @-@ wimey " around Ponyville , alluding to a famous quote from the episode " Blink " , while one of the store @-@ exclusive covers for the Friendship Is Magic comic set the Doctor Whooves character among many iconic Doctor Who elements . The character was openly named Doctor Hooves in The Elements of Harmony : The Official Guidebook , published by Little , Brown and Company . Prof. Colin Burnett of Washington University of St. Louis considered the adoption of these fan names and characteristics within the show as demonstration of co @-@ creative collaboration that can exist in modern media , emphasized by unexpected demographics of bronies that helped to bolster the creators ' success with the work . 
 As a tribute to the older fan base as well as all other fans of the show , the milestone 100th episode , " Slice of Life " , which was first broadcast in 2015 was produced to feature on several of the background characters that the fans had made popular , including Derpy ( now named " Muffin " ) , Doctor Whooves , and DJ <unk> @-@ 3 , among others . 
 = = = Hasbro and Hub Network = = = 
 Hasbro and Hub Network ( prior to its rebranding as Discovery Family ) have also sought to market to bronies . Steiner said , " You develop the best show you can , and hope the humour will translate to a broader audience . But I 've been in the business for 25 years and I 've never seen anything like this . " A company spokeswoman said that bronies are " a small group of My Little Pony fans who don 't necessarily fit what one might expect to be the brand 's target audience " , while its core audience in the older market is predominantly females . Despite being an unusual and unexpected audience , Hasbro and Hub Network chose to " salute and embrace all the viewers who have embraced our brand " , according to Margaret Loesch , CEO of Hub Network and former executive producer of the original My Little Pony animated series . Hasbro has allowed the fandom to be an organic movement leading to its growth and success , according to Stephen Davis , head of Hasbro Studios . 
 Before the brony fandom arose , Hasbro had introduced new My Little Pony toys , including convention @-@ exclusives , at the San Diego Comic Con International . With a brony element in attendance , the convention @-@ exclusive toys have reflected the brony culture ; a large poster was published in 2011 that included several background characters that had attracted the fandom 's interest . A pony toy named " Derpy " was made available for both the convention and My Little Pony Fair in 2012 . Toys " R " Us provided early , limited numbers of new toy based on the zebra character Zecora , due for release in late 2012 by Hasbro . Both Zecora and " Derpy " toys sold out within the first day of the convention . In 2014 , <unk> announced an association with Hasbro to create 3D printed versions of Friendship Is Magic characters , with fan artists creating and selling their designs under Hasbro 's license and approval . <unk> had previous published fan @-@ financed and <unk> models without Hasbro 's license prior to being asked to cease and desist such practice , the new approach with Hasbro 's blessing as been seen as helping to break down the walls between content and fans in the age of social media . 
 Teenage and adult fans have shown interest in clothing with images from the show ; Erin Comella , brand manager for My Little Pony , said that these fans are " literally dressed in the brand " . Hasbro has been providing its licensed clothing vendors such as Hot Topic with My Little Pony @-@ themed shirts and other apparel for all genders and multiple age groups . In part of the older fanbase , Hasbro has come to consider My Little Pony as a " lifestyle " brand , and as of February 2013 , has arranged over 200 licenses across fifteen categories of products . According to Julie Duffy , Hasbro 's vice president of global brand publicity , while their primary market is the young demographic , " [ Hasbro has ] found ways to strike the right balance by working with licensees to offer [ their ] adult fans exciting merchandise geared just for them " . Though Hasbro has not revealed how much of My Little Pony product sales are bolstered by the brony fandom , Caitlin Dewey of The Washington Post suggests that the continued success of the franchise four years after its introduction is tied in part to bronies ' interest in the show and products , and Hasbro 's <unk> to market products towards the adult audience . 
 Hasbro and Hub Network have used advertising parodying others works that are more geared towards the adult fans . Hub Network used a promotional billboard in Los Angeles showing the pony characters parodying the films Bridesmaids and Poltergeist . Hub Network also made a parody of Apple 's <unk> @-@ oriented App Store , which included the phrase , " There 's a pony for that . " A promotional campaign leading up to the second season finale , " A Canterlot Wedding " , in which Twilight 's brother Shining Armor marries Princess Cadance , parodied elements of the 2011 British royal wedding , including the placement of an advertisement in the New York Times wedding announcement section . 
 At the onset of the fandom , Hasbro was generally tolerant of uploads of content and derivative works on sites such as YouTube . However , in late 2011 , a fan @-@ run website called " <unk> " that was <unk> the complete , high @-@ definition episodes that were being sold on iTunes for no cost closed down after receiving cease and desist letters from Hasbro . The otherwise " hands @-@ off " policy has enabled the growth of the fandom . In another case , Hasbro was required to take legal action to protect the My Little Pony trademark against a group working on a massively multiplayer online game , MLP : Online , though the developers , after working with Hasbro 's legal team , are seeking to develop a new Friendship Is Magic @-@ related game without the trademark issues . Though many fan @-@ created videos combine copyright footage of Friendship Is Magic with adult elements from films inappropriate for children like Inglourious Basterds or foul language from musical artists such as Wu @-@ Tang Clan , Hasbro has not taken a stance against these videos and has recognized that the parodies and remixes form a culture of participation that has helped to draw larger attention to the show . In light of the Stop Online Piracy Act , Daniel Nye Griffiths of Forbes considered the fans ' re @-@ use of copyrighted works and creation of new works from them as examples of the inevitable result of any media gaining a fandom , and praised Hasbro for embracing the means to extend the brand through this instead of trying endlessly to stop such infringements . More recently , Hasbro has taken a more proactive nature , such as issuing cease and desist letters to more visible projects such as My Little Pony : Fighting Is Magic and MLP Online , and selling episodes on YouTube which in turn has caused some fan videos to run afoul of YouTube 's Content ID system . 
 A monthly My Little Pony : Friendship Is Magic comic began its run in November 2012 by IDW Publishing . The comic , like the show , is aimed to appeal to younger children with their parents , but includes various pop culture and fandom nods to draw in the older readers . IDW has reported that over 100 @,@ 000 copies of the first issue were been pre @-@ ordered , outselling numerous other comic for that month , and making it the best selling issue in IDW 's history , as well as one of the best selling single issue comics of 2012 . IDW have made plans to reprint the first issue to meet further demand as well as republish the first set as a standalone volume early in 2013 . The monthly comic and its separate " micro @-@ series " , featuring single issue stories that focus on one character , have regularly broken in the top 100 issues sold each month , one of the few non @-@ DC , non @-@ Marvel outside of The Walking Dead that appear in this list , and remain IDW 's top @-@ selling publication . 
 In addition to release official digital albums of songs from the show due to brony demand , Hasbro has worked with Lakeshore Records to create an album of EDM remixes of the show 's songs , entitled <unk> Presents My Little Pony : Friendship Is Magic Remixed inspired by the numerous fan remixes . 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 The adult fandom has been perceived negatively by others , with coverage of the brony fandom overshadowing the show itself . Much of the fandom 's ridicule from others comes from the perception of the mostly adult male fanbase enjoying a show that is marketed to the young female demographic . Through this , the brony community has encountered ridicule through trolling on internet forums , not only from its inception at 4chan , but after moving away from the site . This has also been called out in popular media . The Fox News Channel comedy talk program Red Eye poked fun at the fandom because it largely consists of young adult males . Kurt <unk> of <unk> called the phenomenon a " terrifying new trend " , and wrote , " Hollywood , do you really need to enable the creepy immaturity of these <unk> ? No . It 's time to stop the insanity . " Commenting on <unk> 's article , Greg <unk> of the National Review Online wrote that considering the target audience he could not understand the show 's appeal to adult men . Jerry Springer attempted to bring bronies onto his talk for a segment on " <unk> Guilty Pleasures " , though the fandom warned others about the potential ridicule . 
 The gender @-@ based criticism has also affected younger male fans of the show , such as with Michael <unk> above . Another story that gained national attention was that of Grayson Bruce , a nine @-@ year @-@ old fan who was told to stop bringing a Rainbow Dash backpack to school to prevent bullying that he was receiving . An online campaign to show support for Grayson gained over 32 @,@ 000 supporters on its Facebook page , and the brony fanbase , the show 's creators and voice actors , and various news commentators like Glenn Beck , Ronan Farrow and Eugene Volokh have stood up for the boy 's actions . The school later revised its decision after speaking to the family and clarifying it was not trying to blame the student for the incident . 
 Some media have been critical of the adult @-@ oriented material created by fans . In some cases , these videos may appear in internet searches that children may perform while looking for online copies of the program or while searching for images of characters from the show , forcing parents to have to discuss pornography and sex with their children . One parody series , drawn by animator Max <unk> in the style of John Kricfalusi , places the characters in explicit adult situations and was described by the web site io9 as " disgusting ... and most certainly NSFW " . A segment on the The Howard Stern Show in July 2012 weighed on the pornographic aspect of the brony fandom , often referred to as " clop " . Slate 's Amanda Marcotte opined that the transformation of the pony characters into teenage girls for the My Little Pony : Equestria Girls feature film was a move to satisfy the adult fans who " have expressed a strong interest in seeing the Ponies in sexy , humanized forms " . In one case , several media outlets highlighted a letter written by a brony that claimed to be marrying Twilight Sparkle to a fan artist that drew the character in erotic situations to cease such work , as to highlight of the ridiculous nature of the fandom and Internet as a whole . The fandom acknowledges that such material is generated by a subset of the group , but considers it " an unavoidable part of any online fandom " , as described by TV Guide 's Sadie <unk> , and not worry about this facet . A study performed by graduate students from the University of Connecticut found that " a particularly extreme subset " of the brony fandom shows characteristics of hegemonic masculinity , where male members strive to keep their majority in the numbers by purposely excluding and alienating females . 
 Rebecca Angel , writing for Wired 's <unk> column , described some of the negative feedback from fellow writers about the mostly male brony culture that included accusations of pedophilia , homosexuality , and immaturity . Angel defended the fandom 's culture , describing adult fans ' interest as a form of escapism , and that the show provides characters they can relate to and talk about with other fans . She also acknowledged the double @-@ standard whereas females can watch male @-@ oriented entertainment without question , while male bronies receive criticism about their interest in the show . Angel later described the brony fandom as rebellious towards gender roles , stating that " having interests that go against what men are supposed to embrace is the sneakiest kind of rebellion " . In a similar vein , an " Idea Channel " segment from the Public Broadcasting Service said that the ridicule received by the brony community is partly because the male appreciation for the show challenges preconceived notions of gender roles in the mass media . 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 The My Little Pony toys have been collected mainly by women who grew up with the toys during the 1980s and 1990s , before Hasbro revived the toy series with its Friendship Is Magic line . Bonnie <unk> , the original creator of the franchise , noted that the toys and show were originally conceived to appeal to preschool children of both genders , and considers it a " good thing " for the adult fandom to have the same appreciation of the show as the collectors . According to Summer Hayes , author of six books about My Little Pony toy collections and organizer of the annual My Little Pony collectors ' fair , some of these collectors appreciated the attention of the brony community . Hayes said that the brony community has participated in the toy fair , and that other collectors resent the sudden popularity of Friendship Is Magic . She said that that these earlier fans and collectors had thought ; " ... what about us ? We 've been here forever , and nobody seemed to care . But now that there are all these guys in their 20s that are crazy about it , it 's suddenly important and it means something . " Hayes also said , " To the bronies , I say , I think My Little Pony is awesome , so more power to you " . 
 The adult fandom has gained media attention through outlets such as Wired , Fox News Channel and The Wall Street Journal . Stephen Colbert gave a shout @-@ out to the brony fandom at least twice on his comedy news show , The Colbert Report , although since then his positive connection with the fan base has become questionable . Erin Burnett of CNN 's <unk> reported on the 2012 Summer BronyCon , and ended the segment with a recolored character from the show representing the pony version of herself . The fans gave her some artwork of her character as a way of " welcoming [ her ] to the herd " . NPR 's comedy radio show Wait Wait ... Don 't Tell Me ! highlighted the brony fandom in an episode in June 2011 , and the following week quizzed former US President Bill Clinton about elements from the show during a telephone interview segment called " Not My Job " ; Clinton correctly answered the three multiple choice questions , leading at least one journalist to jokingly refer to him as a brony . An episode of Hot In Cleveland dealing with fan conventions included references to the brony fandom . 
 <unk> Grant Barrett listed " brony " as a memorable new word of 2011 . Time named " the bronies " as the ninth @-@ best meme of 2011 , the Internet meme research site Know Your Meme listed it among its top ten memes of 2011 , and PC Magazine named it one of 2011 's top memes . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The adult fandom of My Little Pony : Friendship Is Magic has led to references to the program in popular culture . Musician Andrew W.K. , a fan of the show , said that he strongly identifies with the over @-@ enthusiastic character of Pinkie Pie . He said , " She 's another creature , much like I am in this world , who is doing everything she can to have fun , " and that he feels inspired by the character spreading excitement and joy to others . He hosted a panel called " What Would Pinkie Pie Do ? " at the Canterlot Gardens convention in September 2012 , and described it as " the most intense experience of [ his ] life " . Rapper MC Chris released a song called " Discord ( My Little Brony ) " on April 1 , 2012 , that showed high familiarity with the show and its culture . Broadway actress Lena Hall has stated she watches the show as it makes her feel " super happy " and appreciates the lessons the show teaches , and considers herself a " <unk> " . In winning the 2014 Tony Award for Best Actress in a Musical , Hall ended her acceptance speech mentioning the television show 's subtitle , " Friendship Is Magic " . 
 The animated television show Mad spoofed Friendship Is Magic at least twice ; one segment was called " My Little War Horse " . An episode of Bob 's Burgers , " The <unk> " , was made as a homage to bronies and their conventions . A secret level in the video game Diablo III included enemies named " Rainbow Western " , " Midnight Sparkle " and " <unk> " , alluding to Friendship Is Magic . In interviews for the video game @-@ related podcast series Geek a Week , both Markus Persson of Mojang and Gabe Newell of Valve said they are fans of Friendship Is Magic . <unk> Labs added a " Brony Mode " to their video game <unk> Truck as free downloadable content in October 2012 specifically as a nod to the brony community . The mode replaces the fuzzy animals in the game with Friendship Is Magic @-@ inspired ponies which the user must drive safely across a landscape . An extended character , the <unk> , available as downloadable content for the game Borderlands 2 , includes numerous references to the show and the fans through the character 's skill tree . Bronies : The Musical is a 2014 off @-@ Broadway production written by Tom Moore and Heidi Powers that is inspired by the brony culture , and won for Best Musical in the Hollywood Fringe Festival . The popularity of the show as a result of the brony fandom led to a brief bit of animation created by the show to be used in an NFL advertisement during Super Bowl XLIX . 
 The Pirate Party Germany 's parliamentary group in the <unk> of Berlin ( the Berlin state parliament ) has insisted on the inclusion of a break called " pony time " , in which an episode from the series is shown , during their meetings at their parliamentary office , which displeased many other members in the Berlin parliament . The internet activist group Anonymous used the character Rainbow Dash to deface the website of the Social Democratic Party of Austria in 2011 and 2012 . A teenage white hat hacker used the name " Pinkie Pie " for anonymity and a fan drawing of the character wielding an axe as part of a successful entry in an early 2012 contest sponsored by Google Chrome to break the security of the web browser ; the same user also was the first to break the security in a second contest held later in 2012 , and found an important security flaw in the Linux kernel A May 2013 update to Google <unk> included an easter egg that would have Friendship Is Magic @-@ inspired ponies run across the chat window . A similar update in August 2013 as part of YouTube 's " Geek Week " added two easter eggs , one that would cause ponies to cross the screen on searching for " bronies " , and a second that , if searching on a number of different pony names like " Twilight Sparkle " , would change the site 's title bar to a representative color of that pony . 
 An article that appeared in the New York Times on December 26 , 2011 , " Navigating Love and Autism " by Amy Harmon , described how a young woman with Asperger syndrome used My Little Pony characters to relieve stress . She visualized the character Twilight Sparkle whenever she " found herself in a bad @-@ mood rut " . The story misidentified Twilight Sparkle as Fluttershy on initial publication and the paper issued a correction , which some journalists have jokingly considered as " the best New York Times correction ever " , though others saw it as a sign of the journalistic integrity of the Times . Harmon was contacted by fans about the mistake , and said , " I hate to get anything wrong , but I confess to some enjoyment in finding the right way to phrase this one . " In 2015 , the New York Times reported that Dylann Roof , the suspect in the Charleston church shooting , was a fan of My Little Pony , but later corrected itself after recognizing it had been duped in a experiment run by a blogger , who had faked the claim but made it as credible as possible as to test how much fact checking major news sources were doing on a high @-@ interest topic . 
 In March 2014 , conservative / libertarian radio / television host and entrepreneur Glenn Beck voiced support for Grayson Bruce , a bullied 9 year old MLP fan , and the brony community . Bruce was told by school officials that he was no longer allowed to bring his My Little Pony backpack to school after he was being bullied for wearing it , claiming that his backpack was a trigger for the bullies . Beck challenged critics of bronies , and the school officials , saying " The only ones being responsible here , I think , is the 9 @-@ year @-@ old kid Grayson . He ’ s being authentic . He ’ s being responsible . He ’ s saying , ‘ This who I am . I don ’ t care what anybody else says about me . This is what I like . ’ Everybody else is not being responsible ... What are we doing ? " Beck concluded with , " " We ’ re not aficionados on My Little Pony . But I am an aficionado on what it takes to be a man in today ’ s world . And just because you like little ponies means nothing . You having the courage to be who you are and stand up no matter what society says , that is worth its weight in gold . " Beck also asked his listeners to send in pictures of them with pony plushies to support Grayson . During two episodes of both his morning show and evening show , Beck and his co @-@ hosts had My Little Pony plushies and backpacks on their desks , made Grayson 's story a major talking point , and interviewed Grayson and his mother on his evening program . 
 = The American Males = 
 The American Males were a professional wrestling tag team in World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) composed of Marcus Bagwell and Scotty Riggs . Their gimmick was of two " pretty boys " who were fond of their own bodies and popular with women . Riggs was Bagwell 's third partner with whom he won the WCW World Tag Team Championship , the previous two being 2 Cold Scorpio and The Patriot . The American Males won the tag team title soon after they began teaming together but soon dropped the belts back to Harlem Heat , the previous champions . Bagwell and Riggs did not return to main @-@ event status , and they eventually split up and feuded with each other . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Marcus Bagwell had competed in the tag team division in WCW since 1993 , during which time he held the WCW World Tag Team Championship with two different partners . Teaming with 2 Cold Scorpio , he held the title belts for three weeks . He later won the title twice more while teaming with The Patriot , a team that was dubbed Stars and Stripes due to the patriotic theme both wrestlers were using at the time . After being left behind by both partners , he expressed a desire to form a new tag team to challenge for the title again . According to WCW 's storylines , his former partners believed that he was too demanding , and he was unable to find anyone interested in teaming with him due to his reputation as being " difficult to work with " . 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The team was formed in August 1995 when Scott Antol signed a WCW contract and was placed with " tag team specialist " Marcus Alexander Bagwell . In the process , both men changed their ring names , Antol changing his last name to " Riggs " and Bagwell shortening his name to simply Marcus Bagwell . Once together , they both wore short shorts and leather vests ( later wrestling tights and suspenders ) to the ring and began clapping their hands over their head in time with their entrance music , which sang their praises between choruses of the team name being repeated over and over . They wrestled on the first episode of Nitro , defeating World Tag Team Champions Dick Slater and Bunkhouse Buck in a non @-@ title match . Their first major appearance together came at the Fall Brawl pay @-@ per @-@ view , where they defeated The Nasty Boys in a match that aired on Main Event . Pro Wrestling Illustrated magazine stated that the team " work [ ed ] well as a unit and could soon challenge for the belts " . Bagwell commented on the team in a scripted interview , saying that he believed that his previous tag teams had failed because they were in a rush to win the title belts and that he planned to work slowly toward a title victory with Riggs . 
 = = = World Tag Team Champions = = = 
 On the episode of Nitro after Fall Brawl , Riggs and Bagwell won the World Tag Team Championship after defeating then @-@ champions Harlem Heat ( Booker T and Stevie Ray ) in an upset win in an impromptu match . The American Males had been scheduled to face The Blue Bloods , but Harlem Heat attacked both members of the Blue Bloods prior to the match and volunteered to take their place . As champions , the pair defeated Harlem Heat and the team of Dick Slater and Bunkhouse Buck . However , Bagwell and Riggs lost the titles back to Harlem Heat one week later on Saturday Night . The American Males remained top challengers for the title belts for the rest of 1995 but were unable to regain the championship from Harlem Heat . 
 By the end of 1995 , The American Males were no longer being pushed by WCW ; they competed at Starrcade 1995 in a dark match and defeated The Blue Bloods . Through most of 1996 , they competed in the tag team division with no major storylines and never reached the same heights as when they were champions . They were able to defeat other mid @-@ card teams like the Faces of Fear , and they competed in a dark match prior to Slamboree 1996 , defeating The Shark and Maxx . They were consistently defeated by the company 's top tag teams , and Pro Wrestling Illustrated noted that they were getting lost in a " very deep " tag team division that included The Road Warriors , Public Enemy , Harlem Heat , The Nasty Boys , the Blue Bloods , Lex Luger and Sting , Four Horsemen , The Steiner Brothers , and The Outsiders , among others . 
 In October 1996 , the team began showing signs of splitting , which intensified over the weeks . At World War 3 on November 24 , 1996 , the frustration came to a head as Bagwell attacked Riggs following both men 's elimination from the three @-@ ring battle royal that served as the main event . 
 The next night on Nitro Eric Bischoff , representing the New World Order ( nWo ) stable , informed all WCW wrestlers that they would become targets of the nWo if they did not join the group within 30 days . Bagwell and Riggs walked to the ring shortly after Bischoff 's statement , with Bagwell looking to join and Riggs trying to talk him out of it . Bagwell decided to join the nWo , turning on Riggs and dissolving the team in the process . In a scripted interview , Bagwell stated , " Who needs Riggs anymore when I have the nWo ? ! " He also later stated that the team 's lack of success after their first title reign was the fault of Riggs ' ineptitude , stating " I couldn 't make up for all his weaknesses . " 
 = = = Split = = = 
 Following the breakup , the former partners feuded for a while with Bagwell getting the better of Riggs . Riggs would go on to briefly feud with Raven , later joining The Flock , while Bagwell formed Vicious and Delicious with Scott Norton before suffering a severe neck injury that kept him out of action for a while . Bagwell later returned to WCW , teaming with Shane Douglas to win another tag team championship . After losing the championship , he formed another tag team , pairing with Lex Luger to form Totally <unk> . 
 In 2000 , when Riggs joined Extreme Championship Wrestling , he did a parody of the American Males gimmick by calling himself " The U.S. Male " and using their overhead clap taunt . 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 World Championship Wrestling 
 WCW World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) 
 = Wilhelm Reich = 
 Wilhelm Reich ( 24 March 1897 – 3 November 1957 ) was an Austrian psychoanalyst , a member of the second generation of analysts after Sigmund Freud . The author of several influential books , most notably Character Analysis ( 1933 ) , The Mass Psychology of Fascism ( 1933 ) and The Sexual Revolution ( 1936 ) , Reich became known as one of the most radical figures in the history of psychiatry . 
 Reich 's work on character contributed to the development of Anna Freud 's The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defence ( 1936 ) , and his idea of muscular armour – the expression of the personality in the way the body moves – shaped innovations such as body psychotherapy , Gestalt therapy , <unk> analysis and primal therapy . His writing influenced generations of intellectuals ; he coined the phrase " the sexual revolution " and according to one historian acted as its midwife . During the 1968 student uprisings in Paris and Berlin , students scrawled his name on walls and threw copies of The Mass Psychology of Fascism at police . 
 After graduating in medicine from the University of Vienna in 1922 , Reich became deputy director of Freud 's outpatient clinic , the Vienna Ambulatorium . Described by Elizabeth Danto as a large man with a cantankerous style who managed to look scruffy and elegant at the same time , he tried to reconcile psychoanalysis with Marxism , arguing that neurosis is rooted in sexual and socio @-@ economic conditions , and in particular in a lack of what he called " orgastic potency . " He visited patients in their homes to see how they lived , and took to the streets in a mobile clinic , promoting adolescent sexuality and the availability of contraceptives , abortion and divorce , a provocative message in Catholic Austria . He said he wanted to " attack the neurosis by its prevention rather than treatment . " 
 From the 1930s he became an increasingly controversial figure , and from 1932 until his death in 1957 all his work was self @-@ published . His message of sexual liberation disturbed the psychoanalytic community and his political associates , and his vegetotherapy , in which he massaged his disrobed patients to dissolve their " muscular armour , " violated the key taboos of psychoanalysis . He moved to New York in 1939 , in part to escape the Nazis , and shortly after arriving coined the term " orgone " – from " orgasm " and " organism " – for a biological energy he said he had discovered , which he said others called God . In 1940 he started building orgone accumulators , devices that his patients sat inside to harness the reputed health benefits , leading to newspaper stories about sex boxes that cured cancer . 
 Following two critical articles about him in The New Republic and Harper 's in 1947 , the U.S. Food and Drug Administration obtained an injunction against the interstate shipment of orgone accumulators and associated literature , believing they were dealing with a " fraud of the first magnitude . " Charged with contempt in 1956 for having violated the injunction , Reich was sentenced to two years ' imprisonment , and that summer over six tons of his publications were burned by order of the court . He died in prison of heart failure just over a year later , days before he was due to apply for parole . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Reich was born the first of two sons to Leon Reich , a farmer , and his wife Cäcilie ( née <unk> ) in <unk> , Galicia , then part of Austria @-@ Hungary , now in Ukraine . There was a sister too , born one year after Reich , but she died in infancy . Shortly after his birth the family moved to <unk> , a village in Bukovina , where his father ran a cattle farm leased by his mother 's uncle , Josef Blum . 
 His father was by all accounts a cold and jealous man . Both parents were Jewish , but decided against raising the boys as Jews . Reich and his brother , Robert , were brought up to speak only German , were punished for using Yiddish expressions and forbidden from playing with the local Yiddish @-@ speaking children . 
 As an adult Reich wrote extensively , in his diary , about his sexual precocity . He maintained that his first sexual experience was at the age of four when he tried to have sex with the family maid ( with whom he shared a bed ) , that he would regularly watch the farm animals have sex , that he used a whip handle sexually on the horses while masturbating , and that he had almost daily sexual intercourse from the age of 11 with another of the servants . He wrote of regular visits to brothels , the first when he was 15 , and said he was visiting them daily from the age of around 17 . He also developed sexual fantasies about his mother , writing when he was 22 that he masturbated while thinking about her . 
 It is impossible to judge the truth of these diary entries , but Reich 's second daughter , the psychiatrist Lore Reich Rubin , told Christopher Turner that she believed Reich had been a victim of child sexual abuse , and that this explained his lifelong interest in sex and childhood sexuality . 
 = = = Death of parents = = = 
 Reich was taught at home until he was 12 , when his mother was discovered having an affair with his live @-@ in tutor . Reich wrote about the affair in 1920 in his first published paper , " Über einen Fall von <unk> der <unk> " ( " About a Case of Breaching the Incest Taboo " ) , presented in the third person as though about a patient . He wrote that he would follow his mother when she went to the tutor 's bedroom at night , feeling ashamed and jealous , and wondering if they would kill him if they found out that he knew . He briefly thought of forcing her to have sex with him , on pain of threatening to tell his father . In the end , he did tell his father , and after a protracted period of beatings , his mother committed suicide in 1910 , for which Reich blamed himself . 
 With the tutor ordered out of the house , Reich was sent to an all @-@ male gymnasium in Czernowitz . It was during this period that a skin condition appeared , diagnosed as psoriasis , that plagued him for the rest of his life , leading several commentators to remark on his ruddy complexion . He visited brothels every day and wrote in his diary of his disgust for the women . His father died of tuberculosis in 1914 , and because of rampant inflation the father 's insurance was worthless , so no money was forthcoming for the brothers . Reich managed the farm and continued with his studies , graduating in 1915 with <unk> ( unanimous approval ) . The Russians invaded Bukovina that summer and the Reich brothers fled , losing everything . Reich wrote in his diary : " I never saw either my homeland or my possessions again . Of a well @-@ to @-@ do past , nothing was left . " 
 = = 1919 – 1930 : Vienna = = 
 = = = Undergraduate studies = = = 
 Reich joined the Austro @-@ Hungarian Army during the First World War , serving from 1915 to 1918 , for the last two years as a lieutenant at the Italian front with 40 men under his command . When the war ended he headed for Vienna , enrolling in law at the University of Vienna , but found it dull and switched to medicine after the first semester . He arrived with nothing in a city with little to offer ; the overthrow of the Austria @-@ Hungarian empire a few weeks earlier had left the newly formed Republic of German @-@ Austria in the grip of famine . Reich lived on soup , oats and dried fruit from the university canteen , and shared an unheated room with his brother and another undergraduate , wearing his coat and gloves indoors to stave off the cold . He fell in love with another medical student , Lia <unk> , with whom he was dissecting a corpse , but it was largely unrequited . 
 Myron Sharaf , his biographer , wrote that Reich loved medicine but was caught between a reductionist / mechanistic and vitalist view of the world . Reich wrote later of this period : 
 The question , " What is Life ? " lay behind everything I learned . ... It became clear that the mechanistic concept of life , which dominated our study of medicine at the time , was unsatisfactory ... There was no denying the principle of creative power governing life ; only it was not satisfactory as long as it was not tangible , as long as it could not be described or practically handled . For , rightly , this was considered the supreme goal of natural science . 
 = = = Introduction to Freud = = = 
 Reich first met Sigmund Freud in 1919 when he asked Freud for a reading list for a seminar concerning sexology . It seems they left a strong impression on each other . Freud allowed him to start meeting with analytic patients in September that year , although Reich was just 22 years old and still an undergraduate , which gave him a small income . He was accepted as a guest member of the Vienna Psychoanalytic Association , becoming a regular member in October 1920 , and began his own analysis with Isidor <unk> . He lived and worked out of an apartment on <unk> 7 , the street on which Freud lived at no . 19 , in the <unk> area of Vienna . 
 One of Reich 's first patients was Lore Kahn , a 19 @-@ year @-@ old woman with whom he had an affair . Freud had warned analysts not to involve themselves with their patients , but in the early days of psychoanalysis the warnings went unheeded . According to Reich 's diaries , Kahn became ill in November 1920 and died of sepsis after sleeping in a bitterly cold room she had rented as a place for her and Reich to meet ( both his landlady and her parents had forbidden their meetings ) . Kahn 's mother suspected that her daughter had died after a botched illegal abortion , possibly performed by Reich himself . According to Christopher Turner , she found some of her daughter 's bloodied underwear in a cupboard . 
 It was a serious allegation to make against a physician . Reich wrote in his diary that the mother had been attracted to him and had made the allegation to damage him . She later committed suicide and Reich blamed himself . If Kahn did have an abortion , Turner wrote , she was the first of four of Reich 's partners to do so : his first wife had several , and his long @-@ term partners Elsa Lindenberg and Ilse Ollendorf ( his second wife ) each had one at Reich 's insistence . 
 = = = First marriage , graduation = = = 
 Two months after Kahn 's death , Reich accepted her friend , Annie Pink ( 1902 – 1971 ) , as an <unk> . Pink was Reich 's fourth female patient , a medical student three months shy of her 19th birthday . He had an affair with her too , and married her in March 1922 at her father 's insistence , with psychoanalysts Otto <unk> and Edith <unk> as witnesses . Annie Reich became a well @-@ known psychoanalyst herself . The marriage produced two daughters , Eva ( 1924 – 2008 ) and Lore ( b . 1928 ) , both of whom became physicians ; Lore Reich Rubin also became a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst . 
 Because he was a war veteran , Reich was allowed to complete a combined bachelor 's and M.D. in four years instead of six , and graduated in July 1922 . After graduating he worked in internal medicine at the city 's University Hospital , and studied <unk> from 1922 to 1924 at the hospital 's neurological and psychiatric clinic under Professor Julius Wagner von Jauregg , who won the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1927 . 
 = = = Vienna Ambulatorium = = = 
 In 1922 Reich began working in Freud 's psychoanalytic outpatient clinic , known as the Vienna Ambulatorium , which was opened on 22 May that year at <unk> 18 by Eduard <unk> . Reich became the assistant director under <unk> in 1924 and worked there until his move to Berlin in 1930 . 
 Between 1922 and 1932 the clinic offered free or reduced @-@ cost psychoanalysis to 1 @,@ 445 men and 800 women , many suffering from shell shock after World War I. It was the second such clinic to open under Freud 's direction ; the first was the <unk> in Berlin , set up in 1920 by Max <unk> and Ernst Simmel . 
 Sharaf writes that working with labourers , farmers and students allowed Reich to move away from treating neurotic symptoms to observing chaotic lifestyles and anti @-@ social personalities . Reich argued that neurotic symptoms such as obsessive @-@ compulsive disorder were an unconscious attempt to gain control of a hostile environment , including poverty or childhood abuse . They were examples of what he called " character armour " ( <unk> ) , repetitive patterns of behaviour , speech and body posture that served as defence mechanisms . According to Danto , Reich sought out patients at the Ambulatorium who had been diagnosed as psychopaths , believing that psychoanalysis could free them of their rage . 
 Reich joined the faculty of the Psychoanalytic Institute in Vienna in 1924 and became its director of training . According to Danto , he was well @-@ regarded for the weekly technical seminars he chaired at the Ambulatorium , where he gave papers on his theory of character structure , arguing that psychoanalysis should be based on the examination of unconscious character traits , later known as ego defences . The seminars were attended , from 1927 , by Fritz Perls , who went on to develop Gestalt therapy with his wife , Laura Perls . Several commentators remarked on how captivating the seminars were and how eloquently Reich spoke . According to a Danish newspaper in 1934 : 
 The moment he starts to speak , not at the lectern , but walking around it on cat 's paws , he is simply enchanting . In the Middle Ages , this man would have been sent into exile . He is not only eloquent , he also keeps his listeners spellbound by his sparking personality , reflected in his small , dark eyes . 
 = = = Der <unk> <unk> = = = 
 Reich 's first book , Der <unk> <unk> : Eine <unk> <unk> zur Pathologie des Ich ( " The Impulsive Character : A Psychoanalytic Study of the Pathology of the Self " ) , was published in 1925 . It was a study of the anti @-@ social personalities he had encountered in the Ambulatorium , and argued the need for a systematic theory of character . The book won him professional recognition , including from Freud , who in 1927 arranged for his appointment to the executive committee of the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society . The appointment was made over the objection of Paul Federn , who had been Reich 's second analyst in 1922 and who , according to Sharaf , regarded Reich as a psychopath . Reich found the society dull and wrote that he behaved " like a shark in a pond of carps . " 
 = = = <unk> potency = = = 
 Beginning in 1924 Reich published a series of papers on the idea of " orgastic potency , " the ability to release the emotions from the muscles and lose the self in an uninhibited orgasm , an idea that Freud came to call Reich 's " <unk> " ( hobby horse ) . Reich argued that psychic health and the ability to love depended on orgastic potency , the full discharge of the libido : " Sexual release in the sex act must correspond to the excitement which leads up to it . " He wrote : " It is not just to fuck ... not the embrace in itself , not the intercourse . It is the real emotional experience of the loss of your ego , of your whole spiritual self . " He argued that orgastic potency was the goal of character analysis . 
 Whereas Reich 's work on character was well received by the psychoanalytic community , Sharaf writes , his work on orgastic potency was unpopular from the start and later ridiculed . He came to be known as the " prophet of the better orgasm " and the " founder of a genital utopia . " 
 = = = Rest cure in Switzerland = = = 
 Reich 's brother died of tuberculosis ( TB ) in 1926 , the same disease that had killed their father . Turner writes that a quarter of deaths in Vienna were caused by TB in the 1920s . Reich himself contracted it in 1927 and spent several weeks in the winter of that year in a sanitorium in Davos , Switzerland , where TB patients went for rest cures and fresh air before antibiotics became widely available around 1945 . Turner writes that Reich underwent a political and existential crisis in Davos ; he returned home in the spring angry and paranoid , according to Annie Reich . Some months later he and Annie were on the streets during the July Revolt of 1927 in Vienna , when 84 workers were shot and killed by police and another 600 were injured . It seems that the experience changed Reich ; he wrote that it was his first encounter with human irrationality . He began to doubt everything , and in 1928 joined the Communist Party of Austria : 
 As if struck by a blow , one suddenly recognizes the scientific futility , the biological senselessness , and the social noxiousness of views and institutions , which until that moment had seemed altogether natural and self @-@ evident . It is a kind of eschatological experience so frequently encountered in a pathological form in schizophrenics . I might even voice the belief that the schizophrenic form of psychic illness is regularly accompanied by illuminating insight into the irrationalism of social and political mores . 
 = = = Sex @-@ pol movement = = = 
 Partly in response to the shooting he had witnessed in Vienna , Reich , then 30 , opened six free sex @-@ counselling clinics in the city in 1927 for working @-@ class patients . Each clinic was overseen by a physician , with three obstetricians and a lawyer on call , and offered what Reich called Sex @-@ Pol counselling . Sex @-@ Pol stood for the German Society of Proletarian Sexual Politics . Reich offered a mixture of " psychoanalytic counseling , Marxist advice and contraceptives , " Danto writes , and argued for a sexual permissiveness , including for young people and the unmarried , that unsettled other psychoanalysts and the political left . The clinics were immediately overcrowded by people seeking help . 
 He also took to the streets in a mobile clinic , driving to parks and out to the suburbs with other psychoanalysts and physicians . Reich would talk to the teenagers and men , while a gynaecologist fitted the women with contraceptive devices , and Lia <unk> , the woman Reich fell in love with at medical school , spoke to the children . They also distributed sex @-@ education pamphlets door to door . 
 = = = Die Funktion des Orgasmus = = = 
 Reich published Die Funktion des Orgasmus ( " The Function of the Orgasm " ) in 1927 , dedicating it to Freud . He had presented a copy of the manuscript to Freud on the latter 's 70th birthday on 6 May 1926 . Freud had not appear impressed . He replied " that thick ? " when Reich handed it to him , and took two months to write a brief but positive letter in response , which Reich interpreted as a rejection . Freud 's view was that the matter was more complicated than Reich suggested , and that there was no single cause of neurosis . He wrote in 1928 to another psychoanalyst , Dr. Lou Andreas @-@ Salomé : 
 We have here a Dr. Reich , a worthy but impetuous young man , passionately devoted to his hobby @-@ horse , who now salutes in the genital orgasm the antidote to every neurosis . Perhaps he might learn from your analysis of K. to feel some respect for the complicated nature of the psyche . 
 = = = Visit to Soviet Union = = = 
 In 1929 Reich and his wife visited the Soviet Union on a lecture tour , leaving the two children in the care of the psychoanalyst Berta Bornstein . Sharaf writes that he returned even more convinced of the link between sexual and economic oppression , and of the need to integrate Marx and Freud . In 1929 his article " Dialectical Materialism and Psychoanalysis " was published in Unter dem Banner des <unk> , the German Communist Party journal . The article explored whether psychoanalysis was compatible with historical materialism , class struggle and proletarian revolution . Reich concluded that they were compatible if dialectical materialism was applied to psychology . This was one of the central theoretical statements of his Marxist period , which included The <unk> of Sexual Morality ( 1932 ) , The Sexual Struggle of Youth ( 1932 ) , The Mass Psychology of Fascism ( 1933 ) , “ What is Class Consciousness ? ” ( 1934 ) and The Sexual Revolution ( 1936 ) . 
 = = 1930 – 1934 : Germany , Denmark , Sweden = = 
 = = = Verlag für <unk> = = = 
 Reich and his wife moved to Berlin in November 1930 , where he set up clinics in working @-@ class areas , taught sex education and published pamphlets . He joined the Communist Party of Germany , but grew impatient over their delay in publishing one of his pamphlets , Der Sexuelle Kampf der Jugend ( 1932 ) , published in English as The Sexual Struggle of Youth ( 1972 ) . He set up his own publishing house , Verlag für <unk> , and published the pamphlet himself . 
 His subsequent involvement in a conference promoting adolescent sexuality caused the party to announce that it would no longer publish his material . In March 1933 Freud told him that his contract with the International Psychoanalytic Publishers to publish Character Analysis had been cancelled . Sharaf writes that this was almost certainly because of Reich 's stance on teenage sex . 
 = = = Character Analysis = = = 
 Reich published what Robert <unk> called his masterpiece , <unk> : Technik und Grundlagen für <unk> und <unk> <unk> , in 1933 . It was revised and published in English in 1946 and 1949 as Character Analysis . The book sought to move psychoanalysis toward a reconfiguration of character structure . 
 For Reich , character structure was the result of social processes , in particular a reflection of castration and Oedipal anxieties playing themselves out within the nuclear family . Les Greenberg and Jeremy Safran write that Reich proposed a functional identity between the character , emotional blocks , and tension in the body , or what he called character ( or muscular / body ) armour ( <unk> ) . 
 Reich proposed that muscular armour was a defence that contained the history of the patient 's traumas . For example , he blamed Freud 's jaw cancer on his muscular armour , rather than his smoking : Freud 's Judaism meant he was " biting down " impulses , rather than expressing them . Dissolving the armour would bring back the memory of the childhood repression that had caused the blockage in the first place . 
 = = = End of first marriage = = = 
 Reich had several affairs during his marriage to Annie Reich , which ended in 1933 after he began a serious relationship in May 1932 with Elsa Lindenberg , a dancer and pupil of Elsa <unk> . He was living with Lindenberg in Germany when Hitler became Chancellor in January 1933 . On March 2 that year the Nazi newspaper Völkischer Beobachter published an attack on Der Sexuelle Kampf der Jugend . Reich and Lindenberg left for Vienna the next day . They moved from there to Denmark , where Reich was excluded from the Danish Communist Party in November 1933 ( without ever having joined it ) because of his promotion of teenage sex and the publication that year of The Mass Psychology of Fascism , which they regarded as " counterrevolutionary . " There were multiple complaints about his promotion of abortion , sex education , and the attempted suicide of a teenage patient . According to Turner , when Reich 's visa expired , it was not renewed . 
 He tried to find support among psychoanalysts in the UK so that he could settle there , and was interviewed in London by Ernest Jones , Melanie Klein , Joan Riviere and James Strachey . They decided that he had been " insufficiently analysed " and had an unresolved hostility toward Freud . Anna Freud , Freud 's daughter – whom Jones had contacted about Reich 's desire to relocate to England – wrote in 1938 : " There is a wall somewhere where he stops to understand the other person 's point of view and flies off into a world of his own ... He is an unhappy person ... and I am afraid this will end in sickness . " 
 Reich and Lindenberg moved instead to Malmö in Sweden , which Reich described as " better than a concentration camp , " but he was placed under surveillance when police suspected that the hourly visits of patients to his hotel room meant he was running a brothel , with Lindenberg as the prostitute . The government declined to extend his visa , and the couple had to move briefly back to Denmark , Reich under an assumed name . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 From 1930 onwards , Reich began to treat patients outside the limits of psychoanalysis 's restrictions . He would sit opposite them , rather than behind them as they lay on a couch ( the traditional psychoanalyst 's position ) , and began talking to them and answering their questions , instead of offering the stock , " Why do you ask ? " analyst 's response . He had noticed that after a successful course of psychoanalysis his patients would hold their bodies differently , so he began to try to communicate with the body using touch . He asked his male patients to undress down to their shorts , and sometimes entirely , and his female patients down to their underclothes , and began to massage them to loosen their body armour . He would also ask them to simulate physically the effects of certain emotions in the hope of triggering them . 
 He first presented the principles of what he called character @-@ analytic vegetotherapy in August 1934 , in a paper entitled " <unk> Kontakt und vegetative <unk> " ( " Psychological Contact and Vegetative Current " ) at the 13th International Congress of Psychoanalysis at Lucerne , Switzerland . His second wife , Ilse Ollendorf , said vegetotherapy replaced the psychoanalytic method of never touching a patient with " a physical attack by the therapist . " 
 The method eliminated the psychoanalytic doctrine of neutrality . Reich argued that the psychoanalytic taboos reinforced the neurotic taboos of the patient , and that he wanted his patients to see him as human . He would press his thumb or the palm of his hand hard ( and painfully ) on their jaws , necks , chests , backs , or thighs , aiming to dissolve their muscular , and thereby <unk> , rigidity . He wrote that the purpose of the massage was to retrieve the repressed memory of the childhood situation that had caused the repression . If the session worked , he would see waves of pleasure move through their bodies , which he called the " orgasm reflex . " According to Sharaf , the twin goals of Reichian therapy were the attainment of this orgasm reflex during sessions and orgastic potency during intercourse . Reich briefly considered calling it " <unk> , " but thought better of it . 
 Just before the Lucerne conference , Reich was asked to resign from the International <unk> Association for prioritizing his revolutionary agenda over Freud 's ideas . He arrived at the conference furious about his treatment . Turner writes that he cemented his reputation as a madman , camping in a tent outside the conference hall and reportedly carrying a large knife in his belt . According to the psychiatrist Grete <unk> , Paul Federn declared , " Either Reich goes or I go . " 
 = = 1934 – 1939 : Norway = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In October 1934 Reich and Lindenberg moved to Oslo , Norway , where Harald K. <unk> , professor of psychology at the University of Oslo , had invited Reich to lecture on character analysis and vegetotherapy . They ended up staying for five years . 
 During his time in Norway , Reich attempted to ground his orgasm theory in biology , exploring whether Freud 's metaphor of the libido was in fact electricity or a chemical substance , an argument Freud had proposed in the 1890s but had abandoned . Reich argued that conceiving of the orgasm as nothing but mechanical tension and relaxation could not explain why some experience pleasure and others do not . He wanted to know what additional element had to be present for pleasure to be felt . 
 Reich was influenced by the work of the Austrian internist Friedrich Kraus , who argued in his paper Allgemeine und <unk> Pathologie der Person ( 1926 ) that the <unk> was a relay @-@ like switch mechanism of electrical charge and discharge . Reich wrote in an essay , " Der Orgasmus als Elektro @-@ <unk> <unk> " ( " The Orgasm as an Electrophysiological Discharge " , 1934 ) , that the orgasm is just such a bioelectrical discharge and proposed his " orgasm formula " : mechanical tension ( filling of the organs with fluid ; <unk> ) → bioelectrical charge → bioelectrical discharge → mechanical relaxation ( <unk> ) . 
 In 1935 Reich bought an <unk> and attached it to friends and students , who volunteered to touch and kiss each other while Reich read the tracings . One of the volunteers was a young Willy Brandt , the future chancellor of Germany . At the time , he was married to Reich 's secretary , Gertrude <unk> , and was living in Norway to organize protests against the Nazis . Reich also took measurements from the patients of a psychiatric hospital near Oslo , including catatonic patients , with the permission of the hospital 's director . Reich described the <unk> experiments in 1937 in <unk> <unk> Über Die <unk> Funktion von <unk> und Angst ( The <unk> Investigation of Sexuality and Anxiety ) . 
 = = = Bion experiments = = = 
 From 1934 to 1939 Reich conducted what he called the bion experiments , which he published as Die <unk> : Zur <unk> des <unk> Lebens in Oslo in February 1938 ( published in English in 1979 and later called The Bion Experiments on the Origin of Life ) . He examined protozoa and grew cultured vesicles using grass , sand , iron and animal tissue , boiling them and adding potassium and gelatin . Having heated the materials to incandescence with a heat @-@ torch , he wrote that he had seen bright , glowing , blue vesicles . He called them " bions " and believed they were a rudimentary form of life , halfway between life and non @-@ life . He wrote that when he poured the cooled mixture onto growth media , bacteria were born , dismissing the idea that the bacteria were already present in the air or on other materials . 
 In what Sharaf writes was the origins of the orgone theory , Reich said he could see two kinds of bions , the blue vesicles and smaller red ones shaped like lancets . He called the former PA @-@ bions and the latter T @-@ bacilli , the T standing for Tod , German for death . He wrote in his book The Cancer <unk> ( 1948 ) that he had found T @-@ bacilli in rotting cancerous tissue obtained from a local hospital , and when injected into mice they caused inflammation and cancer . He concluded that , when orgone energy diminishes in cells through aging or injury , the cells undergo " <unk> degeneration . " At some point the deadly T @-@ bacilli start to form in the cells . Death from cancer , he believed , was caused by an overwhelming growth of the T @-@ bacilli . 
 = = = Opposition to his ideas = = = 
 Scientists in Oslo reacted strongly to Reich 's work on bions , deriding it as nonsense . Tidens Tegn , a leading liberal newspaper , launched a campaign against him in 1937 , supported by scientists and other newspapers . Between March and December 1938 , more than 165 articles or letters appeared in 13 Norwegian newspapers denouncing him . 
 In 1937 the Norwegian pathologist <unk> Kreyberg was allowed to examine one of Reich 's bion preparations under a microscope . Kreyberg wrote that the broth Reich had used as his culture medium was indeed sterile , but that the bacteria were ordinary staphylococci . He concluded that Reich 's control measures to prevent infection from airborne bacteria were not as foolproof as Reich believed . Kreyberg accused Reich of being ignorant of basic bacteriological and anatomical facts , while Reich accused Kreyberg of having failed to recognize living cancer cells under magnification . 
 Reich sent a sample of the bacteria to a Norwegian biologist , Theodor <unk> of the Oslo Bacteriological Institute , who also blamed airborne infection . Kreyberg and <unk> 's views were published in the country 's largest newspaper , Aftenposten , on 19 and 21 April 1938 . Kreyberg alleged that " Mr. Reich " knew less about bacteria and anatomy than a first @-@ year medical student . When Reich requested a detailed control study , Kreyberg responded that his work did not merit it . 
 By February 1938 Reich 's visa had expired . Several Norwegian scientists argued against an extension , Kreyberg saying , " If it is a question of handing Dr. Reich over to the Gestapo , then I will fight that , but if one could get rid of him in a decent manner , that would be the best . " The writer Sigurd Hoel asked : " When did it become a reason for deportation that one looked in a microscope when one was not a trained biologist ? " Reich received support from overseas , first from the anthropologist Bronisław Malinowski , who in March wrote to the press in Norway that Reich 's sociological works were " a distinct and valuable contribution toward science , " and from A.S. Neill , founder of Summerhill , a progressive school in England , who argued that " the campaign against Reich seems largely ignorant and uncivilized , more like fascism than democracy ... " 
 Norway was proud of its intellectual tolerance , so the " Reich affair , " especially following the country 's 1936 expulsion of Leon Trotsky , put Nygaardsvold 's government on the spot . A compromise was found . Reich was given his visa , but a royal decree was issued stipulating that anyone wanting to practice psychoanalysis needed a licence , and it was understood that Reich would not be given one . Throughout the affair Reich issued just one public statement , when he asked for a commission to replicate his bion experiments . Sharaf writes that the opposition to his work affected his personality and relationships . He was left humiliated , no longer comfortable in public , and seething with bitterness against the researchers who had denounced him . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 According to Sharaf , 1934 – 1937 was the happiest period of Reich 's personal life , despite the professional problems . His relationship with Elsa Lindenberg was good and he considered marrying her . When she became pregnant in 1935 , they were initially overjoyed , buying clothes and furniture for the child , but doubts developed for Reich , who saw the future as too unsettled . To Lindenberg 's great distress , Sharaf writes , Reich insisted on an abortion , at that time illegal . They went to Berlin , where the psychoanalyst Edith Jacobson helped to arrange it . 
 In 1937 Reich began an affair with a female patient , an actress who had been married to a colleague of his . According to Sigurd Hoel , the analysis would stop because of the relationship , then the relationship would end and the analysis would start up again . The patient eventually threatened to go to the press , but was persuaded that it would harm her as much as it would Reich . Around the same time , Reich also had an affair with Gerd <unk> , a 25 @-@ year @-@ old Norwegian textile designer . 
 Despite the affairs , Sharaf writes that , as the newspaper campaign against Reich gained pace , he developed an intense jealousy toward Lindenberg , demanding that she not have a separate life of any kind . He even physically assaulted a composer with whom she was working . Lindenberg considered calling the police but decided Reich could not afford another scandal . His behaviour took its toll on their relationship , and when Reich asked her to accompany him to the United States , she said no . 
 = = 1939 – 1957 : United States = = 
 = = = Teaching , second marriage = = = 
 When Hitler annexed Austria in March 1938 , Reich 's ex @-@ wife and daughters had already left for the United States . Later that year , Theodore P. Wolfe , a professor of psychiatry at Columbia University , traveled to Norway to study under Reich . Wolfe offered to help Reich settle in the States , and managed to arrange an invitation from The New School in New York for Reich to teach a course on " Biological Aspects of Character Formation . " Wolfe and Walter <unk> , a former student of Reich 's , put up $ 5 @,@ 000 to guarantee his visa . Wolfe also pulled strings with Adolph Berle , an official in the State Department . Reich wrote in his diary in May 1939 : 
 I am sitting in a completely empty apartment waiting for my American visa . I have misgivings as to how it will go . ... I am utterly and horribly alone ! 
 It will be quite an undertaking to carry on all the work in America . Essentially , I am a great man , a rarity , as it were . I can 't quite believe it myself , however , and that is why I struggle against playing the role of a great man . 
 He received the visa in August 1939 and sailed out of Norway on 19 August on the SS <unk> , the last ship to leave for the United States before the war began on 3 September . He began teaching at The New School , where he remained until May 1941 , living first at <unk> Kessel Street , Forest Hills , Queens , where he conducted experiments on mice with cancer , injecting them with bions . He built a small Faraday cage to examine the vapors and lights he said the bions were producing . In October 1939 his secretary Gertrud <unk> introduced him to Ilse Ollendorf , 29 years old at the time . Reich was still in love with Lindenberg , but Ollendorf started organizing his life for him , becoming his bookkeeper and laboratory assistant . They began living together in the Kessel Street house on Christmas Day 1939 . She was eight weeks pregnant , but according to Turner he insisted that she have an abortion . Five years later , in 1944 , they had a son , Peter , and were married in 1946 . 
 Sharaf writes that Reich 's personality changed after his experience in Oslo . He became socially isolated and kept his distance even from old friends and his ex @-@ wife . His students in the United States came to know him as a man that no colleague , no matter how close , called by his first name . In January 1940 he wrote to Lindenberg to end their relationship once and for all , telling her that he was in despair and that he believed he would end up dying like a dog . 
 = = = Orgonomy = = = 
 It was shortly after he arrived in New York in 1939 that Reich first said he had discovered a biological or cosmic energy , an extension of Freud 's idea of the libido . He called it " orgone energy " or " orgone radiation , " and the study of it " <unk> . " Reich said he had seen orgone when he injected his mice with bions and in the sky at night through an " <unk> , " a special telescope . He argued that it is in the soil and air ( indeed , is omnipresent ) , is blue or blue @-@ grey , and that humanity had divided its knowledge of it in two : aether for the physical aspect and God for the spiritual . The colour of the sky , the northern lights , St Elmo 's Fire , and the blue of sexually excited frogs are manifestations of orgone , he wrote . He also argued that protozoa , red corpuscles , cancer cells and the chlorophyll of plants are charged with it . 
 In 1940 he began to build insulated Faraday cages , " orgone accumulators , " that he said would concentrate the orgone . The earliest boxes were for laboratory animals . The first human @-@ sized , five @-@ foot @-@ tall box was built in December 1940 , and set up in the basement of his house . Turner writes that it was made of plywood lined with rock wool and sheet iron , and had a chair inside and a small window . The boxes had multiple layers of these materials , which caused the orgone concentration inside the box to be three to five times stronger than in the air , Reich said . Patients were expected to sit inside them naked . 
 The accumulators were tested on plant growth and mice with cancer . Reich wrote to his supporters in July 1941 that orgone is " definitely able to destroy cancerous growth . This is proved by the fact that tumors in all parts of the body are disappearing or diminishing . No other remedy in the world can claim such a thing . " 
 Although not licensed to practise medicine in the United States , he began testing the boxes on human beings diagnosed with cancer and schizophrenia . In one case the test had to be stopped prematurely because the subject heard a rumour that Reich was insane ; there were stories , which were false , that he had been hospitalized in the Utica State Mental Hospital . In another case the father of an eight @-@ year @-@ old girl with cancer approached him for help , then complained to the American Medical Association that he was practising without a licence . He asked his supporters to stick with him through the criticism , believing that he had developed a grand unified theory of physical and mental health . 
 = = = Experiment with Einstein = = = 
 In December 1940 Reich wrote to Albert Einstein saying he had a scientific discovery he wanted to discuss , and , in January 1941 , visited Einstein at his home in Princeton , where they talked for nearly five hours . He told Einstein that he had discovered a " specific biologically effective energy which behaves in many respects differently to all that is known about electromagnetic energy . " He said it could be used against disease , and as a weapon " in the fight against the Fascist pestilence " . ( Einstein had signed a letter to President Roosevelt in August 1939 to warn of the danger of Nazi Germany building an atom bomb , and had urged the United States to establish its own research project . ) Einstein agreed that if an object 's temperature could be raised without an apparent heating source , as Reich was suggesting , it would be " a bomb . " 
 Reich was much encouraged by the meeting and hoped he would be invited to join Princeton 's Institute for Advanced Study . During their next meeting , he gave Einstein a small accumulator , and over the next 10 days Einstein performed experiments with it in his basement , which involved taking the temperature above , inside and near the device , and stripping it down to its Faraday cage to compare temperatures . He observed an increase of temperature , which Reich argued was caused by orgone . One of Einstein 's assistants pointed out that the temperature was lower on the floor than on the ceiling . Einstein concluded that the effect was simply due to the temperature gradient inside the room . " Through these experiments I regard the matter as completely solved , " he wrote to Reich on 7 February 1941 . 
 Reich responded with a 25 @-@ page letter in which he tried to change Einstein 's mind . To rule out the influence of convection he told Einstein that he had taken certain measures , including introducing a horizontal plate above the accumulator , wrapping it in a blanket , hanging it from the ceiling , burying it underground and placing it outside . He wrote that in all these circumstances the temperature difference remained , and was in fact more marked in the open air . Einstein did not respond to this or to Reich 's future correspondence – Reich would write regularly reporting the results of his experiments – until Reich threatened three years later to publish their previous exchange . Einstein replied that he could not devote any further time to the matter and asked that his name not be misused for advertising purposes . Reich believed that Einstein 's change of heart was part of a conspiracy of some kind , perhaps related to the communists or prompted by the rumours that Reich was ill . Reich published the correspondence in 1953 as The Einstein Affair . 
 = = = Arrested by the FBI = = = 
 Reich lost his position at the New School in May 1941 after writing to its director , Alvin Johnson , to say he had saved several lives in secret experiments with the accumulator . Johnson was aware of Reich 's claims that he could cure cancer , and told him the New School was not an appropriate institution for the work . Reich was also evicted from Kessel Street after his neighbours complained about the animal experiments . His supporters , including Walter <unk> , gave him $ 14 @,@ 000 to buy a house , and he settled into 9906 69th Avenue . 
 On 12 December 1941 , five days after Pearl Harbor and the day after Germany declared it was at war with the United States , Reich was arrested in his home at 2 a.m. by the FBI and taken to Ellis Island , where he was held for over three weeks . He identified himself at the time as the Associate Professor of Medical Psychology , Director of the Orgone Institute . He was at first left to sleep on the floor in a large hall , surrounded by members of the fascist German American Bund , who Reich feared might kill him , but when his psoriasis returned he was transferred to the hospital ward . He was questioned about several books the FBI found when they searched his home , including Hitler 's Mein Kampf , Trotsky 's My Life , a biography of Lenin and a Russian alphabet book for children . After threatening to go on hunger strike he was released , on 5 January , but his name remained on the " key figures list " of the Enemy Alien Control Unit , which meant he was placed under surveillance . 
 Turner writes that it seems Reich was the victim of mistaken identity ; there was a William Reich who ran a bookstore in New Jersey , which was used to distribute Communist material . The FBI acknowledged the mistake in November 1943 and closed Reich 's file . In 2000 it released 789 pages of the file : 
 This German immigrant described himself as the Associate Professor of Medical Psychology , Director of the Orgone Institute , President and research physician of the Wilhelm Reich Foundation and discoverer of biological or life energy . A 1940 security investigation was begun to determine the extent of Reich 's communist commitments . A board of Alien Enemy Hearing judged that Dr. Reich was not a threat to the security of the U.S. In 1947 , a security investigation concluded that neither the Orgone Project nor any of its staff were engaged in subversive activities or were in violation of any statute within the jurisdiction of the FBI . 
 = = = Purchase of Orgonon = = = 
 In November 1942 Reich purchased an old farm for $ 4 @,@ 000 on Dodge Pond , Maine , near Rangeley , with 280 acres ( 1 @.@ 1 km2 ) of land . Calling it Orgonon , he started spending summers there , and had a one @-@ room cabin built in 1943 , a laboratory in 1945 , a larger cabin in 1946 and an observatory in 1948 . 
 In 1950 he decided to live there year @-@ round , and in May that year moved from New York with Ilse , their son , Peter , and Reich 's daughter Eva , with the idea of creating a centre for the study of orgone . Several colleagues moved there with him , including two physicians with an interest in orgone , and Lois <unk> , who ran the Orgone Press Institute . The artist William Moise joined Reich as an assistant at Orgonon , later marrying Eva Reich . 
 Orgonon still houses the Wilhelm Reich Museum , as well as holiday cottages available to rent , one of which is the cottage in which the Reichs lived . 
 = = 1947 – 1957 : Legal problems = = 
 = = = Brady articles , FDA = = = 
 Until 1947 Reich enjoyed a largely uncritical press in the United States . One journal , <unk> Medicine , had called orgone a " surrealist creation , " but his psychoanalytic work had been discussed in the Journal of the American Medical Association and the American Journal of Psychiatry , The Nation had given his writing positive reviews , and he was listed in American Men of Science . 
 His reputation took a sudden downturn in April and May 1947 , when articles by Mildred Edie Brady were published in Harper 's and The New Republic , the latter entitled " The Strange Case of Wilhelm Reich , " with the subhead , " The man who blames both neuroses and cancer on unsatisfactory sexual activities has been repudiated by only one scientific journal . " Brady 's ultimate target was not Reich but psychoanalysis , which according to Turner she saw as akin to astrology . 
 Of Reich she wrote : " Orgone , named after the sexual orgasm , is , according to Reich , a cosmic energy . It is , in fact , the cosmic energy . Reich has not only discovered it ; he has seen it , demonstrated it and named a town – Orgonon , Maine – after it . Here he builds accumulators of it , which are rented out to patients , who presumably derive ' orgastic potency ' from it . " 
 She claimed , falsely , that he had said the accumulators could cure not only impotence but cancer . Brady argued that the " growing Reich cult " had to be dealt with . On his copy of the New Republic article , Reich wrote " THE <unk> . " He issued a press release , but no one published it . 
 In July 1947 Dr. J. J. <unk> , director of the Medical Advisory Division of the Federal Trade Commission , wrote to the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) asking them to investigate Reich 's claims about the health benefits of orgone . The FDA assigned an investigator to the case , who learned that Reich had built 250 accumulators . The FDA concluded that they were dealing with a " fraud of the first magnitude . " According to Sharaf , the FDA suspected a sexual racket of some kind ; questions were asked about the women associated with <unk> and " what was done with them . " From that point on , Reich 's work came increasingly to the attention of the authorities . 
 = = = Orgonomic Infant Research Center = = = 
 Reich established the Orgonomic Infant Research Center ( OIRC ) in 1950 , with the aim of preventing muscular armouring in children from birth . Meetings were held in the basement of his house in Forest Hills . Turner wrote that several children who were treated by OIRC therapists later said they had been sexually abused by the therapists , although not by Reich . One woman said she was assaulted by one of Reich 's associates when she was five years old . Children were asked to stand naked in front of Reich and a group of 30 therapists in his basement , while Reich described the children 's " blockages . " Reich 's daughter , Lore Reich Rubin , told Turner that she believed her father was an abuser , although she did not say she had been abused by him , and she acknowledged that she had no evidence . She believed that Reich himself had been abused as a child , which is why he developed such an interest in sex and childhood sexuality . 
 The sexual allegations apart , several people discussed how the vegetotherapy had hurt them physically as children , as therapists pressed hard on the body to loosen muscular armour . Reich 's son , Peter , wrote in his autobiography , Book of Dreams ( 1973 ) about the pain this had caused him . Susanna Steig , the daughter of William Steig , the New Yorker cartoonist , wrote about being pressed so hard during Reichian therapy that she had difficulty breathing , and said that a woman therapist had sexually assaulted her . According to Turner , a nurse complained in 1952 to the New York Medical Society that an OIRC therapist had taught her five @-@ year @-@ old son how to masturbate . The therapist was arrested , but the case was dropped when Reich agreed to close the OIRC . 
 = = = Divorce , <unk> = = = 
 Reich and Ilse <unk> divorced in September 1951 , ostensibly because he thought she had had an affair . She continued working with him for another three years . Even after the divorce , he suspected her of having affairs , and persuaded her to sign confessions about her feelings of fear and hatred toward him , which he locked away in the archives of his Orgone Institute . He wrote several documents denouncing her , while having an affair himself with Lois <unk> , who ran the Orgone Institute Press . 
 In 1951 Reich said he had discovered another energy that he called Deadly Orgone Radiation ( <unk> ) , accumulations of which played a role in desertification . He designed a " cloudbuster , " rows of 15 @-@ foot aluminium pipes mounted on a mobile platform , connected to cables that were inserted into water . He believed that it could unblock orgone energy in the atmosphere and cause rain . Turner described it as an " orgone box turned inside out . " 
 He conducted dozens of experiments with the cloudbuster , calling his research " Cosmic Orgone Engineering . " During a drought in 1953 , two farmers in Maine offered to pay him if he could make it rain to save their blueberry crop . Reich used the cloudbuster on the morning of 6 July , and according to Bangor 's Daily News – based on an account from an anonymous eyewitness who was probably Peter Reich – rain began to fall that evening . The crop survived , the farmers declared themselves satisfied , and Reich received his fee . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Over the years the FDA interviewed physicians , Reich 's students and his patients , asking about the orgone accumulators . A professor at the University of Oregon who bought an accumulator told an FDA inspector that he knew the device was phoney , but found it helpful because his wife sat quietly in it for four hours every day . 
 The attention of the FDA triggered belligerent responses from Reich , who called them " <unk> " ( hoodlums in government ) and the tools of red fascists . He developed a delusion that he had powerful friends in government , including President Eisenhower , who he believed would protect him , and that the U.S. Air Force was flying over Orgonon to make sure that he was all right . On 29 July 1952 three inspectors arrived at Orgonon unannounced . Sharaf writes that Reich detested unannounced visitors ; he had once chased some people away with a gun just for looking at an adjacent property . He told the inspectors they had to read his work before he would interact with them , and ordered them to leave . 
 In February 1954 the United States Attorney for the District of Maine filed a 27 @-@ page complaint seeking a permanent injunction under Sections 301 and 302 of the Federal Food , Drug , and Cosmetic Act to prevent interstate shipment of orgone accumulators and to ban promotional literature . Reich refused to appear in court , arguing that no court was in a position to evaluate his work . In a letter to Judge John D. Clifford , Jr. in February , he wrote : 
 My factual position in the case as well as in the world of science of today does not permit me to enter the case against the Food and Drug Administration , since such action would , in my mind , imply admission of the authority of this special branch of the government to pass judgment on primordial , pre @-@ atomic cosmic orgone energy . I , therefore , rest the case in full confidence in your hands . 
 The injunction was granted by default on 19 March 1954 . The judge ordered that all accumulators , parts and instructions be destroyed , and that several of Reich 's books that mentioned orgone be withheld . 
 = = = Chasing UFOs = = = 
 According to Turner , the injunction triggered a further deterioration in Reich 's mental health . From at least early 1954 , he came to believe that the planet was under attack by UFOs , or " energy <unk> , " as he called them . He said he often saw them flying over Orgonon – shaped like thin cigars with windows – leaving streams of black Deadly Orgone Radiation in their wake , which he believed the aliens were scattering to destroy the Earth . 
 He and his son would spend their nights searching for UFOs through telescopes and binoculars , and when they believed they had found one would roll out the cloudbuster to suck the energy out of it . Reich claimed he had shot several of them down . Armed with two <unk> , they fought what Reich called a " full @-@ scale interplanetary battle " in Arizona , where he had rented a house as a base station . In Contact with Space ( 1956 ) , he wrote of the " very remote possibility " that his own father had been from outer space . 
 In late 1954 Reich began an affair with Grethe Hoff , a former patient . Hoff was married to another former student and patient of his , the psychologist Myron Sharaf , who decades later , with his Fury on Earth ( 1983 ) , became Reich 's main biographer . Hoff and Sharaf had had their first child the year before Hoff left him for Reich ; the marriage was never repaired although the affair had ended by June 1955 . Two months later Reich began another relationship , this time with Aurora Karrer , a medical researcher , and , in November , he moved out of Orgonon to an apartment in Alban Towers , Washington , D.C. , to live with her , using the pseudonym Dr. Walter <unk> . 
 = = = Contempt of court = = = 
 While Reich was in Arizona in May 1956 , one of his associates sent an accumulator part through the mail to another state , in violation of the injunction , after an FDA inspector posing as a customer requested it . Reich and another associate , Dr. Michael Silvert , were charged with contempt of court ; Silvert had been looking after the inventory in Reich 's absence . Reich at first refused to attend court , and was arrested and held for two days until a supporter posted bail of $ 30 @,@ 000 . 
 Representing himself during the hearing , he admitted the violation but pleaded not guilty and hinted at conspiracies . During a recess the judge apparently suggested a psychiatric evaluation to Reich 's ex @-@ wife , Ilse <unk> , but this was not communicated to Reich . The jury found him guilty on 7 May 1956 , and he was sentenced to two years ' imprisonment . Silvert was sentenced to a year and a day , the Wilhelm Reich Foundation was fined $ 10 @,@ 000 , and the accumulators and associated literature were to be destroyed . 
 = = = Book burning = = = 
 On 5 June 1956 two FDA officials arrived at Orgonon to supervise the destruction of the accumulators . Most of them had been sold by that time and another 50 were with Silvert in New York . Only three were at Orgonon . The FDA agents were not allowed to destroy them , only to supervise the destruction , so Reich 's friends and his son , Peter , chopped them up with axes as the agents watched . Once they were destroyed , Reich placed an American flag on top of them . 
 On 26 June the agents returned to supervise the destruction of the promotional material , including 251 copies of Reich 's books . The American Civil Liberties Union issued a press release criticizing the book burning , although coverage of the release was poor , and Reich ended up asking them not to help because he was annoyed that they had failed to criticize the destruction of the accumulators . In England A.S. Neill and the poet Herbert Read signed a letter of protest , but it was never published . On 23 July the remaining accumulators in New York were destroyed by S. A. Collins and Sons , who had built them . 
 On 23 August six tons of Reich 's books , journals and papers were burned in New York , in the Gansevoort incinerator , the public incinerator on 25th Street . The material included copies of several of his books , including The Sexual Revolution , Character Analysis and The Mass Psychology of Fascism . Although these had been published in German before Reich ever discussed orgone , he had added mention of it to the English editions , so they were caught by the injunction . It has been cited as one of the worst examples of censorship in U.S. history . As with the accumulators , the FDA was supposed only to observe the destruction . The psychiatrist Victor <unk> ( d . 1995 ) , an associate of Reich 's , wrote : 
 All the expenses and labor had to be provided by the [ Orgone Institute ] Press . A huge truck with three to help was hired . I felt like people who , when they are to be executed , are made to dig their own graves first and are then shot and thrown in . We carried box after box of the literature . 
 = = = Imprisonment = = = 
 Reich appealed the lower court 's decision in October 1956 , but the Court of Appeals upheld it on 11 December . He wrote several times to J. Edgar Hoover , director of the FBI , requesting a meeting , and appealed to the Supreme Court , which decided on 25 February 1957 not to review the case . On 12 March 1957 Reich and Silvert were sent to Danbury Federal Prison . ( Silvert committed suicide in May 1958 , five months after his release . ) Richard C. Hubbard , a psychiatrist who admired Reich , examined him on admission , recording paranoia manifested by delusions of grandiosity , persecution , and ideas of reference : 
 The patient feels that he has made outstanding discoveries . Gradually over a period of many years he has explained the failure of his ideas in becoming universally accepted by the elaboration of psychotic thinking . " The <unk> ( sic ) are against me . " ( Delusion of grandiosity . ) " The airplanes flying over prison are sent by the Air Force to encourage me . " ( Ideas of reference and grandiosity . ) 
 On 19 March Reich was transferred to the Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary and examined again . This time it was decided that he was mentally competent and that his personality seemed intact , though he might become psychotic when stressed . A few days later , on his 60th birthday , he wrote to his son , Peter , then 13 : 
 I am in Lewisburg . I am calm , certain in my thoughts , and doing mathematics most of the time . I am kind of " above things , " fully aware of what is up . Do not worry too much about me , though anything might happen . I know , Pete , that you are strong and decent . At first I thought that you should not visit me here . I do not know . With the world in turmoil I now feel that a boy your age should experience what is coming his way – fully digest it without getting a " belly ache , " so to speak , nor getting off the right track of truth , fact , honesty , fair play , and being above board – never a sneak ... . 
 He applied for a presidential pardon in May , to no avail . Peter visited him in jail several times , where one prisoner said Reich was known as the " flying saucer guy " and the " Sex Box man . " Reich told Peter that he cried a lot , and wanted Peter to let himself cry too , believing that tears are the " great softener . " His last letter to his son was on 22 October 1957 , when he said he was looking forward to being released on 10 November , having served one third of his sentence . A parole hearing had been scheduled for a few days before that date . He wrote that he and Peter had a date for a meal at the Howard Johnson restaurant near Peter 's school . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Reich failed to appear for roll call on 3 November 1957 and was found at 7 a.m. in his bed , fully clothed but for his shoes . The prison doctor said he had died during the night of " myocardial insufficiency with sudden heart failure . " He was buried in a vault at Orgonon that he had asked his caretaker to dig in 1955 . He had left instructions that there was to be no religious ceremony , but that a record should be played of Schubert 's " Ave Maria " sung by Marian Anderson , and that his granite headstone should read simply : " Wilhelm Reich , Born March 24 , 1897 , Died ... " None of the academic journals carried an obituary . Time magazine wrote on 18 November 1957 : 
 Died . Wilhelm Reich , 60 , once @-@ famed psychoanalyst , associate and follower of Sigmund Freud , founder of the Wilhelm Reich Foundation , lately better known for unorthodox sex and energy theories ; of a heart attack ; in Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary , Pa ; where he was serving a two @-@ year term for distributing his invention , the " orgone energy accumulator " ( in violation of the Food and Drug Act ) , a telephone @-@ booth @-@ size device that supposedly gathered energy from the atmosphere , and could cure , while the patient sat inside , common colds , cancer , and impotence . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 = = = Psychotherapy = = = 
 The psychoanalyst Richard <unk> wrote in 1982 that Reich had been a brilliant clinician and teacher in the 1920s ; even the older analysts had wanted to attend his technical seminars in Vienna . But according to Sharaf , they came to consider Reich as paranoid and belligerent . Psychologist Luis Cordon wrote that Reich 's slide from respectability concluded with the consensus inside and outside the psychoanalytic community that he was at best a crackpot and perhaps seriously ill . 
 There were inaccurate rumours from the late 1920s that he had been hospitalized . Paul Federn became Reich 's second analyst in 1922 ; he later said he had detected " incipient schizophrenia " and called Reich a psychopath . Similarly , Sandor Rado had Reich as an analyst and in 1931 and declared him schizophrenic " in the most serious way . " Reich 's daughter Lore Reich Rubin , a psychiatrist , believed that he was bipolar and had been sexually abused as a child . 
 Sharaf argued that psychoanalysts tended to dismiss as ill anyone from within the fold who had transgressed , and this was never done so relentlessly as with Reich . His work was split into the pre @-@ psychotic " good " and the post @-@ psychotic " bad , " the date of the illness 's onset depending on which parts of his work a speaker disliked . <unk> preferred to see him as sane in the 1920s because of his work on character , while political radicals regarded him as sane in the 1930s because of his Marxist @-@ oriented research . 
 Despite Reich 's precarious mental health , his work on character and the idea of muscular armouring contributed to the development of what is now known as ego psychology , gave rise to body psychotherapy , and helped shape the Gestalt therapy of Fritz Perls , the <unk> analysis of Reich 's student Alexander Lowen , and the primal therapy of Arthur Janov . 
 = = = Humanities = = = 
 Reich 's work influenced a generation of intellectuals , including Saul Bellow , William Burroughs and Norman Mailer , and the founder of Summerhill School in England , A. S. Neill . The French philosopher Michel Foucault wrote in The History of Sexuality ( 1976 ) that the impact of Reich 's critique of sexual repression had been substantial . 
 The Austrian @-@ American philosopher Paul Edwards said that the FDA 's pursuit of Reich had intensified Edwards ' attachment to him . He wrote in 1977 that for years he and his friends regarded Reich as " something akin to a messiah . " Paul Mathews and John M. Bell started teaching a course on Reich in 1968 at New York University through its Division of Continuing Study , and it was still being taught at the time Sharaf was writing Reich 's biography in 1983 , making it the longest @-@ running course ever taught in that division . 
 Several well @-@ known figures used orgone accumulators , including Orson Bean , Sean Connery , Allen Ginsberg , Paul Goodman , Jack Kerouac , Isaac Rosenfeld , J. D. Salinger , William Steig and Robert Anton Wilson . Mailer – who owned several orgone accumulators , including some in the shape of eggs – wrote about Reich enthusiastically in The Village Voice , as a result of which Orgonon became a place of pilgrimage and the orgasm a symbol of liberation . 
 = = = Popular culture = = = 
 Reich continued to influence popular culture after his death . Turner writes that the evil Dr. Durand Durand in Barbarella ( 1968 ) seems to be based on Reich ; he places Barbarella ( Jane Fonda ) in his Excessive Machine so that she dies of pleasure , but rather than killing her the machine burns out . W.R. : Mysteries of the Organism ( 1971 ) was directed by Yugoslavian director Dušan <unk> . An orgone accumulator made an appearance as the <unk> in Woody Allen 's Sleeper ( 1973 ) . 
 Patti Smith 's " Birdland " on her album Horses ( 1975 ) is based on Reich 's life and Hawkwind 's song " Orgone <unk> , " on their album Space Ritual ( 1973 ) , on his invention , as is Love Camp 7 's " Orgone Box " ( 1997 ) . In Bob Dylan 's " Joey " from Desire ( 1975 ) , the eponymous gangster spends his time in prison reading Nietzsche and Reich . Reich is also a character in the opera Marilyn ( 1980 ) by Italian composer Lorenzo Ferrero . 
 Kate Bush 's single " Cloudbusting " ( 1985 ) described Reich 's arrest through the eyes of his son , Peter , who wrote his father 's story in A Book of Dreams ( 1973 ) . The video for the song features Donald Sutherland as Reich and Bush as Peter . Robert Anton Wilson 's play , Wilhelm Reich in Hell ( 1987 ) , is about Reich 's confrontation with the American government . Four @-@ beat Rhythm : The Writings of Wilhelm Reich ( 2013 ) is a compilation album on which Reich 's writings are adapted to music . The Australian designer Marc Newson has produced a range of orgone furniture , most famously his Orgone Chair ( 1993 ) . 
 = = = Science = = = 
 The mainstream scientific community dismissed Reich 's orgone theory as pseudoscience . James Strick , an historian of science at Franklin and Marshall College , wrote in 2015 that the dominant narrative since Reich 's death has been that " there is no point in looking more closely at Reich 's science because there was no legitimate science from Reich . " 
 From 1960 , apparently in response to the book burning , the New York publisher Farrar , Straus and Giroux began republishing his major works . Reichian physicians organized study groups . In 1967 one of his associates , Dr. Elsworth Baker , established the bi @-@ annual Journal of Orgonomy , still published as of 2015 , and in 1968 founded the American College of Orgonomy in Princeton , New Jersey . According to Sharaf , contributors to the Journal of Orgonomy who worked in academia often used pseudonyms . The Orgone Biophysical Research Laboratory was founded in 1978 by James DeMeo and the Institute for Orgonomic Science in 1982 by Morton <unk> . 
 There was renewed interest in November 2007 , when the Reich archives at the Francis A. <unk> Library of Medicine at Harvard University were unsealed ; Reich had left instructions that his unpublished papers be stored for 50 years after his death . James Strick began studying Reich 's laboratory notebooks from the 1935 – 1939 bion experiments in Norway . In 2015 Harvard University Press published Strick 's Wilhelm Reich , Biologist , in which he writes that Reich 's work in Oslo " represented the cutting edge of light microscopy and time @-@ lapse micro @-@ cinematography . " He argues that the dominant narrative of Reich as a <unk> is incorrect and that Reich 's story is " much more complex and interesting . " 
 Speaking to Christopher Turner in 2011 , Reich 's son , Peter , said of his father : 
 He was a nineteenth @-@ century scientist ; he wasn 't a twentieth @-@ century scientist . He didn 't practice science the way scientists do today . He was a nineteenth @-@ century mind who came crashing into twentieth @-@ century America . And boom ! 
 = = Works = = 
 = Halloween ( The Office ) = 
 " Halloween " is the fifth episode of the second season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's eleventh episode overall . It was written by executive producer and showrunner Greg Daniels and was directed by Paul Feig . The episode first aired on NBC in the United States on October 18 , 2005 . Guest stars in this episode included Devon Abner , Hugh Dane , George Gaus , Annabelle <unk> , Ava Nisbet and Alec Zbornak . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , the employees at Dunder Mifflin celebrate Halloween at the office . Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) struggles with making the decision of whom to fire . Meanwhile , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) and Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) post Dwight Schrute 's ( Rainn Wilson ) resume on the internet . 
 Due to the Halloween concept of the episode , the cast members of The Office were allowed to wear costumes rather than their " usual , realistically plain suits " . B.J. Novak , writer for the series as well as actor , called the experience " fun " . The episode features the last on @-@ screen appearance of the background character Devon until the series finale . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 4 @.@ 1 in the 18 – 49 demographic and was viewed by 8 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Although informed early in October that he must fire somebody by the end of the month , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) waits until the last day of the month , Halloween , and still hasn 't fired anyone . Meanwhile , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) and Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) post Dwight Schrute 's ( Rainn Wilson ) résumé on the internet , and when a prospective employer calls , Jim pretends to be Michael and gives Dwight a great reference . When the company , Cumberland Mills , calls Dwight to set up an interview , Dwight immediately ruins his chances by arguing with the caller over the importance and relevance of martial arts in his résumé . Later in the day , Pam suggests that Jim should apply for the Cumberland Mills position . Jim is quietly hurt by the suggestion that Pam would not miss him if he left . 
 After several failed attempted firings of other employees , Michael calls Creed Bratton ( played by Creed Bratton as a fictional version of himself ) into his office to fire him . Creed , in turn , convinces Michael to let Devon ( Devon Abner ) go . After Michael fires Devon , Devon angrily rebuffs Michael 's attempts to save their friendship , and invites everyone in the office ( except Michael , Creed , Dwight and Angela ) to join him at a local bar . As Jim leaves , Pam apologizes for pushing him into taking the Cumberland job and assures him that she would " blow her brains out " if he ever left . Jim admits to the camera that Pam is the only thing keeping him there . When the group leaves the office , Devon smashes a pumpkin over Michael 's car in revenge . 
 At the end of the episode , Michael is alone at his home in front of the television , upset over firing Devon . When trick @-@ or @-@ treaters come , Michael cheerfully gives them a generous amount of candy . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Halloween " is the third episode written by the series developer , executive producer , and show runner Greg Daniels . The episode was directed by Paul Feig , his second credit after " Office Olympics " . This episode is the only episode to date to have a quote to play over the Deedle @-@ Dee Productions title card in the closing credits . The quote features Dwight Schrute exclaiming " Quiet , you ! " The episode is rated TV @-@ PG on television in the United States . 
 During the pre @-@ production for the episode , the cast and crew realized that the Halloween conceit would allow the various cast members to wear costumes , rather than their " usual , realistically plain suits " . B.J. Novak called the dress @-@ up experience " fun " , noting that " seeing the most serious of our plotlines play out alongside such silly and bizarre visuals was , I think , one of the most inspired ideas of the episode 's writer , Greg Daniels . " The idea for Pam to be dressed as a cat was inspired by several unused stories , created by Gene Stupnitsky , in which " Pam Beesley must disguise herself as a cat " . The plot lines were vetoed by the shows writers , but Stupnitsky successfully petitioned to allow Pam to wear a cat costume . 
 " Halloween " marks the last appearance of Devon in an episode until the series finale , seven seasons later . Although Devon was only a background character , he is mentioned during " The Dundies " , seen in the background of " The Fire " , and is seen in a deleted scene during " Diversity Day " . Devon is later seen in a deleted scene on " Valentine 's Day " , when Michael passes by a homeless Devon in New York . Devon then chases Michael , presumably still angry over the events of " Halloween " . Guest stars in this episode included Devon Abner , Hugh Dane , George Gaus , Annabelle <unk> , Ava Nisbet and Alec Zbornak . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Due to the presence of Halloween , many of the employees costumes reflect movie and literary characters . Kelly is dressed as Dorothy Gale , but Michael makes an insensitive remark about Bend It Like Beckham . Dwight is dressed as a Sith , one of the characters in the Star Wars universe capable of using the " dark side " of the Force . Phyllis , however , confuses him for " some sort of monk " . Kevin is dressed as a Dunder Mifflin super hero , with a costume design similar to Mr. Incredible . Creed is dressed like a vampire and Devon is dressed like a hobo . Pam , Phyllis , and Angela are all dressed up as cats . Oscar is dressed as a woman , and Michael asks him if he is " flying his true colors " , to which Oscar reacts defensively . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Halloween " was originally broadcast on NBC in the United States on October 18 , 2005 . The episode was viewed by 8 million viewers and received a 4 @.@ 1 rating / 10 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 4 @.@ 1 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 10 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode was the number one ranked episode among adults , men , and women in the 18 – 34 demographic , and achieved its highest 18 – 49 rating since the season 's premiere . " Halloween " retained 73 percent of its lead @-@ in My Name Is Earl audience , its best lead @-@ in retention at the time . 
 Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B + " . He felt that the plot revolving around downsizing was " fitting " , because the episode takes place on " Halloween " , and that this plot returned Michael to the role of villain . Adams also felt that " director Paul Feig and credited writer Greg Daniels had a lot of fun dressing the show up for “ Halloween , ” framing Dwight like a shrouded Emperor Palpatine and making John Krasinski step into Steve Carell ’ s shoes for a couple of great punchlines . " 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews from television critics . Michael Sciannamea of TV Squad gave the episode a relatively positive review and noted that he " could certainly relate to [ the ] episode . " Sciannamea also said that " great moment " in the episode was when " Michael tells Creed , who is dressed as a vampire , that he can spread his wings and fly to wherever he wants . " " Miss Alli " of Television Without Pity rated " Halloween " a B + . Entertainment Weekly named Michael Scott 's line , " I just hope that you and I can remain friends , " one of " TV 's funniest lines " for the week ending October 24 , 2005 . 
 = Bommarillu = 
 Bommarillu ( English : Dollhouse ) ( pronunciation ) is a 2006 Telugu romantic comedy film directed and co @-@ written by Bhaskar , and produced by Dil Raju . The film stars Siddharth Narayan , Genelia D 'Souza , Prakash Raj and Jayasudha . Following the film 's box office success it was remade in Tamil as Santosh Subramaniam ( 2008 ) , in Bengali as Bhalobasa Bhalobasa ( 2008 ) , in Oriya as Dream Girl ( 2009 ) and in Hindi as It 's My Life ( 2013 ) . 
 The film primarily revolves around the relationship between a father and son , in which the father 's excessive concern for his son , and interference in his life , leads to the latter harbouring bitterness towards his overbearing father . The film opened to Indian audiences on 9 August 2006 . On its way to winning state honors and rave reviews , the film went on to win the South Filmfare Awards among other prominent awards . The film 's success broke several records at the box office during its prime and is one of the highest grossing Telugu films . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film begins with a baby taking his first steps on a beach supported by his father . The narrator ( Murali Mohan ) states that , it is right for a father to support his child in his infancy , but questions whether the father should continue to hold the child 's hand even after he is 24 years old . As the credits roll , a visibly angry Siddharth Siddhu Addala ( Siddharth Narayan ) begins verbally abusing all the fathers in the world . When queried about his disgust , he says that his father , Aravind ( Prakash Raj ) , gives him more than what he asks for . He cites instances where his choices of dressing , hairstyle , and many others are overruled by his father 's . However , he vows that his career and the woman he marries will be his own choice . 
 <unk> ( Sunil ) , Addala household 's dutiful servant wakes up Siddhu in the morning . In the background , Siddhu 's mother , Lakshmi ( Jayasudha ) , is seen singing a devotional Telugu song while cooking . At the dining table , Aravind , Managing Director of their construction company , asks if Siddhu will join their office . When Siddhu deliberates , his father becomes impatient and plans for his marriage despite Siddhu 's silent protest . The next week , Siddhu returns home to realize that he is going to get engaged to Subbulakshmi ( Neha ) against his wishes . He speaks with her only to realize that she is a daddy 's girl ( Tanikella Bharani being the father ) and does not take a liking to her . However , with Aravind 's final say , they eventually get engaged . 
 While contemplating on his options in a temple , Siddhu accidentally meets Hasini ( Genelia D 'Souza ) , an engineering student . Siddhu is attracted by her cheerful nature and energy , and the couple begin to meet on a regular basis . As the days go by , Siddhu grows to admire the ever @-@ friendly Hasini as someone who does what she loves , and he discovers many small things which make him happy to be in her company ; he realizes that he has fallen in love with her . 
 Alongside this , Siddhu applies for a bank loan to start his construction company . When his love for Hasini deepens , he wishes to propose to her . He confesses to her that he is engaged to Subbulakshmi against his wishes , but who he really wants is her . On learning of his engagement , Hasini gets dejected , but comes back a few days later and asks him to do what he wishes for and accepts his proposal . At this juncture , the ecstatic Siddhu is seen by a furious Aravind . Siddhu is admonished back home and he expresses his disinterest in marrying Subbulakshmi . When asked for his reason to like Hasini , Siddhu replies that if Hasini can stay with their family for a week , then all their questions shall be answered . He convinces Hasini to stay at his house after lying to her father , Kanaka Rao ( Kota Srinivasa Rao ) that she is going on a college tour . 
 When Hasini is introduced to Siddhu 's family , she gets a lukewarm welcome . As she settles down in the house , the other family members begin to like her . Even though getting used to the living habits of the authoritarian Aravind 's household is difficult , Hasini stays for Siddhu 's sake . In the meanwhile , Aravind reprimands Siddhu when he finds out about his bank loan and his career plans , only to further enrage Siddhu . 
 One day , the entire family along with Hasini attends a marriage ceremony . A cheerful Hasini cheers up the ceremony with her playful nature . Coincidentally , Kanaka Rao who happens to be around , recognizes Siddhu as the drunken young man whom he encountered on an earlier occasion . Hasini realizes her father 's presence and quickly exits to avoid his attention . After saving their face , Siddhu admonishes Hasini for her antics at the marriage . A sad and angry Hasini moves out of the house saying that she does not find Siddhu the same and that she cannot put on an act if she stays in their house . After getting back to her house , she rebuilds the trust her father has in her while Siddhu is left forlorn . Lakshmi confronts Aravind on Siddhu 's choices and wants . In the process , Siddhu opens up his heart , leaving Aravind to repent on his over @-@ protectiveness . Siddhu requests Subbulakshmi and her parents to call off the marriage . While they relent , Aravind manages to convince Kanaka Rao about Siddhu and Hasini 's love . When Kanaka Rao disagrees to get the two lovers married , <unk> suggests letting Siddhu stay with them for a week and the story returns to the pre @-@ credits scene . The viewers are left to assume that the two lovers have a happy union . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Siddharth Narayan as Siddharth " Siddu " Addala 
 Genelia D 'Souza as Hasini Rao 
 Prakash Raj as Aravind Addala , Siddu 's father 
 Kota Srinivasa Rao as Kanaka Rao , Hasini 's father 
 Jayasudha as Lakshmi Addala , Siddu 's mother 
 Satya Krishnan as Siddu 's sister @-@ in @-@ law 
 <unk> Pinky as Siddu 's sister 
 Surekha Vani as Siddu 's elder sister 
 Sunil as <unk> 
 Neha <unk> as <unk> 
 Tanikella Bharani as <unk> 's father 
 Ravi Varma as Ravi 
 <unk> Subramanyam as Kismat Kumar 
 Brahmanandam as loan officer 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The shooting of the film took about three and a half months . Prior to Bommarillu , Bhaskar assisted Dil Raju in Telugu films such as Arya ( 2004 ) and Bhadra ( 2005 ) . 
 On the sets of the film Arya , Raju offered Bhaskar a film to direct . On the sets of Bhadra , Bhaskar narrated the story to Raju and the saga began . Thus , Bommarillu became the first directorial venture for Bhaskar . In an interview , he said that the story for the film began taking shape in as early as 1997 when he wrote about a father and a son 's relationship . However , when the plans of making the film arose , an element of love between the protagonists was added . In the interview , he said that the script , to an extent , is autobiographical . He cites personal examples of some scenes from the film such as the choice of clothes for Siddhu by Aravind , the head @-@ bump between the lead actors and Lakshmi singing in the kitchen . 
 In an interview , Vijay C Chakravarthy , the cinematographer for the film , said that Dil Raju offered him the position in November 2005 . For the film , Vijay said that he made use of Arriflex 435 camera and Hawk lenses . In another interview , Bhaskar said working with Abburi Ravi , his co @-@ writer , was unique . They used to converse in a closed room with a voice recorder , allowing the dialogues in the script to be natural . He also heaped praise on Marthand K. Venkatesh , the film 's editor . After filming , the length of the film reel came to 16 @,@ 200 feet ( 4 @,@ 900 m ) which amounted to a runtime of 3 hours and 15 minutes . The presence of Marthand brought this down to 15 @,@ 100 feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) . This meant a reduction in the runtime by 25 minutes . 
 = = = Casting , location and music = = = 
 The choice of Siddharth was because of the sheer relevance to the character in real life . However , they finalized the choice of the actor only after the script was ready . The choice of Genelia was based on her natural vivacity in real life . This and her eyes , according to Bhaskar , made her an obvious choice for her character . More so , she liked the one line story that Raju told and also a few scenes that he narrated to her . She immediately liked the character and consented for the role . The fact that her co @-@ actor , Siddharth and she acted earlier together in Boys ( 2003 ) , made them more comfortable to work with . The camaraderie that the lead actors shared during the filming , added to their good performances . The choice of Prakash Raj was easy as he befitted the character he portrayed while , Jayasudha was persuaded to play the role of the lead actor 's mother . 
 The palatial house where the entire family stayed in the film is part of Ramanaidu Studios at Nanakramguda , Hyderabad . Several modifications were done by the art director , Prakash . A couple of the songs were shot in a montage , another couple in Frankfurt am Main and other places in Germany and one song each in this house set and at a temple in Kakinada . 
 For the film 's music and soundtrack , Raju renewed his previous association ( Arya and Bhadra ) with Devi Sri Prasad . Savitha Reddy rendered the voice for Genelia 's character in the film . A feature of this film is Siddharth singing one of the tracks from the film . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Bommarillu was released worldwide with 72 prints . Owing to the success of the film , the number of reels grew to about hundred . It collected a distributors share of ₹ 5 crore in its opening week in India . Released in six major metros in the United States , the film collected $ 73 @,@ 200 ( then approximately ₹ 0 @.@ 3 crore ) within the first four days of screening . A September 2006 survey done in the United States by a popular entertainment portal revealed that the film was watched by an Indian expatriate population of 65 @,@ 000 , which generated a revenue of ₹ 3 crore at that time . A cumulative gross revenue for the film was reported to be as ₹ 25 crore including ₹ 3 @.@ 5 crore from overseas , the largest for any Telugu film at that time . 
 = = = Critical acclaim , controversies , awards and remakes = = = 
 The film received rave reviews right for the story and the performances . One entertainment portal has given a rating of 4 @.@ 5 / 5 tagging the film 's review with Picture Perfect . Another such portal suggests the film to the entire family . It goes on to applaud Siddharth Narayan , Genelia D 'Souza and Prakash Raj , the three prime actors from the film for their performances . Similar reviews were voiced out by other such portals , many of which pointing out no real flaws from the film . <unk> reviewed it by stating " ‘ Bommarillu ’ is a pure example of a director ’ s faith in his script and his screenplay . All the wonderful performances of the lead cast and some nice talent from the crew made the film a grand success . This film is surely one of the most well @-@ written and innovative films that Tollywood has produced in recent years . " 
 The film had its own share of controversies . A news report showcased the omnipresent piracy in the Telugu film industry by quoting the cheap prices at which the film was being sold . The film 's lead actor , Siddharth even went on to request the audiences to buy the original audio CD . The film 's producer , Dil Raju , ensured a special code on each distributed print to track piracy with a warning for copyright violation which would incur a fine or a jail term . 
 In April 2007 , a case of copyright infringement was filed on the film 's producer and director that prompted a court to stall the screening of the film . The allegation pointed out that the film was made based on a compilation of short stories that was released in 1997 . 
 The film won the 2006 Golden Nandi Award . While director Bhaskar , won awards for the Debut director and Screenplay , Abburi Ravi won the award for his dialogues . Actors Prakash Raj and Genelia D 'Souza received the Best Actor in a Supporting role and Special jury awards respectively while Savitha Reddy won the Nandi Award for Best Female Dubbing Artist for her work . At the 2007 Filmfare Awards South , the film won awards for the Best Film , Best Actress and Best Music Director . 
 Jayasudha 's efforts to remake this film in Hindi with Amitabh Bachchan and Abhishek Bachchan were unsuccessful . The film is being remade in Hindi as It 's My Life starring Harman <unk> opposite Genelia D 'Souza . The film was remade in Tamil , Bengali and Oriya languages under the titles Santosh Subramaniam , Bhalobasa Bhalobasa and Dream Girl , respectively , in 2008 and 2009 . 
 = = Home media = = 
 The DVD version of the film was released on 4 June 2007 and distributed by I Dream <unk> internationally . It is available in 16 : 9 Anamorphic widescreen , Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 Surround , progressive 24 FPS , widescreen and NTSC format . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Nandi Awards 
 Best Film ( Gold Nandi ) - Dil Raju 
 Best Supporting Actor - Prakash Raj 
 Best First Film of a Director - Bhaskar 
 Best Screenplay - Bhaskar 
 Best Dialogue Writer - Abburi Ravi 
 Best Female Dubbing Artist - Savitha Reddy 
 Special Jury - Genelia D 'Souza 
 Filmfare Awards South 
 Best Film – Telugu - Dil Raju 
 Best Actress – Telugu - Genelia D 'Souza 
 Best Music Director – Telugu - Devi Sri Prasad 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The film has seven songs composed by Devi Sri Prasad with the lyrics primarily penned by Chandrabose , Ravi Kumar Bhaskarabhatla , <unk> and Sirivennela Sitaramasastri . The audio of the film released nationwide on 18 July 2006 . A repository of Indian songs has recommended the feel @-@ good soundtracks to the audiences . 
 = The Bells of Saint John = 
 " The Bells of Saint John " is the sixth episode of the seventh series of the British science fiction television programme Doctor Who . It premiered in the United Kingdom on 30 March 2013 on BBC One ; the episode was the first of the second half of the series . It was written by Steven Moffat and directed by Colm McCarthy . 
 In the episode , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) is looking for Clara Oswald ( Jenna @-@ Louise Coleman ) , a woman whom he has met by chance on two previous occasions only for her to die both times . He manages to find a third version of her in the present @-@ day London , where Miss Kizlet ( Celia Imrie ) is helping the Great Intelligence use the world 's Wi @-@ Fi to upload people to a <unk> via robots known as Servers , casually referred to as Spoonheads . 
 " The Bells of Saint John " was designed to be an " urban thriller " , in that it is taking " something omnipresent in your life and making it sinister " . It was watched by 8 @.@ 44 million viewers in the UK . The episode received generally positive reviews , although several critics felt that the plot and threat were lacking . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Prequel = = = 
 On 23 March 2013 , BBC released a short prequel video to the episode , written by Steven Moffat . In the prequel , the Doctor is sitting at the swings of a children 's playground when he meets a little girl . They talk about losing things , and the Doctor states that he has lost someone twice and he hopes he might be able to find her again . The girl tells him that , when she loses something , she goes to a quiet place for a think , and then can remember where she put it . As the girl leaves , it is revealed that she is Clara Oswald . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 A man on a computer screen describes how human souls are uploaded to the Internet when people use their computers to log in to a certain Wi @-@ Fi network . The man reveals he has been uploaded and is lost . 
 The Doctor ( Matt Smith ) has retreated to a monastery in Cumbria in the year 1207 to contemplate the mystery of Clara Oswin Oswald ( Jenna @-@ Louise Coleman ) , a woman he has met twice previously but who died both times . The monks disturb him one day to tell him that " the bells of Saint John " are ringing . The Doctor goes to his TARDIS and finds its exterior phone ringing . On the other end is Clara , whom the Doctor initially does not recognise . Clara , having been given the TARDIS ' number by " a woman in the shop " and believing it is a computer help line , asks for help to connect to the Internet . When Clara uses the phrase " Run , you clever boy , and remember " as a mnemonic for her password , the Doctor realises who she is . He sets off to meet her in person . 
 When he arrives , Clara refuses to talk to him due to his bizarre appearance and erratic behaviour , so the Doctor changes out of his monk 's clothing into a variation of his usual clothing . When he returns , he finds Clara being " uploaded " via a mobile robotic server disguised as a young girl . The Doctor halts the upload , sending the uploaders a message that Clara is under his protection . The head of the uploaders , Miss Kizlet ( Celia Imrie ) , informs her client that the Doctor has intervened as feared . The Doctor and Clara are outside when the uploaders cause an airplane to descend at them . The Doctor and Clara board the TARDIS and land on the plane , and the Doctor saves it from crashing . 
 The Doctor takes Clara to the next morning in the TARDIS , and they go to a cafe to try to understand the happenings . Clara uses computer skills that she picked up from her uploading experience to track the uploaders to their base at the Shard . The Doctor encounters people inside the café under the control of Miss Kizlet who distract him long enough for a server disguised as the Doctor to upload Clara completely . An angered Doctor sets out to the Shard on an anti @-@ gravity motorbike and crashes it into Miss Kizlet 's office . He demands that she release all the minds that have been uploaded , but Miss Kizlet refuses . The Doctor then reveals that he is still at the café and she was talking to the server he had hacked which he then uses to upload Miss Kizlet to the network . Trapped in the network , she orders her subordinates to release her . By doing this , everyone else including Clara , is restored . 
 The restored Miss Kizlet contacts her client to report her failure to him . The client is shown to be the Great Intelligence , who orders her to reset all people working there , including herself , clearing their memories in the process . As UNIT storms in to shut them down , the uploaders all lose their memories . Miss Kizlet is reduced to the mentality of a small child . Meanwhile , the Doctor takes Clara home and offers her a chance to travel with him , which she refuses . She tells him to come back the next morning , as she may change her mind by then . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 Summer Falls , the book that Clara spots Artie , one of her charges , reading is written by " Amelia Williams " , the married name of the Doctor 's previous companion Amy Pond ; she had been a travel writer in the 21st century before being permanently sent back to the early 20th century , and becoming the editor of her daughter 's detective novel / guidebook . 
 The episode was the official beginning for Clara Oswald , but Coleman had appeared twice before , as two different characters . 
 The Great Intelligence makes its second appearance in a row after appearing in the preceding episode , " The Snowmen " . From the Intelligence 's perspective , more than a century has elapsed . In the intervening time , the Great Intelligence has encountered the Doctor 's second incarnation twice , once in the Himalayan mountains during the 1930s and once in the London Underground in the 1970s . 
 The woman in the shop who gave Clara the Doctor 's number is brought up in " Deep Breath " . The Twelfth Doctor remarks it seems as if someone is trying to bring the Doctor and Clara together . The episode " Death in Heaven " reveals it was the Master , in a female incarnation , who gave the number to Clara . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Steven Moffat described the premise as 
 " the traditional ' Doctor Who ' thing of taking something omnipresent in your life and making it sinister , if something did get in the Wi @-@ Fi , we 'd be kind of screwed . Nobody had really done it before , so I thought , ' It 's time to get kids frightened of Wi @-@ Fi ! ' " 
 However , he denied that his intention was to give a warning about technology , but rather tell an adventure story about a " new way [ for aliens ] to invade " based on something viewers were familiar with . Producer <unk> Wilson suggested that the episode be an " urban thriller " , as the story would already be set in contemporary London to introduce Clara and the Wi @-@ Fi monsters . Moffat compared the style to James Bond and The Bourne Identity . Moffat said that the episode was " an action roller coaster " rather than a story intended to be scary . 
 Despite being announced as the actress to portray the new companion , Jenna @-@ Louise Coleman had first appeared as two different characters , called Oswin and Clara respectively , in " Asylum of the Daleks " and " The Snowmen " , but " The Bells of Saint John " introduces the character who will be the Doctor 's travelling companion . Coleman played each version of the character as individuals with " trust that there would be a payoff " to her mystery . Moffat described this version of Clara as " more real @-@ world " , and Smith stated that Clara " reignites [ the Doctor 's ] curiosity in the universe and gives him his mojo back " . 
 The read @-@ through for " The Bells of Saint John " took place on 19 September 2012 at Roath Lock . It is the first Doctor Who episode to be directed by Colm McCarthy . Filming began on 8 October ; some occurring in London , at the Westminster Bridge and alongside the River Thames , with motorbike scenes at the London locations shot around 16 October 2012 . The rooftop scenes were filmed at Grange St Paul 's Hotel . The location was intended to be in Covent Garden , but was changed to a location with a better view of the Shard . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Bells of Saint John " first aired in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 30 March 2013 , and on the same date in both the United States on BBC America and in Canada on Space . It aired on 31 March in both Australia on ABC1 , and in South Africa on BBC Entertainment . The episode aired on 11 April in New Zealand on Prime . 
 The episode received an overnight rating of 6 @.@ 18 million viewers in the UK , peaking at 6 @.@ 68 million , a 29 @.@ 8 % audience share ; which put it in third place for the night . When time @-@ shifted viewers were accounted for , the figure rose to 8 @.@ 44 million viewers , placing second for the week on BBC One . " The Bells of Saint John " also received 0 @.@ 96 million requests on BBC iPlayer for March , and 1 @.@ 3 million requests for April . The episode received an Appreciation Index of 87 . In 2013 the episode received 2 @.@ 61 million iPlayer views . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " The Bells of Saint John " received generally positive reviews , but several critics felt underwhelmed by the story . Nick Setchfield of SFX gave the episode four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars . He was positive towards the visual style and the plot , as well as the performances of Smith , Coleman , and Imrie . A Radio Times reviewer was pleased that Coleman was playing Clara as a straightforward companion , and highlighted her chemistry with Smith . He described it as " a hugely enjoyable episode that revels in its modern London setting " , praising the way its ideas were realised visually on @-@ screen . MSN 's Hilary Wardle gave " The Bells of Saint John " episode four out of five stars , noting that it moved at a fast pace and the plot was similar to " The Idiot 's Lantern " ( 2006 ) but was " very well done " . She especially praised the chemistry between Smith and Coleman . 
 Ben Lawrence , writing in The Daily Telegraph , gave the episode four out of five stars , saying that it had much to " enthral " a present @-@ day viewer and showed how Doctor Who was constantly reinventing itself . A similar statement was made by Euan Ferguson of The Observer , who also wrote that the episode was " splendid " with good villains , though he felt that the plot was " insanely complicated " and hard to understand . Digital Spy 's Morgan Jeffery also rated " The Bells of Saint John " four stars , feeling that the threat " leaves a little to be desired " and the Spoonheads ' physical appearance was not memorable . However , he said that " practically everything else here is wonderful " , especially Clara 's new characterisation . IGN reviewer Mark Snow rated the episode 8 @.@ 2 out of 10 . He praised the Wi @-@ Fi concept but was underwhelmed by the Spoonheads , and felt that it was more low @-@ key than it was promoted . 
 The A.V. Club 's Alasdair Wilkins gave " The Bells of Saint John " a grade of B , explaining that the plot suffered just as previous companion introductions had because the threat was secondary to establishing Clara . He also wrote that the episode " struggles to make all its chosen genre elements compelling " and was not positive towards the menace of the Wi @-@ Fi and questioned how realistic the technology seen was . Despite this , he said that it was still " fun " with good performances . Dan Martin of The Guardian was disappointed , writing that it " makes a hearty meal of its iconic London locations ... But after the tour de force that was " The Snowmen " , it feels as though this handsome episode constantly just misses the mark " . He found the monsters and plot familiar to past episodes , but noted that a " generic " opening episode had been common for the show when it was introducing a new companion , which was done successfully with Clara . Neela Debnath in The Independent echoed similar sentiments , feeling that it did not live up to the hype and reused several elements from previous episodes . Jon Cooper of the Daily Mirror wrote that " The Bells of Saint John " " had its moments " but " as a whole it didn 't reach the heights of previous episodes " . While he welcomed the departure in tone , he felt that the set @-@ pieces were shoehorned in , and also expressed concern that Clara , despite Coleman 's success , was too similar to previous companion Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) . 
 In Doctor Who Magazine , Graham Kibble @-@ White gave it a positive review , describing it as " zestful and exciting Doctor Who . " He complimented the fact that " the action sequences are played at a fury and the current anything 's @-@ possible flourishes continue unabated " . He noted that " there 's something pointless but pleasing in having Clara 's charge , Artie , reading Summer Falls – a book written by Amelia Williams " . Additionally , he described the Spoonheads as " a very effective threat , albeit written as one of the foot soldiers of the Doctor Who world , with only the verbal facility to paraphrase back what 's been said , " and stated that " the revelation of the concave absence at the back of the skull is horrific . " However , he complained that to him , Clara 's guess that the TARDIS was a " <unk> booth " seemed like " something a 13 @-@ year @-@ old boy would conjure , not a 24 @-@ year @-@ old woman " . 
 = Non @-@ fatal offences against the person in English law = 
 Non @-@ fatal offences against the person , under English law , are generally taken to mean offences which take the form of an attack directed at another person , that do not result in the death of any person . Such offences where death occurs are considered homicide , whilst sexual offences are generally considered separately , since they differ substantially from other offences against the person in theoretical basis and composition . Non @-@ fatal offences against the person mainly derive from the Offences against the Person Act 1861 , although no definition of assault or battery is given there . 
 Offences against the person include minor forms of battery ( any unlawful touching of another person ) ; its complimentary offence , assault ( causing the apprehension of a battery , even when one has not yet occurred ) ; and various more serious offences which are based on assault and battery ( together called " common assault " ) . This includes assault occasioning actual bodily harm , where the victim suffers injuries such as bruising or skin abrasions ( the converse being an injury that is " transient and trifling " ) ; wounding ( a piercing of all layers of the skin ) ; and causing grievous bodily harm ( injuries more serious than in actual bodily harm , for example broken bones ) . The latter two offences may be committed " with intent " , meaning there is an additional mens rea component that makes the defendant more culpable for their actions . Whilst recklessness is sufficient for most offences against the person – that the defendant foresaw the risk of the proscribed injury occurring without necessarily intending it to happen – this is insufficient for crimes of intent . 
 = = General characteristics = = 
 Common to all crimes against the person is the infringement of the right to bodily integrity . It extends to the touching of clothing , for example , and where no physical harm actually results . However , if all <unk> were criminalised , this would interfere with the right to liberty . It is the very touching , and not the harm , that is the violation of principle . This is related to the right to privacy under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights . The central statute on this topic is Offences against the Person Act 1861 , which brought together a multitude of difference offences , with much overlap and inconsistent terminology . These include both the actual infliction and the threat of violence . Although criticised , the Act has not been replaced . 
 In the context of the law of attempts , the Crown Prosecution Service advises that " where the evidence demonstrates that the suspect intended to cause an injury that is substantially more serious than that ( if any ) which was in fact caused , prosecutors should consider the circumstances of the case as a whole as well as the relevant sentencing guideline to determine the appropriate charge . " 
 = = Assault and battery = = 
 A distinction is drawn betwixt the offence of assault and that of battery . Assault is the apprehension of the possibility of immediate unlawful violence , and battery that of the infliction of such violence . Several proposals , including one from the Criminal Law Revision Committee in 1980 have proposed merging the offences . However , the distinction was confirmed in DPP v Little in 1992 . There , the conflation of assault and battery was criticised as duplicitous . If D throws a punch at V , who dodges , this is likely to be an assault but not a battery ; if V is attacked from behind , this may constitute a battery without an assault . Actions which constitute ordinary daily life are not considered assault or battery , for example , jostling on a crowded train . The term " common assault " is used to refer to either a technical assault or a battery . 
 = = = Assault = = = 
 Assault is a summary offence in England and Wales , with the case heard only at a Magistrates ' Court . Although R v Little considered assault a statutory offence , none of the statutes referred to contain any definition of assault . The actus reus , endorsed in R v Ireland , is any act by D that causes V to apprehend immediate and unlawful personal violence . The term " force " rather than " violence " is used by the Crown Prosecution Service ( CPS ) . As a definition , this has proven stable , but its interpretation has varied . The force must be unlawful – outside the realm of defensive or preventative force , for example . Consent of the victim may be enough to prevent the commission of a crime . There is to debate as to whether lack of consent is an element of the actus reus , making it inherent to the commission of a crime , or whether consent is a defence . Andrew Simester and Bob Sullivan argue that the former is more correct , since lack on consent is vital to the crime ; since the act may not constitute a harm even if enacted . The disregard for the victim 's autonomy and privacy is the actionable part of the offence . The victim need not be frightened by the apprehension of violence , merely not want the person concerned to do it . 
 Assault requires a positive act , not an omission . Mere lawful presence in a location is not enough to satisfy the conduct requirement ; illegal trespass , however , is sufficient . John Cyril Smith has suggested that wilfully refusing to retract an inadvertent act that causes the victim to apprehend violence may constitute an assault by omission . It is arguable that there was once a rule that " mere words " could not constitute an assault , but the case of R v Ireland confirmed that even silent phone calls would be grounds for the charge of assault . R. v Constanza added threatening letters to this category . 
 Although assault involves a threat of an immediate battery , the perpetrator need not actually intend to carry out that battery . It is enough that he , intentionally or recklessly , caused the victim to apprehend such an occurrence . The term " immediate " has also been used in different ways . Following Ireland , it seems likely that even where the victim knew the defendant was some distance away , this may be sufficient . As Lord Steyn said there , " what , if not the possibility of imminent personal violence , was the victim terrified about ? " . This would widen the crime of assault considerably . It is perfectly conceivable that the victim was fearful , but did not believe an attack was imminent . That she actually apprehended " immediate violence " , rather than merely " immediately apprehended " , is doubtful . In Constanza , it was sufficient for the prosecution to show that the victim feared an attack in the future , which may have been imminent . It also suggested that the anticipated harm could be psychological rather than physical . 
 Blake v Barnard established a rule that conditional threats could not amount to an assault . However , the court 's reliance on Tuberville v Savage was tenuous at best . Such threats would normally be considered assault . 
 The mens rea requirement is that the defendant must have intend to , or recklessly , cause the victim to fear the possibility of immediate unlawful violence . There is no authority that suggests that " intend " or " recklessly " ought to mean something from their normal meanings . Cunningham recklessness – that the defendant himself foresaw the risk of harm – is applied . Assault is a crime of " basic intent " for the purposes of the Majewski test concerning voluntary intoxication . 
 = = = Battery = = = 
 The defendant commits a battery if they intentionally or recklessly apply unlawful force to another , without their consent . It is subject to the same " everyday life " exception common to assault . Cases have included kissing , spitting and cutting someone 's hair without their consent . This also includes contact with the victim 's clothing , a rule dating back to 1845 in R v Day . It is not necessary that the victim feels the touching . 
 The required causation may be quite oblique . As well as weaponry held in the hand , weaponry thrown is included , as is causing people to touch each other by creating a sense of panic . The general law on liability for omissions also applies to batteries , for example those of the continuing act ( as in Fagan v MPC ) and of a duty of care . However , in R v Ireland the court ruled out psychological injury by means of a telephone as a form of battery , although it was not an important point in the case as other charges were brought . Poisoning is not a battery where there is no accompanying violence . 
 The case of R v Brown established a further requirement : hostility . This is not easily called an actus reus nor mens rea requirement . It was not clear what role it played in that case , but could apply to other cases as a way of clarifying the " everyday behaviour " guidance . It has been strongly criticised by Lord Goff and other judicial and academic writers . It could apply to future cases where the bodily harm was unintended or unforeseen . 
 The mens rea requirement for battery is similar to assault . It is the intention to apply unlawful force to another , or be reckless as to whether such force is applied . It employs Cunningham recklessness – that the defendant must have foreseen the risk of the infliction of unlawful force upon V. In theory , at least , combining the mens rea of battery with the actus reus of assault , or vice versa , is not a crime . The Majewski test is applied to cases of voluntary intoxication , as battery is also a crime of " basic intent " in this scenario . 
 = = Assault occasioning actual bodily harm = = 
 Assault occasioning actual bodily harm carries a maximum sentence of 5 years under section 47 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861 . It is triable either way . Both assault ( fear of violence ) and battery ( infliction of violence ) are included , although it is possible to consider section 47 as creating two offences – one involving an assault , and one a battery . " <unk> " is generally taken to mean " causing " although John Gardner has argued that it is wider than that . In discussing causation , ' frightened ' people are not expected to act entirely rationally ; instead , a relevant test is that of R v Roberts . There , any conduct of the victim short of " daft " could be considered caused by the defendant 's actions . Only the seriousness of the injury separates an assault from an assault occasioning actual bodily harm . 
 The concept of " actual bodily harm " is wide . Almost all injuries are included – for example , bruising or skin abrasions . Injuries are not included if they are " transient or trifling " , but this did not cover even momentary unconsciousness . The wide range of injuries give prosecutors considerable discretion about which charge to bring against a defendant . Psychological injury is included , so long as it forms a recognised medical condition . Mere fright or anxiety is insufficient for actual bodily harm . It is limited only by the need for an actual assault or battery to have taken place . 
 There is no separate mens rea element from the assault or battery , making this a crime of constructive liability . This has been defended by John Gardner , a proponent of the moral threshold theory . However , this is opposed by Simester and Sullivan . 
 = = <unk> wounds or inflicts grievous bodily harm = = 
 Section 20 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861 criminalises " whosoever shall unlawfully and maliciously wound or inflict any grievous bodily harm upon any other person , either with or without any weapon or instrument " . The maximum penalty , five years , is the same as that for actual bodily harm , but a section 20 offence is considered more serious by the courts and the Crown Prosecution Service . A judge is free on the facts of the case to allow a jury find a defendant guilty of assault occasioning actual bodily harm where a defendant is charged with a section 20 offence . 
 The actus reus is the wound or infliction of grievous bodily harm ( GBH ) . A " wound " is something that breaks all layers of the skin , and must have an external component – internal bleeding , however serious , is not a wound . Serious wounds would also fall under grievous bodily harm , but some qualifying wounds ( a pin prick , for example ) are very minor . Some wounds would therefore not qualify as grievous bodily harm . 
 The phrase " really serious harm " was used to describe grievous bodily harm in R v <unk> . The case of R v Grundy confirmed that injuries should be taken in their totality ; that many small injuries may form a serious harm . R v <unk> confirmed the Grundy approach , and also showed that grievous bodily harm against a child was likely to require less bodily harm that that against an adult . R v Burstow extended " bodily harm " to include psychological trauma if it formed a recognised serious mental condition . Simester et al said that this could have wide @-@ reaching consequences , but it is unlikely to be taken to include commonplace occurrences ( relationship breakups , verbal cruelty , broken promises ) – in Burstow , the conduct included a prolonged and intense campaign of harassment . 
 For a long time , R v Clarence was taken as an authority on the meaning of " inflict " , which the court took to mean " an assault or battery of which a wound or grievous bodily harm is the manifest immediate and obvious result " . This narrow definition was extended in R v Martin and R v Halliday to include , for example , injuries sustained during an attempt of the victim to flee . An injury is said to be " inflicted " if it is the result of an impact or percussion set in motion by the defendant ; the injury must relate directly to the impact or percussion , but the impact or percussion may be an indirect effect of the defendant 's actions . R v Burstow established that " inflict " was a near synonym of cause : in Lord Hope 's view , they were synonymous , except that the outcome of the former must be unpleasant . This was applied in R v <unk> and R v <unk> , two cases of knowingly risking passing on HIV without explicit consent . 
 The mens rea element is that of " malice " , which means either intention or recklessness . Cunningham recklessness is applied . However , for the purposes of recklessness , foresight of even minor harm is sufficient – it does not require foresight of serious harm . This has been criticised since it breaks the correspondence principle , that the mens rea should match the actus reus of an offence . 
 = = Wounding or causing grievous bodily harm with intent = = 
 The crime of wounding with intent is created by section 18 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861 . It reads , since amended , as : " Whosoever shall unlawfully and maliciously by any means whatsoever wound or cause any grievous bodily harm to any person ... with intent ... to do some ... grievous bodily harm to any person , or with intent to resist or prevent the lawful apprehension or <unk> of any person ... " . This creates four forms of the offence : unlawfully and maliciously wounding , with intent to either do grievous bodily harm ( 1 ) or resist arrest ( 2 ) ; and unlawfully and maliciously causing grievous bodily harm , with intent to either do grievous bodily harm ( 3 ) or resist arrest ( 4 ) . Thus forms ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) differ from section 20 offences mainly in that there is a specific intention to cause serious harm rather than some harm , and they are therefore the more serious charges . On an indictment under section 18 , the jury is open to convict under section 20 or section 47 if properly directed . 
 " Wounding " and " causing grievous bodily harm " are defined in the same way as they are in the crime of maliciously wounding or inflicting grievous bodily harm . Grievous bodily harm includes serious psychological trauma and serious infection ; however , these are less controversial here because of the inclusion of intent . Intent narrows the crime considerably , and the term " inflict " is not used . In form ( 3 ) , intent can be simply decided in the case of a direct attack , or " virtual certainty " , with knowledge of the virtual certainty – the Woollin principle . In form ( 1 ) , where an injury does not amount to grievous bodily harm , intent to cause grievous bodily harm ( in the advancement of a different cause ) must be shown . Practically , the " virtual certainty " clause cannot come into force , since grievous bodily harm was not actually caused , by definition . In forms ( 2 ) and ( 4 ) , the concept of " malice " has a role to play that it does not in ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) . The defendant must foresee the risk of wounding or grievous bodily harm , where the core intent is to resist arrest . The defendant cannot be reckless to the resisting of arrest , it must be an intention . Concerning the requirement to resist a lawful arrest , the defendant only lacks the required mens rea if he believes in facts which , if true , would make the arrest unlawful ; not just that he believes the facts as they are make the arrest illegal – a mistake of fact suffices , a mistake of law does not . 
 = = Other offences and issues = = 
 There also exist alternative forms of aggravated assault in English law , for example : assault or battery with intent to resist arrest ( as above , the arrest must be lawful ) ; and assault on , resistance to , and obstruction of constables . Under the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 , it is also possible to commit a racially aggravated assault . This is where the commission of the assault in combination to hostility towards the victim , based on their race or believed race , or association with a race . " Race " includes skin colour , nationality , citizenship , and ethnic or national origins . Administering poison , either contrary to section 23 or 24 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861 , is also an offence ; as is false imprisonment – including unlawful arrest , kidnap and hostage situations . Legislation aimed at the possession or use of firearms may also come into this category , as may bomb hoaxes . 
 There are also offences of aggravated assault , created under the Offences against the Person Act 1861 , that now go almost completely unused : for example , assaulting or obstructing a clergyman in the discharge of his duties , and assaulting a magistrate or other person in the exercise of his duties concerning the preservation of a vessel in distress or a wreck . 
 An assault is not caused if a defendant threatens to shoot the victim , but the victim is aware that the gun is not loaded or fake . However , it would be the actus reus of an assault if the victim wrongly believes the gun is , or may be , loaded . Since assault is a summary offence , no prosecutions take place for attempted assault . However , it is possible to commit attempts of aggravated forms of assault . 
 = = = Cases cited = = = 
 = SMS Tegetthoff ( 1912 ) = 
 SMS Tegetthoff was an Austro @-@ Hungarian dreadnought battleship of the Tegetthoff class named after Wilhelm von Tegetthoff , a 19th @-@ century Austrian admiral most notable for defeating the Italian Navy in the Battle of Lissa . 
 Tegetthoff was built at the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino yard in Trieste as part of the first and only class of dreadnought battleships in the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . After her construction in 1912 , an earlier armoured battleship named SMS Tegetthoff was renamed Mars . 
 During World War I , Tegetthoff participated in the bombardment of the Italian city of Ancona . She remained in port in Pola for the rest of the war until she participated in an ill @-@ fated raid on the Otranto Barrage in 1918 that resulted in the loss of her sister ship , SMS Szent István . Following the end of the war in late 1918 , Tegetthoff was surrendered to Italy and later scrapped in 1924 . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Tegetthoff was ordered by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy in 1908 . She was the second battleship of the class that shared her name to be built , the first dreadnoughts of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . The keel of Tegetthoff was laid down in Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino shipyard in Trieste on 24 September 1910 . Following a year and a half of construction , Tegetthoff was launched on 21 March 1912 . Following her fitting out , she was commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian navy on 14 July 1913 . 
 The ship had an overall length of 152 metres ( 498 ft 8 in ) , a beam of 27 @.@ 9 metres ( 91 ft 6 in ) , and a draught of 8 @.@ 7 metres ( 28 ft 7 in ) at deep load . She displaced 20 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 19 @,@ 684 long tons ) at load and 21 @,@ 689 tonnes ( 21 @,@ 346 long tons ) at deep load . 
 The propulsion consisted of four Parsons steam turbines , each of which was housed in a separate engine @-@ room . The turbines were powered by twelve Babcock & Wilcox boilers . The turbines were designed to produce a total of 27 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 20 @,@ 134 kW ) , which was theoretically enough to attain her designed speed of 20 knots ( 23 mph ; 37 km / h ) , but no figures from her speed trials are known to exist . She carried 1 @,@ 844 @.@ 5 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 815 @.@ 4 long tons ) of coal , and an additional 267 @.@ 2 tonnes ( 263 @.@ 0 long tons ) of fuel oil that was to be sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . At full capacity , she could steam for 4 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 800 km ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 12 mph ; 19 km / h ) . 
 Her armament consisted of twelve 305 @-@ millimetre ( 12 in ) / 45 @-@ caliber K 10 guns in four triple turrets . Her secondary armament consisted of twelve 150 @-@ millimetre ( 5 @.@ 91 in ) / 50 K 10 guns mounted in casemates amidships . Eighteen 70 @-@ millimetre ( 3 in ) / 50 K 10 guns were mounted on open pivots on the upper deck above the casemates . Three more 66 @-@ mm K 10 guns were mounted on the upper turrets for anti @-@ aircraft duties . Four 530 @-@ millimetre ( 21 in ) submerged torpedo tubes were fitted , one each in the bow , stern and on each broadside ; twelve torpedoes were carried . 
 The waterline armour belt of Tegetthoff measured 280 millimetres ( 11 in ) thick between the midpoints of the fore and aft barbettes and thinned to 150 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) further towards the bow and stern , but did not reach either the bow or the stern . It was continued to the bow by a small patch of 110 – 130 @-@ millimetre ( 4 – 5 in ) armour . The upper armour belt had a maximum thickness of 180 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) , but it thinned to 110 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) from the forward barbette all the way to the bow . The casemate armour was also 180 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) thick . The sides of the main gun turrets , barbettes and main conning tower were protected by 280 millimetres ( 11 in ) of armour , except for the turret and conning tower roofs which were 60 to 150 millimetres ( 2 to 6 in ) thick . The thickness of the decks ranged from 30 to 48 millimetres ( 1 to 2 in ) in two layers . The underwater protection system consisted of the extension of the double bottom up to the lower edge of the waterline armour belt , with a thin 10 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) plate acting as the outermost bulkhead . It was backed by a torpedo bulkhead that consisted of two layered 25 @-@ millimetre plates . The total thickness of this system was only 1 @.@ 6 metres ( 5 ft 3 in ) which made it incapable of containing a torpedo warhead detonation or mine explosion without rupturing . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Prior to the war , Tegetthoff was assigned to the 1st Battleship Division of Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . During World War I , the battleship saw limited service due to the Otranto Barrage which prohibited Austro @-@ Hungarian battleships from leaving the Adriatic sea . As a result , she hardly ever left Pola . 
 Tegetthoff , along with her sister ships SMS Viribus Unitis , SMS Prinz Eugen , and the remainder of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , was mobilized on the eve of World War I to support the flight of SMS Goeben and SMS Breslau . The two German ships were stationed in the Mediterranean and were attempting to break out of the strait of Messina , which was surrounded by British troops and vessels and make their way to Turkey . After the Germans successfully broke out of Messina , the navy was recalled . The fleet had by that time advanced as far south as Brindisi in south eastern Italy . Tegetthoff also participated in the bombardment of the Italian city of Ancona in May 1915 . Following these operations Tegetthoff remained in Pola for most of the remainder of the war . 
 Aside from the pursuit of Goeben and Breslau in the early months of the war , Tegetthoff and her sister ships only conducted one operation during the course of the war until the ill fated attack on the Otranto Barrage in 1918 , the bombardment of Ancona following Italy 's declaration of war on Austria @-@ Hungary in May 1915 . 
 Tegetthoff would remain in port for another three years . The most significant moments of her stay in Pola were two inspections by dignitaries , the first by the new Emperor Karl I on 15 December 1916 and the second by the German Kaiser Wilhelm II on 12 December 1917 . The second came during the Kaiser 's inspection of the port city 's German submarine base . While there the port of Pola and the vessels therein were subject to over eighty air raids by the newly formed Italian Air Force . 
 = = = The Otranto Raid = = = 
 By mid 1918 , the new commander of the Austrian fleet , Konteradmiral Miklós Horthy decided to conduct another attack on the Otranto Barrage , similar to the Otranto Raid from December 1916 , to allow more German and Austro @-@ Hungarian U @-@ boats to safely get through the heavily defended strait of Otranto . During the night of 8 June , Horthy left the naval base of Pola with Viribus Unitis and Prinz Eugen . Tegetthoff and her sister ship SMS Szent István , along with one destroyer and six torpedo boats departed Pola on 9 June . At about 3 : 15 on the morning of 10 June , two Italian MAS boats , MAS 15 and MAS 21 , spotted the Austrian fleet steaming south . The MAS platoon was commanded by Capitano di fregata Luigi Rizzo while the individual boats were commanded by Capo timoniere Armando Gori and Guardiamarina di complemento Giuseppe Aonzo respectively . Both boats successfully penetrated the escort screen and split to engage each of the dreadnoughts . MAS 21 attacked Tegetthoff , but her torpedoes missed the battleship . Despite missing Tegetthoff , the other boat , MAS 15 , managed to hit Tegetthoff 's sister ship Szent István with her torpedoes at about 3 : 25 am . Both boats were then chased away from the scene by Austrian escort vessels . Immediately following the attack , Tegetthoff thought that the torpedoes were fired by submarines instead of MAS boats and pulled out of the formation of battleships and destroyers and began to zigzag to throw off any more possible submarine attacks . She continually fired on suspected submarine periscopes until she rejoined Szent István at 4 : 45 . 
 Following Szent István being hit by torpedoes and Tegetthoff pulling out of formation , Tegetthoff attempted to take the crippled Szent István into tow . However this attempt , as well as training the ship 's turrets and placing her crew to port as well as throwing any ready ammunition overboard failed and the battleship continued to sink . The attempt to tow Szent István was then abandoned . A few minutes after 6 : 00 am Szent István capsized and sank . Admiral Horthy soon canceled the attack because he thought that the Italians had discovered his plan and ordered the ships to return to Pola . On the contrary the Italians did not even discover that the Austrian dreadnoughts had departed Pola until later on 10 June when aerial reconnaissance photos revealed that they were no longer there . This was the last military operation that Tegetthoff was to take part in and she spent the rest of her career at port in Pola . 
 After the war , Tegetthoff was moved to Venice where she was shown as a war trophy by the Italians . During that time period , she starred in the movie <unk> di nostri mari which depicts the sinking of her sister ship . From 1924 to 1925 , she was scrapped at La Spezia . 
 = Edward M. Cotter ( fireboat ) = 
 Edward M. Cotter is a fireboat in use by the Buffalo Fire Department at Buffalo , New York , United States . Originally named William S. Grattan , she was built in 1900 by the Crescent Shipyard of Elizabeth Port , New Jersey . Due to age she was rebuilt in 1953 and renamed Firefighter upon her return to service . The following year she was renamed Edward M. Cotter . Her namesake , Edward Cotter , was a Buffalo firefighter and leader of the local firefighters union who had recently died . 
 Edward M. Cotter is considered to be the oldest active fireboat in the world and was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1996 . 
 Along with her firefighting duties , during the winter Edward M. Cotter is used as an icebreaker on Buffalo 's rivers . Edward M. Cotter mounts five fire monitors that are capable of pumping 15 @,@ 000 US gallons per minute ( 0 @.@ 95 m3 / s ; 12 @,@ 000 imp gal / min ) . She can often be seen sailing out of her berth and south @-@ west to Lake Erie , returning north through the <unk> and firing her fire monitors . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The ship that was to become Edward M. Cotter was built in 1900 by the Crescent Shipyard of Elizabeth Port , New Jersey . She was originally named William S. Grattan after the first paid fire commissioner for the city of Buffalo . Construction was started on March 24 , 1900 and she was christened on September 5 , 1900 by Virginia Pearson , the young daughter of one of the city 's fire commissioners . The final construction cost for the ship was $ 91 @,@ 000 . 
 The completed ship was 118 ft ( 36 m ) in length , had a beam of 24 ft ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) , and drew 10 ft 10 in ( 3 @.@ 30 m ) . A 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 @.@ 1 mm ) -thick belt @-@ line of Swedish steel was included around the hull for icebreaking duties . William S. Grattan was powered by two Babcock & Wilcox coal @-@ fired boilers with steam engines rated at 900 horsepower ( 670 kW ) . A single propeller provided propulsion . The rated speed of the ship was 13 knots ( 24 km / h ; 15 mph ) . 
 The ship was also equipped with three double action steam pumps that supplied water at 9 @,@ 000 US gallons per minute ( 0 @.@ 57 m3 / s ; 7 @,@ 500 imp gal / min ) to the three fire monitors used for firefighting . Two of the fire monitors were mounted on the forward section of the ship and one was on the stern section . 
 = = History = = 
 At the beginning of the twentieth century , Buffalo 's waterfront was an extremely busy center of commerce . Grain elevators , warehouses and shipping traffic had overtaxed the two existing fireboats : John T. Hutchinson ( Engine 23 ) and George R. Potter ( Engine 29 ) . Also , the city of Buffalo had shoreline hookups to allow the fireboats to serve as floating pumping stations supplying high pressure water to a fire hydrant system that covered the downtown area . The decision was made by city officials to order a third boat that would also have icebreaking capability along with her normal firefighting duties . 
 Upon completion she traveled up the Atlantic coast , down the St. Lawrence River , across Lake Ontario , through the Welland Canal and finally across Lake Erie in an uneventful trip that took 14 days . She was met 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) out of the harbor by her sister fireboats and escorted in . 
 = = = 1928 fire = = = 
 On July 28 , 1928 William S. Grattan responded to the oil barge James F. Cahill , loaded with 5 @,@ 000 barrels of crude oil , that was aflame . After burning 17 hours , the barge 's mooring lines gave way and the barge began to drift . William S. Grattan 's crew attempted to attach tow lines to the drifting barge but it struck a dock at an oil company where the empty oil tanker B.B. McColl was moored . The fumes on the B.B. McColl ignited causing an explosion and fire that engulfed William S. Grattan . Captain Thomas <unk> along with his crew abandoned ship and swam through the flames to shore . Chief Engineer Thomas Lynch of William S. Grattan lost his life and seven other crew members were injured . The unattended boilers on William S. Grattan soon ran dry and exploded , leaving the ship burned out and heavily damaged . 
 William S. Grattan sat boarded @-@ up for eighteen months while city and fire department officials decided whether to replace her at a cost of $ 225 @,@ 000 dollars or rebuild her for $ 99 @,@ 000 dollars , which was $ 8 @,@ 000 dollars more than her original cost . The decision was made to rebuild and in 1930 she was rebuilt at the Buffalo Dry Dock Company of Buffalo , New York . During this refit some improvements were made to William S. Grattan . One improvement was that her boilers were converted from burning coal to burning oil . The engines were rebuilt and her firefighting system was updated and could now handle foam fire retardant . Also , the pilot house was raised to the upper boat deck level and a fixed turret tower with a fire monitor was constructed on the stern of the ship . A fourth fire monitor was added to the top of the pilot house of the ship as well . As part of her acceptance ceremony she participated in a race against the harbor tug Kentucky , which was considered to be one of the fastest tugs on the Great Lakes . 
 = = = 1953 refit = = = 
 In the early 1950s , it was noticed that William S. Grattan was showing signs of age . Her boilers were only able to operate at 40 percent capacity and an engine room steam leak in 1951 injured part of her crew . During November 1952 , William S. Grattan was sent to the Sturgeon Bay Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Company of Sturgeon Bay , Wisconsin for a refit . 
 During this refit her boilers and steam engines were replaced by diesel engines , the pumps for the firefighting system were replaced , the single propeller was replaced with twin propellers , the fixed firefighting platform was replaced with a hydraulically operated platform and the twin funnels were replaced with lower dummy funnels . Upon her return in 1954 , she was renamed Firefighter . In 1955 she was renamed again in honor of Edward M. Cotter , a respected Buffalo firefighter and the leader of the local firefighters union , who had recently died . After the refit Edward M. Cotter mounted five fire monitors capable of pumping 15 @,@ 000 US gallons per minute ( 0 @.@ 95 m3 / s ; 12 @,@ 000 imp gal / min ) . 
 = = = International firefighting = = = 
 On October 7 , 1960 Edward M. Cotter came to the aid of firefighting authorities in Port Colborne , Ontario , Canada . Two days previously , on October 5 , 1960 , a set of grain elevators caught fire at the eight @-@ story Maple Leaf Milling Company . The Port Colborne Fire Department did not have its own fireboat and they were unable to bring the fire under control . The Buffalo Fire Department was asked to send Edward M. Cotter to lend assistance . Escorted by a United States Coast Guard cutter , because she had never needed navigational equipment of her own , Edward M. Cotter proceeded across the international border . The voyage to Port Colborne took two hours with an additional four hours needed to bring the fire under control . This mission is said to have been the first instance that a United States fire boat had crossed an international border to help authorities in another country . 
 = = = Notable rescues = = = 
 In 1978 USS Little Rock , a retired United States Naval guided missile cruiser on display at the Buffalo and Erie County Naval & Military Park , began taking on water and listing . Edward M. Cotter and several Buffalo Fire Department fire engines pumped water out of Little Rock for five days keeping the ship afloat and level while repairs were made . Edward M. Cotter also assisted the disabled United States Coast Guard cutter Ojibwa during the winter of 1983 . Ojibwa , while on Lake Erie , had lost her steering and was taking on water . Edward M. Cotter towed Ojibwa to her base in Buffalo and helped keep her afloat while repairs were made . Another rescue occurred on July 31 , 1984 when Edward M. Cotter towed the Polish tall ship Zawisza Czarny off a sand bar during the ship 's visit to Buffalo . 
 = = Heritage = = 
 As commerce declined on Buffalo 's waterfront , Edward M. Cotter was transferred from the Buffalo Fire Department to the Public Works Department in 1992 for icebreaking duties . In 1996 Edward M. Cotter was designated a National Historic <unk> and was transferred back to the Buffalo Fire Department in 1997 . 
 A non @-@ profit group named " Friends of the Cotter " , founded in 2005 , has been running fund @-@ raising events to overhaul Edward M. Cotter . Along with her normal duties Edward M. Cotter has been sent to various festivals and boat shows around the Great Lakes . 
 = = Other fire boats = = 
 Edward Cotter is one of a few fireboats to ply the Great Lakes : 
 William Lyon Mackenzie is operated by Toronto Fire Service and operates in Lake Ontario . 
 Curtis Randolph is operated by Detroit Fire Department and operates in the Detroit River 
 = Mixes ( Kylie Minogue album ) = 
 Mixes is the fourth remix album by Australian recording artist Kylie Minogue . It was released on 3 August 1998 , by Deconstruction Records . The album contains remixes of tracks from her sixth studio album , Impossible Princess ( 1997 ) . The remixes were done by DJs such as Brothers in Rhythm , Junior Vasquez , and Todd Terry . The remixes was influenced by various genres of dance music , such as electronica and dance @-@ pop . The album was originally scheduled for a 1999 release , but Deconstruction pre @-@ <unk> the release date of Mixes in the United Kingdom to August 1998 , since the Australian counterpart , Impossible Remixes ( 1998 ) , had been released earlier than its original date . With favourable critical reception , Mixes charted in the United Kingdom at number sixty @-@ three on the UK Albums Chart , her highest remix album at the time . The Brothers in Rhythm remix of " Too Far " was released as a promotional single in the UK and North America . 
 = = Background = = 
 In October 1997 , Minogue released her sixth studio album , Impossible Princess . Then in January 1998 , Minogue begun rehearsals on the low @-@ budget tour , Intimate and Live . Minogue intended to only perform in Australia , but strong public demand in the United Kingdom prompted her to schedule dates there . With tickets selling out instantly , more shows were announced in both Australia and the UK . Minogue started the tour in early June 1998 and confirmed that she would release " Cowboy Style " , the fourth single from the Impossible Princess album , and revealed plans of two remix albums , one for Australia and one for the UK . 
 In July 1998 , Deconstruction and Mushroom confirmed the release of two remix albums entitled Mixes and Impossible Remixes respectively . Deconstruction said the Mixes album would be released as a triple @-@ vinyl set and set the release date for the following year . However , fans voiced their concerns on expensive import prices for global shipping and with increasingly popular demand , Deconstruction scrapped the idea and released the remixes on a two @-@ set compact disc , and forward the triple vinyl at a later date . This allowed Deconstruction to release the album earlier and Mixes was released on 3 August 1998 in the UK . Mushroom released Impossible Remixes on 8 July 1998 , but initial pressings were on sale two months earlier . 
 = = Material = = 
 The album shares nine remixes from the Impossible Remixes album ; four remixes of " Breathe " , two remixes of " Did It Again " and one remix of " Some Kind of Bliss " , along with three remixes of Minogue 's promotional single " Too Far " . The remixes had all been previously featured in Minogue 's CD singles . All tracks were co @-@ written by Minogue , with additional song writing assistance by James Dean Bradfield , Dave Ball , Ingo Vauk , Steve Anderson and David Seaman . In 1997 , Minogue travelled to Los Angeles , California to re @-@ record her vocals for the " Breathe " remixes . 
 Mixes is a dance – remix album , and according to Brendan Swift at AllMusic , the songs are well @-@ noted " where constant repetition is heard at it 's most catchy with a hint of something we know : other dance melodies used ' again and again . ' " Charlie Porter from Amazon.co.uk commented about some songs remixes ; " Brothers In Rhythm work their slinky magic on " Too Far " , Sash ! Takes the album down a Euro @-@ trance path , then the good old Trouser Enthusiasts turn " Did It Again " even more saucy . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The artwork was photographed by British photographer Simon Emmett and designed by Farrow Design , who both contributed to the cover sleeve of Impossible Remixes . The artwork shows a " simple yet subtle " silhouette of Minogue which later appeared on the tour guide for the Intimate and Live concerts . After completing the shoot , Emmett was asked by Minogue to shoot the sleeve for her single " Cowboy Style " , and his most recent work with Minogue was shooting her on Glamour magazine in July 2012 . 
 Jenny Stanley @-@ Clarke , who wrote the biography Kylie : Naked , felt the release " seemed nothing more than to run out Kylie 's contractual obligation for a required third Deconstruction album . " She favoured the contributions of " high profiled " DJ 's . Charlie Porter from Amazon.co.uk discussed Impossible Princess ' " sob story " , highlighting the albums title change , single releases , and album release as factors to it . He then stated " This remix album takes away some of that records pretensions ( yes , it was a touch flawed ) , and puts our favourite Australian back on the party floor , where she belongs . " He concluded " Yes sir , that girl can boogie — please don 't try and turn into an indie queen again . " Mixes debuted at sixty @-@ three on the UK Albums Chart on the entry date 15 August 1998 . The album was Minogue 's highest charting remix album in the UK , until it was taken over by Boombox , which peaked at twenty @-@ eight . Mixes also charted on the UK Physical Albums Chart , which compile the top 100 albums based on physical CD sales ; it also reached at number sixty @-@ three . It is also Minogue 's final album from Deconstruction . 
 = = Singles and promotion = = 
 The Brothers in Rhythm remix of " Too Far " served as the albums promotional single on 21 May 1998 . " Too Far " was originally selected as a potential single for Impossible Princess , but Deconstruction decided to release " Some Kind of Bliss " instead . " Too Far " was released as a promotional single in the UK by Deconstruction and North America by BMG , but Deconstruction refused to promote it after BMG released it without discussion . The vinyl included a bonus remix side by Junior Vasquez . Both the original version , and the remix version received critical acclaim from most critics , whom highlighted it as an album stand out . " Too Far " has been included on two of her concert tours ; Intimate and Live Tour and Showgirl : The Homecoming Tour . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 All credits and personnel adapted from Mixes liner notes : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Forti = 
 Forti Corse , commonly known as Forti , was an Italian motor racing team chiefly known for its brief , and unsuccessful , involvement in Formula One in the mid @-@ 1990s . It was established in the late 1970s and competed in lower formulae for two decades . The team 's successes during this period included four Drivers ' Championships in Italian Formula Three during the 1980s , and race wins in the International Formula 3000 championship , in which it competed from 1987 to 1994 . From 1992 , team co @-@ founder Guido Forti developed a relationship with the wealthy Brazilian businessman Abílio dos Santos Diniz that gave Diniz 's racing driver son , Pedro , a permanent seat in the team and the outfit a sufficiently high budget to consider entering Formula One . 
 Forti graduated to Formula One as a constructor and entrant in 1995 , but its first car — the Forti FG01 — proved to be uncompetitive , and the team failed to score a point . Despite this setback , Forti was committed to a three @-@ year deal with Diniz , which was broken when Pedro moved to the Ligier team prior to the 1996 season , taking most of the team 's sponsorship money with him . Nevertheless , Forti continued to compete in the sport , and produced the much @-@ improved FG03 chassis , before succumbing to financial problems mid @-@ season after an ultimately fruitless deal with a mysterious entity known as Shannon Racing . The team competed in a total of 27 Grands Prix , scoring no points , and is recognised as one of the last truly privateer teams to race in an era when many large car manufacturers were increasing their involvement in the sport . 
 = = Establishment and early years = = 
 Forti was founded by Italian businessmen Guido Forti , a former driver , and Paolo Guerci , an engineer , in the late 1970s and was based in Alessandria in northern Italy . It was registered as a Società a <unk> <unk> , or Limited liability company . It was initially run in lower motor racing categories such as Formula Ford and Formula Three , both at Italian and European levels . The team was well equipped and soon became a regular winner . Forti drivers Franco <unk> , Enrico <unk> , Emanuele Naspetti and Gianni Morbidelli ( who would all go on to drive in Formula One ) won Italian Formula Three titles in 1985 , 1987 , 1988 and 1989 respectively . In addition , <unk> won the prestigious Macau F3 Grand Prix and the Monaco Grand Prix F3 support race in 1988 , and Morbidelli won the FIA European Formula Three Cup in 1989 . Teo Fabi and Oscar <unk> also raced for the team in its early years , the former winning the Italian <unk> 2000 championship in 1977 , and the latter racing as far afield as South America , in the Argentine Formula Three Championship . Forti continued racing in Formula Three until the end of 1992 , when it quit the formula in order to concentrate solely on International Formula 3000 . 
 = = Formula 3000 = = 
 For 1987 , Forti moved up to International Formula 3000 with less immediate success than experienced in Formula Three . The main reason for this was the chassis the team chose to compete with . Instead of using customer <unk> , Marches or <unk> , all of which were produced by established companies who had many years ' experience of designing and building such cars , Forti stuck with their Italian Formula Three chassis supplier Gian Paolo Dallara , who had just designed his company 's first F3000 machine . Forti was the first team to use this machine , which was dubbed the Dallara <unk> ( a chassis which later would make a single appearance in Formula One for the <unk> Scuderia Italia team , as that team 's car was not ready for the first race of the 1988 season ) . This combination of an inexperienced team and an untested car did not score any points in its first F3000 year , nor did the team attend every race on the schedule . Forti used 1988 to gain valuable experience in F3000 , and this helped the team to perform better in following seasons , as did a change to more competitive Lola and then Reynard chassis . 
 After a full season in 1988 and the team 's first championship points , courtesy of Claudio <unk> in 1989 , it became apparent that Forti was improving as a competitive force . In 1990 , Gianni Morbidelli scored Forti 's first victory in an F3000 race , and although no Forti driver won a championship title in this category , the team established itself as a frequent front @-@ runner , scoring nine wins and five pole positions in International F3000 . From 1993 onwards , Forti concentrated solely on F3000 , and ran drivers such as Naspetti , Fabrizio <unk> , Andrea Montermini and Hideki Noda . 1991 was Forti 's most successful season in F3000 , with Naspetti finishing third in the Drivers ' Championship , ten points behind champion Christian Fittipaldi . Although the team 's form dipped over subsequent years , by 1994 Forti was the most experienced team in the championship , employing Noda and Pedro Diniz as drivers . 
 = = Formula One = = 
 = = = Preparation = = = 
 As his team became more successful , Guido Forti started to think about a move upwards , into Formula One . However , there had been several discouragingly recent examples of teams , such as <unk> and Onyx , which had graduated from F3000 into Formula One and failed more or less immediately due to a lack of finance . Conversely , Eddie Jordan had shown that the move could be made successfully , with an impressive performance in 1991 with his Jordan team , which had finished fifth in the Constructors ' Championship with a total of seven points @-@ scoring finishes . Forti considered a solid financial base to be the most important factor for success . In 1991 he therefore started working on his Formula One project . At the end of 1992 , he signed a deal with wealthy Brazilian driver Pedro Diniz , whose personal fortune and sponsorship connections proved invaluable in increasing the team 's budget . Diniz 's father , Abílio dos Santos , was the owner of the large Brazilian distribution company <unk> Brasileira de <unk> and the supermarket chain <unk> de Açúcar . By offering companies preferential product @-@ placement in the Brazilian market , the Diniz family was able to obtain personal sponsorship deals with brands such as <unk> , Duracell , Gillette , Kaiser , Marlboro , Parmalat and <unk> , in addition to backing from <unk> , to fund Pedro 's career . By 1993 , through Abílio dos Santos , Forti met Carlo <unk> , an Italo @-@ Brazilian businessman . <unk> became a co @-@ owner of the team , buying Guerci 's shares , and started working on the team 's Formula One project . He finally managed to ensure a respectable budget for Formula One by late 1994 , which was " effectively underwritten by the Diniz family " . He also hired several experienced personnel , including designer Sergio Rinland and former Ferrari team manager Cesare Fiorio . Furthermore , retired driver René Arnoux was employed as a consultant and driver coach for Diniz . Guerci remained with Forti as one of its race engineers . 
 This securing of financial assistance and recruitment of staff meant that Forti 's ability to participate in Formula One for 1995 was assured . Financed by the companies brought in by Abílio Diniz , the team was guaranteed financial stability in the short term , with a claimed first year budget of around $ 17 million . In addition , this was only the first year of a planned three @-@ year contract with Diniz and his backers . 
 = = = Forti FG01 car = = = 
 The hardest task for the team was designing and building its own car for the first time , instead of buying one from a general supplier such as Dallara or Lola , as was required by the Formula One Technical Regulations . Guido Forti 's first attempt at an F1 chassis , the Forti FG01 , resulted in an outdated , overweight and very slow machine , and has been described as nothing more than " a revised F3000 car " and , more harshly , " a fearful pile of junk " . 
 The FG01 had many influences . Design consultant Rinland had previously worked on the Brabham <unk> chassis in 1991 and Fondmetal GR02 chassis in 1992 , the latter under the auspices of his own company , <unk> , before moving to the United States to work on a Champ Car project . In late 1994 , Forti bought the remaining assets of the now defunct Fondmetal team , including the remaining GR02 chassis , and requested Rinland 's assistance in developing the bespoke Forti chassis based on a planned Fondmetal chassis for the 1993 season . Rinland thus provided a great deal of input on the FG01 chassis , assisting experienced Italian engineers Giorgio <unk> and Giacomo <unk> in designing and building the car . The car 's aerodynamics were completed by former Brabham , Fondmetal and <unk> employee Hans <unk> using wind tunnels in South Africa , and composite work was done by the Belco Avia company . However , it was rumoured that the FG01 was little more than a re @-@ working of the GR02 . 
 Thus the FG01 did not promise much in terms of performance . It was angular and bulky , with poor aerodynamic performance negatively affecting grip and handling ; it had a plump nose , initially no airbox , and was overweight and under @-@ powered , using a small Ford @-@ Cosworth ED V8 customer engine largely financed by Ford do Brasil , which developed an estimated 100 bhp less than the most powerful engine in the field , the Renault V10 supplied to the Benetton and Williams teams . It was also the only car to have a manual gearbox in the 1995 F1 season . The car was liveried in a distinctive yellow @-@ and @-@ blue colour scheme accompanied by fluorescent green wheel @-@ rims , illustrating the team 's Brazilian influence in its first year . The precise hue of each colour was chosen as a tribute to Ayrton Senna , who had been killed at the 1994 San Marino Grand Prix ; the cars were liveried in identical shades to those used on the Brazilian 's helmet design . 
 = = = 1995 season = = = 
 Forti 's number one driver for the 1995 season was rookie Pedro Diniz who had raced for Forti in F3000 , but without much success . However , he was guaranteed a seat as his family and sponsors were paying a significant amount of the team 's budget . The second driver was later confirmed as his more experienced compatriot Roberto Moreno , who had last competed in F1 back in 1992 when he had a disastrous year driving for the infamous Andrea Moda team . However , his seat was initially only guaranteed on a race @-@ by @-@ race basis , as Portuguese driver Pedro Lamy , in addition to the team 's former F3000 drivers Emanuele Naspetti and Andrea Montermini , were also considered . It was speculated that whoever joined the team would be contractually bound to be number two to Diniz and that his father had insisted on an all @-@ Brazilian driver line @-@ up . A Forti spokesman indeed confirmed that Moreno 's nationality , in addition to his experience , was the main reason for his selection . The team later attempted to enter its former F3000 driver Hideki Noda for the 1995 Pacific Grand Prix , but he was refused an FIA Super Licence . 
 Unlike some of the existing teams , Forti was able to test its chassis extensively prior to the start of the season . However , Diniz proved to be around seven seconds per lap off the pace of the leading runners in group testing at the Estoril circuit in March , indicating that the team was likely to be mired at the back of the field . Diniz finished 10th in the season @-@ opening Brazilian GP , but was seven laps down on winner Michael Schumacher . In Argentina , this situation became worse , as , although both drivers finished , they were both nine laps down on winner Damon Hill at the end of the race ( with Diniz ahead ) and neither were classified , as they had failed to complete 90 % of the race distance . The drivers ' similar fastest laps during the race were over ten seconds slower than Schumacher 's fastest race lap , and almost five seconds slower than the next slowest runner 's fastest lap ( Domenico Schiattarella in the Simtek ) . Imola was similarly poor , as both drivers finished seven laps down ( with Diniz again ahead ) and again failed to reach the 90 % threshold for classification . Forti was already the butt of paddock jokes , and were far slower than the other ( and financially poorer ) backmarkers : Pacific , Simtek , and Minardi . However , the budget enabled improvements to be made to the car . During the season , its weight was reduced by a significant 60 kilograms ( approximately 10 % of the F1 minimum weight limit of 595 kg ) , and a semi @-@ automatic gearbox , an airbox and redesigns of the front wing , sidepods and monocoque were introduced . The personnel count also doubled during the course of the season . This resulted in a gradual improvement in pace throughout the year , and there were no more non @-@ classified finishes . 
 In between the Brazilian and Argentine Grands Prix , Rinland returned to Europe full @-@ time to take the official post of the team 's Technical Director . His long @-@ term task was to establish an English @-@ based design office for the team , but his initial job was to improve the competitiveness of the FG01 through a series of technical upgrades . However , Rinland subsequently left the team after a few weeks , after falling out with the team 's management over the car 's lack of competitiveness . 
 Indeed , Forti 's finishing record was good for rookies at 50 % ( excluding the non @-@ classifications ) , helping Diniz to establish a reputation as a steady , dependable driver . Forti were then elevated when Simtek folded after the Monaco GP , and Pacific 's lack of finance and development enabled Forti to start matching them from the half @-@ way point of the season . At the German GP , both Fortis outqualified both the Pacifics for the first time , and this happened on two further occasions during 1995 . Forti 's improvement was also aided by Pacific taking on two slower pay drivers , Giovanni <unk> and Jean @-@ Denis Délétraz , to ensure that the team finished the season . At the final race of the season , in Adelaide , Forti seemed to have established a firm base for the 1996 season , emphasised by Moreno qualifying within 107 % of pole position for the first time - a crucial result , as this percentage of the pole time would be used to determine non @-@ qualifiers in 1996 - and Diniz scoring the team 's best result in F1 , with a reliable run to seventh place , ahead of Gachot in the Pacific . This was only one position behind the points @-@ scoring placings . Nevertheless , despite not scoring any points , Forti finished a de facto 11th in the Constructors ' Championship , ahead of Pacific and Simtek by virtue of better finishes outside of the points . 
 Post @-@ championship , Forti took part in the 1995 Bologna Motor Show , where three <unk> — driven by Montermini , <unk> and Vittorio <unk> — raced against , and lost to three Minardis in the Formula One Indoor Trophy . 
 Despite the progress made by Forti during the course of the season , 1995 was still regarded as a failure . The team had spent more money than its immediate rivals in designing , building and developing a fundamentally inefficient car . Diniz and his sponsors were described as " throwing their money away " , and the Brazilian 's reputation as a serious F1 driver was damaged , as it took him several years to prove that he was not just in the sport because of his funding . In addition , Moreno 's participation with Forti was lamented by many observers , who felt that the experienced driver did not deserve the ignominy of such an uncompetitive car . The only positives were the reasonable reliability record and the fact that the Diniz family were contracted to fund the team for the next two years . 
 = = = 1996 season = = = 
